Susan A. Thornberry is a Representative from California, Committee on Armed Services 1 Thornberry . She is a member of the Armed Services Committee .
 Rep. William M. “Mac,’s‘Mac’ is a Representative from Texas . He is the chairman of the Committee on Armed Services 1 WITNESSES Farkas .
 Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia/Ukraine/Eurasia 7 Hill. Evelyn N. Hill is a former deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia and Ukraine . She was also a former Deputy Assistant secretary of Defense of Defense.
 Members Post Hearing: Questions Submitted by Members Post hearing . Witness Responses to Questions asked during the hearing .
 The House of Representatives will hold a hearing on the Armed Services Committee on February 10, 2016 .
 The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02m., in room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. The committee meeting was held at 10.02m.
 WILLIAM M ‘MAC’ THORNBERRY is the Chairman of the Board . He is a former chairman of the House of Representatives .
 Today the committee meets to hear testimony on understanding and deterring Russia . The committee will also hear testimony about understanding Russia .
 Russia has taken unprecedented provocative actions against NATO ships and planes in Syria . Russia has consolidated its gains in Ukraine, has intervened in Syria, has continued to take provocative actions .
 The committee will again have hearings to explore the security environment we face, including threats and the current state of our military . The panel will also hear from the Secretary about whether the administration's budget request answers those challenges .
 Putin has the only nuclear arsenal, which it continues to modernize, that is comparable to ours . Other countries are also going to school on the tactics Putin is using in Ukraine, Syria, and elsewhere .
 I think we can expect to see more of these again and again in other places by other actors . I think they can expect more of this kind of actors to appear .
 The U.S. needs to prepare for the wide spectrum of national security challenges posed by Russia and by others . We need to understand the challenges presented by the only nation that continues to pose an existential threat to the United States .
We are grateful to have three highly qualified witnesses to help explore these matters . Today we are grateful that we have threehighly qualified witnesses .
SUSAN A DAVIS is a REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE on ARMED Services . She is a former journalist and author of the book, "Argentine"
 I am happy to be here for Mr Smith, and we certainly welcome him back just as soon as possible. And I'm happy to have him back, and I'm sure he'll be here again, and he will be back soon .
 Russia's strategic motivations are key to Russia's success in Russia, says Putin . Russia is a key part of Russia's economic growth in the past . Russia's economy has been hit by an economic downturn in recent years .
 Russian nationalism has fueled a foreign policy marked by territorial aggression and expeditionary military activities . Russian nationalism, as we know, has fueled an aggressive foreign policy .
 They have used enhanced capabilities and hybrid warfare techniques that have been instrumental in their endeavors . They have been using enhanced capabilities. They have also used hybrid warfare methods to achieve their objectives .
 Russia's noncompliance with the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty and its energetic policy of discrediting the U.S., NATO, and the European Union . Russia’s noncompliance is further compounded by its energy policy, the author says .
 Russia is a major threat to the U.S. and its many allies . The United States and its allies can most effectively respond to the difficult security challenges Russia presents .
 I agree with Secretary Carter, who recently said while we do not desire conflict of any kind with Russia, we also cannot blind ourselves to the actions they appear to choose to pursue . I agree, but I also agree, that we can't blind ourselves.
 We must remain objective and clear-eyed about Russian intent. We must be ready to contend with Russia from a position of strength and in concert with our allies and partners in the international community .
 Three highly qualified witnesses to help explore the issues. As I say, we are very grateful to have three highly qualified Witnesses to help .
 Evelyn Earkas is the former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia . She says the Senate Armed Services Committee will try not to hold that too much against you .
Without objection, your full written statement will be made part of the record . Without objection, you will be able to make a statement to the public .
 Dr. FIONA HILL, DIRECTor of the U.S. and EUROPE, is a professor at the University of New York University . He is also a former director of the United States and Europe's most successful international programs .
 It is a great honor to appear here in front of the committee, and I am very privileged to be here with such distinguished colleagues. It is an honor, and it is a good honor to be there.
 I will just touch on a few highlights from my written statement . I will also offer some supplemental information to that written text .
 Smith: "It is extremely important first of all for us to understand the nature of Russian decisionmaking" Smith: It is important to understand how Russia makes its own decisions .
 We no longer have a polithuro or a communist party or central planning . We have no more central planning or polithur or a political party .
 Power in Russia today is very informal and it is rooted in networks around President Vladimir Putin .
 There are no significant checks and balances on Putin’s presidential power, and so Putin himself is one aspect of the Russian challenge .
 If Putin were to disappear tomorrow, he would be replaced by someone from within his inner circle . However, waiting Putin out is not going to be a long-term strategy for us .
 The inner circle of power around Putin is a very tight group of the same age range, and people whose professional and personal relationships date back decades .
 Everyone around Putin shares the same convictions, so he is not an anomaly . Putin is not a anomaly, he says .
 Putin's particular style of leadership has been described as 'Putin's style' of leadership . Putin's style is similar to that of President Barack Obama's .
 The point of writing this book was to point out that Putin is a professional secret service operative . But the point was to underscore that Putin's secret service is a pro-Russian operative .
 He has been trained, as he puts it, to work with people and work with information . He's been trained to help people with information and help with information.
 As president he personalizes all of his interactions, both in Russia domestically and in terms of foreign policy, as he would have done as a KGB agent . This means that as president hePersonalizes his interactions with other agents and intelligence targets .
 Putin has also been trained to conceal his true identity and intentions at all times . Putin also trained to hide his intentions and intentions .
 He always keeps his options open so he can adapt to changing circumstances . He can continue to pursue his goals .
 Putin is a very traditional, conservative Russian politician . In terms of his political convictions, he is very conservative .
 Russia is deeply rooted in the political leap since the collapse of the Soviet Union . There is a general consensus in Russia that the current world order, including the European security order, disadvantages Russia .
 Russians see their state as one of just a tiny number of world civilizational powers, like China and the U.S. They believe that Russia should have special privileges internationally, especially in Europe .
 Any successor to Putin, no matter who this is, would be just as staunch a defender of what they see as Russian interests as Vladimir Putin is . This is just to underscore that any successor would be a staunch defender of Russian interests .
 I also now want to turn to the nature of the current presidency under Vladimir Putin . I also want to focus on the current president under Putin .
 Putin has transformed his presidency into what we might call a 4 wartime presidency . Since the wars in both Ukraine and Syria, Putin's presidency has transformed .
 There has heen a high command, a centralized military, and political command set up inside of Moscow . All critical security and political issues are fed into a small group of people around Putin there .
 To be honest, we don’t really know what happens within that group, how deliberations take place, how information is passed to Putin .
 Most of the people in this group share the same operative perspective as Putin does. But what we do know is that most of them share a similar perspective to Putin does .
 They come from very similar backgrounds and, as I mentioned, they have the same convictions . They are very similar to each other and come from similar backgrounds .
Russian military men are not hard men of Russian politics, according to the hearing . "We should bear in mind that they are actually military men," he says .
 Sergey Shoygu used to be the defense minister of emergencies . He was also the minister of emergency minister . He has been in charge of the Russian military since 2007 .
 The only person in this inner circle who does come from the Russian military is Gennady Gerasimov . He is a newcomer to the inner circle of Putin's power .
Before today’s wars, the turning point in Russia's relationship with Russia was the August 2008 war with Georgia .
 It was a decisive moment for Russia in understanding their relationship with the West . Russia's relationship with West was a key moment for them to understand their relationship .
 Moscow closely observed the reactions and political responses of the U.S. and NATO and European powers to the war . They took the lack of United States and NATO military support for Georgia as a sign that they could exploit fissures.
 Russian military reform is a major military reform in Russia . Russian military leaders analyzed the performance of their own military to decide on the course of reform .
 The key lesson of the Georgia war in 2008 for Russia was that no other European state was willing to engage in a similar military adventure and to take Russia on .
 Since the Georgia war, the Russian military has become a direct instrument of policy for Putin and his inner circle . Since the war, Russia has become an important part of Putin's policy .
 They seek to figure out how to deploy it against opponents in foreign policy for tactical effect . They aim to use it against foreign policy in foreign policies for tactical benefit .
 This gives Russia a great advantage, and it also makes Moscow think that it can take a lot of risks . This gives Moscow a great opportunity, and makes Russia think it can also take a lots of risks.
 Putin and his inner circles think of the Russian military as an operational tool . So just to underscore again, Putin's inner circles.
 They experiment with the direct or threat of direct application of military force, including the strategic and tactical nuclear forces, to see what advantage they can gain .
 The Russian military has several shortcomings as an operational tool, says the Russian military . However, I just want to point out before handing over to colleagues that the military has many shortcomings .
 Russia's military modernization over the last decade has been beset by planning difficulties . Russia’s military modernization in the past 10 years has been plagued by problems .
 The reform to the armed services began in 2008, but it wasn’t until 2011 when Russia began its rearmament program and the revitalization of its defense sector .
 The Russian military was not quite ready for prime time when it was launched in Crimea and then in Ukraine .
 The war in the Donbass was launched as a covert operation. This is one of the several reasons why the war was launched in the region as a secret operation .
 The war in Ukraine has been seen by the Russian 5 military as more of a proving ground for the future .
 Russian military engaged in large-scale and snap exercises since outbreak of Ukraine crisis . The Russian military has been engaged in a series of large- scale and snaps exercises .
 February is the traditional exercise season for Russia . The conscript force will have reduced capacity as the draft turns over .
 Putin’s challenge is to figure out how to maintain the military momentum that Russia gained in Georgia in 2008 . Russia gained the momentum in 2008, and to keep it by surprise in Ukraine and Syria .
 Russia may be reaching the limits of its ability to apply the military as a direct operational tool in future conflicts . The hearing will be held in Moscow, Russia's capital.
 There is discussion right now about the future of negotiations with the Minsk agreement . There is also discussion about the possible future of talks with the Russian government .
 The military budget has been squeezed by the reduced prices from energy and revenues in the budget . The state now has lower capacity for replacing the armaments and material that have been expended in the war in Ukraine .
 The Western sanctions hit Russia in 2014 just as the rearmament program was trying to reach its stride . The sanctions came just as Russia was attempting to reach a stride .
 Russia has been denied access to critical foreign technology as well as further revenues . Russia has also been denied the access to further revenues by Russia .
 The Syrian government is also not paying for the weaponry that it is receiving from the Russian government . The intervention in Syria may be more costly than Russia basically admits .
 Russia's military expenditures are also expending on hehalf of the Syrian government . It is not just the cost of Russia’s own military expenditures in Syria .
 Russia’s dilemma is where to allocate its budget and how to deploy its relatively limited trained manpower . Russia's dilemma is now one of prioritization — where to allocation its budget.
 The Russian military is still absorbing the effect of economic decline and the resources that they have . The military remains in charge of the Russian military .
 Russia and Putin team at war in the Middle East is actually unfamiliar territory . Russia and the Putin team, being at war with the Russian government, is not a new territory .
 Russia's goal in Syria is to consolidate Assad’s regime to make sure that something stays in place until there is a better arrangement for keeping the Syrian state together . Russia's goals in Syria are to keep Assad's regime in place.
 Putin requires large numbers of other players, not just the U.S. and European allies, to play along with Moscow at the negotiating table, as well as trying to head off operational setbacks, which will be inevitable .
 At this particular point, it is not clear how hard it will be for Russia to keep up the momentum in Syria .
 Putin's political performance so far has boosted the Russian public's ratings of Putin’s political performance . Putin's victories so far have boosted the public's rating of Putin.
Everything within the current system depends on the maintenance of President Putin’s charismatic authority and his record as a leader . We have to bear in mind that with this highly centralized nature of Russian power, everything within the system depends.
 If the Russian people lose their faith in Putin as president, then the political system risks becoming destabilized . Russia's political system could become destabilized if people lose faith in the president .
 They are just a few percentage points short of 90 percent in the most recent polls . They would be very enviable in any context, but they would bevery enviable, according to the polls .
 Russia's siege mentality is in large part because of the siege mentality that we have in Russia today . We have to remember that is also because of his record as president, but it is also in large parts because of him .
 Russians genuinely believe this is reflected in polls not just at the elite level but at the public level . Russians are out to get them in the United States and in the West .
 The wars have deflected Russian public attention away from economic and political demands . The Russian economy and the state budget have taken a beating since 2013 .
 Putin and his team have been able to blame all of Russia’s woes on the United States and on Western actions and sanctions .
 Putin has shown he has been willing to pay a high economic and diplomatic price as he seeks to tip regional balances of power in Europe and the Middle East in Moscow’s favor . The question is for how long it will be for Putin to pay the price .
 Vladimir Putin and his team also are. You can be sure if we are asking this question then Vladimir Putin is also on the team .
 Putin’s overriding strategy is to secure security for Russia and his system and to press forward with his interests. So just to conclude, Putin's overriding strategy and his overriding goal right now is tosecure.
 Putin and his security team are also trying to deter us, the IJnited States and NATO, from intervening in any way militarily against Russia in any of the conflicts in Ukraine or Syria .
 Putin cannot any more afford the resources for the mass army total mobilization approach that the Soviet Union adopted during the Cold War to defend itself .
 The whole of Russia’s military modernization program is being geared towards a combination of conventional nuclear and nonconventional nonmilitary means, this so-called hybrid means of defense . Russia's military modernization is aimed at combining nuclear andnonmilitary means .
 Putin has tried to instrumentalize the idea of Russia military force to show us that he intends to use it . Putin has also tried tostrumentize the concept of Russia's military force, he says .
 He has to show that he will use nuclear weapons under some contingency . This also means that he has to prove he will do it under some contingencies .
 These are the ultimate deterrent, but they are not much use as a deterrent if you don't believe that anyone is prepared to use them .
 This is why there is so much signaling about nuclear weapons, as I am sure we will hear from Dr. Dr. John Sutter . He says he is sure we'll hear from him .
 Putin's goal for Putin is to push away the United States and NATO, not to actually exchange in any nuclear or military exchange .
Russian threat perceptions are very tricky for us to deal with Russian threat perceptions . We must devise 7 for ourselves coherent strategies and policies for dealing with the Russian threat . This means that it is very tricky to both take onboard the nature of Russian threats and to devise 7.
 Dr. EVELYN N FARKAS is a former U.S. Defense Secretary . He is a retired U.N. diplomat who served as a senior defense official for the U.K. military .
 Senate Armed Services Committee member served as staff member from 2000 to 2008 . "It is an honor to appear before the sister committee of the Senate Armed Service Committee," he says .
 Admiral Stavridis is one of Russia's foremost experts on Russia . He is also one of the world's leading experts on the country .
 Russia poses a geostrategic threat to the U.S. and our interests, according to the United States . Russia poses an important threat to our interests. The United States and its interests are at risk .
 Secretary Carter listed it first among the threats faced by our country . The list was compiled by the White House .
 Russia and the U.S. opposed to one another on fundamentals and most foreign policy issues . It is unfortunate and in the 21st century to have — in this 21st Century to have – Russia and U. States opposed to each other on fundamentals .
 The Russian government is pursuing policies that run counter to U.S. national security interests and values . But the reality is that the Russian government's policies are counter to the United States' interests .
 Russia has seen what Russia can do with, even with its unfinished military modernization . Now, we have seen what the country can do, and what it can do.
 President Putin is expected to be reelected in 2018 for another 6 years . We can't wish this problem away, he says .
 Russia must use all elements of national power to pressure Russia to reverse course . We must use diplomatic, economic, informational, and military to pressure the Russian government to back course .
 The U.S. must counter and resist Russia’s actions through a combination of deterrence, strengthening our allies and partners . The United States must communicate the truth about the lU'emlin's actions to the world .
 Congress should urge the Pentagon to provide an aviation brigade to support the armored brigade combat team . Congress should also urge the Defense Department to provide a brigade for the combat team.
 Congress should continue to support beefing up security assistance to Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova . Congress should also support beefed up security aid to Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia .
 They need more training; they need help with defense transparency and accountability . They need to be more transparent and accountable, they need training .
 The U.S. should provide all three countries with antitank weapons, which will provide them with the potential to deter the larger, more ready Russian forces .
 In Syria we must get our allies engaged on the battlefield and provide equipment and other support to the Syrian opposition. In Syria, we must help the opposition, says President Obama .
 If we succeed in finding economic and other leverage, this could also mitigate the need for more fighting, he says . More fighting is unavoidable right now, he adds .
 U.S. should establish a new foreign military assistance fund to help allies and partners across Europe and Afghanistan transition from Russian to United States military equipment . This means no rockets used by the United States defense industry should be Russian .
 We must be united with our allies and partners worldwide and resolute towards Russian bad behavior . We need to be united. We must also be resolute against Russia's bad behavior.
 We need not enter a new Cold War or an across-the-board standoff with Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We need to be careful to avoid a new cold war or a new standoff .
 The Kremlin is open to cooperation and there are mutual interests, of course, we should work with Moscow, says the Kremlin .
 Russia will not work with us unless the Kremlin sees it in their national security interest or we have sufficient leverage to force a change in Putin’s approach .
 If we take the actions described in his testimony, we will raise the price to Putin for achieving his international objectives, he says . Putin's actions are described in the testimony, he adds .
 Russia is the greatest geostrategic threat to U.S. national security interests, says U.N. expert . Russian people's resources can be directed towards a future, he says .
 STATEMENT of ADM JAMES G STAVRIDIS, USN, DEAN, T H E FLETCHER School, TUFTS UNIVERSITY Admiral Stavridis .
 I have testified here many, many times over the years, both as United States European Command, NATO commander, and before that as commander of United States Southern Command . I have also testified many times, many of those times, as U.S. European Command.
 The top global challenge for the U.S. today is the European proWem. I will begin by saying that the top global challenges I see for the United States today is, in fact, the European ProWem .
 Russia is facing economic challenges, but a big portion of it is the overhang from Russia . The country is facing an economic crisis .
For the United States our best pool of partners are going to be the Europeans. And I think that for the U.S. our best Pool of partners will be the European .
 Russia is facing a challenge from Russia, says Dr. John Sutter . Russia has a history of trying to win over Russia, he says .
 28 nations, 50 percent of the world’s GDP, and a significant defense spending, probably $900 billion in total . $600 billion from the United States, $300 billion from Europe, $600billion from the U.S.
 Our European allies are only spending about 1. percent of their GDP, well under the NATO goal of 2 percent .
 Russian defense spending is going up, even given the constraints of the fall in oil prices and the general global slowdown in the economy .
Military power continues to improve their forces in very specific areas . They remain a very significant military power who continue to improve forces .
 NATO commander was NATO commander just several years ago . Russia has demonstrated intent to use it in Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine, he says .
 It is positioned alongside our greatest pool of allies, you see the significance of this challenge . So when you couple capability with demonstrated intent to use it, it is a challenge .
 A subset of this is the Russian cleverness in approach of how they are using military force . The Russian military is using a variety of military forces, including the use of military force.
 It is a mix of special forces; information warfare; cyber, information warfare and information warfare . Russia is demonstrating extremely accelerated capability, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Dr. Dr. John Sutter is known as Dr. Sutter and Dr. James Cevallos . He is known for his work in the U.S. as a professional photographer . He has been working on a new series of exercises to help you
 The Russian ability to sweep into the Baltic capitals in really a matter of days. 60 hours is the number that was used, says Hill .
 I participated in a recent 10 war game exploring this and I believe this is an accurate assessment . I believe that this is a accurate assessment of the war game .
You are going to have an opportunity, of course, to talk to your successor. Well, you will have a chance to talk with your successor, he says . You will have the opportunity, he adds .
 I am encouraged by the increase in defense spending to focus on Europe . I am also encouraged by a increase in spending on Europe. I am encouraging by the increased spending on defense .
 NATO has the longrange capability, but in the short term we face real challenges from Russia, he says . As I look at the situation overall, I think NATO has a long range capability .
I think we need to continue to maintain a posture of deterrence. So fundamentally, I think we must maintain a deterrence of deterrence, he says .
 We need to use sanctions and continue to strengthen those as we look at Russian behavior, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
We need to reassure our allies in Europe, I think, to reassure them we can encourage increases in their own defense spending, which is their responsibility, to put alongside our good work in Russia. And I think we need to reassuring our allies.
 Farkas said we don’t need to stumble backwards into a full-blown Cold War . The Cold War is not just a Cold War, he said .
 I believe we should cooperate where we can in places like Afghanistan, counterpiracy, counternarcotics, counterterrorism . But we must confront where we see the need to do so, he says .
 I think today when I look at Russian behavior broadly and globally, to include Syria, where they are supporting a reprehensible regime . I think we do need to confront them, and I think it's time to confront, I think .
 The committee's support of the Armed Forces of the U.S. will enable us to be a strong partner in doing so, the committee says .
 I am going to try to limit myself to just a couple that focus on our responsibilities and how we ought to help build to deal with the situation that the three of you have described .
 Later this week our Strategic Forces Subcommittee has a hearing on our own nuclear deterrent . The subcommittee will also hear on the nuclear deterrent.
 Admiral: "I just mentioned the importance of that as one of the elements. And, Admiral, you just mentioned that as a part of that"
 Russia continues to modernize its nuclear stockpile . It continues to manufac11 ture new weapons.
 The 1980s versions of the 1980s are still working. Meanwhile, we are sitting here trying to keep them working .
 The role of nuclear deterrence in this broader context is what I am trying to understand. So the role ofnuclear deterrence is what he is trying to understanding .
 Russia maintains about 1,500 strategic warheads. About 1,000 in reserve, probably 2,000 to 3,000 tactical nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. maintains some level to meet that, and that mutual assured destruction philosophy will continue to matter at the strategic level .
 Russian forces are not as strong as they were during the Warsaw Pact days, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: "We are reminded of it fairly frequently by President Putin"
I think we are looking at intermediate nuclear range missiles as well as tactical nuclear devices. And here I think we're really looking at Intermediate Nuclear range missiles . And here we are also looking at tacticalnuclear devices, he says .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says it is necessary to modernize the country's resources to meet Russian challenges . "This is a significant resource constraint," he says, but it is needed to meet challenges .
 The admiral says he agrees wholeheartedly with the admiral . He says it's a good thing to say that .
 Russia says it is important for us to maintain our nuclear deterrence with Russia . It is important to maintain a nuclear deterrence.
 They absolutely rely on their strategic nuclear forces to maintain their status, frankly, as a global power .
 There is too much emphasis on tactical nuclear weapons, we say . But, given their conventional weakness relative to us, they also place more emphasis on their nuclear weapons .
 Putin's military doctrines permit a nuclear first use against a conventional attack . Under President Putin, they have actually refined their military doctrines .
 Russia can use tactical nuclear weapons to respond to a conventional attack against Russia . If the Russian government deems it a threat to the existence of the state, they can use nuclear weapons .
 The comments come from the Kremlin's ambassador in Copenhagen and elsewhere . The comments are a very dangerous development, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The LJnited States have a doctrine whereby they believe they can deter the LJNited States and other countries from intervening in an ongoing military operation, they say . They say they can then de-escalate in order to do so, if they want to
 The de-escalation would mean if they escalate, the U.S. would say, “Oh, this escalatory attack coming from Russia,” it would say . ‘That is too much for us to respond to.’
 We de-escalate, in essence, and let the Russians do what they would like to do, we say . So we de- escalate. So we do what we want to do. We want to let them do their own thing .
 The Russian doctrine is "a bit complicated," says CNN's John Sutter . "I probably went a little bit into the weeds of the Russian doctrine," he says .
 The Russians are relying on their tactical nuclear weapons to an extent that we find alarming in the U.S. But I think it gives you 12 a sense of how dangerous the situation is right now .
 Hill is also watching very closely the INF development, the Intermediate Nuclear Forces and the fact that the Russians have violated that treaty . Hill is, of course, also watched very closely.
 The U.S. needs to be prepared to deploy intermediate nuclear weapons back to Europe if the Russians do not roll back their program . "I believe that the United States needs to get ready to deploy, unfortunately, Intermediate nuclear weapons"
 The Russian approach to Russia has been criticized by some in the past for its lack of transparency . The Russian government has been accused of a lack of respect for the country .
 The New START [Strategic Arms Reduction] Treaty still seems to be holding in place . As we have been making clear, they are talking about tactical intermediate nuclear weapons here .
 Putin and the team around him have been trying to build up since the war in Georgia in 2008 . But it is that whole element of tactical surprise, which is key right now to the military momentum .
 The whole point of everything that we have seen has been to show us that the military is not just there for show, it is there for use . The military has been showing us that it is not only there for shows, but there is also for use.
 As I said in my oral remarks, it is there to be an instrument of policy. As he said in his oral remarks he said, it was there to being an instrument for policy . It is there, he said.
 It is no good if people just think, you know, you might be toying with the idea of using things . It's no good for people to think about using things, but it's not good if you just think .
 People have to believe that you will use them under certain circumstances . People must believe that they will use it under the certain circumstances.
 All of the contingencies that we have been highlighting here have been put on the table. And this is why all of these contingencies have been highlighted . This is why we are putting them on the tables .
 The team around Putin wants us to think that Russia will, in fact, use tactical and intermediate nuclear weapons .
 The treaty from 1987 will be coming up to the anniversary of the treaty next year . The treaty was signed in 1987 .
 Putin and the people around him want us to go back to that mentality of 30 years ago . In many respect, Putin wants us to return to the mentality that is 30 years old .
C credibility depends on making it very clear that this is not an idle threat. And again, credibility depends upon making itvery clear.
 Russians perceived in their engagements with the U.S. prior to the war in Georgia in 2008 was that we did not take any of their threats seriously. One of the biggest problems that the Russians perceived was that they didn't take any threats seriously .
 When they established a red line about the expansion of NATO we didn’t believe them, we didn't believe them .
 In some meetings, some of us were in the past, we heard senior U.S. officials say things like, “Well, the Russians will shout and they will stomp their feet but they won’t do anything,” they say . “
 This is in meetings that some of us in previous capacities took part in . Some of us had previously taken part in the meetings . This is the first time we have been in such meetings .
 The point was that they did not have the capacity to take military action in the past under Yeltsin . Under Gorba13 chev, the state was very much weakened .
 The whole point of this is not to engage in a nuclear exchange, but just to make sure that we know that Russia means business .
 Russia has a different debate with Russia now about deterrence . It is not just about deterrence, it is about deterrence. It is about the threat of deterrence .
 Putin and those around him, who are not military people, are engaged in conventional discussions, if one can call it that, of deterrence . "This is actually unacceptable," says Putin .
 Russia is a very different debate that we need to be having with Russia than we have had before. So it is a different debate, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I think it is a very important issue about the lessons others draw from our actions or inactions that apply in all sorts of places . I think this is an important issue for people to learn from their actions and actions .
At some point I want to explore the hybrid warfare and what that means for own capabilities . At some point he wants to explore how hybrid warfare can be used .
 Russia’s use of hybrid warfare, unconventional, more clever, all the — what you had mentioned earlier, he said .
 Part of it is to exert influence and go as far as they can without triggering Article 5 . I think part of the plan is to exerted influence and not trigger Article 5. I think that part of this is to be seen as a way to influence the government .
 NATO and in terms of the European Alliance it is difficult to actually draw a line in this context, but take us a step further with it . There is a real difference in their capacity now, as you said, that there is areal difference in the capacity now.
 This is the fifth article of the NATO Treaty and it says an attack on one shall be regarded as an attack by all .
 It is only two sentences long, but it defines an attack as air, sea, and land upon the forces or citizens of a NATO state . It is really worth getting out and reading; it is just two sentences.
 The treaty was being constructed in the 1950s, when it was being built, and developed . It would have been clear as a definition of the treaty in 1950s .
 A second element will be unmarked soldiers, so-called little green men, typically moving across borders . The second element is unmarked soldiers .
 The war game was completed with the Center for New American Studies . It includes this element of really taking off your military badges so that in the information campaign alongside it, as a state can deny that these are your soldiers .
 Alongside cyber and the little green men comes the information campaign, which I just mentioned .
We have seen this again and again, particularly in Ukraine in the Donbass region . We have seen a similar situation in the region, especially in Ukraine .
 NATO's "strung together" elements present a real challenge in the NATO context, says the author .
 We will defend Russians wherever they are; and by the way, we will define what a Russian is . We will also defend Russians everywhere they are .
 NATO would likely be more definite about where these tests would be responded to . Admiral, I just wonder whether you felt that NATO would be much more definite.
 The war game had a lot of European colleagues involved, and we moved very quickly to respond to this. And again, in the war game, we moved quickly to response to this .
 I think the problem with the unconventional approach is the surprise and the ambiguity of what is an attack. I think it is the only thing I would add — I absolutely agree that the problem is the shock and ambiguity of the attack is the problem .
 I think we have taken an approach with our allies, in particular in the NATO context, but also with the non-NATO periphery countries, is to try to strengthen their capacity . I think the approach that we've taken with our ally is to strengthen its capacity, he says .
 ERI money goes to special operations training that we are doing with Baltic countries . Bulgaria, Romania, Poland, all those periphery countries in NATO as well as the ones outside .
 If we strengthen our ability to respond, that will lower the likelihood that we will have to, as you said, respond to a Russian attack through 15 NATO, that local forces can take care of it . Local forces can also take control of it, according to U.
 "Local forces" doesn't mean necessarily the military forces, he says . "Our SOF folks are in there working with the military," he adds .
 We also need to look at the local police, the law enforcement authorities, national guard. We need to also look at local police and national guard .
 The hybrid means that, as you know, it is hard for us because of our authorities. So part of the hybrid means it is difficult for us to be part of it, unfortunately, as we know .
 The State Department needs to be working closely with its colleagues and mixing funding, if you will, to conduct training .
 The admiral mentioned, the information campaign, as well as the admiral . He said strengthening the allies is really important, and then another thing that he mentioned was also mentioned .
 State Department is setting up a new cell to address the messaging with regard to the counterterrorism effort that we are conducting with our allies and the need to get information out to counter the radical Islamist ideology .
 I would argue that we need a similar cell like that to counter the Russian propaganda . Well, I would argues that we needs a similarcell like that .
 I'm afraid, I don't think that that will actually do the business that we need to be done, he says . And I have to say, I am afraid, that I don’t think that. And I’m afraid that, I have
 The Russian government has a very sophisticated approach on the part of the Russian government, says CNN's John Sutter . "We have to be very cognizant of how broad-ranging that is," he says .
 Putin and the team around him have the same outlook and perspective as operatives, says CNN's John Sutter . "We have to just bear in mind that it is not just Putin," he says .
 This is an unusual group of people that we are dealing with as world leaders and the inner circle . This is a unusual group. This is the group that we're dealing with, we're talking with, as well as the world leaders .
 It is very hard to find some counterpart who is similar to this elsewhere . It is hard tofind some counterpart to this.
 Putin has always put it, working with people to manipulate situations, says Putin . It is the coin of the careers has been dealing in a clandestine fashion, and disassembling and dealing with information .
 When Putin thinks of an operation he doesn't just think of the military aspects of this. When Putin think of an op he doesn’t just think about the military aspect of this .
 Admiral Stavridis said it is all aspects of cyber and it is political . As Admiral Stvridis says, it is 'all aspects' of cyber .
 The State Department, frankly, will be run around in circles if that is kind of the focal point of what we do, he says . "We don’t have the capacity or the resources for this," he adds .
 Russia is engaged in the information space in creating a moral equivalency with the U.S. and with our allies at all different levels . Russia is also engaged in creating an information space.
Public opinion polls across Europe as well as in Russia show everyone believes that we are engaged in exactly the same activities .
 The British Empire and the Russian Empire were involved in hybrid warfare back in the 19th 16 century . They were trying to subvert regional leaders from the Indian Empire onwards .
 The Russians have said that they are going to engage the U.S. and its allies in the same kind of tactics that they believe we have been doing .
 Afghanistan has been engaging in clandestine operations in a continuous fashion since the war in Afghanistan onwards, says U.S. commander .
 They don't believe that we stepped down at all at the end of the Cold War in terms of the kinds of operations that we have been doing. They don’t believe that they stepped down. The Cold War ended at all, they say .
 The operation is just an affirmation that we have never really changed our operational perspective either. And in fact, they took the operations that we've launched in counterterrorism as just a affirmation that they have never changed our operations .
 Edward Snowden sitting in Moscow is not just for the propaganda value, it is for the media value .
 They believe very firmly that we are engaged in exactly the same tactics as we are . They believe that we're engaged in same tactics that they are .
 Putin’s viewpoint is that the United States lies; it spies on everybody; it engages in these kinds of activities . The United States has been accused of spying on everybody .
 Russia and the U.S. are very similar and to kind of discredit her is also in the environment. The whole point of the information war is to show that Russia and United States are similar .
 It also requires other leaders, our allies in the European capitals, media, the think tank world that I belong to, and everyone else to be very cognizant of what we are dealing with .
 We all have to do our homework, both inside and outside government, in figuring out how to contend with this . We all need to do their homework, either inside or outside government .
 The State Department can't actually compete with Russia, says U.S. Congresswoman . If I could, Mr Chairman and Madam Congresswoman, just to counter a little bit on the point, I could .
 The world writ large, based on our excellent intelligence sources, has been missing . But I think what has been lost is an ability to share information with our allies, with our partners .
 We are not very good at declassifying and reclassifying information that is not propaganda, we say . We're not very bad at declassification and re classifying information, we think .
 The Open Skies Treaty was actually useful because, unlike satellites, that is unclassified data that is gleaned as a result of aircrafts that take pictures .
In any event, I think that we can do more just by getting some information out. But in any event we can't do more than just get some information, I say .
 That is the minimum that the State Department could do and should do, together with the intelligence community . The State Department should do the same thing, according to a report .
 It is important that we share that information. So that is the only thing I wanted to point out there, that it is important to share that info .
 South Carolina's Mr Wilson is a distinguished gentleman from South Carolina . He will yield to the distinguished gentleman.
 In September 1990 I visited as a tourist to Moscow. And I have a particular interest in what you are saying and doing because in September 1990.
I was so hopeful, and I have studied Russian history and Russian culture . I was so optimistic, I have now studied Russian culture and history . I'm so hopeful.
It was like stepping back into 1917 and it was the end of a failed socialist era of empty stores, empty streets . It was like standing back in 1917, it was like step back to 1917, says author .
 U.S. President Barack Obama was hoping for a partnership between Russia, Europe and the United States . But it has just been, he says, for the betterment of the Russian people .
On subsequent visits across the country with my family, we saw the beginning of a freemarket society, a modern society . But sadly, on subsequent visits to the UK, we see the start of a modern day society .
 A crony capitalist system of some type benefiting the elite. But it has evolved now, sadly, into an autocratic political system, a crony capitalism system .
 I am still hopeful for the country and the Russian people, but what challenges we and they have, I say . I'm still hopeful of the country. I'm not sure what challenges they have.
 Russia's ongoing information propaganda operation is of great concern. But as chairman of the Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee, Russia’s ongoing information campaign is a great concern .
 I think I have laid out some of the components already, so with regard to dealing with the hybrid, I think all of the special operations training that is ongoing. I think it is ongoing, and I think some of it has already been laid out . I think there are some of
 There is also some assistance that is being provided to embassies on the strategic communications front .
 Ukraine is where we have been helping our ambassador work with the Ukrainians . And I am specifically thinking about Ukraine, where we've been pretty active .
 The State Department should take the lead on that and DOD should be in support. I don't think, first and foremost, though, the strategic communication is the Department of Defense’s responsibility .
 NIST 18 teams have a special niche capability with their so-called Nist 18 teams . The special operations forces have a unique niche capability .
 The other thing, of course, is just in training them to see when things are happening and changing on the ground .
 The Department of Defense's intel capabilities need to be brought to bear on the situation . "There is an intel component there, so obviously the Department of defense’s intel capabilities are needed," he says .
 The main components are the main components, aside from the ones that I already mentioned . So I think that's not the main part of the story, but it's the main component .
 "Cyber" is a good shopping list, but it is also cyber, as I hope I indicated. Can I just add to that mix? "I think that is aGood shopping list," he says .
 Russia's ability to compete in that space is something we need to emphasize as well, he says . I think this is an area Russia is really moving rapidly, along with other nations around the world .
 There is a very important role that our armed services can still keep playing through professional-level exchanges with Russia . Let me just add one small point, that there is a big role that we can still play with Russia, he says .
 Farkas warned us against in terms of some of the weaponry issues and joint ventures that we have engaged in previously . The strategic communications are still of extraordinary importance, especially for strategic communications .
 Russia is not any kind of implacable foe or enemy, says U.S. President Barack Obama . "We do not believe that Russia is any type of implicable foe," says Obama .
 The Russian government wants to use the military as a tool in their foreign policy . The current Russian government's conduct and posture of the current government is a problem .
 We have to make it very clear that there is still a different possibility ahead of us for a different kind of relationship, as we have already said, on many issues where we have mutual interest . We have been very close to each other since the start of the relationship.
 Those professional-level contacts are very important in emphasizing that they are important. And those professional- level contacts are also very important .
 There is a great deal of respect for the U.S. armed services among the Russian military, he says . We should capitalize upon that when we communicate with them, he adds .
 South Carolina has a thriving Russian-American population . "I hope they see the positive society we are," says South Carolina resident .
 Russian submarine activity has risen to a level not seen since the Cold War days, Admiral Stavridis says .
 Undersea forces playing cat-and-mouse games throughout the Arctic, through the Mediterranean, through Greenland-IcelandU.K.
 I would say we are back up to 70 to 80 percent of what we saw during Cold War times . That implies more patrols coming closer to the United States, more probing kinds of activities, he says .
 A closed session briefing on this might be of great interest to the members, he says . As you are well aware, this gets into highly classified information quite rapidly, but I will close there .
You talked about ground troops and air assets that need to be boosted . Again, you talked about air and ground troops .
 "We spend a lot of time talking about the pivot to Asia-Pacific," he says . "We have had some of those briefings that you mentioned earlier," he adds .
 Admiral Stavridis is a member of the Admiral of the Navy . He has been in charge of the U.S. Navy since the 1980s .
 In terms of the Russian fleet, it is not a huge fleet, but it is 270ish kind of ships . It's 270ish sort of ships, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, it's not a big fleet .
 The submarine force in particular is extremely high-tech and extremely capable . But its submarine force is being used most aggressively at this point .
 The Russians are going to increase the conventional surface force as well as increase the surface force . If we look at the building programs, what is on the waves and what the Russians communicate to us about what they're going to build, we should look at what they are
 So we are seeing robust activity, particularly in the subsurface venue . We are seeing strong activity, especially in subsurfaced venue .
 It is less about the platform and more about the uses to which they are being put, which again are much more aggressive than we have seen really in a decade. And it is less than the platform, it is about the use of the platform .
 Admiral Stavridis: We don't have a lot of time here. We have been looking at for the last 10 years in terms of shifting assets to Guam and other parts .
 The U.S. is a global power and we have global interests, says John Sutter . Sutter: We ought to be reassessing that as a theory, recognizing that the United States is aglobal power . He says we should reassess that as an
 A significant portion of the fleet could be shifted into the Pacific . But it is a good time to be reassessing whether we want to shift a significant part of it into the ocean .
 Mr Garamendi has been working hard on the Coast Guard Subcommittee . The Russians have about 42 icebreakers shored up in the Arctic .
 I was wondering if you could just sort of comment on Admiral Stavridis. I'm not sure if you can just kind of comment. I was asked to comment on the Admiral Stvridis .
 I would invite the committee to read into the record the article I just wrote with General Schwartz about a solution for icebreakers . I'd invite the Committee to read the record of the article .
 The high North is going to be an area in which we need to be much better, and icebreakers have to be part of that . There is no question that the high North will be a much better area .
 The submarine force is an area that the Russians have emphasized in their modernization, as opposed to the surface fleet . I think really just to say that the submarines are an area of the submarine force, I think .
 missiles are also something that — the missile capability they have improved — has improved . The missile capability has also improved, according to experts .
We need to have good situational awareness, I think, again, the submarine fleet. So we need to be aware of the situation, and I think it's time for the fleet to be prepared .
 The Russian fleet, of course, is also in the Pacific and our Pacific forces are watching them closely there, as well .
 Russia is not just thinking about the U.S. as a long-term threat in the Arctic, it says . It's just one point, because China came up, that Russia is thinking about it .
 Russia, the Arctic and the Asia-Pacific theaters are connected, and they are literally connected physically . For Russia, Arctic and Asia- Pacific theaters, they are connected .
 Russia is worried about Chinese, Korean, and other incursions as the ice melts in the Arctic .
 Russia's commercial fleet is about their commercial fleet, not just about their military posture in the Arctic . Russia's military posture is about its commercial fleet and its military fleet .
 I think we have to have a very broad-ranging discussion of the Arctic, not just from our own perspective . I think it's not just just from my own perspective, it's from the own perspective.
 Admiral Stavridis, especially grateful to you for your lifelong service to freedom .
 President Putin wants a transatlantic relationship with Europe . He wants a future grounded in the European Union in economics with Europe.
 It is highly to the interest of the U.S. that that competition move Ukraine in a direction of the West .
 Through the mechanisms as you are describing, through financial support. Through financial support, and through financial help, you can see how you can help others .
 Russian General Slipchenko's comments on Iran's electromagnetic pulse ambitions were a little "discomfited" I suppose is an understatement, he says .
 Russia has a significant EMP, electromagnetic pulse, capability, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Without broaching into classified information, I will confine myself to say Russia has an electromagnetic pulse"
 A nuclear blast at the right level can knock out an enormous amount of our cyber capability . It is a mechanism wherein a nuclear blast is a way to knock out a huge amount of cyber capability. It's a mechanism where a nuclear Blast at theright level can knocked out
 Some have referred to this as the event that causes the cyber Pearl Harbor . Some have called it the cyber attack .
 Russia could use only one or two nuclear weapons to impact a large society like the U.S. The fact that Russia would even have conversations about that with Iran is very disconcerting .
 The S-300 anti-air warfare system is highly prized by the Iranians . I will close on Russia and Iran by pointing out that today we see the fulfilment of the sale.
I think we will see nothing but further cooperation between Russia and Iran in a variety of spheres . I think we, unfortunately, will see no further cooperation with Russia or Iran in the future .
 I hope your voice is carried far and wide. Well, I obviously am glad you are on our side, and I hope you're on your side . I'm glad you're in good spirits, I'm happy to see you in good health .
 Hill: Increasing assistance to European allies will affect Russia’s behavior in Syria . Hill: Russia's behavior will affect Europe's response to the situation in Syria. Hill: Increase in assistance will affect Russian behavior in the region .
 Admiral Stavridis' response to Iran has been linked to his comments about the country . The comments were made in response to the comments about Iran .
 Russia sees the order in the Middle East as completely broken down now, the order established since Suez in 1956 . Russia wants to make sure that it has some say there because it is a whole set of interests, including relationships with Iran, with Egypt, with Israel
 Turkey has a lot of tensions with countries like Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Turkey . It has also had tensions with Saudi Arabia and Turkey, as a result of the incident back in November .
 The U.S. needs the United States to help it get out of what could be a quagmire on the military side into some kind of negotiation .
 Syrian state is pushing to keep Assad in place in some semblance of the Syrian state, which is what it is pushing towards right now .
 Russia seeks a balance of power in the Middle East that will protect its interests, as well . But Russia seeks balance of powers that protect its own interests, and its interests .
We do actually still have some leverage there as long as we can remember that it is not all about us in the case of Syria. So we do actually have some Leverage there, we do not need to worry about Syria .
Under the leadership of the chairman I was able to visit Ukraine and Eastern Europe a few months ago and last year . I was struck by the enthusiasm that the Eastern European countries shared at having us participate in drills.
 The military talked excitedly about extending its plans to counter a Russian invasion further east with our new NATO allies . We had tank drills going on; we were very enthusiastically positioning aircraft .
 I was shocked at how little we were doing to counter the Russian hybrid warfare threat. And to be perfectly honest, I was surprised at how much we had to do .
 France released excited press releases about their reinforcement to the Maginot Line when Germany is building tanks . It reminded me of what it must have been like to see France releasing excited press release about the reinforcement .
 ERI chief: "I just find it hard to believe that we are making smart strategic decisions when we are supporting all these tank drills at the necessary expense of expansions in our cyber warfare"
I was wondering if you could comment on hybrid warfare, but at the right balance we need to strike with our resources, he says . I was wondering whether you could speak specifically to the need to address hybrid warfare .
 The base budget also addresses the hybrid threat. If I could just quickly on this, I think part of what is important to bear in mind is that the base budget should also address the hybrid threats .
 General Votel turned around very quickly and came up with a plan to address Russia . The special operations community gives him a lot of credit for turning around quickly .
 The Department responded very rapidly, he says, for the Crimea crisis . He suggests that the committee invite him to brief you on their plans to address Russia threat .
 In the United States European Command they have turned around and are already doing a lot of training . There is money in their base budget, and they are already training .
 Ukraine has been doing training in other countries, not just in Ukraine .
 They have already been working in the Baltics and Georgia and other places . They have also worked in Georgia and Baltics .
 ERI funds for us to demonstrate to the Russians that we will be ready to respond if they take military action towards us . It is not necessarily a question of money, because what the special operations forces do in terms of building that resiliency internally doesn’t cost as much
 It is hard to compare the dollars because you just need more dollars to do the conventional stuff . The unconventional stuff generally doesn’t cost as much as the unconventional stuff, says the author .
 Russia has had a strong sense of purpose and focus. I mean, one of the reasons that we see that Russia has been beating us in this regard is because they have had a very strongsense of purpose, says Putin .
 Russia has made a lot of mistakes in kind of miscalculating Russia’s intent, and that is kind of what has now come to bite us, frankly, since the war in Georgia .
 We didn't foresee what they were going to do in Syria, not because we didn't see them moving material and equipment in Syria . It is because we weren’t able to anticipate what they might be doing, it's because we were not able to foresee what
 Our sensors are up now in NATO and elsewhere. As we have heard, our sensors are now up in NATO .
 I think what we have to do overall is posture ourselves in terms of analysis, as well. And I think that we need to posture ourselves, and that we should posture ourselves .
 It is not just an issue of intelligence and collecting intelligence; it is how we think about this issue . It is how they think about it. It's not just a issue of Intelligence and collecting intel; it's how we Think about it .
 DIA has been gutted over the last several years, in terms of its work on Russia . People have been redeployed from what would seem is not a priority area, says Mr Moulton .
 Onto other areas — the war on terrorism and elsewhere — which of course have been important . The war on terror and elsewhere has been important.
 When Putin gets up every day he thinks about the huge Russian landmass, he thinks of it .
 He is not the head of a second-rate regional power, but he is the president of a multiregional power . He is also the leader of a regional power.
 The admiral said Russia's posture is "in that context and our own global posture, as the admiral says"
 Russia is the immediate threat. I would just say that we need to bear in mind now that Russia is an immediate threat to us .
 ERI will make our allies feel better but it is not going to have any effect at all on Putin . There are some people who believe it will make us feel better .
 I lean toward solutions that are cyber, special forces, unmanned vehicles . I lean towards solutions that were cyber,special forces, and unmanned vehicles.
 I think what is in the cusp between the two is a battlefield capability that is anti-armor, anti-tank . I think the two are capable of defeating each other on the battlefield .
 That kind of lethal force has a role to play that kind of falls in between the two categories, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Distributed force" is a kind of distributed force that can be lethal, distributed force .
 A battalion, armor, heavy tanks are unlikely to be the solution to the problem, says John Sutter . But he thinks a battalion, Armor,Heavy tanks will not be a solution there .
 Russia has increased its defense spending by 25 percent in the last 2 years . Russia faces severe economic challenges that Russia faces, the government says .
 The U.S. has had continued discussions about defense sequestration, which includes significant reductions in Army end strength . Meanwhile, the United States has had continuing discussions about sequestration .
 I am particularly interested in Army end strength, in cyber, and in cyber . I am also interested in the so-called pivot to Asia . The Army is reassessing its pivot toAsia .
Former colleague and friend of Army future commission has just come out . He is a supporter of the recent Army Future Commission .
I think that is spot on and lays out the numbers, I think, appropriately . I think that's spot on. I think it's appropriate to lay out the number, and that's where to go, I say .
 An Army that is about a million is what is needed between Active, Reserve, and Guard . In very round numbers, I think an Army that's about one million is needed .
In terms of cyber, I think it is time to add significant capability, in fact, to examine the question of whether or not the nation needs a cyber force . In terms of Cyber, it's time to added significant capability.
 I think it is high time to think about a cyber force — small, a few thousand, but to grow . I think the cyber force is small, small, and to grow, says author .
I do think we will continue to see an emphasis on maritime and air activity globally . I do think there will be a focus on maritime activity globally. I do believe we will see anemphasis on maritime activities globally .
 There is no simple answer of, gee, we should pivot to Asia or not. I want to make sure we are all on the same sheet of music here in that the world is big and global and complicated, I say .
 Europe and in the Levant and the near Middle East should be reexamining a huge shift of forces to the Pacific . But what we have seen of late in Europe and the Levant causes me to think we ought to be re-examined .
 I have gotten to where I am today generally by agreeing with Admiral Stavridis, so I agree with everything that he said. Well, he said, so he agreed with everything he said . He said.
 The Deputy Secretary of Defense has this third offset in this budget request . The new budget request addresses critical capabilities that we need to develop .
 "I probably can’t get into it too much more, but at cyber capabilities, cyber teams, and things like that. And I would mention in that context that they are looking at," he says .
 There are other elements of the budget that do address the unconventional threat, as well .
 I think what we have to bear in mind, based on all the things that we have been talking about today, is flexibility and adaptability in any of the mechanisms, he says . I think that whatever we do, we must make sure we have flexibility, adaptability.
 The U.S. has been in the Middle East for more than a decade . It's not the first time it's been seen as a pivot to Asia or the pivot to the region .
 Russia has never changed its posture toward the U.S. Russia may be the current and present threat, but it has never really changed its stance .
 The U.S. is not dealing with many of the other threats that also face Russia, frankly, the United States is not . Russia’s main threat over the longer term is Russia's main threat.
 All the transnational threats that we are worried about Russia is too, too, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has to change its calculus for Russia also, so that they change their minds about thinking of us as a threat . "We have to actually move in a direction in which we change that calculus," says Putin .
 The U.S. State Department and the Pentagon are involved in some of the world's most important diplomatic relations . The Pentagon and the State Department are among those involved in the process .
 We have to make sure that we don’t get ourselves fixated on just the nature of the threat as it is. And we have to be careful to keep the threat from becoming a threat .
 We need as many flexible mechanisms as possible, and we need to think to ourselves about how we adapt, not pivot one way or the other .
We have to be very careful that whatever we do, as I think Admiral Stavridis and Dr. Dr. John Sutter are very careful about what we do .
 Farkas are saying not to fixate on Russia, the Middle East, and the Levant as well . They want to have a holistic approach and figure out how everything will fit together .
 Farkas has stated publicly that his support for defensive legal assistance in the Ukraine was not supported within the Department of Defense . Farka: "Farkas, you have stated publicly, that your support for defense legal assistance was not support within the Defense Department
 Russia has requested lethal defensive equipment, specifically anti-tank weapons, the Javelin system . I think, as I mentioned in my testimony, that the countries around Russia’s periphery, they have requested lethal defense equipment, the author says .
 The administration has not seen the need to provide this equipment to those countries . But it would be an important potential deterrent to Russia, he says .
 The U.S. has been drawn into the conflict in Ukraine . The conflict is defensive in nature, but it is not uncontrollable, he says .
 I do believe strongly that we should make that system available to those countries . So I do think strongly that the system should be available to that countries .
As far as the discussion about the Russia threat, I think you are hearing a chorus of voices, starting with, as I mentioned earlier. As far as this, the discussion is about the Russian threat.
 Secretary Carter has been actively pushing items in the budget for a while now to address the Russia threat . Deputy Secretary Work has been pushing items into the budget.
 The Defense Department has a strong voice coming out of the Department of the Defense . But it is not the voice that matters, he says .
 Sometimes if you talk too loudly you can, your strategy can backfire . And in fact, sometimes if your strategy is too loudly, it can back fire .
 The Russian president has said he doesn't need to get into a confrontational dynamic with Russia . He says he wants to avoid a confrontation with the country .
On this strategic and dangerous elements of our relationship we actually have to reengage in the discussion. And I don’t want to veer too far off your question topic, but on this Strategic and some of the more dangerous elements, we actually need to re engage in the
 The Russian government took the Ukraine's interest in joining the European Union as such an assault on their foreign policy . The Ukrainian government took that opportunity to go in and seize Crimea .
 I think the thing that hasn't been mentioned, or maybe not mentioned sufficiently, is intelligence . I think that hasn’t been mentioned is intelligence.
 I found it shocking in the administration, but it was disappointing, he says . "I mean, it wasn’t shocking," he says of the administration .
 We have a lot of very good intelligence on Russia, but we do not have sufficient analysts . We have not enough resources to get that information proc27 essed and get it out to the policymakers fast enough .
 U.S. European Command needs more ISR for the United States European Command . The committee is dealing with that issue all the time in many different contexts, he says .
 The satellite capability is one thing, but we really need to have the eyes on all the time. And, you know, the satellites are one thing. We need to be able to use them all over the world .
 I do believe we need to make sure that we have sufficient resources. And so that is an area where we need more resources, he says . He says.
 Ukraine could provide resources to the Ukrainians, as well. And, of course, we could provide those resources to Ukrainians, also .
 President Putin did think that there was a strong possibility that we might turn a blind eye . I think that President Putin certainly did think there was an opportunity .
 He took the lack of a robust response to this as a sign that we weren’t really serious. He took it to be a sign we weren't really serious .
 All of the questions that we are talking about today from our own perspective are questions that are being asked in Moscow about their own perspective . The questions are about analysis and intelligence and their posture, all against and against deterring us .
 Putin has been seeking to exploit as many fissures as possible between her and our allies . This is one area where I have something of a slight disagreement with Dr. Dr.
 Earkas about we have to be very careful when we are discussing support for Ukraine and elsewhere about keeping unity with our European allies . Earka: We need to be more careful when discussing support.
 This is really a very key element about changing those expectations that we will get back to business as usual with Russia. This is very key part of changing the expectations of business with Russia . This is one of the key elements to change those expectations.
 Mr Chairman, and also the ranking member, for holding this important hearing .
 It matches a lot of the analysis that myself and others have been doing here very recently . It matches the analysis I've been doing this very recently, according to the analysis .
 A bill will be introduced this week that is surrounding the land forces and the need to stop the drawdown .
 Admiral, thank you for your comments as far as ensuring that we keep the land forces strong. Admiral.
 Our bill will essentially stop this drawdown, keep the land forces about 1,000,035 for the Army in the total Army . The current plan is right now .
 The administration’s intent is to go to 450,000 in the Active Army, 335,000 on the Army National Guard, and then under 200,000. For a total of 977,000, the administration wants to increase the number of Active Army members .
 Admiral: I would like you to comment on, first of all, if you have any general comments about our efforts . Admiral: "I would like to see what you can do to help us with our efforts"
 Sergeant Major Walls, I appreciate his support, and we have the support of chairman, which is very important, he says . The sergeant Major Walls is the chairman of the committee .
 The U.S. military says it has the ability to strategically maneuver in the Middle East . But it's not just homeland defense or deterrence, it's also deterrence, the military says .
Retired admiral says he wouldn't be doing his job as a retired admiral if he didn't say the words “Marine Corps’ at this point. And, you know, I wouldn’t be doing my job.
 The budget will be submitted to the committee and the Hill . I think I was happy to see their force levels remain strong in this budget. And I think it's good for the budget to be submitted .
 General Ham and I have had a lot of conversations about this, and this is where the ability to use the Marine Corps in and around that construct is critical to your bill, he says .
Marine efforts alongside the maritime and the air that have to go with it. Marine efforts should be very holistic, says David Cameron .
 The U.S. Marine Corps and Marine Corps Reserve are both contained inside this bill to stop the drawdown .
 Marines were on a flank with each other at Nineveh and Anbar Province, Iraq .
 The admiral makes an excellent point that the admiral made, he says .
 The Department of Defense has relied heavily on the Black Sea Rotational Force in that area . NATO Balkan countries provide important readiness training and preparation for Georgian forces to deploy with us .
 The Army is stretching the Army too thin, he says . He also says that we need to keep an eye on readiness and end strength .
Congressman Takai's response to Congressman Takai has been truncated . Just one very small point, which picks up on the truncated response, is a small point .
 Farkas has said, to keep our allies in mind here, and to also make sure that whatever we are doing is also complemented by our military interactions with them, as well as our military interaction .
 Admiral Stavridis has been making clear, as well. All of this interoperability, maneuverability of the forces overall is extremely important, he says . He says .
 Some have attributed the increase in hybrid warfare across the globe to the inability of the West to find a way to integrate Russia and other rising powers . Brazil, India, and China, and Russia are among the rising powers in the world .
 Russia is using grey zone campaigns to grab more influence and shift the terms of regional orders . I am thinking — well, with that in mind, it is not really surprising. I'm thinking, well, I'm not really surprised .
I think that is a very interesting question, and I think its premise is roughly right, which is to say that part of why there is an increase in grey zone activity or hybrid warfare, or here I would really. I think that's a veryinteresting question, which I think is
 The term “asymmetric warfare’s” is partly — of exclusion from normal mechanisms . Congressman, use the term ‘asymmetrical warfare,’ is part of the term .
 In other words, tools are available in cyber, in social networks, in information that allow smaller, less-advantaged groups to engage in these kind of activities . In other terms, tools can be used in cyber.
 The BRICs are extraordinarily different cases. It is interesting you mention theBRICs because I think these are extraordinary different cases .
 Brazil is a mega-power which I do not think feels excluded from the international order . Brazil suffers from a great deal of internal challenges economically. Brazil is not excluded from international order but suffers from internal challenges .
 With Brazil, the prescription is to engage them fully using economic leverage to pull them into the global system . With Brazil I think the prescription was to engage the country fully with economic leverage. With Brazil.
 India represents our best potential partner going forward in this century, I think . India is India's "best potential partner" I think India represents the best potential partners going forward, I say .
 A U.S. relationship with India is one that will be critically important, says U.N. ambassador .
 You see China engaging in relatively responsible ways in the international order. And you see China engage in relativelyresponsible ways in international order .
 Russia is the world's most dangerous country, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has a history of open conflict between Russia and Russia, says Putin . Putin says Russia will not be able to engage in an open conflict with Russia .
 These are items that have been up for discussion for a long time, looking at the composition of that council . The council's composition has been a long-running discussion .
 The admiral said Russia is using the type of means that they are using in order to assert themselves . But I think otherwise, it is really Russia that is the problem, he said, as the admiral .
 Russia must become a member of every club that we are in, rather than counterbalance us politically . It is not that we oppose Russia having a special role in its periphery or in Europe writ large, or that we think Russia must be a member.
 How to get them to not use those means is really the subject of my testimony, whereby what I think we need to do is demonstrate to them that those means won’t work. And so how to get it to not be used is the topic of his testimony.
 Putin is looking for the relationship with the West, Putin said . Putin is also looking for a better relationship with West, he said .
 Russia wants to be in the same kind of arrangement that Russia thinks it has on the U.N. Security Council . Russia has a right to veto things that it doesn’t like.
 Russia sees the order breaking down in Europe and the Middle East . Russia is now the focal point in the region .
 Russia has a broader vision for Russia of seeing that the methods they are using in Europe and the Middle East will actually be counterproductive for Russia in a much more global perspective .
 Russia is also vulnerable in Central Asia, which is another area of its traditional interest . Russia is actually vulnerable in both of those theaters, and it's also vulnerable.
 If Russia wants to be on the board with the rest of us then it has to play by rules that we all generally share, including China .
 We have to engage Russia in different theaters and to show that there is actually an alternative way of getting of our attention and of being there present when we are discussing new rules of the game . We have a 31 alternative way to get our attention.
 It is a diplomatic challenge, but I think it also requires a showing from the military perspective that we are talking about today that we mean business . We will not accept those methods, he says .
 China, India, India and other rising powers are trying to see how we handle this relationship with Russia .
 Russia's crisis is a test for how we want to set the tone for future engagements internationally . We should think about this crisis as a test, not just for Russia, but for how it will be used for international engagements .
 Russia is the most immediate threat to the United States, says Farkas . He says the U.S. should focus resources on Asia-Pacific or shifting that back towards the East . FARKas: "I think you and the admiral both touched on
 North Korea is our number one threat, especially given the provocations that we have seen from them with the missile tests, the nuclear tests, their increased capabilities . South Korea is looking to increase its missile defense capability with our help .
 North Korea conducts a nuclear test, recognizing that within their current capabilities we fall significantly within range . Hawaii feels very directly the threat every time North Korea launches a missile test .
 North Korea is our number one threat, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: North Korea's threat is the world's most serious threat . North Korea has been a threat to the West for years, but it's not a threat, Sutter says .
 I worked for the Senate Armed Services Committee and worked very hard and aggressively for Senator Levin, at the time, on North Korea . I worked, as I mentioned earlier, for the senate Armed Service Committee .
 Russia is at the same level as the threat that we are seeing from Russia right now. But I don’t think that it is at a similar level as it is in terms of the potential dangers we face with Russia .
 The Russian Federation has far surpassed the capabilities of the North Korean regime, he says . "We have the means to respond to both," he adds . Russia needs a bigger undertaking, he said .
 Russian threat is in our face, says CNN's John Sutter . "It is here 32 and now, it is in the face," he says . "You know, they are both threats and — but I emphasize the Russian one"
 Putin will take the opportunity to use military force again, as he did in Ukraine, even before that in Moldova . We really need to understand it because there is a real danger that if we don’t stand firm against Putin he will take it again, says David Cameron .
 He will be tempted to use it again, and of course, the worst case for us would be if he used it against a NATO ally or God forbid, against us . He doesn't think it is probable, but it is still, for the Department of Defense, obviously prudent to
 The North Korean threat is not important, he says, and we need to focus on that, as well . So I think that is the worst-case scenario, but clearly I don’t mean to say that the North Korean threats are not important. So I
 The ranking thing is a little bit overdone. We can’t pick among — you know, we can't pick among, and I think the ranking thing was a littlebit overdone Ms.
 North Korea is the most dangerous country in the world, says author . He says it is in a tactical sense. I would only add to that, I have written extensively .
 Russia represents a significant strategic challenge for the United States, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Russia's throw weight and its strategic play is a significant challenge for U.S.
 I would not in any way understate the risks on the Korean Peninsula in particular . But I wouldn't understate any of the risks in particular, he said .
 Hill: U.S. and Russia are “on a longterm collision course,’ in particular as it relates to Syria . Hill: The United States, Russia and the United States are on a long term collision course .
 I'm just wondering if you can expand on that little bit and why you believe that is the case. I am just wondering whether you can expanded on that a little bit .
 The relationship preceded Bashar al-Assad’s; it was a relationship that Russia also established with his father . The relationship was the first time Russia had a relationship with Bashar.
 They are very interested in propping up the regime and keeping the state of Syria together . They are also interested in keeping the country together .
 Russia has exactly the same concerns as all of the other neighboring states do and European states do about the influence of extremism on its domestic politics .
 Russia has the largest indigenous Muslim population of any European country . Moscow has the biggest Muslim population in its capital, Moscow .
 There are foreign fighters from the neighboring countries in Central Asia and the Caucasus . There are also foreign fighters.
 Russia believes keeping the Syrian state together with someone like Assad, a strongman at the head, is the best solution for them . Russia has, you know, all the questions that we have about the future of Syria.
 We have been on a collision course because obviously we have not had the same starting point . We have not been on the same collision course. We are not on the collision course, we are not at the same start point .
 Syrian government wants to keep some semblance of the Syrian state together . But we did not want to begin with Assad .
 Russia has decided to use its military as a blunt instrument in foreign policy to force us to start from the same point as Russia has in determining the future of Syria . Russia has been discussing Syria's future in the past .
 U.S. and Russia are on a head-to-head collision path in Syria, says President Obama . "I agree with your assessment of that and remain concerned about this head to-head collisions," says Obama .
 I think it will take a lot of work, however, because it is not a two-way game. I think the work will be done, but it is, as we have been saying all the way along, this is not the two- way game .
 It is not between the U.S. and Russia by any stretch of the imagination, it is not. It is between the United States and Russia .
 Russia has differences not just with the U.S. but with Turkey, which it very clearly expressed now on very risky and very dangerous terms . Russia has expressed its differences with Turkey.
 Russia has a difference of opinion with Saudi Arabia, with Qatar and other Gulf States . Russia has different opinion with Qatar, with other Gulf states .
 Russia has not jumped into the sectarian divide in the Middle East by any stretch. We have to be very careful here to make sure that we are clear that Russia hasn't jumped into a sectarian divide by any time .
 Russia’s Muslim population are predominantly Sunni, but it also has a Shia population inside of its own territory and on its periphery .
 Russia doesn't want to be part of a religious war; it wants to actually stop these . Russia doesn’t want to become part of the religious war .
 Russia wants to see some kind of new balance of power in the Middle East . Russia wants some sort of new power in Middle East.
 It doesn't want to see Iran get the upper hand over other Middle East players, either . It doesn’t want to be seen as an example of Iran in the region .
 Russia and the United States are on vep^ much the same page. So in many respects, Russia and U.S. are on the same pages .
 Israel has a very different relationship with Israel than it was during the Cold War for Russia . It is a different relationship. It is not the same with Israel as it was with Russia in the 1950s .
 We just have to get away from the idea that it is just a collision between the two of us over actually a country that we don't have any intrinsic interest in owning. We just need to stop the idea of a collision.
 It wants to eventually get out of Syria, maintaining its base and other interests there . But it wants to see an order emerging around Syria and the Middle East .
 Assad will be difficult to swallow, given his level of atrocity against his own people . I agree we can get to a diplomatic solution, but it will require us accepting Assad .
In the Balkans we had to cut a similar deal. I take some comfort from the fact that in the Balkans it was similar to the same deal .
 Milosevic stayed in power, and in the end he died in jail cell in The Hague .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin says Russia has a better ability to decide what we want to do . Putin says he is trying to understand Russia's situation from the Russian perspective . Putin: "We have a better able to decidewhat we want"
I would like to pull you aside and share 10 gallons of coffee with you over the next 10 days . In fact, I would like you to share a gallon of coffee.
 NATO has with regard to little green men in the Baltics is troublesome. One, it seems to me, it appears to me the ambiguity that NATO presently has with regards to littleGreen men is troublesome . It seems to be to me that NATO currently has a ambiguity
 The way warfare has changed and morphed. We talked a bit earlier about Article 5 and then the definition of an attack, which is Article 6, and then Article 6 . We talk about Article 6 and the way warfare is changing .
 NATO will work much harder to identify through intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance activities . I think because of what has occurred in Ukraine, NATO is much more on alert, I think .
 I wouldn't want to speak for the Baltic States, but I am assured they would take a very aggressive posture, he says . I think they would immediately use lethal force. And I think, frankly, I wouldn’t want to talk for theBalt States .
 Our Baltic allies would like our Baltic allies, and that is what they would like, I say . That is what we owe them. I mean, that's what the — our Baltic ally would like .
 We are, as I mentioned earlier, doing a lot of work with our special operations forces . We are doing a lots of work. We are also doing some work with the special ops forces, he says .
 We need to do more to help law enforcement in Baltic countries, and also the Balkan countries, Romania and Bulgaria . We need more, though, to help the Baltic countries.
 I am going to say thank you for that, but it seems to me we need clarity as to what is an incursion, what's an attack, what is a attack. I'm not sure what's going on, but I'm going to ask for clarity .
 The National Security Agency provides the tool sets and, I would argue, will be where this response will occur . The agency, which is part of the Department of Defense, provides the tools .
 The Department of Defense has a specific set of responsibilities to protect military capabilities, notably our nuclear systems .
 The committee could profitably spend a great deal of time examining the cyber structure in the government . The committee would probably need 20 gallons of vodka to really get through the cyber structures .
 Nobody has Admiral Stavridis. I asked the question for a specific reason, which is everybody is responsible . I asked for a Specific reason.
 The budget has a whole lot more money for cybersecurity. I think they mean how to protect our databases . I noticed that the budget has more money to spend on cybersecurity .
 The segment that is most vulnerable is our grid system. Financial, health, military, financial, financial and financial systems are vulnerable . The grid system is vulnerable to financial, health and military systems .
 Russia is expanding its modernization capability with an enormous focus on nuclear weapons . Russia has a leader who frequently mentions that we should not forget that they have nuclear weapons.
 The Russian president says we need to keep our force modernized so that we can continue to deter Russia . He says he is not going to argue about the dollar amount, but he does think it needs to be modernized .
 The 30th anniversary of the Gorbachev-Reagan summitry is next year . We also need to find a way of pushing back to arms control discussions, particularly as we reach next year.
 Mr Garamendi is a former president of France and France . He was in charge of the French government during the 1980s and 1990s . He has been in power since then, but has not been in charge since then .
 I am going to prevail upon you all for just a couple more questions. I'm going to be able to answer a few more questions hopefully . I'm not sure what questions I will answer .
 A line of argument is that Putin wanted to cooperate with us until the Balkans happened and we bombed, you know, Syria .
 I think it is the problem of understanding other people’s threat perceptions and the environment in which they operate . I think the problem is to understand other people's threat perceptions, the environment they operate.
 I think it was always a very hard sell to persuade someone like Putin and the people around him that, you know, we actually meant well towards Russia . I think we actually mean well to Russia, I said . I said it was a hard sell. I think
 This is somebody who was trained in a Cold War environment to be deeply suspicious about the U.S. This is someone who was training to be suspicious about America . This is one of many people trained in the Cold War.
 I don't think he is actually in any way intrinsically anti-American, but he is always deeply suspicious of threats to Russia . I don’t think he’s actually in a way intrinsically pro-American. He is deeply suspicious.
 The U.S. has been in the business of regime change, she says . She says it's not really to do necessarily with the Balkans .
 Admiral Stavridis is referring to what he and others saw in the Balkans in the 1990s . He says we might eventually get around to him and to Russia .
People in Russia believed NATO could bomb Belgrade that meant NATO couldBomb Moscow . Back in 1999, I was actually in Russia during the NATO bombing .
 Putin and the people around him have talked themselves into seeing that everything that we do fits into that frame . Since then, Putin has talked himself into seeing everything that he does fits into the frame .
 Putin claimed that the State Department had been behind the protests in Russia in 2011, 2012 . But he firmly believed it, he said .
 He believes that we have continued with active measures since the Cold War . He says we have never stepped back from active measures .
 The problem has been how to persuade someone who thinks like that that in actual fact this is not the case. And so the problem is how to convince someone who think like that is not a case.
 He has some sort of self-interest to perpetuate this myth, or those around him, he says . And he has some kind of — or those people around him — to perpetuate it .
 The use of assassination has also heen in the news here recently, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 I would like to broaden out for a just a second and ask each of you to address this issue . I would want to ask each other to address it.
 Putin sees the international order since the end of World War II as being developed by us for us . Farkas: Putin is trying to rewrite the international rules because he sees the world's order since end of WWII .
 A fundamental rewrite of the international order so it can be more to their advantage, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 If you would start and just address this briefly, if you could, this attempt would be an attempt to change the whole ballgame . But if you would just address it briefly, you would be able to do so .
 Putin is trying to rewrite the rules, and that is precisely the problem that we have. Unfortunately, Putin is attempting to rewrite rules, he says .
 In his belief system, he believes minority rights allow him to go in and seize territory . He is occupying 20 percent of Georgia right now . He also believes that minority rights let him go into Ukraine and take Crimea .
 Dr. John Sutter says he has the right to intervene in order to protect those Russians . Dr. Sutter: "I'm not afraid to intervene, but I'm concerned about the safety of Russians"
 He would like to prevent us from intervening in order to support peaceful transitions from autocratic, despotic rulers to democratic systems . He would also want us to stop intervening to back peaceful transitions .
 He was opposed to any kind of outside intervention. He perceived them as being on the same model as the Iraq intervention, where we intervened and we got rid of Saddam Hussein .
 His view is he wants to intervene in order to protect the dictator . He wants to keep the Saddam Hussein or the Bashar al-Assad in power .
 It is a different understanding of the balance between sovereignty and human and minority rights that we have had since the Second World War . And it is a new understanding of how we have dealt with human rights since that time .
 Mr Putin's political concerns for Mr Putin have not been touched on greatly, says Mr Putin . Mr Putin is the chairman of the Russian government .
 A committee of politicians has to tell a committee that it matters pretty deeply how you are perceived, where your power base comes from .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has a strong image of himself as a strong man . His appeal to the Russian people is tied into this idea of himself being strong man, he says .
 One time they get Ivan the Terrible, the next they get Peter the Great . One time, they get Stalin, then they get a Gorbachev . Another time they are getting Peter the great .
 He has got to be seen as winning and he has to be viewed as capable of pulling levers of power . He has been seen as able to pull these levers ofPower .
 It is fundamental to who he is domestically as well as all of the geopolitical points we have talked about today . It's fundamental to what he is domestic and what he's doing in the world .
 Changing the international order is very much on the agenda for Putin and the team around him in Russia . Putin's team is in charge of changing the world's order .
 Russia needs to wrest a veto out of the international system, Parkas says . Parkas: There has been a very strong consensus in Russia that the order is not working for them . He says there needs to be some way of wresting a veto from Europe .
 In terms of the internal political situation in Russia now, Putin is in a more precarious position than he might have seemed from the perspective of his ratings .
 He has had a lot of signature achievements, especially in the economy and in terms of stability in the political system. I mean, he really has been a very successful leader, says David Cameron .
 The cosmic dice actually seem to have rolled in a good place, as far as most Russians are concerned . We should be really well aware of that.
 The problem is that there is no political alternative to the current political system . The solution is to solve the problem, and it is one that perhaps other politicians would envy .
 The only alternative to Putin is Putin-in-the-past. And that is risky because the only alternative is Putin in the past .
 All of his ratings depend on how he performed prior to that opinion poll being taken .
 In the past Putin was seen to be lacking at different points. And in the past he was actually seen to have been lacking at various points .
 The ratings of the political system of the Russian government and of the state outside of Putin’s performance are very different .
 Russians are not happy with the way that their country is being governed . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in power since 2008 .
We're all familiar with in many other settings. That is something I guess we are all familiar to in many others settings .
 He has to show that if the economy is failing that someone else is to blame, he has to do it . He must show that someone other is also to blame .
 He is putting all of the spotlight onto military victories in Syria and in Ukraine and onto being a big international player . And he is also putting all the spotlight on military victories.
 The period when we are all bemoaning a lack of international leadership, Putin is trying to demonstrate it, says Peter Bergen .
 It is now very important for his own validation, legitimacy, and ratings at home in Russia . It is not in the way that we would like, but it is now more important for him to be validated .
 Mr Chairman was trying to use his ability to learn and understand the history, the culture, the language and the language .
 We need to be capable of reaching across a divide like this, and that requires real intellectual capital, says author . "We need to reach across the divide," he says .
 We have volumes of data about Russia but we are not very good at understanding and analyzing it . We have a lot of data but we're not very well at understanding it .
Go back to reading Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, and Lermontov, and Pushkin, and the great Russian writers . Go back to the books you've read .
 Charles Hill wrote a book about understanding opponents based on its literature . "Let me just take subset of the question to our responsibilities," he says .
 "We need to continue to put an emphasis on graduate education," he says . "Not speaking specifically to Russia, which I addressed a moment ago"
 Ike Skelton is the dean of a graduate school of international relations . He is also the chairman of a committee on how to educate our future leaders in the military .
I think it still is taking some hits if not below the waterline then pretty close to it . I think it is still taking some hit if not under the water line then pretty near it .
 I don't want to stand in the way of the chairman and the panel having lunch either, so I will be very cautious here . I don’t want to standing in theWay of the Chairman and the committee having lunch. I will not stand in a way
 Assad is on the cusp of a major victory and thousands of civilians are fleeing . Thousands of civilians have fled.
 There is a serious concern that those in the city will stay and be cut off from food and other types of foreign aid . There is also concern that some of the city's foreign aid will be cut out .
 Russian aggression and interference are on the cusp of another siege in Syrian city of Aleppo . The Syrian city is a heavily populated city .
 There is a certain psychological element to this, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think part of our problem is that it is not just a military issue here," he says .
 Putin and the people around him have been engaged in similar military operations in Georgia and Ukraine . The Chechnya region is within their own territory .
Two wars in Chechnya, beginning in 1994 and the Russian Federation, began in 1994 . The two wars were fought in the Russian federation, starting in the 1990s .
 Putin looks at Assad and sees Assad as being in the same situation that he was when he came into office in 2000, when the war on Chechnya had erupted again .
 Putin was determined, no matter what the consequences were in terms of civilian casualties or the destruction of Chechnya’s capital city .
 Putin is pushing his forces behind Assad to make sure that Assad prevails . So Putin is trying to keep Assad in power .
 civilian casualties are not really factoring into this in an operational way. So I am afraid the civilian casualties will not be factoring in this way .
 Russia is viewed in the Middle East and in the way that it is viewed more globally . Russia is seen as a nation by many in the Mideast and by some in the world .
 Turkey is now Europe’s problem, and they are now Europe's problem, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia needs to rethink the way that they are pursuing this, says Peter Bergen . "We have to show that civilian casualties actually matter," he says .
 "We have to do more militarily to support the Syrian opposition and work with our allies," he said . If I could just add to that, he said in his opening comments, I think, unfortunately, we have to support our allies .
 Secretary Carter is trying to get some more metal into the game, if you will .
 If we can’t get it only through military means, we should look at other measures, he says . He says if we can't get it through military, other measures should be considered .
 We have a couple unpalatable futures ahead if we are going to solve this diplomatically . I would only add that we have a few unpalable futures ahead .
 I think we are going to have to accept Assad for some period of time. One I have mentioned already, which is he thinks we will accept him for some time .
 Yugoslavia broke apart in war 20 years ago, and ultimately those problems were solved by partitioning . That sounds quite unthinkable, but if you look back on the Balkans, you saw Yugoslavia break apart . The United States, with NATO, and with Russia collectively.
 There are some lessons there from history looking at the Balkans that may have to be applied . I think there are some Lessons there from the Balkans.
 The first is as we talk about, you know, budget-saving and downsizing all the time in the U.S. A target is headquarter staff, often a target.
 COCOM staff size is not an obvious target for staff, says COCO boss . "If we, you know, if we get too small in those areas then there are capabilities that are just not going to happen"
 The U.S. European Command has 92 countries in its responsibility . AFRICOM is separate from the United States European Command .
 The EUCOM staff have been working for more than a decade to help us understand the world of Europe . We are proud of our work with the EUCOM . We have been in contact with some of the world's most important countries .
I think that the process of rightsizing our staffs is something that has to go on consistently . I think that we need to get rightsizing staffs to be human rightsized .
 There has been an enormous growth in staffs, broadly speaking, over the last 20 years, including the Department of Defense, the NSC staff. 42 and, of course, right here on Capitol Hill .
It strikes me as we are in a world of rapid-moving information and technology we ought to he able to do some level of consolidation . It strikes me that we should be able to consolidate, he says .
 The COCOM model, the combatant command model, has been described as "the combatantcommand model" The commander says he believes in the COCom model .
 I think it makes a great deal of sense and it allows us to have the kind of regional specialization that I think is crucial. I think that makes a good deal ofsense and it lets us have a kind of region specialization .
 EUCOM and AFRICOM ought to be remerged, I think at the moment that probably is not a good idea . Whether or not EUCOM or A FRICOM should be reemerged is not an good idea, he says .
 NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM may have some synergies there that could be addressed . The U.S. Northern Command and South Command may be more profitably, perhaps .
 I do think we need to put downward pressure on staffs, but we must do it in an informed way . I think we must put down pressure on our staffs. We need to do this in a informed way, I say .
 The Army has also moved some air forces out of Europe, as well. I know you talked about in your testimony about moving Army forces.
 We are deploying them back to Europe, which I am guessing is probably more costly for us to do that . But now we are deploying it back, which we are likely to be more costly, I'm guessing .
 I think, like a lot of people currently in uniform, I also am an A-10 fan, I think . I think I think like a few of those who are in uniform. I think that, like many of those currently in uniforms, he also is a fan.
 I think they are a simple, workable answer. I think in a European context could be extremely important if we really went to the dark end of the spectrum . I think it is a simple answer, and I think we should go to a dark end. I
 At the end of the day, the good news about airplanes is you can fly them and they can come in .
 There is a real power in having them present that allows you to deter and, again, conduct significant operations . But there is a power in have them present, and they can be deter and again, at the dark end.
I would also echo we ought to be looking again at cuts in the European theater on the air side, I said .
There is the soft engagement, which I believe is also valuable, he says . And last quick question, again in the budget pressures we are all often focused on making sure we have hard military power .
 Chairman Skelton built into the system, which is education as a tool of national power that goes alongside it .
 It is where we create soft power; it is how we learn how to use hard power . It's where we make soft power, it's how we teach hard power. It's how to make hard power easier to use .
 The Marshall Center is a pittance in the big scheme of things, he says . All of these regional centers are extraordinarily valuable to the Department and to the nation, he adds .
 There have been discussions of consolidation of some of those centers, says CNN's John Sutter . Do you have any ideas — there have been talks of consolidating some of the centers?
 I think the budget savings are so miniscule that that probably does not make a great deal of sense . I think it is too small to make a good deal ofsense .
 This has been very helpful, and I am very grateful to each of you for sharing your expertise with us today in some very complex, difficult issues that the country faces . This is a very complex issue, and it has been a very difficult time for the country.
 The Russian Security Challenge Russia poses a greater foreign policy and security challenge than at any time since the mid-1980s . The Soviet Union and the U.S. were engaged in a nuclear arms race .
 Russia’s military seizure and annexation of Crimea have sparked Europe's worst security crisis since the 1990s Yugoslav wars . Russia's military seizure of Crimea and its war in Ukraine's Donbas region have sparked a security crisis .
 Russia's military intervention in Syria has upended Western calculations in the Middle East . Russia's intervention in the Syrian conflict has been seen as a step back from the West .
 Russian actions now endanger Euro-Atlantic aspirations for stability across a region stretching from Belarus to the Eastern Mediterranean . Russian actions are now a threat to stability across the region .
 The legitimacy and credibility of these institutions has been undermined in spite of the enlargement of NATO and the EU . The Charter of Paris, the Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the NATO-Russia Founding Act, were all seen to have led to a new era of more cooperative
 Russian President Vladimir Putin openly rejected the U.S. and Western vision of the post-Coid War order in Europe . In an August 2014 speech in Yalta, in Crimea, he said, "I don't want to see a war in Europe"
 He proposed jettisoning it to return to an earlier frame for managing relations that emerged 70 years ago . The U.S. and Soviet Union decided the fate of Europe and agreed to rearrange borders over the heads of the defeated powers and smaller countries .
 Putin made a pitch for the U.S. and Russia to come together again, in a new Yalta . Russia's special status in regions of Europe and Eurasia once constituted part of the Russian and Soviet empires .
 Moscow would have a veto over any development that impinged on Russia's sovereignty and interests .
 Russia has permanent membership of the 50 UN Security Council . In many respects, this would be the same arrangement that Russia has at the United Nations .
 Russia's decision to go to war with Georgia in August 2008, to seize Crimea in March 2014, and to embark on a covert war in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region have all been forceful assertions of this demand for a veto . Russia's move to take Crimea in 2014 has all been
 external observers have spent a great deal of time looking at Russia and Russia's actions since the annexation of Crimea and the outbreak of war in the Donbas region .
 Russia's leadership system has been hyper-personalized since Putin's return to the presidency in 2012 . There is a collective leadership around Putin, and there are people in that collective with different conceptions of what Russian policy at home and abroad should be .
 Between 2008-2012, when Putin was prime minister and Medvedev was president, the system was much more pluralized . Between 2008 and 2012, during Putin's political tandem with Dmitry Medvedeva, the political system was more pluralize .
 Since the two switched places in Moscow, the decision-making circle in Moscow has been pared down . The two changed places in the past .
 Putin has transformed his current presidency into a wartime presidency . A centralized military and political command center - the Stavka, the high command in Russian — has been created in Moscow .
 All information on critical security and political issues is fed in to a small group of people around Putin . Key decisions seem to be taken within that group .
 This makes penetrating the membrane of deliberations inside the Stavka exceedingly difficult, even for supposed Russian insiders . This makes penetration of the membrane very difficult, according to the Russian media .
 There are no significant checks and balances on Putin's presidential power, says a spokesman . There are also no checks on the Russian president's power.
 Putin has availed himself of the centrality of the Russian presidency in the Russian constitution to concentrate power around himself .
 The presidency and the constitution are essentially fused together, with each guaranteeing the other . The president and constitution are basically fused together .
 Other state institutions, from the cabinet of ministers to the Russian Duma, have been systematically downgraded .
 Duma has become little more than a rubber stamp for presidential proposals . The Duma is a presidential proposal.
 Power is essentially informal in Russia. Power is the ability to exert traction inside the system, or to transmit ideas .
Broader social connections to Putin and his inner circle create degrees of power . Broader social links to Putin create degree of power.
 Everyone in the inner circle is part of a tight 2 51 group from the same general age cohort . Their relationships with President Putin extend back decades in St. Petersburg .
 Putin grew up, studied, studied and was posted by the KGB in the 1980s . Putin moved to Moscow in 1996 and began his ascent toward the presidency . He was posted in Dresden, East Germany, where he was posted as deputy mayor .
 The informal networks that intersect with the inner circle make power in Russia very complex and difficult to manage as well as navigate .
 The Russian people appear to have very little direct power or traction in the system . The Russian Duma and political parties have limited roles in the country .
 As in other countries, economic interests can bring some weight to the bargaining table . The state relies upon intelligence operatives in the security services, or the uniformed military .
 The aggregate opinion of these groups, and the population at large, is the essential element in affirming the legitimacy of the current Russia political system, says the author . The average opinion of the groups is expressed in polls and through elections, he says .
 Putin's popularity is critical to keep power in balance . Putin's record as a leader and public's ratings of his political performance over time are critical to balance .
 Everything in contemporary Russian politics depends on the maintenance of Putin's charismatic authority . Putin's charisma is key to Putin's success in Russian politics .
 Putin’s ability to continue to juggle competing interests, and his own fitness to rule, his health and mental capacities, are key . This means that Putin's ability to keep up with competing interests is key to his success .
 If things go badly wrong, if too many domestic crises crowd the agenda that Putin cannot solve, if outside events throw up unexpected obstacles and constraints . Putin is seen by the population at large to be ineffective or weak, or if he is literally incapacitated in some way, then his ratings
 If the Russian people lose their faith in Putin as president then the whole political system risks becoming destabilized . Russia's political system could become destabilized if people lose faith.
 The group around Putin in the Kremlin is fixated on messaging the population and branding and rebranding President Putin . So far, they have succeeded in keeping Putin’s ratings up because of the siege mentality .
 The prominence of the demand for national security in the context of the Ukraine crisis and the war in Syria has given Putin a clear, but temporary, advantage .
 It has deflected public attention away from concrete demands for higher living standards that were creeping up in public opinion polls in 2010-2012 . It has also deflected attention from demands for political rights and freedoms that were a feature of the large political protests in the same period .
 Putin and his team have been able to blame all of Russia's financial woes on the United States and Western sanctions . The Russian economy and the state budget have taken a beating since 2013 as a result of low global energy prices and fiscal mismanagement .
 Russians are rallying around their man and their country, and tightening their belts . Russians, for now, are rallying to tighten their belts.
 Putin and the Kremlin have to turn the temporary advantage into something more permanent if they are to keep the population unified and mobilized behind Putin’s presidency .
 Every major defense and security decision, and every one of Putin’s public appearances and pronouncements 3 52, is filtered through this requirement .
 Homeland defense and the current political system’s defense — are one and the same .
 Putin is expected to stay in power for eight or nine years, and beyond, if the economy continues to decline . Russia's economy has declined in recent years .
With or without Putin, Russia will continue to pose a significant security challenge to the U.S. and its Western allies . The Power of Personalized Politics is on CNN's iReport .
 Putin is most likely to be replaced by someone from his inner circle .
 Putin's successor is more likely to resemble him in leadership style than any of his immediate predecessors since the mid-1980s . Mikhail Gorbachev, Boris Yeltsin, and Dmitry Medvedev are among those who have similar leadership style .
 It is extremely important to understand how Putin operates, personally, as a leader. Nonetheless, it is very important to know what Putin is doing .
 Putin is still in office as Russia's president. Irrespective of the larger trends in Russia, we need to figure out how to engage with Putin .
 Putin has shown he is willing to pay a high economic and diplomatic price as he seeks to tip regional balances of power in Europe and the Middle East in Moscow's favor .
 U.S. has consistently underestimated Vladimir Putin and his capacity for action, says Clifford Gaddy . This has included upsetting the ""reset"" of relations with the United States, the loss of ""modernization partnerships" with Germany and the European Union, the rupture of relations
 The Coda for this book, summarizing the key findings, is attached in the appendices to this written statement . The book is published in the Coda, a book written by the author .
 Putin has several important features that distinguish him from other world leaders . Putin has many features that distinguishes him from others .
 Putin has consciously developed a skill set over the course of his career in the intelligence services . He now uses it in his political career. It is part of his skill set.
 The operative must conceal his true identity and intentions at all times . The operative will be able to reveal his true identities and intentions .
 Putin's Kremlin team has worked very hard to increase this tactical advantage by making the Russian President as inscrutable and unpredictable as possible . Since he came into office, Putin’s Kremlin team is working very hard.
 When messages seem to be transmitted without approval they are accompanied by equal measure of dis/mis-information . When messages appear to be sent without approval, they are followed by equal measures of dis-information.
 Everyone spends a huge amount of time trying to figure out what Putin thinks . Putin has a lot of time to think about .
 They are deflected away from trying to figure out what they should actually do in response to his various moves or to get ahead of the situation . They are thus deflected from figuring out what to actually do .
 Putin is closely involved in outreach to world leaders . He delivers messages directly, cajoling, and coercing where necessary, to push Russia’s positions .
 Putin's approach is individually tailored to each leader, and combined with other official contacts targeted at top-level elites . Putin’s approach is individual tailored to the each leader .
 Putin tends to make agreements on the state-tostate level painfully personal . Further adapting the approach of the operative, he tends to be more personal .
He prefers to make significant foreign policy deals on the basis of leader-to-leader commitments in one-on-one meetings . He prefers to made significant foreign policies on the ground of one- on-one talks .
 Putin publicly refers to individual leaders having broken their behind-the-scenes undertakings . Russia's prior disagreements with Georgia under President Mikheil Saakashvili, and Turkey under President Recip Tayyip Erdogan .
 The punishment is meted out against the leader or leaders, reminding them of their broken commitments, and airing their dirty laundry in public .
 Putin is a master at adapting and changing his tactics, says Putin . Putin is also a master of adapting his tactics .
 Putin is strategic in the sense that he follows a few firm principles, says Putin . Putin is very clear about them in his speeches and public pronouncements .
 He tries to remain flexible and to keep his options open so that he can adapt to changing circumstances . He is also trying to keep options open to change circumstances .
 He prepares stratagems in advance, and then plays his cards carefully to try to win on a particular issue . In each instance, he prepares his cards in advance and then moves forward onto the next stage .
 Vladimir Putin is somewhat unique in his style of leadership and in his methods he uses . He is by no means an anomaly in his views within Russia, nor is the current personalized nature of Russian governance out of the ordinary .
 A small inner circle around a strong leader is a central element in Russian political culture . It dates back to the tsarist era and extends through the Soviet period .
 Russian president is not personally charismatic, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin is a well-known figure in Russia, but he is not charismatic, he says .
 Putin is not selling anything to Russians, nor is he especially interested in proselytizing abroad . His popularity and appeal stem from his style of leadership, his perceived inscrutableness and calm under stress .
 Putin is not a Marxist-Leninist or Bolshevik or Communist like some of his predecessors . He is not the same as his predecessors, but he's not a Bolshevik or Bolshevik .
 His primary focus is on the home front, even if his actions take him far beyond Russia’s borders .
Like many other contemporary leaders internationally, he is a populist . Like many other modern leaders, he's a populist.
 Ideology, or what passes as ideology in Russia today, is closely tied to Putin’s image .
 Putin and his team have worked hard to manipulate and maintain a set of ideas that bolster and legitimize his policy positions . Putin's team has been working hard to maintain his policies that bolster his policies .
 Putin and his political team have retro-fitted a wide range of broadly accepted ‘Russian ideas’ to establish and maintain legitimacy for his presidency . Putin's political team has retrofitted a range of widely accepted “Russian ideas"
 Putin’s predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, tried to do the same thing in the mid-1990s .
 Putin presents himself as defending and securing what Russians care about . Putin presents him as defending his country and its people .
 Putin has taken charge of forging a common sense of Russianness . Since the war in Ukraine, Russians have seen their national security threatened by the crisis .
 Putin often refers to Stalin and this period in his speeches . In some respects this is a conscious reprise of Stalin's role during the Great Fatherland War .
 Putin’s presidential image has shifted from an “action figure” fixing things and putting Russia back on its feet in the 2000s to more of a ‘patriarch’
 Putin has to ensure unity, no fissures, no divisions, no fragmentation, no schisms . Putin uses all these words constantly in his speeches, he says .
 His domestic and foreign policy agendas are carefully crafted to reflect Russian mores and norms . His foreign and domestic policy agenda is carefully crafted.
 All of the perspectives Putin presents in his speeches are ingrained in Russian elites and society . All of Putin's perspectives are embedded in the country's elite .
 Any successor to Putin will be — and will have to be — as staunch a defender of Russian interests as Putin is . Putin is a staunch defender of Russia's interests .
 There is a general consensus in Russia, deeply rooted in the political elite since the collapse of the USSR . The current world order, and especially the European political and security order, disadvantage Russia .
 Putin's August 2014 speech in Yalta, openly rejecting the U.S.-led order, was merely another iteration of points he has made dating back over more than a decade .
 European states consider that European integration projects and collective institutions like NATO make them stronger . From Moscow’s perspective, the same projects and institutions weaken Russia, says Moscow .
 Moscow expected to give up some of Russia’s sovereignty . As the European order is currently configured, if Russia wants to associate with the existing European and transatlantic institutions, then Moscow is expected to change its position .
 Putin seeks to enhance the country’s sovereignty, not reduce it . As Russian president, Putin wants to enhance its sovereignty .
 He wants to ensure that Moscow has maximum freedom of maneuver, politically, economically, and militarily . He wants Moscow to have maximum freedom, politically and economically .
 Russia should not be part of any formal alliances, as alliances usually come with obligations and constraints . This is why Putin and other Russian officials constantly say that Russia shouldn't be involved in alliances .
 Russians see their state as one of only a tiny number of "world civilizational powers" with a unique history, culture, and language, like China . Russians core beliefs, views, and principles influence Putin's decisions on foreign and defense policy .
 Russia has special privileged interests in Europe, and also internationally . Because of its status as a world civilizational power, many in the Russian elite have special interests .
 Putin and Russia are prepared to negotiate where interests collide, but always on Russia’s terms . With the other great civilizational world powers like China and the U.S.
 Moscow wants everyone to acknowledge that Russia has the right to block steps that it does not like . With institutions like the EU, NATO, and with lesser powers, Moscow wants all of them to acknowledge it has a right to do so .
 Putin's decisions are geared toward advancing Russians' and Russia's 6 55 preferred arrangement . All of Putin’s decisions are aimed at advancing Russians’ and Russia’'s 655 preferred arrangement.
We can be sure that this is also the case when we look at the wars in Ukraine and Syria . We can't be sure this is not the case in the Ukraine and Syrian wars .
 For Putin, the inner circle, the idea that Russia should become "just another European state" or be viewed as a regional power is antithetical to their core beliefs .
 Russians have similar qualms about their position in the European Union, even having become a full member of the EU decades ago .
 There is a populist backlash against the EU and a strong resurgence in nationalist sentiment in many other European countries . In response to the unprecedented surge of refugees into Europe from Syria and other neighboring countries .
 The preferred scenario for Russia in Europe, as Putin has repeatedly made clear, would be one without NATO and without any other strategic alliances that are embedded in the EU's security concepts .
 Putin has repeatedly described NATO enlargement as driven by the United States . Putin has said it is aimed at bring U.S. military bases and forces up to Russian borders to contain Russia .
 Many Russian elite accept the NATO bombing of Belgrade in 1999 as ground truth . Many, including Putin, have done so since the bombing, and especially since NATO expansion to Eastern Europe in 2004 .
 Putin has pushed for a renegotiation of European security structures to downgrade the conventional military and nuclear role of the U.S. and NATO . Putin has also pushed for the renegotiation.
 The war in Ukraine, and Russia's stepped up aviation and maritime military incursions into European air and sea space are all designed to intimidate the United States’ European allies and to rupture the integrity of NATO and EU collective defense .
 Russia wants to break out of the old system of security, which Putin depicts as encircling Russia . These actions are also intended to signal that Russia wants a new system to accommodate Moscow's perspective .
 Russia seeks to avoid treaties with mutual responsibilities, or situations where it has to contend and negotiate with a major political bloc of countries .
 Russia would have a clear military advantage in any configuration of opposing forces . Dealing with smaller sets of European states would be much easier for Russia to digest strategically .
 The Long Path Toward a Collision in Syria seems a stretch to explain Putin’s decision to intervene in Syria, especially against the backdrop of war in Ukraine, which appears much more important for Russian state interests .
 Both wars are linked with Russian threat perceptions and views of the United States . Both have their roots in Russia’s 2008 war with Georgia .
 We have been on a collision course with Russia for a very long time, and have failed to acknowledge it until Putin forced us to do so in 2014 . Moscow annexed Crimea in 2014.
 Putin and his security team have convinced themselves that the U.S. has been seeking pretexts to overthrow regimes inimical to Washington’s interests .
 Russian intelligence services knew that Saddam Hussein was bluffing about having weapons of mass destruction to deter the United States, Iran, and other potential enemies from contemplating military action against him .
 They made their views clear to American interlocutors before the U.S. invasion . They made it clear to Americans before the United States invasion .
 President Putin and his team did not believe that "faulty intelligence” on the part of U.S. agencies drove the Bush Administration's decision to get rid of Hussein .
 The U.S. President and his team saw a blatant determination to complete the unfinished business of the first Gulf war . Instead, they saw a clear determination on the part of the United States President .
 The so-called "color revolutions" in Georgia in 2003 and Ukraine in 2004, combined with the enlargement of NATO into Russia's immediate neighborhood, simply confirmed this view and darkened their perceptions of the United States even further .
 The Kremlin regarded these actions as encouraged — if not launched by the CIA and other Western intelligence services — rather than as spontaneous manifestations of popular discontent .
 Putin considered U.S. democracypromotion efforts in the 1990s and 2000s to be continuations of the CIA’s so-called ""active measures" from the Cold War .
 Moscow saw Washington's close embrace of Georgia and the new government of Mikheil Saakashvili . Moscow also saw discussions of Georgian membership in NATO .
 Putin accused NATO of expanding at Russia's expense and moving its "frontline forces" to Russia’s borders . In February 2007, at the Munich Security Conference, President Putin accused the alliance of expanding .
 Putin emphasized that any indication of Georgian and Ukrainian membership in the NATO alliance was a red line for Russia . But his threats were repeatedly dismissed in Western capitals .
 Putin got the opportunity to enforce Moscow's line with a full-scale military invasion of Georgia . Saakashvili launched his own military operation against Georgia's secessionist republic of South Ossetia . The August 2008 war in Georgia failed as a clear warning to the United States and
 The war was a decisive turning point in Russia's relations with the West . It demonstrated that Putin was now likely to resort to military force in other circumstances .
 Operational setbacks during the conflict were analyzed and assessed and used to guide the further modernization of the armed forces .
 Putin and his security team closely observed the reactions and political responses of U.S., NATO, the EU, UN, and individual European countries during the war .
 The lack of U.S. and NATO military support for Georgia is a clear indicator of fissures in the Western alliance that Moscow could exploit in similar future circumstances .
 Putin and Russian leaders repeatedly telegraphed their interpretation of world events as efforts by the U.S. to "push Russia into a corner," or remove regimes that were generally friendly to Moscow .
 Putin and the Russian security establishment were certain that the U.S. had deliberately set up these uprisings in motion . The revolts of the "Arab Spring" erupted in the Middle East and North Africa in 2011 .
 Putin and his inner circle believed that the U.S. had deliberately created disorder in the Middle East to bolster its own position . Washington's waning economic, diplomatic, and military power internationally .
 Putin was personally angered by events in Libya and the death of President Muammar Qaddafi . Qaddafi tried to flee Tripoli after NATO's intervention in the civil war there .
 In Putin's view, the United States was now responsible for a long sequence of revolutions close to Russia's borders and in countries with close ties to Moscow .
 The Kremlin claimed the United States was trying to stage a color revolution in Russia . The U.S. and its foreign policy had become a threat to Putin regime for the foreseeable future .
 This was the backdrop to Putin's clampdown on opposition political activity at home . Putin's intent to seize and then annex Crimea after political protests toppled the Ukrainian government in Kiev in 2013-2014 .
 Putin's decision to launch a military operation to prop up the regime of Bashar Assad in Syria in 2015 was also shaped by this view . This view also shaped Putin's decisions to launch the operation in 2015 .
 In Russia's view, the Middle East order that the United States dominated after the 1956 Suez crisis was upended with the "Arab Spring" For Russia, the toppling of the incumbent authoritarian leaders, the strongmen, in Iraq, then Egypt, and then in Libya were a
 Russia has long-standing interests in the Middle East in general, and Syria in particular, dating back to the tsarist and Soviet eras . Russia had long- standing interests in Middle East and Syria .
 In Syria, the regime was directly dependent on Bashar Assad and his immediate associates .
 If Assad was brought down by the Syrian opposition, there would be no responsible party to step in and maintain the coherence of the Syrian state . The U.S. would not be responsible for the state's coherence .
 The collapse of Assad in Syria with no alternative strongman on the scene would create a political and military vacuum and more chaos . From Moscow's perspective, the collapse ofAssad in Syria would create more chaos.
 Assad would have to stay in place until someone could be identified to keep some semblance of the Syrian state together . Assad would need someone to keep a semblance of a state together.
 Moscow wants to be an agenda setter and order creator in the Middle East . Russian Interests in Syria are growing.
 Putin seeks one for Russia in the Middle East, where the complete collapse of Syria would create disorder at home for Putin .
 Syria is as much a domestic dilemma for Russia as a foreign policy problem for Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Syria is a major issue for Russia.
 Russia has the largest, indigenous Muslim population of any European state . Russia is the largest indigenous Muslim state in the world .
 Islam established itself in Kazan among the Tatars of the Volga region shortly before Christianity took hold among the Slavic population in the 10* Century . Islam is the older religion in Russian territory .
 Russia's strains of Islam have come under pressure from Salafi and Wahhabi groups emanating from Saudi Arabia and the Gulf . Putin sees as serious threat to Russia's cultural and religious integrity .
 Putin and his team set out to harness or curb all religions at home, including Russian Orthodoxy, to avert ideological competition . When he ascended 9 58 to the Russian presidency in 2000, Putin was in charge of curbing all religions .
 To maintain control of Russian politics, Putin and the Kremlin cannot afford the rise of any group that fuses religion and politics in opposition to the Russian state and has outside allegiances . To maintain the Kremlin can't afford to lose control of Russia, Putin says .
 The religious wars in the Middle East pose the same threat to Russia as the rest of Europe and the U.S. The religious conflicts in the region are similar to those in Russia and Europe .
 Thousands of foreign fighters have flocked to Syria from Russia, Central Asia and the Caucasus . They are attracted by the extreme messages of ISIS and other groups .
 The numbers are disputed, although the most recent announcement from the Russian government indicated that they were tracking 2,800 Russian citizens currently in Syria . The most recent statement indicated that the government is tracking the number of Russian citizens in Syria.
 Extremist groups have been active in Russia since the 1990s and 2000s . The Chechen wars of the 1990's and 1990s were the worst .
 Putin has expended a great deal of political energy, and literal blood and treasure to pacify Chechnya since 2000 . Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov swears fealty to Putin personally . The creation and installation of another “indigenous variant of Islam’s Islam
 Putin has no desire to see any of the new crop of fighters return to radicalize and enflame the domestic situation any further .
 Putin does not discriminate between one terrorist group and another, says Putin . In this regard, Putin doesn't discriminate between terrorist groups .
 An extremist is an extremist in his view, especially if they seek to topple governments, overthrow the acknowledged head of the state .
 The actual nature or underlying theories of their persuasion is a mere nuance, a detail . The real nature of the theories is a simple detail .
 Putin became increasingly convinced of the need to bolster Assad to stem the tide of state collapse in the Middle East . The war in Syria unfolded over the last several years .
 Putin and his security team have applied lessons from past operational failures . They have drawn experience from the intervention in Crimea and the covert war in Ukraine . Putin often explicitly referred to as a training exercise for the Russian military .
 Strategies for dealing with Russia in Syria, and more broadly, are by no means easy . Dealing with Russia is by no way easy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Managing the U.S. -Russia relationship will require a good deal of attention inside and outside government, and close coordination with our allies .
 Putin and his security team firmly believe they are deterring us, the U.S. and NATO . The United States and NATO are trying to protect themselves and Russian interests .
Russia's military modernization and posture has been geared toward this end . Russia's military posture and posture is geared toward the end of the military era .
Two pieces look at Russia's military doctrine and strategy, including shifts in Russia’s nuclear doctrine . I have attached in the appendices to this written statement .
 Putin assumes that the negotiation about Russia’s place in the European order, the resolution of the dispute over the future of Ukraine, and the current questions about Russia's role in Syria and the Middle East, should all be hashed out directly with the United States .
 Ultimately, in pursuing Russia’s goals, Putin is a pragmatist, and we should be too, he says .
 Russia does not have the military or economic resources for the 20* century mass-army, total mohilization approach to defending its interests . In figuring out how to deter the U.S. and NATO, Russia doesn't have the resources to defend itself .
 Putin has to combine conventional, nuclear, and non-conventional, non-military methods to secure an advantage, Putin and his security team aim to intimidate us .
 Russia is willing to escalate on all fronts to deter the U.S. and NATO from taking any military action against Russia . Russia has the capacity to act, and is willing. They have to demonstrate that Russia has to act.
 Russia's unclassified national security strategy states that Russia will use nuclear weapons only in response to an attack with weapons of mass destruction on Russia or on a Russian ally . Nuclear weapons are the ultimate deterrent, according to Russia's strategy .
 Putin seeks to make us believe that he will use nuclear weapons if any of the current conflicts seem likely to draw in the United States or NATO against Russian forces . But Moscow has now put the nuclear option on the table for lesser circumstances .
 Putin is not good for Putin to suggest that he might use nuclear weapons . It is no good for him to do so, just suggest he may use the weapons .
 Putin is drawing up a contingency for deploying nuclear weapons if he feels he needs to . But his goal is to push the United States and Europe away from Russia .
We are now back in a similar frame to the nuclear war scare of the 1980s, which only ended with the Reagan and Gorbachev summitry that led to the 1987 INF Treaty .
Past precedents for dealing with the Soviet Union during the Cold War will be the key to dealing with Russia today . The U.S. and NATO's military deterrent capability will be beefed up .
 Russia is not the Russia of the 1990s and early 2000s with limited capacity for military action . Russia is also not the Russian of the 90s and 2000s. Russia also has limited capacity to military action.
 The Russian challenge will have to encompass the arc of a long game . Russia's political power and the role of personalized politics in Moscow will be key to success .
 Strategic patience must accompany the balance of deterrence, defense, and constraint, along with 11 60 incentives, and direct engagement with Putin and his inner circle .
 We will have to do our homework if we are to succeed in identifying workable policy solutions . We will need to find workable solutions to solve the problems of the world's problems .
 Washington will have to engage in constant communication with its European allies to tackle sources of tension or misunderstanding head on . Washington will also have to deal with tensions with European allies .
 The U.S. will have to be willing to compromise on some positions to persuade, not force, its allies to go along with decisions they are not ready for . The United States will be able to make decisions they're not ready to make .
 Moscow is looking for any fissures to exploit to play Washington off against its European and other allies . Moscow is also looking to exploit its allies against themselves .
 Brookings Institution is engaged in a series of research projects examining the core social, economic, and political stresses contributing to the breakdown of the European security order .
 NATO, the EU, and the OSCE are reviewing the state of the post-Cold War European institutional architecture . We are reviewing whether these institutions can still serve to re-engage with Russia at this time of acute tension .
 We are looking at other relationships outside Europe to determine how these might affect Russia's longer-term positions . We are also looking at others outside Europe.
 The Russian government is looking at the prospects for the Russian economy and for regime stability . In addition, we are looking at possible changes in the nature of the current regime ranging from reform to collapse .
 Forecasts of Russian economy's performance and political responses have been notoriously poor since the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 . Russia's capacity for military action has often missed the mark, particularly since the crisis .
 Most analyses of Russia fail to account for the specific features of Russian behavioral and political responses to internal and external shocks, and the nature of Russian threat perceptions .
 The stakes for rigorous, objective, and accurate analysis on all the Russian challenge are high . In this larger context, the stakes are high, says Peter Bergen .
 Preconceived or agenda-driven studies are typically misguided and incorrect . What policies Putin will pursue to cope with the current economic crisis depends on understanding Russian priorities and preferences .
 The success criteria for Putin are very different from criteria in the U.S. and Europe . National security imperatives always have primacy over economic priorities in Russia .
 This means there is great potential for radical and unexpected transformations of the Russian economy and Russian politics. This means that there are great potential to change the country's economy and politics .
 The developments of the last decade have demonstrated since the 2008 war in Georgia . Both underor overestimating Russia's and Putin's personal capabilities can lead to dangerous miscalculations and surprises .
 If we are not to be continually surprised, we will have to put more resources behind understanding what is happening inside Russia as well as analyzing Russia's interactions internationally .
 Russia's intervention in Syria is a stark reminder that Russia is a multi-regional power . Russia’s vast landmass and interests extend from Europe and Eurasia to the Middle East, Central and South Asia, to the AsiaPacific and the Arctic .
Russian and Modem History with Distinction in Spoken Russian, June 1989 .
 Maurice Thorez Institute of Foreign Language, Moscow, Russia Ten-month intensive Russian language program . The program is part of a 10-month language program.
 A copy of these stalcmenis will be made publicly available in electronic form not later than one day after the witness's appearance before the committee . % itiiesses may list additional grants, contracts, or payments on additional sheets, if necessary .
 A copy of this form should be attached to your written testimony . It will be made publicly available in electronic format, as required by House rules .
 The Brookings Institution Director of the Center on the U.S. and Europe and a Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution . He is presenting testimony representing his personal views .
 Brookings Institution does not take institutional positions on any issue . The Brookings Institution is an independent think tank .
 If you answered “Yes’ to either item 4 or 5, list the source and amount of each grant, contract, dr payment . XYes o No. 6: If you answer “yes’s’to either item four or 5.
 You may list additional grants, contracts, or payments on additional sheets . You may also list additional grant, contracts or payments .
 Brookings Institution's commitment to independence includes not taking Institutional positions on issues . "My testimony represents my personal views and does not reflect the views of Brookings"
 Brookings' donors include any responsive Federal grants or contracts, and/or agreements with a foreign government for the relevant time period .
 A portion of which may be related to the subject matter of the hearing may be linked to the hearing . The hearing will be held in New York.
 Brookings may also have ongoing agreements with a portion of the donors disclosed above, which could include future payments to Brookings .
 Brookings will provide responsive information regarding ongoing agreements with any donors responsive to this disclosure . Brookings will offer responsive information on ongoing agreements.
 Russia poses a geostrategic threat to the United States and our interests. Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia/Ukraine/Eurasia.
Last week Secretary Carter ranked it first among the threats faced by our country .
 Russia and U.S. opposed to one another on fundamentals and most foreign policy issues . It is unfortunate and almost absurd in the 21st century to have Russia and the United States opposed to each other on fundamentals .
 President Putin's drive to achieve these objectives has raised tension between Russia and the U.S. President Putin has raised tensions with the United States .
 Russia has worked not simply to balance United States power, but to check it . To demonstrate Russia's great power, or "equal among equals" status, Russia has tried to balance U.S. power .
 Divergent policies regarding democracy and sovereignty have become a greater obstacle to cooperative bilateral relations as the Kremlin implements its agenda .
 The United States advocates for democracies where civil society checks the powers of the state . The U.S. supports the rights of citizens to turn out their despots and vote in new leaders .
 Putin is incensed by Arab springs and European color revolutions . His latest military operation in Syria aims to protect the dictator from the people he has gassed, barrel bombed.
 By the time Putin took office again as president in 2012, it was clear due to falling oil prices, and corruption . Putin's earlier bargain with the Russian people was no longer sustainable .
 The Kremlin adopted a nationalist, revisionist, anti-American foreign policy . The Kremlin has been criticized for its anti-U.S. policy .
 Putin blames the West for an epic 70 2 Russian humiliation to a public determination to rebuild the Russian sphere of influence . Putin went beyond bemoaning the demise of the Soviet Union and blaming the West .
 He worked actively to counter NATO and EU expansion, favoring competition over cooperation . He worked to counter the expansion of the EU and NATO .
 Putin ramped up political subversion and intimidation throughout Eurasia, funding anti-Western, pro-Russian and/or fringe NGOs and political parties in its periphery and in NATO countries .
 His government continues to exert economic pressure through its near monopoly of oil and gas supply and corrupt ties with elites worldwide . His government continued to exert financial pressure through his near monopoly.
 The Kremlin increased its use of lies and propaganda to influence ethnic Russian populations and the international community and to confuse policy debates .
 Russia again invaded a neighboring country and occupied its territory . And Russia again occupied the territory .
 The Kremlin continues to use force in its periphery, and now in the Middle East, to hold a veto over sovereign state policies and gain leverage for diplomatic negotiations .
 Underpinning Russia's aggressive foreign policy is a modernizing military. Underpining Russia'saggressive foreign policy has been a modernized military .
 Russia's military has been under fire since the invasion of Georgia in 2008 . The Kremlin is trying to reorganize and modernize the Russian armed forces .
 The modernization effort $700 billion over ten years applies to all the services, but has focused on developing key conventional and asymmetric capabilities . The modernization efforts are aimed at developing new capabilities for the military .
 Russia declared in a bid to compensate for its conventional weakness relative to the United States and its allies . The right to first use of a nuclear weapon in response to a conventional attack that put the existence of the state at risk .
 The rationale is that by raising the price to the adversary through a cyberattack or limited use of a nuclear weapon Russia could force the enemy to capitulate . The rationale for raising the cost of a cyber attack is that it could force Russia to capitulates .
 Russia can do even with its unfinished military modernization in advancement of the Kremlin's objectives . We've seen what Russia can doing even with the unfinished military modernization in Russia .
 In response, we must use all elements of U.S. national power diplomatic, economic, informational and military to pressure Russia to reverse course .
 If Russia wins its aims Ukraine remains ungovernable, territories in Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova remain occupied . Assad remains in power Putin's Kremlin will be emboldened to use military force again and again to achieve its foreign policy objectives .
 At stake is no less than the post-World War II world order, which simultaneously enshrined territorial state sovereignty and human and minority rights .
 Europe must double down with the international community to press Russia to withdraw Russian forces from eastern Ukraine and Crimea and restore Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 Minsk agreements grant greater autonomy to Russian-backed separatist regions of eastern Ukraine in exchange for Russian withdrawal . This means implementing the Minsk agreement, which grants greater autonomy, to the region .
In the Middle East, we must gain economic and military leverage against Asad and Putin, says the U.S. President .
International diplomacy must be coupled with and strengthened by positive and negative economic and military measures . International diplomacy must also be strengthened by negative and positive economic andMilitary measures .
 Congress should authorize and appropriate greater economic, trade and investment assistance to Ukraine and the other vulnerable Russian neighbors who have opted to seek association with the European Union . Congress should also authorize greater economic and trade assistance.
 We should also consider placing new sanctions on Russia for the humanitarian impact of their military operation in Syria . Russia has failed to act in good faith in the war on ISIS and in the Syrian peace process, we say .
 The EU members already sanctioning Russia, but all European states, including Turkey, and our Middle Eastern allies . Such sanctions should be implemented in concert with the EU members, not only with Russia .
 No rockets used by the U.S. defense industry should be Russian or Russian scientists involved in launches . This means that no rockets used in the United States defense industry will be Russian . This is not the case for Russian scientists.
 Congress should authorize and appropriate for a new foreign military assistance fund to help allies and partners throughout Europe and Afghanistan transition from Russian to U.S. military equipment .
 Germany and other allies must meet Europe's natural gas demand in way that gives them leverage against Moscow, not the other way around . U.S. companies and alternative suppliers must work with Germany, other allies to meet the demand .
 On the military front, we must deter Russia from further military action, says the U.S. State Department .
 ERI needs funds for exercises, training, positioning 72 4 equipment and rotating troops through the vulnerable Baltic and Balkan countries and Poland . ERI is based in Poland and the Baltic and Baltic countries .
 Congress should urge Pentagon to provide an aviation brigade to support the armored brigade combat team . Congress should also urge the Pentagon to help support the military's armored brigade .
 The Army should keep an eye on readiness and be willing to reconsider current endstrength limits . If necessary, if necessary, the Army should reconsider currentendstrength limits.
 Congress should continue to support beefing up security assistance to Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova to defend their territory . On the non-NATO periphery, Congress should support beefed up security aid to Ukraine and Georgia .
 The military assistance provided from 2014 to the end of 2015 over $260 million, well over $40 million and over $30 million in equipment and training to Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova . The assistance has much improved those militaries .
 Future assistance should expand the current territorial defense training for Ukraine to covers greater portion of their armed forces . Georgia and Moldova should be applied to the Ukraine's territorial defense .
 Georgia received assistance package Georgia received at NATO summit last year . We must push for faster NATO implementation of the assistance package, Georgia says .
 Georgia is the second largest troop contributor to Afghanistan . Georgia should have a chance to deter the larger, more ready Russian forces, he says .
 In Syria, we must use all U.S. influence to get our allies engaged on the battlefield and to provide equipment and other support to the Syrian opposition .
 We are already in a proxy war; let's not lose it and the peace Syria needs so badly by failing to garner necessary leverage against Asad and Putin . Let's not lost it, we need to get more leverage.
 If we do also succeed in finding economic and other leverage, this could mitigate the need for more fighting, but it is unavoidable now. If we also succeed, it could mitigate a need to more fighting.
 Caucasus and Central Asia should advance our interest in energy diversity for Europe, counterterrorism cooperation and an open land and air supply route to and from Afghanistan .
 We must continue to offer those countries an alternative partner to Russia . We must also offer those nations an alternative partners to Russia.
 Afghanistan is never again a haven for terrorism against the U.S. But also so Kabul can withstand illintentioned outside interference, including from Russia . We must finish our work in Afghanistan so it is never once again a havens for terrorism .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan have been fighting over Nagorno-Karabakh for years . A snap solution would give Armenia the option to regain its full sovereignty and catch up economically with its neighbors .
 Allied ability to deter, prevent and respond to Russian cyber operations must be improved . We must protect U.S. military assets and edge in space .
 The U.S. must also work proactively to put out accurate information on Russian policy and actions . The United States must also improve current efforts to counter Russian propaganda .
 New State Department Global Engagement Center to counter radical Islamic terrorists' messages . We need a dedicated team like the one being established as the new State Department global engagement center .
 An intelligence cell should push declassified and reclassified intelligence to share with the public, allies and partners . Such a Russia-focused team should be supported by an intelligence cell .
 Our cyber expertise should be applied to exposing Russian so-called "trolls" and generally foiling Russian message campaigns .
 We must be strong and united with our allies and partners worldwide and resolute towards Russian bad behavior . We need to be strong, united and united. We must also be resolute against Russian bad behaviour .
 We need not enter a new Cold War or an across-the-board stand off with Russia, says David Cameron . But we need not entering a new cold war or a stand-off with Russia .
 The Kremlin is open to cooperation and there are mutual interests we should work with Moscow, says the Russian president .
 The Kremlin manufactures lies with impunity to reduce the risks of misperception and miscalculation and to be ready for opportunities to cooperate . We should also maintain a dialogue to foster as much transparency.
 Russia and the U.S. must exchange views and information on nuclear weapons and strategic stability . Russia's nuclear weapons are the most dangerous aspect of our relationship, nuclear weapons .
 If we take the actions described above in conjunction with our allies and partners worldwide we will raise the price for Putin of achieving his international objectives controlling the countries on Russia's periphery and rewriting the international rules .
 Russian people can be directed towards a future that is economically, politically and culturally better for citizens of the Russian Federation and Russians beyond its borders .
 The U.S. has managed what is currently the greatest potential geostrategic threat to United States national security interests . We will have successfully managed what's currently the biggest potential threat.
 EveJyn N Farkas is the former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia/Ukraine/Burasia . She is responsible for policy towards Russia, the Black Sea, Balkans and Caucasus regions and conventional arms control .
 Previously she was a senior fellow at the American Security Project . She focused on stability and special operations, counterproliferation and U.S-Asia policy .
 Before that, she served as Senior Advisor to the Supreme Allied Commander Europe/Commander, United States European Command, and as Special Advisor for the Secretary of Defense for the NATO Summit .
 From April 2001 to April 2008, she served as a Professional Staff Member of the Senate Armed Services Committee . She was a Professional staff member of the Armed Service Committee .
 Her issue areas included foreign and defense policy in Asia Pacific, Western Hemisphere, Special Operations Command . Her issues included foreign military assistance, peace and stability operations, the military effort to combat terrorism .
From 1997-2001 Farkas was a professor of intemational relations at the U.S. Marine Corps Command and Staff College . He was also a professor at the United States Marine Corps command and Staff college .
 She served in Bosnia with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in 1996-1997 . She was an election observer in Afghanistan in 2009 .
 She speaks Hungarian and German, has studied French, Spanish, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, and Flindi . She appears as a commentator on NBC, CNN and Fox .
 Farkas obtained her MA and Ph.D. from The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy . She is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and Aspen Institute Socrates Seminar advisory board .
 Rule 1 1, clause 2, of the Rules of the House of Representatives for the 114* Congress requires nongovernmental witnesses appealing before House committees to include in their written statements a curriculum vitae .
 This form is intended to assist witnesses appearing before the House Committee on Armed Services in complying with the House rule .
 A copy of these statements will be made publicly available in electronic form not later than one day after the witness’s appearance before the committee . Please note that a copy of the statements, with appropriate redactions, will be released .
 Witnesses may list additional grants, contracts, or payments on additional sheets, if necessary . Witnesses may also list additional grant and contract payments on extra sheets .
 I ask that this statement be entered for the record, as you have always so graciously allowed me, I ask . I ask for this statement to be entered, as I have always been sograciously allowed him. I ask this statement is in the record .
 I appear before you today in my personal capacity, but drawing on my 37 years of active service in the U.S. Navy, four years as a NATO Commander, and his current work at the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory .
 The top of the list is the security situation in Europe as it relates to Russia under President Vladimir Putin .
 Russia's direct challenge to the transatlantic partnership through the illegal annexation of territory and unilateral action in Syria threatens the vision we all share of a Europe “whole and free,” especially for our NATO allies and others .
 NATO remains Europe’s primary security provider, as it has been for almost seven decades .
 The 28 nations of NATO produce 52% of the world’s GDP and spend nearly $1 Trillion on Defense . The good news is that taken as a whole, the 28 nations produce 52%.
 The continuing financial crisis in Europe has made shouldering the burden of defense a challenge for all members of the alliance . But 80 especially for our friends in Europe, says the European Union .
 Average European defense funding levels have declined as a percentage of gross domestic product to just 1.43%, well below the 2% goal . Just five of the 28 NATO members meet the 2%.
 The financial realities of defense reveal a NATO that is less prepared than it must be . The financial reality of defense reveals a NATO is less ready than it is .
 We cannot expect NATO to do more with less with less, thus we must commit to reversing this disconcerting trend . We must do more to reverse the disconcerted trend .
 Putin's Russia is in many important ways a declining power, but under his aggressive leadership it manifests a confident position in the global scene .
 Despite Russia’s economic slow-down, it remains intent on pursuing an assertive foreign policy .
 The Kremlin has boosted defense spending over 25% since seizing Crimea in 2014 . Russia's GDP is forecast to decrease again in 2016 .
 This dramatic spending increase shows intent to consolidate its current territorial gains . It may hint at expansionist militai 7 plans for the future .
 Russia is trying to redraw borders that improve its strategic position relative to the western order . The committee is well aware of the details of Russia's attempts to expand into Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine .
 The order, founded on the rule of law and democratic values, is fundamental to stability on the European continent . As you are w'ell aware, this order is founded on law anddemocratic values .
 As 2 81 we have seen, definiti vely attributing responsibility to the state directing these operations is difficult . countering this ‘hybrid warfare’ approach is in many ways more difficult than countering a “conventional’s approach .
 Russia repurposed the Open Skies Treaty to take advantage of our commitment to the rule of law . The treaty was designed to allow Russia to use its own rules to protect its sovereignty .
 The U.S. has flouted the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty with tests of ground-launched cruise missiles to prohibited ranges .
 Russian submarine activity has risen to a level not seen since Cold War days . Russian aircraft continue to challenge the sovereign airspace of NATO members .
 These and other activities, combined with “snap exercises, of questionable intent, form a distinct and unabating aggressive tone that is difficult to ignore . The author's aggressive tone is hard to ignore, he says .
 Our allies in the Baltics in particular are deeply worried about Russian intent, and logically enough seek reassurance . Our allies, in particular, are deeply concerned about Russian intentions .
 A recent RAND study postulated that Russian forces could sweep into Baltic capitals in 60 hours .
 This is extremely disconcerting to them given their hi-story and proximity to Russia . This is understandably disconcerted to them .
 A recent CNAS War Game in which I participated clearly demonstrated European concern about this issue . But there is a lack of cohesion on the part of some of the allies, he says .
 We are not currently configured to detect and respond to these types of moves in a robust and immediate military fashion . Unfortunately, we are not yet configured to respond to this type of moves .
 General Phil Breedlove, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe and Commander, European Command, has consistently described how NATO’s indicators and warnings have atrophied .
 The Baltics make 3 82 responding to a Russian incursion incredibly difficult . Even if we had perfect intelligence, the simple geography of Europe is difficult .
Two Brigade Combat Teams were removed from Europe . The decision was w'eakened a sense on the part of our Allies that we are truly committed to the defense of the Alliance’s borders .
 NATO has the military capability to defeat Russia and expel Russian forces from Alliance territory . Any effort to recapture the Baltic States would likely involve a drastic escalation, as plainly stated in Russian military doctrine .
 President Putin often reminds the west that Russia possesses and is unafraid to use nuclear weapons . It would bring into question the use of nuclear weapons, a capability Putin often says .
 The hope can be realized through increased troop levels, commitment to our nuclear deterrent program, and rational diplomatic communication with Moscow . The hope is that Moscow will be able to increase troop levels .
 The Alliance must apply smart power, combining both hard military power with a sophisticated campaign of information, collaboration, and burden sharing .
 NATO cannot solely rely on what some have called ‘virtual presence’ in the form of rotational forces from the U.S.
 A more credible deterrent to Putin's challenge involves ensuring tbrce commitments that result in actual presence . A more serious deterrent to the Putin challenge is to ensure t brce commitments.
 The four-fold budget increase in resources to counter Russian aggression, as part of the Defense Department's budget released last week, is a credible start .
 The Army must increase force levels in Europe and maintain a robust overall presence of 4 83 in the range of a million troops active, reserve, and guard .
 The same can be said about invigorating naval and air capacity and presence in the region . The same could be said.
 We must also insist that our NATO partners undertake similar increases in defense spending, to make the actual presence durable .
 NATO forces must accelerate already occurring training and conduct integrated exercises on a regular basis to improve their combat readiness and show strength . Our NATO forces need to show strength and improve their readiness .
 Russia responds to strength. While detemiining what level of combat power and military factors deter Russia is difficult, Russia is strong .
 Increasing U.S. and NATO's physical presence along NATO’s eastern flank wall change how Putin, and the Kremlin, view our resolve and commitment to our allies .
 We also must remain committed to a safe, secure, and effective nuclear deterrent program in Europe . We must also stay committed to the safe and secure nuclear deterrent programs in Europe.
 This determined continuation of our nuclear program supports our NATO allies and our strategic national interests, says the U.S. State Department .
 NATO will not accept Russian revisionist claims and aggressive actions against NATO member states . NATO's additional presence in Eastern Europe should be accompanied by robust diplomatic communication with the Russian Federation .
 We should cooperate with Russia where we can help with Afghanistan, counter-terror and counter-narcotics, we should cooperate . We should also cooperate with the Russian government in Afghanistan .
 5 84 a particular emphasis on the message that the borders of NATO nations are ultimate red lines for the Alliance and the United States of America .
 The recommendations will reassure our allies in Europe and around the world, according to the U.S. State Department .
 We must stand strongly with our NATO allies and even more closely work with them to ensure Europe’s long-term security . We must work closely with NATO allies to ensure European security, says David Cameron .
 NATO allies must meet the 2% spending of their GDP on defense. We must also continue to insist that our NATO Allies meet the2% spending on defense .
 This is a minimum that the Alliance has collectively pledged to support, but thus far is failing to meet . This is the minimum that they have collectively pledged, but so far has failed to meet.
 Over time, the misbalance in the burden sharing between the U.S. and the rest of the Alliance cannot continue . The misbalance between the United States and the others cannot continue.
 This should be a central U.S. point of concern at the upcoming NATO summit .
 Russia uses a balance of hard and soft power smart power as some have called it . This requires an expansive approach to Russia that uses a balanced approach to the country . This is not the same as some call it .
 Such an approach will require education and the building of human capital in the U.S. It will require learning and studying the history, culture, and strategy of Russia .
 I believe that by constructing the right strategy to deal with Russia, we will help ensure a more stable global system going forward . I believe by constructing a right strategy, we'll help ensure the more stable world system going ahead .
 I conclude by thanking you for permitting me to share my views. Hearings like this are an important part of that process, and I conclude .
 He oversaw operations in Afghanistan, Libya, Syria, the Balkans, and piracy off the coast of Africa . Among his maity commands were four years as the I6th Supreme Allied Commander.
 He also commanded U.S. Southern Command in Miami . He was charged with military operations through Latin America for nearly three years .
 He was the longest serving Combatant Commander in recent U.S. history . He was longest serving combatant commander in recent history .
 In the course of his career in the Navy, he served as senior military assistant to the Secretary of the Navy and Secretary of Defense . He also served as the secretary of defense and secretary of the navy .
 He led the Navy’s premier operational think tank for innovation, Deep Blue, immediately after the 9/1 1 attacks . He also led the U.S. Navy's premier operationalThink Tank for innovation .
 He won the Battenberg Cup for commanding the top ship in the Atlantic Fleet and the Navy League John Paul Jones Award for Inspirational leadership . He won more than 50 medals and decorations, including 28 from foreign nations .
 He commanded a Destroyer Squadron and a Carrier Strike Group, both in combat . He also commanded a destroyer squadron and a carrier Strike Group .
 He earned a PhD from The Fletcher School at Tufts . He won the Gullion prize as outstanding student in his class in 1 983 . He also won academic honors from the National and Naval War Colleges .
 Jim has published six books on leadership, Latin America, ship handling, and innovation, as well as over a hundred articles in leading journals . Jim has also published over 100 articles in journals .
 An active user of social networks, he has thousands of followers on Twitter and Facebook .
TED talk on 21st century security in 2012 has had over 700,000 views . His TED talk has had more than 700,00 views .
 He tweeted the end of combat operations in the Libyan NATO intervention .
 His memoir of the NATO years, “The Accidental Admiral,’ was released in October 2014 .
 Jim is the 12th Dean at The Fletcher School, a post he assumed in the summer of 2013 . Jim is a former Dean at the Fletcher School .
 He is happily married to Laura, and they have two daughters one working at Google and the other an Ensign in the US Navy . He has two daughters, one of whom is a Google Ensign .
 Rule 11, clause 2, of the Rules of the House of Representatives for the 1 M* Congress requires nongovernmental witnesses appearing before House committees to inelude in their written statements .
 The U.S. must ensure that our nuclear deterrence is robust and effective . The United States must also ensure that the Russian nuclear doctrine is robust, effective .
 The Russian deployment last fall of a Borei-class submarine carrying long range nuclear missiles to Vladivostock . The potential of a second sub arriving this year indicates Russian intentions to increase its presence on and beyond its Pacific Coast .
 The deployment of a Borei-class ballistic missile submarine indicates that Russia intends to continue to operate ballistic missile submarines from its Pacific coast as well as from the Kola Peninsula .
 The U.S. operates ballistic missile submarines in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . This is a long-standing practice of the Russian navy, just as the United States operates ballistic missiles .
 The number of U.S. Navy ships as well as the number unilateral exercises. Joint exercises affect the United States ability to project power in the region and reassure allies .
 The Borei-class submarine deployment is a separate issue from the question of the Borei submarine deployment . But I would consider that a separate question from the issue of the submarine deployment.
 The Russian deployment last fall of a Borei-class submarine carr3dng long range nuclear capable ballistic missiles to Vladivostock . The potential of a second sub arriving this year indicates Russian intentions to increase its presence on and beyond its Pacific Coast .
 The U.S. must continue to project power and protect freedom of navigation in Asia-Pacific and maintain our nuclear triad .
 The Navy must be funded to ensure the right mix of platforms and capabilities . This means that the Navy must also be funded. This means the Navy will have to be funded for the future .