 This article evaluates whether these claims hold any weight under international law . This article is a look at whether this claim holds any weight in international law.
Russian approaches to international law are outlined and their effects on its foreign policy are examined . In addition to the general trends in contemporary Russian approaches to the international law.
 Russia’s subsequent actions in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the course of 2014 – 2016 amounted to military aggression against Ukraine . Russia's subsequent actions amounted to illegal occupation of part of its territory, killings of civilian population, and tortures perpetrated on soldiers of
 Recent developments in different parts of the world serve as evidence of the global consequences of the afore-mentioned events, which could lead to the collapse of the international legal order .
 The international community of states may experience grave consequences if they fail to stop the military aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine, writes Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine and other states can be successful only when the international community comes together, not only to rebut Russia’s claims with respect to Crimea and Ukraine, but also to hold Russia accountable .
 This article critically analyses the legal arguments put forward by the Russian scholar­ ship concerning the annexation of Crimea . It also attempts to assess their validity .
 The relevant Russian legal doctrine includes works by N Abdullayev, Ye . The relevant legal doctrine is based on works by Ye .
 Kopytkova, V Kryazhkov, V Lazyer, K Sazonova, L Tarasova and V Tolstykh are among others . V Tomsinov, Kopykova, Sazonov, V Kopyktova and others are among
 During the course of this examination the article naturally examines relevant writings of foreign scholars as well .
 The fact that the Russian Armed Forces were used in February – March 2014 has long ceased to be denied . Russia’s claim that the use force against Ukraine was a necessary measure to defend Russian nationals and compatriots has long been denied .
 Some Russian officials confirm clear evidence. In addition to the evidence, it has been confirmed by some Russian officials .
 As for the protection of the nationals abroad as a form of permissible self-defence, there are five main conditions that must be met .
 These conditions have been coined and are advocated by some international and Russian scholars and commentators . They have been used as a way to describe the conditions .
 The Council of Europe, the OSCE and the EU have consistently argued that the Russian allegations are false .
 Russian-controlled "self-defence" forces committed gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the peninsula . The right to life, security, liberty, inviolability of person and property, etc. It was the Russian “green men’s
 The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has reported violations in this field . These and many other violations have been reported .
 It is impossible to assert the absence of other peaceful means to resolve the conflict in order to claim the necessity to employ the last-resort option, which is self-defence .
 There had been no civil strife in the Crimean Peninsula triggering the necessity for Russia to use force .
 Russia had not made any attempts to ‘find a solution’ while diplomacy was still available as an effective and practicable tool to resolve the crisis . Russia had made no attempts to find a solution while diplomacy is still available .
 The Russian Federation was implementing the military occupation of the Crimean Pen­insula and preparing its annexation simultaneously with the civil protests in Kyiv and other cities of Ukraine .
 V Putin acknowledged the use of force post factum in mid-April 2014 . The operation had been an undercover operation .
 Russia’s second argument is based on the facts, legally and factually deficient. These circumstances confirm that Russia's second argument was based on facts, legal andfactually deficient .
 The aim of rescuing citizens is to rescue citizens as the only purpose and goal of a military operation . Another necessary condition to justify the legal use of force is that an operation be of a humanitarian nature .
 The inconsistency between Russia’s actions and the nature and goals of such a “humanitarian operation” is self-evident . Russia's actions, as proclaimed by Russia, are self-Evident, says the author .
 Russia’s occupation and annexation of the Crimean part of Ukrainian territory in 2014 will not be regarded as a proportional or adequate measure . Russia's occupation of the Crimea part of Ukraine in 2014 is not considered adequate measure.
 In the first place, as has been pointed out, it did not involve the protection of citizens’ rights . In the second place, it didn't involve citizens' rights .
 The occupation of the peninsula continued right up until Russia’s annexation of Crimea, which is permanent .
 The seizure of Ukrainian military premises, warships and infrastructure, the persecution of pro-Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar activists can hardly be labelled a proportional and adequate measure .
 Russia's actions did not meet a single one of the above-mentioned conditions . Russia’s actions didn't meet one of them, according to international law .
 Russia includes the entire multi-ethnic population of Crimea . Under international law one can only refer to nationals of a state . The Crimea population is called ‘compatriots’
 The case of Crimea does not create legal grounds to apply R2P . There was no imminent risk of genocide, crimes against humanity, or ethnic cleansing in Crimea .
 Russia’s actions contradict the R2P concept as defined by the UN,18 . Russia failed to initiate a non-coercive and non-violent response to the alleged violations of human rights, according to the UN .
 The Russian response also contradicts the key elements of the R2P concept . The possibility to apply force only when all other options have been exhausted has been exhausted .
 The Russian Federation did not have any legal grounds to rely on any of the abovementioned concepts concerning protection of citizens abroad .
 The use of force to protect compatriots is not even developed in international law, Russian officials say .
 The Russian Federation has repeatedly claimed that V Yanukovych and the self-proclaimed leaders of Crimea requested an armed intervention . Russia’s characterization of its use of force as a lawful response to a request by the legitimate leaders of Ukraine and Crimea for assistance .
 Chaos and anarchy reign in the country, and people’s lives, safety and human rights are under threat, particularly in Crimea .
 With the influence of Western countries, open acts of terror and violence are being perpetrated . People are being persecuted on political and linguistic grounds, says the author .
 Russia's President V Putin should use the armed forces of the Russian Federation to restore law and order, peace and stability, he says . I appeal to the President of Russia, V Putin, to protect the people of Ukraine .
 We cannot remain indifferent if we see that they are being persecuted, destroyed and humiliated . However, we can't remain indifferent. We cannot be indifferent to people who are persecuted or humiliated .
 It should be noted that, in his interview for the Russian film “Crimea,’s Russian film, he said. It should also be noted.
 Putin acknowledged that he had decided to conduct the military operation to “return Crimea back to Russia’s’ Crimea . Putin said he gave the necessary orders to the military and security forces on 22 February 2014 .
 The President of Ukraine has no authority to appeal for the deployment of foreign armed forces . Yanukovych had already been removed from the office at the time of his request .
 Yanukovych was not recognised as President of Ukraine by the state itself nor by foreign states and international organisations . Subsequently, Yanukovych was never recognised as president of Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation recognized its legitimacy and the legitimacy of the removal of Yanukovych . It is important to note that the Russian Federation, by negotiating with a new Ukrainian government and maintaining diplomatic and other relations, recognizes its legitimacy .
 Russia recognized newly-elected President P Poroshenko . Later Russia recognized new President Poroshenko.
 S Aksyonov had no legal grounds to hold the post of the head of the Crimean government .
 The Verkhovna Rada of the ARC appoints the head of government in Crimea upon the consent of the President of Ukraine .
 Neither the Council of Ministers nor any other organ of Crimea had the authority to appeal to foreign states with a request to use force in the peninsula .
 There was no legal basis for the use of foreign military forces on the territory of Ukraine . Thirdly, there was nolegal basis for using foreign forces on Ukraine .
 Grant, it is useful to look into the content of the invitation to intervene. Grant is a good way to look at the invitation .
 A foreign state was invited to oust the military and law enforcement agencies of Ukraine . The temporal or geographical scope of its action was unidentified .
 The two states did not have any previously established cooperation mechanisms providing for such actions .
 Neither Yanukovych nor Aksyonov had the right to invite Russia to use force in Ukraine. Other foreign commentators are also convinced that neither Yanukovych or Aks Lyonov had right to invited Russia to Use force in the Ukraine .
 Russia’s use of force in the peninsula to carry out the military operation to ‘return Crimea’ is in contradiction with fundamental principles of international law . Russia's use of forces was acknowledged by Russian senior officials and illustrated by many facts on the ground .
 The actual actions by the Russian Federation can only be qualified as an armed attack and aggression against Ukraine in light of Art. of the UN Charter, other provisions of the Charter .
 Most impor25    impor25 Прем’єр  і Путіна, 1 March 2014, according to CNN.com .
 The firing of weapons is only one of the acts of aggression under international law, indicated in particular in the UNGA resolution and the Rome Statute .
 Russia engaged in the abovementioned acts of aggression, not to mention that in fact the use of firepower did take place . It is difficult to decide which, among a multi­ tude of acts and actions, to choose to demonstrate that Russia engages in theabovementioned acts
 The first time a single shot has been fired without a single bullet fired in a single incident .
 Russian troops fire ‘warning shots’ at Crimea airbase, The Telegraph, 4 March 2014 .
 The invitations are at odds with the constitutional law of Ukraine and the relevant concepts of international law . The invitations as such are at least at odds.
 In fact, the Russian Federation has committed an armed attack, which is an act of aggression against Ukraine . The attack is an attack on Ukraine, according to the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 The majority of scholars deny a general right to secede,40 which is borne out by the practice . 42 V Nanda emphasises ‘the uncertainty of the status of secession, which is neither permitted nor prohibited in international law’
 In general, secession is regarded as an exception which can be recognised as lawful only under extraordinary circumstances . secession is considered an exception.
 Russia has been consistent in advocating the sanctity of the territorial integrity of states . In this context, Russia, in its turn, has been consistently supportive of territorial integrity .
 It should be noted that there is a difference between “people’s as an entity on one hand, and “indigenous people” or a “minority” as entities on the other hand .
 The difference lies in the fact of the dominant position in the existing state and numerical superiority as characteristics of a ‘people’ are not required for an “indigenous people’s’ or “minority’
 Russians, including those in Crimea, are a national minority in Ukraine . Russians are a minority in the Ukraine .
 Under international law, an ethnic group is not entitled to self-determination in the form of secession . UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities was unambiguous on this .
 The same approach applies to representatives of other ethnic groups (e.g.
 The above facts give ground to assume that the Russian side suffers from the absence of a clear-cut legal stance . It is not agreed upon which community has a genuine right to secession in the Crimean case .
Foreign scholars rest on the position that there is no ‘people of Crimea’ who are entitled to secession . On the other hand, foreign scholars rest.
 The criterion of the exhaustion of all possible remedies for internal self-determination is becoming more important in the decolonisation era . The criterion is now more important than ever, according to experts .
 The Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among States in Accordance with the United Nations of 1970 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993 .
 Other ‘people’ in principle realize their right to self-determination within an existing state . Other “people in principle’s’ right toSelf-determination in the state is also a right .
 Crimea is known for having a special status, under the Ukrainian Constitution and laws . Crimea is among the other administrative and territorial units of Ukraine .
 The autonomous republic is an autonomous republic with specific issues being under its authority . It is anonomous republic. It is also an autonomous nation .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea within Ukraine is completely in line with the international legal approach of internal self-determination .
 Any statements that internal possibilities for self-determination had been exhausted can only be groundless . Therefore any statements thatinternal possibilities forSelf-determination were exhausted are groundless.
 The secession cannot be justified by the circumstances of the change of government in Ukraine, according to Russia . Russia allegedly “violat the equality and selfdetermination of peoples with regard to the Crimeans”
 The events in the peninsula had a negative impact on international peace and security . No general procedural requirements nor human rights were observed during the referendum .
 A foreign state’s interference with this process is illegal in any event, because it is not in compliance with two fundamental principles of international law . The principle of territorial integrity and the inviolability of borders is not per se prohibited.
 T Franck,73 G Abi-Saab,74 C Walter,75 and J Crawford. This opinion is expressed, for example, in the works by T Francks, 73, and 74 C Walter .
 The EU Declaration of Guidelines on the Recognition of New States in Eastern Europe and in the Former Soviet Union of 1991 . A common position on the process of recognition requires, inter alia, respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and commitments subscribed to
 In the Crimean peninsula in February – March 2014 not only was there foreign interference with the process of self-determination, but effective and overall control over the events on the part of Russia .
 A Bayefsky , Self-Determination in International Law: Quebec and Lessons Learned, Kluwer Law International, The Hague – London – Boston: 2000, 83 .
 M Kohen, Secession: International Law Perspectives, Cambridge Uni­versity Press, Cambridge: 2006 .
 A von Ungern-Sternberg, K Abushov, C Walter and K AbUSHov are all published in Oxford Uni­ versity Press, Oxford Uni ­ versity press .
 Russia had consistently maintained the opposite position prior to its occupation of Crimea . Russia had maintained the same position in Kosovo in 2009-2010 and following the collapse of the USSR .
 The Russian Constitution prohibits secession of the federal constituents . It was clarified by the Russian Constitutional Court .
 Russia denies the right to secession to the constituents 79 Cf.g. The Russian government says it does not want to split .
Zeitschrift für ausländisches Recht und Völkerrecht 75 , 92; Delahunty, supra note 31. Walter, supra Note 75, 306; T Christakis, Self-Determination, Territorial Integrity and Fait
 The inconsistency of the external self-determination of Crimea with international law is accepted by the European Union, the G7, the Council of Europe, the OSCE and other intergovernmental organisations .
 The international community as a whole takes such a stand. Most importantly, the international community is taking a stand .
 M Bothe notes that most international law scholars agree on the fact that Russia annexed Crimea . In this respect international law sticks to the maxim ex iniuria ius non oritur (‘law does not arise from injustice’
 The analysis of the compliance of the “self-determination of the people of Crimea’ with international law leads to the conclusion that there has been no holder of any right to self-determination . There were possibilities for “internal self- determination’s
 The legality of Crimea’s ‘self-determination’ is also excluded by the fact of the engagement of Russia's armed forces in support of the ‘referendum’ and other unveiled Russian actions directed toward the annexation of Crimea .
 S Tierney, Nationalism and Globalisation: New Settings, New Challenges, Hart, Oxford: 2015, 32.
 Russian Territory, Occupied Territory or What?, 53 Military Law & Law of War Review 99, 101 .
 There was a spate of killings, mass violence, abductions, attacks on journalists and human rights activists . There were also incidents with racist motives, committed upon instructions or with the tacit approval of the Kyiv authorities .
 A group of people supposedly controlled by the illegal authorities of Kyiv attempted to overthrow the legal government of Crimea . Also, a group of members of the Kyiv government tried to overthrow Crimea's government .
 The authorities in Kyiv do not represent the Ukrainian people as a whole, especially the population of Crimea . They do not exercise effective control over the territory and do not maintain law and order .
 On 18 March the Republic concluded a treaty with Russia and was included in its territory . The Republic concluded the treaty on 18 March .
 V Tomsinov: “he coup d’état that took place in Kyiv on 22 February 2014 brought to power pro-Western radicals.’ He adds, “He coup d'état took place on 22 Feb 2014.
 Russia's own position with respect to Kosovo is in a direct contradiction with Russia’s own position . The above-referred positions are in the direct contradiction. Russia's position is similar to that of Kosovo .
 The allegations of violence against the 97 people have been made against him . The 97 people are accused of assaulting each other .
 The Russian Federation had ample opportunities to collect the necessary evidence. It should be noted that by exercising effective control over the peninsula the Russian Federation has ample opportunity to collect evidence .
 PACE Resolution found no imminent threats to rights of the ethnic Russian minority in Crimea .
 Y Aleksandrova refers to the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in the Quebec secession case and draws parallels with the situation in Crimea .
 She indicates that ‘the natural right of citizens ‘to freely pursue their future’ emerges in the moment of forced exclusion by the government and its disregard of the majority of the people .
Almost all branches of the government were cleansed at all levels, resulting in a situation whereby key offices were occupied by political forces embroiled in the coup .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine is the sole legislative body of Ukraine . It represents the people of Ukraine as a whole .
 Neither sporadic initiations of criminal prosecutions of random MPs, nor skirmishes in the parliament, can be interpreted as signifying an absence of “opportunities to participate in the conduct of public affairs at all levels’.
Every parliamentary election should be held for party members suspected of committing offences or involved in similar activities . Using this logic, such ‘absence of opportunities’ takes place with regard to the residents of all regions .
 Each new cabinet would bring about the aforementioned “absence of opportunities’ of the population of this or that administrative unit of a state. Once again, using this logic each new cabinet could bring about ‘absence’ Of the population, this would bring
 Crimea's autonomous status meant that no “steps to bring about a public consensus’ were needed . The possibilities of internal self-determination within one state were not exhausted at all, according to the above-mentioned logic .
 The right to decide on changes within its territory is within the domain of internal jurisdiction . It is an attribute of internal sovereignty – one of the key criteria of statehood .
 There are no factual and legal reasons to claim Crimea’s secession accords with either international or national law .
 Russia’s actions aimed at incorporating the Crimea based on the claim that the peninsula ‘is historically Russian land’ violate numerous acts of the most respected international organisations .
 The UNGA noted that Ukraine did not authorize the referendum in Crimea . The referendum had no validity and could not form the basis for any alteration of the status of the ARC or of the city of Sevastopol .
 Russia’s recognition of Crimea as a part of Ukraine was subject to specific conditions are legally untenable . Claims about the ‘forced assimilation’ and “deprivation of historical memory’ are not truthful and are not supported by any evidence .
 Many of the assertions contained in President Putin’s ‘Speech on Crimea’ have been successfully challenged by respected international institutions .
 The issues mentioned were not raised in the conclusion of any of the key bilateral treaties, including especially the 1991 Agreement Establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States . The issues were not discussed in the end of the treaties .
 International law does not recognize historical or ethnic ties as giving grounds to claims over territory . This territory used to be Russian at some point in history .
 A propos “historical claims’ it is advisable to examine the historical background. Nonetheless, a propos ‘historical claim’ is advisable, says the author .
 The earliest mentions of the inhabitation of the Crimean Peninsula are dated in the 12th century BC, while Russia annexed the peninsula in the late 18th century . Crimea was not related to Russia for 3,000 years .
 The peninsula was inhabited by numerous Greek states and the Scythian state, Pontus . It was controlled by Rome, Byzantium, Genoa, the Khazar state, and the Crimean Khanate, which became a vassal of the Ottoman Empire .
 Crimea used to be a part of an empire, but it was not part of Russia . Crimea was not an empire. Crimea was part of a Russian empire .
 In 1941–1944 Crimea was occupied by Nazi Germany and Romania . In 1941-1944 Ukraine was occupied in Crimea by Romania and Germany .
 In May 1944, around 200,000 Crimean Tatars and 25,000 Bulgarians, Greeks, Armenians, and other ethnic groups were deported to the Central Asian regions of the USSR . The deportation was carried out under extremely harsh conditions and resulted in numerous deaths .
 The meeting was attended by such members of the CC Presidium as N Khrushchev, K Voroshilov, N Bulganin, L Kaganovich, A Mikoyan, M Saburov and P Pervukhin .
 The Presidium comprised 27 people, therefore, there was no quorum, and the remaining 14 people were simply absent’125 – are simply untrue . The remaining 14 are simply absent.
 Its Supreme Council was unanimous in excluding the Crimean region from the list of its constituent regions .
 The Constitution of the RSFSR was the highest authori­ty of the Republic at the time . The SC was the most powerful political party in the country .
 Any allegations of procedural violations or irregularities are groundless, according to the U.S. Attorney General for the United States .
Until 1991 referendums had not been held in the USSR . Their legal framework was not generally described in the 1937 Constitution of the RSFSR, except for a mention in Art .
 Sevastopol was not transferred to Ukraine and had a republican subordination . Its status was explained by the better supply of goods to inhabitants and the direct administration of enterprises and institutions .
In practice, legislation of the Union was supplemented by legislation of Soviet republics . In practice, laws of the Soviet republic were supplemented by law of the respective Soviet republic .
 The legislation of the Ukrainian SSR was applied in Sevastopol .
 The 1954 decision should also be pointed out, as well as the true reasons underlying the 1954 decision . The decision was made in 1954 .
 1944 deportation resulted in an acute agricultural and economic crisis in the pen­ insula . The 1944 deportation led to the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian people's contribution to the post-war renaissance of the peninsula. This fostering of this economic recovery already in the first decade following the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine constitutes a weighty proof of the Ukrainian people’s contribution to post- war renaissance .
 This move was aimed at showing the political unity of Ukraine and Russia . It was intended to show the unity of the two countries .
 The Russian Federation does not empower its authorities to determine whether the transfer of the peninsula in 1954 was in accordance with the Constitution and legislation of the Soviet Union, nor to act upon such determination .
 The same concerns the arguments on the constitutionality of Soviet authorities’ decrees presented by officials of the Russian Federation and scholars .
 It goes without saying that such evaluations have no legal consequences . Such evaluations are not legal consequences, it says . It also says such evaluations can be evaluated without legal consequences.
134 treaties were based upon the principle of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and the inviolability of its borders . They presumed Crimea to be a part of the territory of Ukraine . The treaties include treaties on the deployment of the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 Russia has never challenged the status of Crimea before any international institution . Russia has not challenged Crimea's status before any institution .
 The texts of Russian-Ukrainian agreements between 1990-2003 clearly refute V Putin’s allegation that Crimea was recognised as Ukrainian territory subject to Russia's consent .
136 were based on an acknowledgement that Crimea was Ukrainian . Even some provocative decisions by the Russian State Duma, adopted in 1992– 1996, were made based on the fact Crimea was Ukraine .
 The ratification of the Treaty of Friendship by the Russian parliament rendered any claims to the peninsula baseless . Even the fiercest nationalists among the members of the Duma were recognized .
 The statement that “Crimea was in essence peacefully annexed by Ukraine’s Ukraine is an oxymoron, says A Kapustin and other Russians .
 According to international law, an annexation means the forced acquisition of territory and it cannot by definition be peaceful .
 Russia's recognition of Ukraine’s sovereignty over Crimea is an example of Russia's disregard of the legal meaning of the territorial integrity of states .
 The transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 contradicted the constitutional laws of the USSR, as well as the statements on Russia's historical rights .
 The assertions that Russia recognised the Crimean part of Ukraine upon certain conditions are simply not true, neither factually or legally .
 Russia may be preparing for possible litigation and honing future arguments to bring forward a dispute or a criminal trial before competent international bodies .
 The Russian scholarly arguments suffer from an international law background problem. It should be noted that despite their multitudinous volume, they suffer from a problem .
 This general conclusion may be equally applied to any point they may raise . This conclusion may also be applied to anyone who may raise it .
 Russia’s use of force against Ukraine in Crimea in 2014 meets none of the legal requirements for the lawful Use of force contained in international law . As far as specific arguments are concerned, we should stress, first of all.
The references to the requests by V Yanukovych and S Aksyonov are equally flawed . The references to V Yanukovych's requests by the Russian president are also flawed .
 Russia’s actions can only be qualified as an armed attack and act of aggression against Ukraine . In light of the UN Charter, the UNGA resolution on ‘Definition of Aggression’ and the Rome Statute of the ICC, Russia's actions cannot be
 The events in Crimea between February – April 2014 do not fulfil any conditions for lawful self-determination in the form of secession . The events between February and April 2014 are not expected to be followed by a referendum .
 The Russian Federation committed an act of aggression against Ukraine, according to the Russian Federation . It illegally occupied and annexed the territory of a another sovereign state .
 The assertions that Ukraine has been exercising “peaceful annexation of Crimea since 1991 are groundless from the standpoint of international law . annexation cannot, by definition, be peaceful, according to international law, says U.S.
 Such a practice would be contrary to international law principles on territorial integrity and the inviolability of borders, says the author . Such a policy would also be contrary.
 Russia is obliged to respect the status of Crimea as an integral part of Ukraine . Russia must respect Crimea's status as a part of the country .
 The contributions of Russian international law scholars reflect the political character of their publications . The contributions are based on their political character.
Research objective is to prove the legality of Russia's seizure of Crimea by any means, against all odds . This can be partly explained by their research objective .
 The Russian doctrine has failed to conduct an in-depth study of February-April 2014 events in light of relevant international legal principles and rules . This explains why the representatives of the Russian doctrine have failed to study the February- April 2014 events .
 They also misinterpret, misrepresent or distort legal norms, and resort to subsidiary sources for the determination of rules . There are relevant primary sources of international law, according to international law .
 Russia has consistently disregarded the fundamental principles of international law governing the relations between the two states during the post-Soviet period . Russia has repeatedly disregarded fundamental principles.
 Russian officials have consistently advocated this position, even during the course of the annexation in February 2014 . Russian senior officials have been advocating this position for years .
 The entire situation serves as an example of an ex-post facto justification. This is why the entire situation is used as a justification . The situation is an example.
 The undercover nature of the military operation aimed at annexation of the peninsula helps to explain this characteristic of the arguments .
 The Russian doctrine substantiates the statements of the authorities and replicates them . The doctrine substantiate the statements.
 Russian doctrine is absence of any critical analysis of politicians’ statements . Another peculiarity of the doctrine is the absence of critical analysis.
 The Russian official and doctrinal stance throughout the course of 2014–2016 reflects an international legal nihilism . The Russian government's stance reflects a "legal nihilism"
 Russia’s international standing. Not only does it undermine Russia's international standing, but it also creates new and major threats and challenges for international law .
 Russia's use of force in Syria was partially caused by the weak international community response to its aggression against Ukraine . Such threats have become even more acute in connection with Russia’s use of forces in Syria .