Manafort's lawyers are asked to reduce his sentence, which can be awarded for work in favor of Ukrainian politicians .
 The U.S. government demands from the RF immediate release of a Ukrainian seamen .
 In Europe, the true purpose of Russia's construction of the Kerch Bridge was called . The true purpose was to build the bridge in Russia .
 Manufacturers of ammunition and small arms in Russia suffer losses due to sanctions . Russia has been hit by sanctions for sanctions .
 Lukashenka made an unpleasant statement to Ukraine about seizing the Crimea . He made a statement about seizing Crimea .
 Lukashenko made an unpleasant statement to Ukraine about seizing the Crimea . He also made a statement about Crimea .
 The composition of the court in the case of Savchenko-Ruban was determined . The composition was determined by the court .
 The U.S. is interested in continuing negotiations with Russia regarding the restoration of the Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity . Russia is ready for a serious talk, says the United States . The United States is also interested in continued negotiations.
 The United States is also interested in negotiating with Russia regarding the restoration of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity, Volker notes .
 Russia has expressed no interest in resolving this issue, but the U.S. hopes it will happen someday . As of today, Russia has said no interest.
 He predicts that the humanitarian situation in the region will improve . Ukraine will be restored only when Russia starts a serious talk about ending its aggression in the east of Ukraine .
 Volker promised that the U.S. will support Ukraine until it happens. Volker said that the United States will support the Ukraine .
 U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says the United States will never recognize Crimea's annexation . He also stresses that the U. S. will not recognize the annexation of Crimea . Pompeo supports the recent statement of Pompeo .
 Kurt Volker announced his plan to meet Vladislav Surkov, Russia's aide to Russia's president, sometime in December . Volker has said he will meet Surkov in December.
 Russian military attacked the Ukrainian Navy ships and captured 24 Ukrainian sailors . However, this meeting was canceled after the Russian military attack .
 He later said that the resumption of this meeting depended on whether the captured sailors would be set free . He said that if they were freed, they would be able to meet again .
 Virginia judge plans to punish Paulafort on charges of financial and tax fraud . The next week, Virginia judge will punish him on charges .
Ukrainian oligarchs Viktor Yanukovych and Opposition Bloc accused of sending money from Ukraine to avoid taxation . Ukrainian oligarchs were accused of trying to obtain bank loans in a fraudulent manner .
 A Virginia judge says public prosecutors are "manifestly inappropriate" for bankruptcy and tax fraud offenses committed by a political technologist . A note filed by a Virginia judge, lawyers call punishment offered by public prosecutors ""manifestably inappropriate"
Manafort's lawyers point out that the health of their client has deteriorated . He has suffered significant financial and reputational losses .
 For the 69-year-oldafort, the sentence of prosecution offered by the prosecutor may become livelier .
 Paul Manaforth was present during the trial, he was disorientated . On February 15, when he was present, he had been disorientating .
Donald Trump was the ex-head of the election headquarters in the period from 2006 to 2017 . He received $ 30 million for counseling pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine .
 In mid-September 2018,afort agreed to an agreement with Muller on a so-called political affair .
 On August 21, the jury judgedafort guilty of eight of the 18 charges against him . The jury found him guilty on August 21 .
 Agency for Missing Persons in Conflicts of the U.S. Department of Defense, Kelly McKeighy met with the Minister of Veterans Affairs Irina Fris in the Pentagon .
 During the meeting, they discussed the directions of the Agency's activity, writes censor.NET .
In particular, about the work of the laboratory for the identification of the remains of missing bodies, communication with the families of servicemen, information and education activities .
 They have stayed on international cooperation and attracted higher education institutions for such activities . Separately, they have stayed in the field of research and analysis .
 73 Ukrainian military servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine are considered missing . 14 representatives of the National Guard and 5 borderguards are considered to be missing . In 2018 the Parliament passed the Law on the Legal Status of Missing Persons .
 She also announced the opening of the Humanitarian Training Center in Dnipro, February 18 . The training center is intended to increase the level of personnel qualification and inter-agency coordination .
 It is about employees who carry out forensic medical examination, national police, as well as representatives of the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 The Director of the U.S. Department of Defense Agency for Missing Persons during Conflicts assured that they were ready to advise Ukraine on the establishment of this center .
 The Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine reported that the Russian Federation's border ships committed aggressive actions against Ukrainian ships that were carrying out a planned transition from Odessa to Mariupol of the Azov Sea .
 The Russian border ship "Don"" carried a ram of the Ukrainian raiding tug, which damaged the main engine of the ship, lining and liner fencing, and also lost the life raft .
 The Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine emphasizes that the intention to implement the transition was warned in advance and acted within the framework of international law .
 Three ships of the Ukrainian Navy were captured and 24 Ukrainian servicemen captured . Russian security forces captured three ships and 24 servicemen .
 The Russian-controlled Russian court of the occupied Simferopol has chosen a precautionary measure for 24 sailors in custody until January 25, 2019 . The Russian court has chosen the precautionary measures .
 On November 26, the Verkhovna Rada voted for the introduction of a military state for 30 days in Vinnytsya, Donetsk .
 The decision to introduce a martial law was taken in connection with the act of aggression against Ukraine in the Kerch Strait .
 The suspects will remain under arrest at least until the end of April . They will be arrested at least for the next few months .
 Gerasimov said that this is "a fundamentally new strategy" to destabilize the situation in Russia . The United States plans to attract the protest potential of the ""fifth column" to Russia .
 The Pentagon allegedly can use high-precision weapons to strike at the most important sites in the country . Also, the Pentagon reportedly can use the weapons to attack the most significant sites in America .
 The U.S. and allies determined the aggressive vector of their foreign policy, according to the general .
 Their goal is to eliminate the statehood of unwanted countries, undermine the sovereignty, and change the legitimately elected bodies of state power . They want to eliminate statehood and undermine sovereignty, they say .
 Gerasimov added that one of the ""victims" of this U.S. policy is Ukraine .
 The State Duma of Russia in the first reading, February 12, supported the bill on "sovereign Internet" The bill involves the autonomous work of the Russian segment of the Internet .
 The Washington Post reported that the United States blocked the Russian ""troll factory" from accessing the internet during the Congressional elections .
 A declaration was adopted on concerns about Russia's actions in the Donbass and in the Black Seas . A summit of the Bucharest Nine was held in Kosice, Slovakia .
 The leaders of the states demand from NATO a more coherent and strategic approach. All this, they say, is the demand from the nations .
 Poland, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Latvia and Estonia, Estonia, Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic and Bulgaria. Poland, Poland, Lithuania and Latvia are among the countries in the world .
 In November 2015, at a summit in Bucharest, these states signed a joint declaration declaring united efforts to provide a "strong, credible, balanced, military presence" of NATO in the region .
 Russia initially sought to block the Sea of ​​Azov when the Kerch Bridge was built .
 manufacturers of small arms and ammunition in the Russian Federation lost about 50 billion rubles in 2014 . Sanctions imposed in 2014 on Russia for aggression against Ukraine led to the loss of about 50billion rubles .
About 80% of Russian products went to the U.S. and European countries where civilian weapons are allowed . It is reported that before the sanctions, about 80% went to U. S. and Europe .
 In 2013, Russian media claimed that with the permission of the Pentagon, U.S. companies bought hundreds of millions of Russian ammunition cartridges per year .
 Rifle ammunition in Russian Federation produce Tula, Barnaul, Novosibirsk, Ulyanovsk, Klimovsk and Amur cartridges .
 As of February 2019, more than 4. million gun owners are registered in Russia . The General Directorate of State Control and Licensing and Permissive Work of the Russian Guard.
 Russian manufacturers of rifle ammunition lost an average of 10 billion rubles per year after sanctions . Russian manufacturers lost about 10 billion dollars a year.
Since 2014, total losses amounted to about 50 billion rubles, since 2014, according to reports . Since 2014, there have been more than 50 billion Rubles in the world .
 U.S. began to replenish the "patronized hunger" with ammunition from China and Bulgaria .
 The products of Russian ammunition factories are still represented in the U.S. There are still loopholes that allow legally supplying cartridges to the American market .
 The Kalashnikov Concern was on the U.S. sanctions list on July 16, 2014, and on September 12, 2014 . It was forced to suspend many of its product contracts.
Ukrainian soldier women have conquered the hearts of NATO headquarters staff, earning endless ovations .
 President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko made an unpleasant statement to the Ukrainians through the annexation of Crimea by Russia . The annexation was part of the annexation by Russia.
Before the Soviets, I was surrounded by Western and Ukrainian journalists and tortured me, whose Crimea is Russian or Ukrainian . And before the Soviets. And before that, he was surrounded with Western and Ukrainians, who tortured me .
 "If it's your dying, fight for this piece of land, "Lukashenko said . It was a completely unexpected answer for them .
 This will be news in the evening, and in the morning, they will forget, no words will be said . It will be News in the night, but in the day, they would forget, they'll forget .
 Lukashenko called for "to look further and deeper in these matters" and to try "at least in this case" to understand him . He called for ""to look more and deeper" in his case .
 I signed one document yesterday, but today I am climbing and start shouting . I signed a document yesterday but today, I'm climbing and starting shouting .
"I really had to speak for Russia's support," he said . "I always say to the Americans and the West," he explained .
 He assured that in the talks with Russian President Vladimir Putin they ""decided" this position, and the phrase ""unity at the presidents level" was a joke .
 Lukashenka: If we talk about the principle of equality, why the Russians do not say, for example, to join Russia in Belarus in Belarus, and not vice versa.
 Nadezhda Savchenko and Volodymyr Ruban are facing criminal proceedings in Kiev . The court received criminal proceedings against Savchenko, Ruban .
 The same day, the Rada revoked the immunity . Also gave permission to detain and arrest the deputy Nadezhda Savchenko .
 Savchenko complained to representatives of the ombudsman on video surveillance in the cell . Savchenko also complained to the representatives of a cell surveillance ombudsman .
 Savchenko was a partner of Vladimir Ruban, detained on March 8 at the KPVV "Mayorskie" during an attempt to transport large quantities of weapons from the territory of the Donetsk region .
 Vladimir Ruban has been arrested without a right to a pledge . He was arrested in Pechersk district court of Kiev .
 Ruban is suspected of illicit handling of weapons and preparing for terrorist attacks, including armed attacks on statesmen and political leaders . Ruban was also suspected of preparing for attacks on Ukraine's President and Interior Minister Arsen Avakov .