 The Ukraine crisis is arguably of a different order of concern, since it has invoked the participation of the United States, the European Union and Russia . Each of them possesses abundant nuclear weapons capacity, each of them with abundant nuclear capacity .
 The study identifies 10 key narratives that forge the battle for information warfare between nuclear powers and nuclear powers . The study is based on a broader work that monitors mainstream and alternative media .
 The Ukraine Crisis 2014–2015 is the Ukraine crisis 2014-2015 . My overriding interest is in the understanding of contemporary Western propaganda as it has unfolded since 2001 .
 There is an equally imperative task to examine the characteristics of non-Western propaganda, including that of Russia and of pro-Russian media anywhere . But the main focus here is on Western and Western media propaganda .
 I shall explore this theme in relation to the Ukraine crisis in the period 2013–2015 . I shall examine this theme. I shall also explore this issue in relation with the Ukraine Crisis in the year 2013-2015 .
My more general purpose is to argue the importance of reducing news consumer dependency on mainstream for-proﬁt corporate and State media, and enhancing the countervail of alternative news sources .
 Analysis of media content ﬂows between the BRICS economies is in its infancy .
 The issue of ﬂow may be less signiﬁcant than the ways in which the contents of international communications represent, reinforce or resist phenomena of imperialism or neoimperialism .
 The one-sidedness of corporate mainstream Western media coverage speaks not to the alleged media pluralism lauded by celebrants of digital and social media expansion . But to a much older narrative of complicity with the propaganda aims of imperial power.
Western media coverage of Iran's nuclear energy program has been widely observed . Such synchronicity reinforces trends that have been widely seen in Western media coverage .
 In his broader work, I identify at least 10 principal plots to the Ukraine crisis, each attached either to a single episode or phase of the crisis . The Ukraine crisis is operating as a lightning rod for information warfare .
 I examine the divergent narrative interpretations of such episodes or phases, between those largely espoused by the Kiev regime and its U.S. and EU allies and their respective media .
 I focus on Western media and what we can learn from these about the nature of Western conﬂict propaganda and the beliefs and presumptions that these invite of audiences amidst the exposure of hypocrisies and contradictions that propaganda so often entails .
 I work inductively from a range of texts that represent the clash of discourses between mainstream Western media accounts, on the one hand, and competing accounts that come principally from Western alternative media .
 Such a clash inevitably tends towards the destabilization of the hegemonic Western discourse, not in the sense that it entitles an analyst to declare what is “true’ or “false” or ‘false,’ but in a sense of
 Signiﬁcance of the International Monetary Fund as source of ﬁnancial aid . The IMF is the largest fund in the world .
 The West and Western media considered that Russia forcibly seized Crimea and assisted local ethnic Russian thugs in the Donbass to establish separatist ﬁefdoms in Luhansk.
 Russian and alternative media maintained that Crimeans, following long-established historical preference, overwhelmingly voted for annexation by Russia . Western media, by contrast, maintained that crimeans, followed long- established historical preference.
 Russia strategically maintained a cool distance between itself and separatist movements in Eastern Ukraine . Russia is seeking a political, federalist solution to grant a strong measure of autonomy to the peoples of the Donbass region .
 Washington, the European Union and NATO, are the principal propaganda intentions of Washington and NATO . The intentions were conveyed through Western mainstream media .
 Ukraine is seeking not independence from Ukraine but a more equitable and UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA and CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1019 autonomous status within it .
 Many may be ethnic Russians who regard Russian as their ﬁrst or predominant language . This in itself does not necessarily signify that they are pro-Russia or anti-Ukraine .
 At the beginning, it looked as though the coup attempt might fail . Western media had speculated how Kiev could break off the western part of Ukraine as a separate political entity .
 The journalists alleged Russian intimidation, military occupation and electoral manipulation ahead of the referendum on March 16 . The referendum is scheduled for March 16.
 The Times and other Western media suggested that Russia had “invaded’s Crimea, without clarifying that Moscow already had some 16,000 troops stationed in Crimea . Russia has 25,000 soldiers in Crimea under an agreement with Ukraine that allowed Russia to maintain up
 A much more negative expert account is offered, it is true, by Greta Uehling . She is particularly inﬂuenced by her studies of the Crimean Tatars .
 Uehling claims Russian troops were used to “help take over’s Supreme Council, she says . She also says proRussian Prime Minister Sergei Aksyono had criminal ties .
 Vladimir Putin was quite open at the time that the Russian troops present in the Crimea would help prevent Crimea being taken over by the coup regime of Ukraine .
 Konstantin V Malofeev claimed to have advised the Kremlin in advance of the collapse of the Yanukovych government in February 2014 that the government would likely fall . Russia should exploit the ensuing chaos to annex the Crimea and South-Eastern Ukraine .
 The report offered no evidence of such a memo, nor evidence that it had been applied for policy purposes .
 Its existence was denied by both the Kremlin spokesman and by Malofeev .
 There should have been no surprise at the evidence of a strong pro-Russian tendency in Crimea, where Russia's presence dates back to the early 1700s .
 The province had previously formed part of Crimean Khanata of the Tatars, sometimes said by Tatars today to have been one of the strongest and most independent powers of Eastern Europe . It had been absorbed within the Ottoman Empire .
 Many of these ethnic Russians had long resented Soviet Premier Krushchev’s somewhat arbitrary transfer of their region to Ukraine in 1954 .
 A pro-Russian separatist movement had been strong in the early years of Ukrainian independence . The separatist movement has been strong since the early days of Ukraine's independence .
 73 percent of Crimeans backed the secession of Crimea and Ukraine with a view to joining with Russia . In a 2008 survey by the Razumkov Center, 73 percent had made up their minds .
 In March 2014, Crimean government organized a referendum in which citizens chose between staying in Ukraine but with greater autonomy or joining with Russia .
 Richard Sakwa is an independent and balanced scholarly expert on Russian and European politics . He concludes that it is reasonable to assume that even in perfect conditions a majority in Crimea would have voted for union with Russia . In Sevastopol the favorable vote would have been overwhelming .
 Large sections of Ukrainian military, security service and police forces switched their allegiance to the separatists and then to Russia .
 The autonomous RADA of the Crimea had historically been at odds with the Kiev government .
 Russian pensions are three times higher than Ukrainian . Ukrainian pensions are in the process of being slashed as the Ukrainian government concedes to IMF demands .
 It paid particular attention to relevant events around the time of the fall of the Soviet Union .
 In January 1991, before Ukraine's independence, Crimea had held a referendum on Crimean autonomy . In August of that year, the government of Crimea held a vote on Crimea's autonomy .
 In March, 87 percent of Crimean voters voted to stay in the Soviet Union . They anticipated it would allow them far greater independence than incorporation within Ukraine .
 The newly independent government of Ukraine, once in power, stopped this referendum from taking place . It had been requested by 246,000 of Crimea’s 2. million people .
 Moscow did not protest Ukraine's refusal to allow a referendum vote . Moscow had done nothing to prevent Ukraine from declaring its own independence .
 Russia's President Yeltsin had indicated that Russia would not let republics with large Russian populations secede from the former Soviet Union . But he then backed down .
 When signatures for a referendum were being collected in 1992, Ukraine offered more autonomy for Crimea .
 The vote was reversed the following day amidst threats of bloodshed and direct presidential rule from Ukraine . This vote was reverse after threats of violence and direct rule from the Ukraine .
 Ukraine declared the May 5 vote unconstitutional and plans for a referendum were canceled . Ukraine declares the vote unconstitutional .
 Crimea had been part of Russia since the 1700s . Soviet President Khrushchev had reassigned Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 .
 Khrushchev's gift did not include Sevastopol, site of Russia’s Black Sea .
 When Ukraine became independent following the collapse of the Soviet Union, territories that had previously been Russian but then appended to Ukraine by Soviet rulers were retained by Ukraine .
 The constitution was rendered null and void by the February 2014 coup . For example, secession may have been unconstitutional with respect to the constitution .
 The 1954 1022 OLIVER BOYD-BARRETT transfer of Crimea was not correct . The transfer of the Crimea to Crimea in 1954 was a mistake .
 If constitutional behavior had broken down in Kiev there was no reason to preserve it in Crimea . But if constitutional behavior was broken down there were no reasons to keep Crimea in Crimea.
 The West had created numerous precedents that in a less partisan environment would have required their support for the Crimean declaration,g.
 Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008 was declared without staging a referendum . Kosovo was declared independence without a referendum in 2008 .
 They averted comparisons between Russian action in Crimea and Western support for separatism elsewhere . They averts comparisons between Russia's actions in the Crimea and the West's in the region .
 In 1999, NATO fought a war against what remained of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . The goal of militarily occupying Kosovo province and prying Kosovo away from Yugoslavia.
 The word "unelected" was rarely attributed to the interim Kiev rulers . By contrast, in their coverage of Ukraine, the word "coup" was almost always used in quotes .
 Ukraine blocked water supplies in 2014, claiming that consumers had not paid their debts . Ukraine blocked the water supply in 2014 .
Eighty-two percent of Crimean electricity also came from Ukrainian plants . Eighty- two percent of Crimea's electricity came from Ukraine . The Crimean region is home to more than 100,000 people .
 There were issues as to which country Crimean enterprises should pay taxes and implications for their vulnerability to U.S. and EU sanctions .
 The infrastructural re-integration of Crimea would be a lengthy process, with cultural and political challenges, including an increasingly intolerant attitude towards dissenting journalistic and other dissident voices . Kiev's attitude to dissent against the coup regime is arguably on a par with Kiev’s
 Walker omitted mention of Russia’s two major concerns, namely Western hypocrisy over Crimea and the threat posed to Russia by NATO expansionism . Walker had omitted mention.
 U.S. diplomats invent something called “Eurasianism,’s alleged Russian ambition to take over Europe, using Ukraine as the launch-pad .
 Protestors distrusted the appointment of billionaire “oligarchs’ as regional administrators . Protestors were angry at the appointment.
 Moscow has offered a harsh austerity plan to replace the less onerous loans previously offered by Moscow . The IMF is now offering a "aid" that would now replace the more onerous loan offered by Russia .
 Veteran investigative reporter Robert Parry told Aaron Woronczuk that at face value the photos were taken by the U.S. government . Parry said the photos apparently showed ﬁghters who had allegedly been in Russia and who were now present in Eastern Ukraine .
 It began to look as though the “newspaper of record’ had not engaged in the most elementary fact-checking of material handed to it by the Kiev regime . The U.S. State Department plastering its alleged ‘evidence’ on its front page .
 The Times editors rammed through the piece and its blurry photos without any independent examination . The editors did check the story, saw it was a grotesque falsiﬁcation and published it anyway .
 In either case, the Times functioned as a legitimate journalistic outlet, but as a propaganda agency of the state .
 Investigating the 12 Company of the People’s Militia, Chivers and Sneider found what appeared only to be Ukrainians . Many had afﬁnities, family connections and other ties to Russia .
 Ukrainians had many different views as to what might constitute a good outcome to the conﬂict . The Ukrainians had a different view as to the outcome of the con.
 Weaponry in evidence appeared not to be the sophisticated Russian equipment that one would expect if Russia had been actively intervening, but was well-worn and dated .
 This involved fascist pro-Kiev paramilitaries from outside of Odessa who had formed units of the National Guard . This involvedfascist pro- Kievparamilitaries. They had formed groups of National Guard units .
 Ukrainian military recruited to undertake dirty work that regular military would not do . The men were recruited to do the dirty work.
 Many of their victims were forced to ﬂee into the Trade Unions building which was then attacked by grenades and set on ﬁre while their attackers sang nationalist songs .
 The lack of commiseration, empathy, or compassion in relation to the death of “Colorados’ in Odessa, “jokes’ on the blood of Russian babies on a school charity fair, the openly Russophobe art exhibition titled “Kill a
 Samantha Power criticized the post-coup regime in June 2015 . She said investigations into serious crimes have been sluggish, opaque, and marred by serious errors .
 Unlike Crimea and the Donbass, Odessa remained under the control of Kiev . Despite the high proportion of ethnic Russians among its citizens, the city remained under control of the Kiev government .
 In June 2015, Ukraine President Poroshenko appointed to governorship of Odessa . Mikheil Saakashvili is the ex-president of Georgia .
 Saakashvili was wanted in his home country for human rights abuses and abuse of government funds . He had dragged his country unsuccessfully into war with Russia in 2008, and was wanted for human Rights abuses .
 The Washington Post and the Financial Times saw no evidence of this . Yet other papers, including the Washington Post, saw no proof .
 Crimean referendum followed on May 11 by referenda in provinces of Eastern Ukraine . Russia discouraged cries for annexation of these provinces with Russia .
 Russia had good reason to tread very carefully with respect to the Donbass . In fact, Russia has good reason for treading very carefully .
 In Donetsk, protesters had proclaimed the Donetsk People's Republic on April 7 . A Luhansk People’s Republic was formed on April 27 . In Donetsk.
 The two entities established a union known as the Novorossiya Republic . A month later, on May 24, the two entities created a union .
 The West now supported the deployment of an “army against their own population,’ argued Escobar . Escobar argued the very action used by NATO as pretexts for interventions in Libya and Syria .
 Richard Sakwa considers that the Kiev reaction reﬂected a long-standing prejudice in Western Ukraine that those who lived in the Donbass region were not ‘real Ukrainians’ but were Russians who had been sent in the 1930s .
Analysis suggests votes for independence were not as bids to leave Ukraine as they had been in Crimea .
Post-Gadhaﬁ elections in Libya in 2012 were widely applauded as a display of democracy . But these circumstances were scarcely less dire than the Western-induced post-gadha election in 2012 .
 Pro-Russian separatists in Luhansk killed all 40 soldiers and 9 crew members . This was shortly after a government military transport was shot down by separatists .
 U.S. mainstream media dutifully reported the Kiev government’s version of events as fact . Kiev had claimed that the anti-Kiev forces in Odessa had set themselves on ﬁre .
 Kiev forces had also bombed hospitals, kindergartens, and residential areas . Kiev forces have also bombed schools, hospitals, and schools .
 Washington had been so eager in 2003 to berate Saddam Hussein for purportedly using poison gas on his own people . None of this had been condemned by Washington, which had been in 2003 .
 Human Rights Watch directly reported war crimes against civilians in July . In July, the group reported war crime against civilians .
 Ukrainian regime forces retook the cities of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk, which occupied strategic positions along roads from Western Ukraine to Donetsk .
 They then marched on the major cities of South-Eastern Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk . They then march on the main cities of the region .
 Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council spokesman Andrei Lysenko made clear that Kiev did not intend to take any prisoners . He dismissed any possibility of creating a corridor that would allow Donetsk People's Republic forces to leave the region .
 As of June 27, 2014, 110,000 people had been internally displaced in Ukraine . 54,000 were internally displaced within Ukraine .
 Many attacks failed to distinguish between civilians and combatants, as was evident in the use of weaponry not designed for areas where precision was required . The use of weapons not designed to provide precision was evident.
 Human Rights Watch says large majority of attacks on Luhansk were carried out by Ukrainian government forces . Insurgents are responsible for far fewer and targeted government positions on the outskirts of the city .
 This gave rise to rumors of a mooted anti-Poroshenko coup by outraged Nazi nationalists . This gives rise to rumours of an anti-poroshenko Coup .
 By the end of October, elections in the eastern oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk created the parliament of the Donetsk People's Republic .
 The republic would serve as the de facto autonomous region, and also the potential government if it were to secede outright . The region would also serve as a de facto region, or a potential government .
 In this paper, I focus on some of the understandings about Russia, Ukraine and the West that the propagandists will prevail among members of the public . The Western powers whose voices, values and preferences are privileged by Western media.
 Through close reading as illustrated by my treatment of Western coverage of events in Crimea, Odessa and Donbass, I identify preferred understandings by reference to their principal topics . Through closeReading as illustrated, the author's treatment of West's coverage of Crimea and Odessa
 Some of the narratives that I have selected also relate to other narratives . I do not have suffﬁcient space to incorporate all of the propaganda themes that emerge from examination of this particular narrative .
 I have attempted to formulate 1028 OLIVER BOYD-BARRETT's themes as emergent principles of propaganda . These themes apply to particular topics, as follows .
Attack by an Army Against its Own People is perfectly excusable and is also a pretext for Western aid to that regime against regime opponents .
 If the regime is not favored by the West, then evidence of such deployment is an acceptable pretext for Western humanitarian intervention and democracy promotion . The purpose of such intervention is regime-change.
 Western media need not consider as relevant the long-standing weaknesses of these countries, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: Western media should not consider the contribution to the excesses and non-democratic instincts of their oligarch classes .
 Western loans are often associated with privatization of infrastructure, shipping and rail . The IMF and other Western loans typically do the privatization of transportation, infrastructure and shipping . Western loans often involve the legalization of market access for foreign interests in traditional and GMO agribusiness .
 Democracy is based on political parties that are afﬁliated with the interests of different oligarchs . Democracy should be supported by Western powers so long as it can exhibit the trappings of modern democracy such as regular elections .
 A state that has many oligarchs but whose power is contested by a strong executive within a democratic, multi-party framework cannot be regarded as an acceptably functioning democracy . Western powers do not like the interests that it represents or advances, says the author .
 Evidence Events that initially reported as somewhat uncertain and needing qualiﬁcation become indisputable “facts’ by dint of mere repetition and the slow simplifying conversion from ambiguity to certainty .
 Ukraine and separatists or independents in Eastern Ukraine were simply proxies for Russia . The distinction seemed less important over time, but it seems to be less important now .
 Fascism Dependence by a Western-supported coup regime on fascist forces backed by corrupt oligarchs is not a signiﬁcant concern for Western governments or media .
 The entire separatist movement is smeared with frequently contestable claims of its dependence on Russian support and assistance . By contrast, alleged criminal links of political and military leaders of resistance to a Westernsupport coup regime are trumpeted as “evidence of insincerity, corruption and inef�
 Humanitarian Support Actions taken to provide humanitarian support for the victims of an aggression committed by a party that enjoys the support of Western powers .
 Western reaction to Russia’s preparations of aid convoys for desperate peoples in the Donbass .
Invasions may have occurred even if the country's troops were already and legitimately present in a region of the ‘invaded’ country . A substantial majority of the voting population expressed its fear of aggression from its “own’s government . The coup regime in Kiev
 The cry of “invasion,” pending or otherwise, can then be levied against the country in question whenever that country does anything, or perhaps nothing, that the Western powers do not like . So that the country continues to be viliﬁed and its leaders
 The leadership of that region enjoys Western favor, then Western powers and their mainstream media will be supportive of secession . Secession is when a region of an established country wishes to secede.
 The February 2104 coup failed and Kiev broke off Western Ukraine from the rest . This was evident in mainstream contemplation of what might happen if the coup failed . It was evident that the coup was not successful .
 It was evident in Western support for Kosovo’s assertion of independence from Serbia . Kosovo's assertion ofindependence from Serbia.
 Crimea and the Donbass regions did not enjoy Western favor, their respective bids for secession were condemned . Crimea's leadership and Donbass region did not enjoys Western favor .
 If a region seeks to secede from a coup-installed regime that has the backing of Western powers, its aspirations for autonomy are unworthy . The regime threatens to criminalize that region’s language and makes evident its disdain for the ethnicity of a large proportion of
 The region seeks to annex with a major neighboring power with which it is afﬁliated ethnically and culturally . They are deemed even less worthy if the region wants to annex the region .
 Western support for such a region is permissible when the region in question has the support of Western powers . When the country from which it secedes is disliked by Western powers, in which case not even a referendum for secession is deemed necessary .
 Suffering the sufferings of a people which is attacked by a power allied to Western interests attract more attention, say experts .
 In this second case, suffering need not invoke intense sympathy, nor be covered in detail, because such people have brought their suffering upon themselves through unwise choice of leaders or alliance . In this case, the suffering needs not invoked intense sympathy.
Killings and assassinations of ﬁgures who are opponents of regimes that the West does not like, such as Boris Nemtsov, are automatically to be cast as nobleﬁghters of the good cause .
 Killings and assassinations of ﬁgures who are opponents of regimes that the West likes require little or no attention or sympathy . Killings of opponents to the coup regime of Kiev following February 2014, require little attention and sympathy .
 In this paper, I have identiﬁed leading press frames and discourses of the Ukraine crisis . The Ukraine crisis and its associated conﬂicts between the Kiev authorities and the authorities of separatist movements within Ukraine .
 The paper dwells mainly on one UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA and CONFLICT PROPAGANDA . 1031 of the 10 frames identiﬁed and analyzed in my broader work .
 The author has determined the principal arguments, presumptions and intentions of propaganda as these reﬂect the interests of Western powers .
 These considerations help demonstrate the propaganda-of-pretext that suffuses Western media accounts of conﬂicts in which their own countries are engaged .
 It counsels the universal importance for news consumers to attend to a much broader diversity of viewpoints than are typically provided by institutions with business models and political alliances .
1033 Parry, Robert.14c. UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA and CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1033 parry .