 On February 27, 2014, Russian troops in unmarked green uniforms entered Crimea . The so-called “green men’s or “polite people, as the Russians called them, entered Crimea.
 As a result of the Russian invasion, Crimea became “Russian’s’ Crimea became a ‘Russian” While in two regions of Eastern Ukraine, Donbass and Lugansk, currently controlled by Russian-controlled war lords, the so-called “hybrid
 The life and safety of people, especially in the southeast and in the Crimea, is under threat . The life of people in Crimea and the southeast of the Crimea are under threat.
 Under the influence of Western countries, open terror and violence are carried out. Under the influences of Western nations, open terrorism and violence is carried out .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has asked to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation to restore law, peace, law, law and order, stability, and protection of Ukrainian population .
 At emergency Council meeting, Churkin furiously defended the then ongoing Russian military invasion into Ukraine . At the emergency council meeting, he furiously defended Russia's military invasion .
Churkin claims a wave of violence swept across the Western and Central parts of Ukraine . He claims the violence was well known to American diplomats .
 We made preparations to pick him up in Donetsk by the ways of land, sea, and from the air . We made plans to pick up him up by the way of land and sea .
 The UN Secretariat officially provided the Ukrainian government with a copy of the letter in January 2017 . The Ukrainian General Prosecutor's Office started collecting materials for indicting Yanukovych of treason .
 Yanukovych confirmed on January 19 that he wrote that letter . On January 19, Yanukovych confirmed again that he, in fact, wrote the letter .
 The Russian official version was that his death was caused by a heart attack . The official version of the Russian version is that he died of a heartattack .
 Some Russian and Ukrainian journalists speculated that Churkin died after an emotional telephone conversation with President Putin about Yanukovych’s letter .
 I did not ask for troops to invade Ukraine, this was not so . There was no letter to Russian President Vladimir Putin about that .
 It was not a letter, but a plea to stop gangs of illegally invading bandits who, not being subordinated to any authority, began killing people .
 It may have been emotional, but I was looking for ways to protect people . I was trying to protect myself, and I wanted to help others . It was an emotional moment, but it was also a good time for people to be safe .
 Yanukovych told journalists that he lived in Rostov-on-Don in Russia, but it is widely known that he spends msot of his time in a big dacha in Sochi .
 Russian officials deny any knowledge of Yanukovych’s 2014 letter . A complete denial by Russian officials.
 The President’s Administration is a unique apparatus in Russia that ‘is ensuring the activities of the President of the Russian Federation and exercising control over the execution of decisions of the president’
 Prosecutor General Yuri Lutsenko announced the filing of pre-trial investigation materials in a charge of treason against ex-President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Ukrainian ex-President Lutsenko has asked the Kremlin to commit aggression against Ukraine . He is currently hiding in Russia, in writing to the Kremlin .
 Lutsenko added that more than 50 witnesses, photos, video materials, material evidence and documents proving Yanukovych's guilt have been presented during the pre-trial investigation .
 Yanukovych's lawyers denied the existence of Yanukovych’s letter and claimed rights were violated during the pre-trial investigation . Yanukovych's lawyer said his client's rights were violation during the investigation .
When Mikhail Lesin died in Washington, there were also official reports about a heart attack . I recall that when he died in the city of Washington, he was also reported to have had a heartattack .
 Federal Bureau of Investigation finds he died of numerous injuries, apparently inflicted on himself . It's unclear whether he was fighting himself or during a fight .
 In the last paragraph Venediktov refers to the strange death of Mikhail Lesin on November 5, 2015, in a Dupont Circle hotel .
 Lesin lived in Beverly Hills, California, and created a corporation to buy expensive homes . From 2011-2013, Lesin has lived in the city of Beverly Hills .
 He headed the Gazprom-Media, the state controlled media giant in Russia . Then he was back to Russia, where he headed the state-controlled media giant .
 Lesin died of blunt-force injuries to his head, and not of a heart attack, the Russian mass media had announced .
 All circumstances of the death are so suspicious that it’s hard to believe that Lesin was not killed .
 Sergei Kirov, 63, was found outside the Russian Consulate on November 8, 2016, on Election Day . He was a 63-year-old employee of the Russian consulate .
 Russian consular staff told the BBC that Lesin had died of ‘a heart attack’ This death remains a mystery .
 Vladimir Tavrichesky is preparing a new large-scale adventure . He is shocked and unbalanced by the failure of the operation “Our Trump”
 Putin’s order on February 18, 2017 to consider legitimate the documents issued by the war lords of the Donbass and Lugansk Region . According to Piontkovsky, Putin's order is indicators of the Kremlin's new plans.
 The denial of the Yanukovych letter signals a new effort to whitewash his actions and Russia’s involvement and perhaps a new attempt to resolve the Ukrainian situation .