 His research interests are amongst others Russian Foreign Policy and the EU-Russia relations .
 He kept busy with German-Russian exchange for various organizations . In addition he kept busy in Germany with other organizations .
 The present brief report describes the main fault lines of Russian media discourse on the political crisis in Ukraine between late November 2013 and April 2014 . The report is based on a brief report by Russian media .
 It focuses on the characterisation of the Maidan movement, the Crimean Crisis and the development of separatist movements in the Donbass region as three distinct episodes .
 The report is based on articles and transcripts from the archives of online versions of a number of newspapers and one TV channel . The report was published by the National Institute of Journalism .
 This is intended to provide a broad overview of perceptions and evaluation of both the dominant state discourse and marginalised liberal discourse . This is meant to provide an overview of the state discourse .
 The overwhelming majority of Russians rely on state TV as their primary source of political information . The majority of Russian voters rely on the state TV for their political information.
Anti-Maydan views expressed on state channels, for example by Dmitry Kiselyov, are quite influential in forming public opinion in Russia .
 It is difficult to analyse untranscribed media data, I largely rely on articles in the widely read tabloid Argumentï i Faktï, the online newspaper Vzglyad and Rossiyskaya Gazeta .
 This short report highlights the diversity of reporting by Russia's liberal press . It also includes representatives of Russia'sliberal press .
 opinions are read only by a minority and remain marginalised in Russian society . One caveat is that opinions diverging from the official point of view, such as those expressed in Novaya Gazeta and on Slon.ru, are only read by the minority .
 Russian intelligentsia is a liberal segment of the Russian intelligenceentsia . Young people in metropolitan areas such as Moscow and St. Petersburg are likely to share the liberal segment .
 In the following, I refer to these broad differences with the labels 'liberal' and 'dominant' discourse . The following, he refers to the broad differences between the two .
 The Maidan movement in late November 2013 was characterised very differently across the Russian media landscape . In keeping with basic differences in ownership, political outlook and audience, the beginning of the Maidan Movement in late 2013 wasCharacterised very different .
In the dominant discourses the Ukrainian movement was analysed mainly from a geopolitical point of view . Liberal newspapers concentrated on stories on the ground, with a focus on the activists on the Maidan and their motivations .
Young people were characterised as having 'realistic ideas' about Europe . They framed activism and courage in positive terms .
 Russia's liberal press emphasised the largely peaceful character of the Maidan movement and the harmlessness of nationalist and anti-Russian sentiments . Russia'sliberal press also emphasised that Maidan is peaceful .
 Yanukovich's decision to hold back his signature on the Association Agreement with the European Union was widely described as a result of Russian pressure or as a betrayal of the Ukrainian people .
 Later, Majdan's sincerity was contrasted with the hollowness of the so-called Anti-Maidan .
Historical differences between Eastern and Western Ukraine were used as a springboard for understanding . In this regard, historical differences between the two countries were used for understanding.
Anti-Maidan protesters were portrayed as people from the East who were different in their appearance and customs . They had been bussed in to Kiev and either paid or threatened to ensure their support for the state authorities .
 The differences between Eastern and Western Ukraine also took center stage in the dominant discourse . But in a different context, the differences between the two countries also took place .
 The status of Ukraine was compared to that of eighteenth-century Poland, which switched back and forth between different poles of influence and political orientation . Ukraine finally lost its sovereign statehood in 1795 .
 Yanukovich's decision was seen as a sovereign one and as being in the interest of the Ukrainian state . European values were discredited as involving violence, deceit and double standards .
In turn, actions taken against such illegal acts were said to be reasonable and justified . In turn, the actions taken by Western police forces in similar situations are said to have been reasonable .
 The involvement of the United States as the main sponsor of the coup d'etat and its strategic interests in separating Ukraine from Russia were contrasted with the natural brotherhood of the Russian and Ukrainian people and their sincere interest in each other .
 The West was accused of hypocrisy, of attempting regime change and of the ruthless pursuit of its own strategic geopolitical and economic interests . More generally, the West is accused of trying regime change, of trying to gain power .
 The responsibility for the political crisis was ascribed to a 'Ukrainian fifth column' financed by the West for the last decade . European institutions now mobilised by European institutions .
 The springboard for this was the amendments and laws adopted by the Ukrainian Parliament on 16th January . The amendments affected the freedom of peaceful assembly.
Clashes between members of the Right Sector and Berkut forces lasted until the end of January 2014 .
 President Yanukovich offered the position of prime minister to Arseniy Yatsenyuk . He accepted the resignation of PM Mykola Azarov .
 The Verkhovna Rada annulled most of its earlier decisions and voted instead for a law granting amnesty to protestors under the condition that they would clear administrative buildings and transport roads . In turn, the Verkhova Rada Annulled many of its previous decisions .
 The language used by state-controlled media and newspapers that had been critical of the whole revolutionary process from the very beginning, became harsh and even hostile .
 The more visible presence of Ukrainian nationalists on Maidan became the dominant lens through which the ongoing crisis was evaluated . More importantly, the more visibility of the Ukrainian nationalists became the primary lens through the crisis .
 Former Kremlin spin-doctor and political strategist Gleb Pavlovsky says radicals would be helpless to withstand a serious attempt to disperse them . On the other hand, the well-known former Kremlinspin-doctor says the radicals would not be able to withstand the attempt .
 He suggested that the consolidation of Ukrainian statehood had simply become much more difficult due to the rise of radical nationalism . He suggested the consolidation had just become more difficult.
In this context, participation in the new government by members of the far right was perceived as especially outrageous . The new government was seen as particularly outrageous .
With the transition of power to the opposition in Kyïv, the situation in Sevastopol changed quickly . The situation in the capital of Crimea changed quickly.
Ten to fifteen thousand demonstrators gathered around noon in front of the Supreme Council building in Ukraine .
 One day later, unidentified armed men forced their way into the building . One day after the incident, the building was attacked by armed men .
 The Supreme Council of Ministers convenes an emergency session . Anatoliy Mohyl'ov is dismissed as its chairman .
 This evaluation of events was apparently also shared by ethnic Russians in Simferopol' who were interviewed.
 To them, all the people on Maidan were banderovzy, while they described Russia as their true rodina, or homeland, to which they wished to return after 20 years of occupation .
 The Russian Security Council had already confirmed the directive to transfer military troops to the Crimea under the pretext of military exercise in the border region .
 The decision itself was said to be irrational, inadequate and the beginning of the end . The decision is said to have been 'inadequate'
 No annexation neither in Southeastern Ukraine nor in the Crimea would correspond to any rational Russian interests . No annexation either in S southeastern Ukraine or in Crimea would be rational .
 Andrey Zubov is a professor at the Moscow Institute for International Relations associated with the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Zubov's article was published by the Moscow institute for International relations .
 Zubov was informed of his removal from the university on 24th March . Three days later he was told of the decision by the university .
 Novaya Gazeta provided a platform for liberal-minded economists to warn against the negative consequences for Russia of annexing the Crimea . Also published an open letter by Grigory Yavlinsky, former leader of the social-liberal party Yabloko .
 Most other news sources either did not take them seriously or did not cover them at all . Most other media sources either didn't take them serious or didn't cover them .
 96.77% voted for reunification of Crimea with Russia, the legitimacy of the referendum and the result itself became the major contested issues . In the aftermath of the Crimean referendum on 16th March 2014, the referendum became the biggest contested issue .
Legal and historical considerations of the right of the inhabitants of Crimea to secede were mixed . In this context, legal and historical consideration of Crimea's right to secee was mixed .
 Crimea's secession was justified with reference to other international cases . On the one hand, Crimea's referendum was justified .
 The tabloid Argumentï i Faktï published a short discussion of territorial redistribution since 1945 . Tibet 1950, Northern Cyprus 1974, German Democracy Republic 1990 and Kosovo 1999 were among others .
 Kosovo's declaration of independence from Serbia had been uncritically acknowledged by many Western states . The West's critique of the Crimean referendum by the West could only be understood as hypocrisy, according to this argument .
 The decision of the Crimean people was said to conform to the right to self-determination supposedly guaranteed by the U.N. Charter .
 Crimean Tartars constituted 13% of the population of the Crimean Peninsula . The support for Crimean secession from Ukraine became crucial in legitimising the referendum and enhancing its democratic credentials .
 The media presented different experts and representatives of the Tartars as bearing witness to, alternately, the legitimacy of the referendum .
 The Meilis is the highest executive-representative body of the Crimean Tatar People . Great majority of Tartars had not participated in referendum at all .
 The dominant discourse pointed to the disunity of Tartars by quoting Lenur Usmanov, the leader of the Crimean Tartar community of Sevastopol, who supported the annexation of the Meilis .
 This is the location of ancient Khersones, where prince Vladimir was baptised . This is where he was baptized .
 His spiritual feat of adopting Orthodoxy predetermined the overall basis of the culture, civilisation and human values that unite the peoples of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus .
The graves of Russian soldiers whose bravery brought Crimea into the Russian empire are also in Crimea . The graves of soldiers who brought Crimea to Russia are in Crimea.
 This is also Sevastopol' a legendary city with an outstanding history, a fortress that serves as the birthplace of Russia's Black Sea Fleet .
 He reminded his audience of the unorganised collapse of the Soviet Union . He also said that Crimea was handed over like a sack of potatoes .
 Crimea's inclusion in Ukraine could only be endured as long as Ukraine remained a good neighbour, says Putin . Ukraine would protect the rights of Russian citizens and Russian speakers, he says .
 In late February 2014, Russian media reported Anti-Maidan gatherings in Donetsk and Kharkov after proponents of the new government in Kiev captured the local administration buildings .
 Russian media evaluations of the 'Russian spring' differed considerably from one media outlet to another . Similar to reporting on the events in Crimea, Russian media evaluation of the events differed considerably .
 Some quoted representatives of the demonstrators, such as Pavel Gubarev, who denounced the government in Kiev as illegitimate and called for the governor of the oblast, Andrey Shishatsky, to step down . Some highlighted the "aggressive character of the coming event"
 Readers were also informed about an alleged appeal made by the "small number of Euromaidan protestors" to the Right Sector .
Demonstrations were held in Donetsk, demanding his release and a referendum on the status of the Donbass .
 The devil was in the details and in the different assessments of events in both Donetsk and Kharkov . The devil is in the detail of the events in the two cities .
 In a kind of reverse mirror of Maidan reporting, the dominant discourse now emphasises police violence against the protestors .
Liberal press reported clash of pro-Russian and anti-interventionist protestors .
 The driving core of the separatists is from Rostov oblast in Russia, just across the border . It was argued that the driving core was not Ukrainian territory proper .
 The present report shows that discourse on the Ukrainian crisis in the Russian media has been more diverse than the widespread Western perception of it as uniformly Anti-Maidan propaganda would suggest .
 The dominant state media and widely read tabloids largely framed the take-over of power by the Ukrainian opposition as a fascist coup d'état .
Media outlets legitimised the annexation of Crimea as an expression of the genuine will of the Crimeans to rejoin their historical motherland, Russia .
 Russia's marginalised liberal press has viewed Maidan movement an expression of the Ukrainian people's will to overcome the corrupt regime of President Yanukovich . They heavily criticised the annexation of Crimea as being against Russia's true interests and international law .
 The report cannot do justice to the great complexity of events and the nuances of the Russian media discourse covering them, says the report .
 Russian state TV channels such as Pervy Kanal, Rossiya-1,Rossiya-24 and NTV are the dominant source of political information in Russian society . NTV remains the dominant sources of political news in Russian societies .