 In December, Moscow adopted a new military doctrine and stressed again that NATO and the United States were Russia’s biggest enemies .
 It also strengthened its military position in the Black Sea, the Caucasus and the Arctic region . It also strengthens its military positions in the Caucasus.
 Moscow forged closer relations with China and stated that an international war was possible. Internationally, Moscow forge closer relations.
 Ukraine is caught between Russia and the European Union . Ukraine is a struggling country caught between the two countries .
 Historically, the country has been associated with Moscow and its culture is split between the Russian-dominated East and the West .
 Samuel Huntington stated that Ukraine is a cleft country with two distinct cultures . In his book The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Order, the late Harvard professor Samuel Huntington said that Ukraine has two cultures .
 Ukraine is a bridge that links and separates Russia from Europe . Geographically, Ukraine is an important part of the continent .
 Moscow did last year when it occupied and annexed Crimea and encouraged eastern Ukraine to revolt against Kyiv . A bridge, however, he argued, can break at any time .
 The recent upheavals and the uncompromising struggle between the pro-eastern and pro-western tendencies show how deeply Moscow is involved in the evolution of this country .
 If Ukraine wants to join the European Union, Moscow becomes suspicious . Moscow is ready to sabotage any move in that direction .
 Russia is ready to use any means, military included, and if necessary, it could dismember the country . If Ukraine wants to join NATO, Russia is prepared to use all means, including military included .
 The process started by annexing Crimea and by threatening a split of the Donbas region . The process began with annexing the Crimea and threatening to split the region .
 Moscow also forged closer relations with China and stated that an international war was possible. Internationally, Moscow also stated that a war was Possible .
 Ukrainian authorities realized that the country was in a dire situation after the bloody events of the last year .
 Moscow did not respect the international agreement regarding Ukraine’s borders . On the other the country did not have the military capacity to confront Russia .
 Ukrainian people clarify their identity and national interests and distinguish friends from foes . The crisis and the armed conflict already took several thousand lives .
 The conflict made President Petro Poroshenko, as well as most Ukrainians, look toward Europe for their future .
 The separatist war and hostilities of 2014 opened a new era in East-West relations . The separatist conflict and hostilities began in 2014 .
 No one wants a dangerous escalation, but they are moving slowly toward more confrontation . For the time being, the events are unfolding slowly because no one wants to be dangerous .
 The Kyiv parliament repealed the 2010 law regarding Ukraine’s nonaligned status on December 24 .
 Kyiv is working to reform the national economy and military forces to meet European and NATO standards . He also said that Kyiv was working to improve the country's economy and its military forces .
 NATO has not actually issued a formal invitation to Kyiv for membership in the alliance . But the idea has already alarmed Moscow .
 Potential membership in the Western alliance would confront Russia in its own backyard . Moscow finds that unacceptable, says Moscow .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov reacted more moderately by stating that the new law would only heat up the current confrontation . Lavrov also said that the law will only heatup the current situation .
 Moscow's newly modified and adopted military doctrine reflects Russia's anxiety . Moscow’s newlymodified and adoptedMilitary doctrine reflects Russian anxiety . Russia's new military doctrine.
 Local observers and Western analysts stress that except for its nuclear capacity Russia’s military is weak and its economy is in shambles . Local observers say Russia's nuclear capacity is weak, but Russia's economy is weak .
 The economy is based almost exclusively on the export of oil and gas . In fact, the economy is almost exclusively based on the exports of oil.
 The plummeting global price of oil together with the Western economic sanctions has brought Russia to its knees . Russia's oil prices have brought the world's most expensive oil prices to their knees .
 The rubble, for example, lost almost half of its value and the stores began to empty themselves of goods as they were during the last Soviet years . The rubble is now being used as a place to store goods .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov warned of confrontation in light of NATO expansion . Lavrov addressed the 51st Security Conference held in Munich, Germany on February 7 .
 He inaugurated the new Eurasian Economic Union, meant to be similar to and to compete with the European Union . But even that started on the wrong foot, he says .
 The countries making up the new union are Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Armenia and Kyrgyzstan . The new union is based on the country's relationship with Russia .
 Belarus, for example, has criticized Moscow for blocking its commerce with Kazakhstan . Belarus, a pivotal member, is a key member of Belarus .
 Putin banned many imports from Europe but could not prevent Belarus from importing and resending such goods to Kazakhstan . As retaliation against Western sanctions, Putin ban many imports.
 Many goods are sold in Russia, sabotaging Putin’s response to the European sanctions .
 Vladimir Putin has sacrificed the political and economic freedom of the Russian people for the idea of old-style Soviet glory, Reuters reports .
 Opinion polls show that his ratings are near record highs among average Russians . Yet, opinion polls show he has near record high ratings among average Russian Russians .
 There is a deep streak of imperialism in Putin's Moscow and of irrational nationalism among Russians that defy reasoning and threaten world peace .