 Political life in Ukraine in the coming months will be determined by the election calendar and the international situation, and above all Russia’s relations with the West .
 In 2019, presidential elections and parliamentary elections should take place in 2019 . In 2015, the elections will be held in the United States .
 The preparations for both events will determine political life in Ukraine in 2018 . The preparations will also affect the attitude of politicians in Kiev towards the conflict with Russia .
 Petro Poroshenko will continue trying to skillfully play for time on the Donbas issue . President Poroshenko is preparing for the re-election battle .
 The problem is that Poroshenko is behaving the same way regarding another matter, namely the fight against corruption . Poroshenko has been accused of corruption in the past .
 His evasions and delays on this issue not only harm the country, but also won’t help him in the election fight, which does not mean he has no chance of winning .
 The problems in Ukraine today revolve around the absence of reliable leaders . There is little indication that this will change in the foreseeable future .
 The main external factor affecting all areas of Ukrainian life remains the conflict with Russia, in all its aspects . The conflict is also the question of who Crimea belongs to, to gas and energy issues and more broadly, the economy .
 Two-thirds of the population support Ukraine’s membership in the North Atlantic Alliance . Support for entry into the EU is not far behind, but support for entry to the European Union is still far behind .
 War in Donbas, which increasingly binds Ukrainians to Europe, is also biggest obstacle to integration . Donbas is also the biggest obstacle for integration in Europe .
 It's also known that without the involvement of other countries, it won't be possible to settle the problem of Donbas and Crimea .
 Political forecasts indicate that a breakthrough is not to be expected in the near future . Political forecasts, both in terms of the West and Russia, indicate that the West is not expected to make a breakthrough .
 Each of the participants in the Minsk process has their own internal political problems . No one will push for a turning point in the crawling – basically stagnant – process of implementing Minsk agreement .
 Kiev authorities in Kiev are blocking implementation of the Minsk points . It would mean the long delayed adoption by the parliament of a law giving the occupied territories autonomous status .
 In the current domestic and international situation, the status quo seems to be the optimal situation for Ukraine . The political team currently in power appears to be in the best position in the country .
 Crimea and a large part of the Donbas by Ukraine has dealt a powerful blow to pro-Russian politics in the country . The past three years have shown that the loss of Crimea and the Don Bas has dealt an impact on pro-Russia politics .
 Ukrainian politicians are acting as allies of a neighboring country, with whom a de facto war is taking place . It's not just a matter of compromising the overt behavior by Ukrainian politicians .
 Moscow camp on the Dnieper also lost most of its electorate that remained on the other side of the front . The Moscow camp also lost some of its voters in the last two years .
 It is now on Russia, and not Ukraine, to ensure the economic survival of Donbas . Donbas has been hit by an economic crisis in the past two years .
 Kiev is aware that an attack would probably end with a Russian intervention . It would mean a loss of support for Ukraine from the West, says Kiev .
 Ukraine's conflict is politically favorable for Ukraine, but it remains for them to wait for more favorable circumstances . The conflict is only a pretext to postpone the implementation of the Minsk agreement .
 Ukrainians see that war is used by a large part of the political class and the oligarchs as a pretext to abandon or slow down reform . Such a play for time also carries risks, says Peter Bergen .
Accusations are starting to sprout up that many of whom derive political and financial benefits from the current stalemate .
 There are signs of increased pressure on Kiev to solve the problem. It can be expected that there will be increased pressure to solve it .
In March, Poroshenko decided to formally recognize the grassroots blockade by veterans and nationalists of occupied territories . The blockade has been taking place since January .
 A lack of resolution will cause more and more dissatisfaction, because it has a direct negative impact on the economy and people’s everyday lives, says the author .
 Over a period of three years after the outbreak of the conflict, very few buy the argument that changes are slow, or on hold, because of the war .
 The difficult external situation and social mobilization around the war in Donbas should be a catalyst for reform, says the author . "The difficult external situations and social mobilisation around the conflict should be the catalyst"
 In situations of bloodshed and patriotic outbursts, it should be easier to make the painful albeit necessary changes .
 The promise of ‘de-oligarching’ remains unfulfilled, similar to the fight against corruption . The promise is similar to that of fighting corruption .
 Only 27% of Ukrainians today see a political leader who can be trusted in the country .
 62% believe that the country needs new leaders, and 70% do not trust the current political class . This is a potentially huge electorate to be by new politicians .
 This does not imply major changes but rather the triumph of disappointment, apathy, and the turning away from politics and public life . This doesn't imply major change, but rather a triumph of disappointments and apathy .
Only 38% of Ukrainians believe in a new Maidan, and only 20% are ready to participate in demonstrations . Only 38% believe in the Maidan.
 Petro Poroshenko is one of the biggest disappointments for the political supporters of Maidan . The Ukrainians elected him as president, they knew his past and knew that he was a oligarchs .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for more than a decade . He has been the leader of the pro-Moscow camp on one hand, and radical nationalists on the other . Russia has been involved in the conflict with Russia since 2008 .
 At present, Poroshenko definitely dominates in Ukrainian politics, having not only a strong presidential administration, but also controlling the parliament, and controlling the prosecutor’s office and security services .
 Poroshenko is expected to further strengthen his influence due to the upcoming presidential elections .
Russian President Boris Yeltsin's election for second term will require ideas and effort comparable only to the re-election of Boris Yeltingin in 1996 .
 The president’s actions will be focused towards the 2019 elections, as will the activities of most other state agencies . The president's actions are expected to be focused on 2019 elections .
 It will be in Poroshenko’s interest to maintain the status quo,e. It will also be in his interest to prevent the emergence of new and significant political centers in the country .
 The president will oppose the dissolution of the parliament, and even more so will be against a change of government .
We should assume that Poroshenko will want to use the head of government as a buffer even more now. We should assume he will use it more more now .
 Volodymyr Groysman is an obedient executor of the president’s instructions . He is a former president's executor .
 The presidential administration will remain the actual center for administering the most important areas of the state . In fact, the president will continue to use his broad administration .
 The government and the divided parliament remain marginalized in this situation . Meanwhile, the government remains marginalized in the situation .
 Groysman is a trusted colleague of Poroshenko . His role as head of government allows him to build his own position .
 His main task was to stabilize the socio-economic situation last year . He dealt with that challenge last year and dealt with it.
 Groysman has declared that he has no presidential ambitions . Despite the fact that he appears suitable, in the eyes of the West as well, he has said he is not interested .
 The two politicians will be supporting the presidential campaign through his politics . This is very important as it reduces any possible tension in the relationship between the two politicians .
 Groysman’s position is strengthened in that the present shape of the parliament will not allow for the emergence of a new prime minister .Groysman's position has been strengthened in the past .
Early elections would mean early elections, and the majority of deputies don't want this . This would meanEarly elections. This would be a problem for deputies, according to the sheriff .
 Polling indicates that in the present situation the new Verkhovna Rada would be even more fragmented than the present one . In the present scenario, the new Rada will be more fragmented.
 The purpose of the Front is to survive in the hope of rebuilding the confidence of voters before the 2019 elections, which is why it remains in the coalition . The aim is to rebuild the confidence.
 The presidential camp is aware of the danger posed by Avakov’s activation of nationalists and veterans of the Donbas . Avakov has been accused of activating nationalist and veterans.
 Groysman harshly criticized the veterans’ blockade of the Donbas . He said it was in Russia’s interest .
 interior minister holds a strong card in the form of former fighters against the Russians and rebels, members of the volunteer battalions .
 These battalions played an important role in the first phase of combat when the regular army and other official armed forces had been routed . They played a key role in first phase.
 volunteer troops were absorbed by the National Guard of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the land forces of the army . Then, gradually, these volunteer troops are absorbed by National Guard and land forces .
 The former volunteer battalions that now make up the National Guard units signal their loyalty to Avakov .
 He tolerates independence of the Right Sector Voluntary Corps . In addition, he tolerates the independence of right Sector Vol voluntary Corps .
Avakov may decide to run for president under the banner of the “war party’s and nationalist slogans . Based on his reputation from the Donbas war period and his indulgence of the radicals, Avakov may run for the president .
 The former prime minister has rebuilt part of her past political position . She is winning support similar to Poroshenko, while her party the president's coalition is in the polls .
 Tymoshenko may well have the ambition of becoming the informal leader of the entire opposition .
 Much will depend, however, on the opinion of Moscow and some Ukrainian oligarchs .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi has already been both in a serious conflict and then friends with Poroshenko . Most important will be the attitude of Kolomoysskyi, who has been in the serious conflict .
 It's worth remembering that he once supported Tymoshenko, when very few did . It is worth remembering he once did, when few did.
 The president knows that an open conflict with Kolomoyskyi could cost him dearly . The president also knows that he could be in trouble if Kolomoysskyi is in trouble .
Political forces vying for the favor of the oligarch, which will only strengthen him, he says . The oligarch will be strengthened politically and in business, he adds .
In February 2016, the deputies controlled by Kolomoyskyi cast the necessary votes to appoint Groysman . When there was a crisis within the coalition, Batkivshchyna and Self Reliance left it .
 Kolomoyskyi belongs to the “old oligarchs, for whom, in post-Maidan Ukraine, the situation is no worse than before 2014 . One of the main demands of the bloodied Kiev street protesters is to limit the influence of big business on the state
 The problem is that the president himself is an oligarch and that under his rule the government has not only reached out to the old oligarchs but has also developed relationships with new ones .
 A tactical alliance of the new rulers with oligarchs is beneficial for both sides, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The alliance is beneficial to both sides.
 The government has gained the support of deputies from oligarch-controlled groups in the parliament . unofficial sources of funding and media support are important before the elections .
 The oligarchs were given a guarantee of personal security, protection of their interests and the possibility to continue lobbying . In return, they were given the chance to keep lobbying .
 New authorities withdraws from declaring revision of many forms of privatizations under Yanukovych . This silent arrangement explains the withdrawal of the new authorities .
 The president's control over the Prosecutor General's Office makes it possible to effectively torpedo certain uncomfortable investigations . The president’s control of the prosecutor's office can be used to torpedo certain investigations .
 Prosecutor General Viktor Szochin replaced by Yuriy Lutsenko, also Poroshenko’s man .
 Not much has changed, as the prosecutor’s office remains a tool of the president, which means it blocks any real fight against corruption .
 Institutional and legislative conflicts related to this problem will have a negative impact on the situation in Ukraine, says Ukraine .
 Before the election, one can expect a rash of information to appear compromising individual participants in their political lives .
Anti-corruption activists are compelled to submit declarations of property . This could have prompted Poroshenko to sign the March 27 amendments to the law .
 The fight against corruption will face the resistance of bureaucrats and public officials, for whom “unofficial material gain is something natural and a privilege they do not intend to give up.
 The National Anti-Corruption Bureau was created in April 2015 and launched in October 2016 . The authorities can always boast of the creation of the anti-corruption Bureau .
 The tendency to tie the hands of the NABU can already be seen, which was created under U.S. pressure .
 The head of the National Anti-Corruption Bureau was given his position to ensure his independence . He was given the job to ensure that he was independent .
 The audit was carried out by three people, designated by the president, the government and the parliament . Dismissal is only possible due to negative results of an audit .
 The Security Service of Ukraine is blocking the establishment of the Anticorruption Court . The biggest obstacle to the effective functioning of the NABU is obstruction by the security service .
 The conflict between the NABU and the prosecutor’s office and SBU can be expected to grow . Many investigations are left incomplete, and the conflict between them can be seen as a result .
 The only chance for reforms to be successful will be with the continuation of external pressure, firstly from the U.S. and the International Monetary Fund . Ukraine's political system in Ukraine has been plagued by corruption .
 Washington is expected to no longer be so active in urging Kiev to reform . Taking into account the political perspectives and views of the current U.S. administration, it is expected that Washington will no longer.
 Groysman government will maintain good cooperation with the Fund . The Fund will be the most important task of the government in the near future .
 The IMF continues to give Ukraine successive loans which began under Yatsenyuk in 2015 . Despite differences and certain tensions, the IMF has given Ukraine successive loan loans .
 The Fund has praised Groysman, chiefly for macroeconomic stabilization . The Fund is also praised for its stability .
 The main achievement of this government has been the restoration of economic growth . The government's main achievement has been restoring economic growth.
 The downward trend, observed in 2014–2015, has been broken. While this is modest at only 2%, it is important that the downward trend has been broke .
 In 2016, the Ukrainian economy returned to the path of growth after two years of decline . In 2017 it is expected to grow by more than 2–2.5% according to various estimates and by 3–3.5%. In 2018, the economy will grow by 3-3
 Inflation has fallen from 61% in April 2015 to 12% in spring 2017 . Due to restrictive monetary policy of the National Bank of Ukraine .
Ukrainian economy is slowly rising, but social welfare spending will grow . The closer the election, the larger the larger it will grow, the bigger it will be .
 Groysman has already announced an increase in benefits for 5. million pensioners beginning on October 1, 2017 . The increase is a step towards modernizing the pension system .
First of all is pension reform, which means increasing the retirement age . First of all, pension reform means increasing retirement age.
 Such serious reforms are unlikely given the state of the present coalition are unlikely. Such serious reform is unlikely, according to the current coalition .
 There is a majority in the parliament, but not a majority supporting the government . The current parliament is expected to continue until the end of the current term .
 It is difficult to expect a breakthrough in Ukraine in the next two years, both in external and, most of all, internal politics . In summary, it is hard to expect.
 There remains an element of uncertainty associated with Russia’s policy . While in the latter everything speaks of stagnation .
 Petro Poroshenko's interests are the interests of the political class, but also the fears of most political class about early elections .