 Petro is a volunteer of the Maidan self defense unit . He guards the entrance to his Sotnia tent in Kiev’s center .
 He has been there since December and came from a small town in western Ukraine . He has lived in the town since December .
 He will stay there until the new legitimate government will be elected on May 25 . He will remain there until a legitimate government is elected . The new government is expected to be elected by May 25.
 Billboard with a picture of Putin as Hitler as Hitler and the words “Get out of Ukraine,” on the road from Mykolaiv to Kherson .
 Deniz and Lena stand with a pro-­‐separatist “civil self-­-defense’s group of local people . Deniz, Lena are both from the same group as Lena .
 They were unarmed and kept vigil by the administrative building in Yenakiieve, the birthplace of ousted president Viktor Yanukovych .
 The people complained that they work here for the prosperity of the rest of Ukraine . The factory does not even install filters, forcing them to breath polluted air .
 Ukrainian gangsters complain that official documents are out of control in Ukraine . They say gangsters interfere in politics .
 It was removed from the Dniepropetrovsk Main Square, along with the sculpture of Lenin, by protesters .
 The director of the local historical museum will keep it in the warehouse . The director will keep the warehouse in the museum's warehouse .
 She collects items from the Maidan Revolution in the hopes of having a future exhibition . She is hoping to have an exhibition of the items .
 Since protests started in December 2013, around 20 statues of Lenin have been removed from cities across west and central Ukraine .
 Soviet-­era cable car operates over the Dnieper River in Dniepropetrovsk, Russia .
 Dnepropetrovsk is in central Ukraine and is the fourth largest city and the main industrial center of the country . The city is located in the country's largest city.
 Pro-­Russia separatists failed to take control of some administrative buildings in Russia . Pro- ­Russia separatists tried to take over some buildings in Moscow .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi, oligarch and current Governor of Dnipropetrovsk announced a $10,000 reward for exposing pro-­Russian separatists .
 I talked about it with my parents and other family members; they reacted normally and supported my choice . I talked to my family members about it. They reacted normally, supported my decision .
 Aleksander Kostiushko was among the dozen soldiers from the 79th Paratroopers Brigade who died on the border with Russia . Ukrainians were allegedly attacked from both sides; by rebels and from Russian territory .
 The brigade is comprised of some professional soldiers but most were either drafted from the reserves or came as a volunteers . The brigade was formed by some of the army's most senior officers .
 The Ukrainian army is a mixture of conscripts, professional soldiers and volunteer battalions . The army was formed after the war started .
 The Ukrainian government signed a ceasefire with the rebels and Russia on Sept., 2014 .
 Some 3,000 people are dead, but unofficial numbers are much higher . The death toll is believed to be more than 3,500 .
 About 260,000 people were displaced as of Sept. The United Nations believes that this is a very conservative estimate .
 I met Shura by the Dutch Embassy in Kiev the day after Malaysian Flight MH17 was shot down over Donbas . The Dutch Embassy is in Kiev.
 She introduced herself as a Ukrainian patriot and is of mixed Ukrainian, Russian and Tatar origins . She is a Russian, Ukrainian and Ukrainian patriot .
 The Berkut who beat us was at Maidan against us. They saw my tattoo and said they would cut my arm off -­­­‐ because the Berkut had beaten us against us . They said they'd cut his arm off because they saw his tattoo .
 The Ural army truck was taken to Sevastopol to the Russian army base . After that, we were loaded in an Ural Army truck and taken to the base .
 The FSB was interrogating us, but luckily we were set free because friends and other people got involved in our release .
 The Russian army prison for women is in Khabarovsk, Russia, for women . The prison is a prison for men and women . It is also a prison in Russia .
Ruslana and Milana took the evening stroll along the Dnieper River . The two gypsy sisters were on a evening stroll .
 When asked if they study they laughed and said that they finished their education already . When asked about their studies they said they had finished their studies already .
 Donetsk and Slavyansk, and Dniepropetrovsk with people strolling along the river seems like it is in a safer country .
 A few days earlier, a gypsy family was attacked by armed and masked man in Slavyansk, a separatist stronghold . The family was also attacked by an armed man in the town .
 Girls in Dniepropetrovsk, Ukraine, say they are fine, nobody bothers them .
 School kids took part in a survival skills competition . The competition was organized by local pro-Ukrainian Cossacks .
 Police help police guard administrative offices agains possible attacks by pro-­Russian separatists .
 The first person shot and killed during the Kiev protest was a man from the Dniepropetrovsk region .
 In Ukraine, there are two orthodox churches - the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate and the Russian Patriarchate . There are also two Orthodox churches in Ukraine .
 The day after Easter Sunday, a rebel check point in Slavyansk was attacked over night, allegedly by pro-­‐ Ukrainian forces .
Pro-Russian protesters seized some administrative buildings and declared People's Republic of Donetsk on April 7, 2014 .
 Gyorgg Lakatos with his son Sebastain on a beach in Cherkasy by the Kremenchuk Reservoir on the Dnieper River .
 He comes to visit his son in Cherkasy, Italy, where he lives with his grandmother . Both parents work in Italy .
 Cement wave breakers block the road from Novoazovsk in expectation of a separatist push any day .
 Before the war the road was packed with cars traveling between Russia and Ukraine .
 At the end of August separatists backed by Russia took control over the port of Novoazovsk, opening up new front in the war .
 Three soldiers from the Donbas Battalion prepare for a reconnaissance trip .
 The Couch Battalion are people who fight the war at home in Kiev from behind their computer on Facebook . The Couch battalion is based in Kiev, Ukraine .
 His family came to Ukraine in 1989 when many Ethnic Russians left Kazakhstan . His family moved to Ukraine when many ethnic Russian left Kazakhstan in 1989 .
 A Russian citizen from a mixed Ukrainian-­‐Russian family, he grew up in Ukraine . He later lived in Russia and retuned to Ukraine and later moved to Ukraine .
 For three years, he had problems getting Ukrainian citizenship, which prevented him from getting work and settling down . He was unable to get work and settle down in Ukraine .
She often plays in a suitcase her mother and grandmother brought with them while leaving Donetsk . She often plays with them in the suitcase.
 Stanislav, Yaroslava’s father, divorced her mother but to help his daughter he set them up in a private hotel . The owner of the hotel, on the outskirts of Lvov, helps IDPs.
 When the war came near Lvov, Lvov was already leaving, Stansilav had already left .
 Each day a group of about 70 people prayed by Constitution Square for the unity of Ukraine and for peace .
 When one priest tried to protest he was beaten, another was kidnapped . One priest was kidnapped a few days later .
 rebels declared that the dominant religion is the Russian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate . When rebels took control of the city, they declared that it was the Moscow Orthodox Church .
 Galasiuk said this year she will not go to Crimea to vacation, but to Odessa instead, as a protest against the Crimean occupation . She said she will go to the Crimea to protest the occupation .
 She has a Russian boyfriend, who she says is ashamed of what his country did in Ukraine . She says he's ashamed of his country's actions .
 Right Sector Fighters served on the front line as volunteers as volunteers . Right Sector is not registered with any official structure of Ukrainain government .
 Father Vladimir, of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate, baptizes the first child ever in his Church . The church is just about to begin construction .
With independent country there should be an independent church, he said . With independent country, he says.
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate uses Old Church Slavonic . We have services in Ukrainian language while Ukrainian Orthodox church uses Slavonic.
 It’s a symbol which is holy for anyone who considers himself Ukrainian . It's a symbol that is holy to anyone who is Ukrainian .
 Olga Antonovna Onoprenko and husband Grigorij Yegorovich are a retired couple from Cherkasy .
 Ukrainian flag painted on the column that once supported a sculpture of Vladimir Lenin . It was taken down by pro-Maidan activists .
 In April 2014, pro-Maidan activists chased away a small group of pro-Russian protesters . They set up checkpoints on the city outskirts, which checked suspicious cars entering Mykolaiv .
 Tatarikova Irina prays for the safety of her husband who is about to go back to the front as a professional soldier .
 She came to pray every day when he was on the front line for the half of the year . She came here to pray each day when she was at his front line .
 He returned in September just in time for their wedding three days later . He returned to his wedding in September .
 He was wounded on August 16 during a shelling at Luzhansk Airport . He was a sergeant in the second year of his fiveyear contract when he was wounded .
 He has a spinal injury and undergoes rehabilitation so he can walk again . His body was covered by his body and he is now recovering from the injury . He is hoping to be able to walk again.
 Kids from the “Club of Youth Peacekeepers “ from Kamianets-­‐ Podilskyi in west Ukraine, came to Kiev to attend a youth camp . Kids from “ club of youth peacekeepers’s“ club’
 The camp is located on the Khortica Island Cultural Reserve . It is one of the largest islands on the Dnieper river . The camp was built in the early 1900s .
 Dniepropetrovsk residents pay respect at service for the fallen Unnamed Soldiers held in the city center .
 21 unidentified Ukrainian solders were killed in the area of an anti-terrorist operation .
 Before burial experts collected DNA samples for further identification . DNA samples were collected for further Identification .
 It was destroyed on July 3, 2014, at 8:15 in the morning during the battle for Slavyansk . The battle took place in the early hours of July 3 .
 The house was next to a large communal heating plant, but it ended up being a target . Nina thought her daughter would be safer with her, because the house was near to the plant .
 Up to 25 people died in the house and many survivors have no place to live . Many survivors have been left without a home or a home to survive .
 Leonid Bibik dressed as ousted president Victor Yanukovich poses for photographs with people visiting Mezhygorie, the private residence of the former president .
 He was wounded on February 18 when he drove a van into the Berkut and was shot at . He was shot in the head after he drove into the area .
 The money he earns posing for photos goes towards maintenace of the place . Now he works in Mezhygorie and the money goes towards the place he works .
 My story explores the division of Ukraine, using the Dnieper river as a guide .
 I document how the mixed ethnic and historical legacies of Ukraine brought people into their present realities . I document the mixed Ethnic and historical Legacies of the Ukraine .
 It was a continuation of the work I did in Crimea in 2008 about a place being neither proUkrainian nor pro-Russian . The work in Crimea was part of his work in Ukraine .
 The Dnieper River is a border or the main artery of the country . The river is a major artery in the country and is a key part of the East .
 I will revisit people and places I photographed to see how their life has changed within a year . The Maidan revolution and full scale war in Donbas to the shaky cease fire which is now in place .
 She was a stylist from Crimea living in Kiev, who became a Maidan activist . She was born in Crimea and moved to Kiev in 2010 .
 She considers joining the Volunteer Battalion and fighting, if necessary . Now she helps other IDPs and the Army, and considers joining them .
 Victor Yanukovich poses for photographs with Ukrainians visiting the private residence of the former president . The former president was ousted during the protests in Ukraine .
 The Dnieper River is a symbolic line of reference that serves as a metaphor for the present split in the country . In his story, the river is a symbol of the split between the two countries .
 Dnieper's story is so absent from the stories I see about Ukraine, he says . Making the line of reference allows him to talk about the most important issues in a wider political, historical and geographical context .
 The river is a major symbol of Ukrainian statehood that unites extensive areas on both its banks . The River is a key symbol of Ukraine's statehood .
 Lands on the right bank have commonly been considered the heartland of ethnic Ukrainian territory . The left bank has identified as Russian .
 Eastern and western Ukraine even have different versions of recent Soviet history .
 The lingua franca of eastern Ukraine is Russian while in the western part of the country it is Ukrainian .
In public spaces, people mixed both languages while speaking to each other . However, there was no division at all in public spaces .
 My goal is to cover as many perspectives as possible across a country divided between Western and Russian sympathies and connections . I want to cover all perspectives across the country.
I came to understand how that state of affairs affected not only individuals, but the entire society . I came to understanding how thatState of Affairs affected not just individuals but the whole society .
 Poland, and its own family, have had a very troubled history with Ukraine . Poland is Ukraine’s strongest supporter today .
 Ukraine's other neighbor, Russia, practices an opposite strategy, which is to keep people apart by supporting war, divisions and hatred . Ukraine and Poland serve as an example of a noteasy but possible reconciliation .
 I strongly believe that what Ukraine needs now more than anything is reconciliation among its own citizens . I strongly believes that what Ukrainian citizens need is reconciliation with their own citizens.
 The country's internal split was deepened by the armed conflict in Donbas . It is being fueled by propaganda that creates new historical narratives .
With my work I am trying to reconstruct a common narrative where opposing sides can understand each other’s motivations . With my work, I am attempting to reconstruct the common narrative.
 Photography is an excellent tool to discuss complicated and painful topics in societies which have been affected by political turmoil .
 It is a non-aggressive medium, which does not create definitive statements, but rather allows people to start open discussions and listen and look at each other without pre-conceptions . It is not a definitive statement, but it is an open discussion .
Ukrainian artist wants to create a common platform of understanding . He would like to exhibit his work in cities across Ukraine in an effort to create an understanding .
 My work will provide residents of different regions an opportunity to see themselves in the context of belonging to one shared country they share rather than one that is split by local differences .
 Despite the war and its aftermath, Ukraine was never more united as a nation . There is still a huge space left for dialogue and forgiveness, according to the author .
 There were many stories done about the war in Donbas but not many long-term documentary stories . The war was fought in the Donbas region of Donbas .
 First, the Maidan Revolution in Kiev, then Crimea and the war there, dominated the narrative in the news . The Maidan revolution in Kiev and Crimea dominated the news.
 Ukraine has faded away from the news all together – at a time when fundamental changes are taking shape . The geopolitical map of the whole post-Soviet space is being redrawn .
 I am a self-taught freelance photographer based in Tbilisi, Georgia for the last 10 years .
Since 2010, I have started to explore a new topic dedicated to women, sexuality and gender issues in the former Soviet space . I began my career in 1999 in Poland, where I'm from, reporting for the daily newspaper, Gazeta Wyborcza .
 A year later, I started freelancing because it’s important for me to be able to choose my own stories and tell them the way I think is best .
 I go on assignments to shoot news stories, but I equally focus my energy on personal documentary work . I also focus on self-assigning the stories I personaly care for .