 Ukraine has shot himself in the foot a blockade of Donbass and now presses the trigger of the gun, which she put himself to the temple on independence .
 Many considered too “soft’ on the background of the mass murder of the population of Donbas, Ukraine .
 During Maidan in February 2014, the legally elected President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych was overthrown in a coup . All Western governments called the coup legitimate .
 Only now he wasn’t even from the point of view of the Ukrainian Constitution .
 Former member of Parliament until 2014, Volodymyr Oliynyk made a detailed report about these events . The coup of 2014 was absolutely unconstitutional, he says .
 Yanukovych forces of Maidan through Parliament changed the Ukrainian Constitution, returning it to its previous version, to legalize his coup . In short, after the departure of Yanukovych forces, the constitution was changed .
 Turchynov, who was acting President because he was speaker of the Parliament, was signed and promulgated . These amendments were signed by the acting President of the parliament .
 Turchynov was authorized to put his signature on the Constitution . The problem is that before the publication of the new Constitution in a formal way he was allowed to sign .
 Right it was only the head of the Yanukovych government of Mykola Azarov . Right it is only the president of the Ukraine government .
 The law was canceled by the Constitutional court of Ukraine in 2014 . Besides, amendments were based on the law in 2014.
 Decisions of the constitutional court are binding on the entire territory of the country . The final and unappealable decisions of the court are final and final .
 The new Ukrainian authorities have crossed through the Constitution and through a constitutional court which has the exclusive right to determine the constitutionality of a decision .
 Ukrainian Constitution does not allow removal of President from his duties . But such grounds are not provided in the Ukrainian Constitution .
 The decision about the resignation of Yanukovych is absolutely unconstitutional. That is, the decision about Yanukovych's resignation isabsolutely unconstitutional .
 The current Ukrainian government fully and irreversibly illegitimate from the point of view of the Ukrainian Constitution and law . Viktor Yanukovych is still the legitimate President of Ukraine, says the writer .
 Ukrainian authorities are supported by the international community, says CNN's John Sutter . "All these facts do not change anything for Ukraine and Donbass," Sutter says .
 Ukrainian authorities themselves put a gun to his head and prepared to pull the trigger . The fact is that his Russophobic insanity and the quest to prove crimes against humanity is the reason for the coup .
 Ukrainian side in the UN requested a certified copy of the letter submitted by Russia Vitaly Churkin at the meeting of the security Council on 4 March 2014 . Some media supporters of the Maidan published information that was disclosed in 2014 .
 The Maidan, illegal seizure of power in Kiev led to the fact that Ukraine was on the verge of civil war . The events on the Maidan led to a civil war in Ukraine .
 In the country there is chaos and anarchy, life, safety and rights of people, especially in the Southeast and in the Crimea, under threat .
 Under the influence of Western countries, people are persecuted on political and language grounds . People are persecuted in Western countries on political, language grounds.
 In March 2014, Viktor Yanukovych, and Bashar al-Assad, have requested military intervention to restore order in the country . In September 2015, the pair asked for military intervention in Syria .
 We should remember that in that time she had already had to deal with the Crimea issue. We should also remember that she had had todeal with the Crimean issue .
Coup Peninsula organized a referendum asking whether the population wants to rejoin Russia . Not accepted the coup Peninsula organized the referendum .
 Originally it was to be held in may but the date was shifted to 30 March, the day the letter of Yanukovych was sent . Five days later, on March 16, the letter was sent to Yanukovych .
 The U.S. and their henchmen raised a howl about the invasion of Russia . The events in the Crimea took hard controlled character, says Churkin .
 Russia is not eager to play the role of world policeman, the U.S. and NATO would have received a perfect pretext for war . Moscow still had to deal with the situation with the Crimea .
 referendum confirmed the return of the Crimea and the situation in the Donbass deteriorated sharply . Then the referendum confirmed return of Crimea and situation in Donbass worsened sharply .
 Russia would prefer to wait. There were too many fronts and risks in the internal and international level, and Russia would rather wait .
 Authorities prefer negotiation, dialogue and not arms, according to tradition . In addition, the authorities prefer negotiation and dialogue, not arms .
 The Russians prefer a bad peace is good war . The Russians remember what they cost Second world war .
 Ukrainian MP Anton Gerashchenko on air of TV channel 112 on February 21 . Even if they know that Ukraine is not going to fulfill these agreements, he is on air .
 Minsk agreement is not vypolnyali from the date of signing in February 2015, he says . Ukraine seen by Ukraine as a temporary measure, deliberate deception, he adds .
 Ukrainian authorities are not going to perform according to their own admission . Only now with the adoption of the UN resolution, they became binding international Treaty . Ukrainian authorities have not been able to perform the treaty .
 Putin has decided to wait, to be patient and negotiate to delay the use of weapons and force opponents to reveal a card, show your true face and intentions . The face of multiple serious crises Putin has chosen to wait .
 Putin decided that rather long endured, and that once a fight is now inevitable, you need to find the means to win .
 There may be useful preparatory measures that have been adopted in Russia . There may also be useful pre-emptive measures that could be used in Russia.
 It all started with increasingly tough warnings against Ukraine concerning the attempt to undermine the Minsk agreements . It all began with increasingly tougher warnings against the Ukraine .
 Russia can then put on the table the trump card, Yanukovych, according to the law, still the President of Ukraine . If she continues to insist on the aspiration to settle the conflict in Donbas by force, than shout louder Ukrainian officials, Russia can now put on
 Russia could accuse Russia of trying to justify a future invasion of Ukraine . If this reminded Russia that the West could accuse her of attempting to justify an invasion of the Ukraine .
 If Ukraine will begin a new offensive and the Russian intervention is inevitable, then Yanukovych will be able, like Assad in September 2015, to repeat the request for Russian military intervention to prevent the bloodbath .
 Russia has given Ukraine more than two years for the application to be signed, but ineffectual agreements . Russia will accept it, having the legal basis for the intervention from the point of view of international law as well as moral grounds .
 Western governments will be yelling, and during the war in South Ossetia in 2008, but in fact, from the point of view of the law, they will not do anything .
 Russia can reinforce its inaction to the implementation of the Minsk agreements in order to silence the zealous. Russia can also reinforce their inaction to implement the agreements . Russia can be seen as a way to silence zealous Russia .
 Ukrainian army failed nearly three years to win the people’s militia, it is easy to imagine what awaits her .
 Russia supplied Ukrainian authorities to checkmate with their active participation . So patiently and decisively Russia supplied Ukraine authorities with its active participation.
 The adoption of laws to build a country and failure destroys it. As stated in the adopted Viking proverb, the adoption of a country is a failure .
 The new Ukrainian authorities and the neoconservatives it would be worthwhile to reflect on it. The new Ukraine authorities and neoconservatives are the new authorities .