Both Russia and the West celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany . The conflict over Ukraine puts decades of stability and peace on the continent into question .
 Some observers see Russia’s conflict with the West as a clash of values . Others see Russia's conflict with West as clash ofvalues .
 It is also a clash of different visions of the past, different cultures of memory . More than that, it is also an issue of different cultures.
 The Ukrainian Maidan protests were seen as the country's delayed ’89 moment, a popular movement for democracy and human rights . Russian officials and media presented the demonstrators as radical nationalists and “fascists’ – direct heirs of the Ukrainian Nazi collaborators defeated by the Soviet Army
 The war in Donbas was provoked and supported by Moscow . It has been narrated in Russia as a war against Ukrainian “fascism’ that threatens Russians in Ukraine .
 The fact that millions of Russian citizens have fallen for this propaganda can only be explained by the fetishization and mythologization of the ‘Great Patriotic War’ during the last decade . The fact of the Russian citizens has been blamed for the propaganda .
 Pro-Russian separatists in small town of Donbas say tank they used against Ukrainian army has been taken down from plinth of memorial .
 The metaphor is powerful enough, it suggests that the ghosts of a war that ended 70 years ago are easily evoked . Regardless if the story is true, the metaphor ispowerful enough .
 In post-Cold War Europe, politics of memory has in fact often been about geopolitics .
 The fight for hegemony on the European continent is disguised as a conflict of historical master narratives . World War II plays a major role in the fight for dominance on the continent .
 The end of World War II appears not to have truly occurred until the end of the Cold War . At the same time, for the countries of the “new Europe’s’ new Europe, the end was not true .
 European Union has to recognize communist crimes if it is serious about common European memory and identity . For them, the legacy of communism as a result of the post-war political division of the continent still needs to be critically addressed .
 Russia presents a third narrative, basing its post-Soviet national identity on the triumphalist memory of victory over Nazi Germany . Insofar as Russia is considered a part of Europe, it presents a second narrative .
 Russia seeks equal recognition by the West as one of the European powers . At the same time, Russia tries to debunk the “revisionist” memory politics of its western neighbours .
 The beginning of memory wars in the post-Soviet space can be dated back to 2005 . The sixtieth anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany was pompously celebrated in Moscow and turned into a loyalty test for politicians of neighbouring countries .
Russian spin-doctors of Viktor Yanukovych used the “Nazi’s’ label to compromise his pro-Western political opponent Viktor Yushchenko in 2004 presidential elections .
 In the following years Moscow entered into a bitter dispute with Kyiv over the role of Ukrainian nationalism in World War II and over the interpretation of the Ukrainian Famine as genocide .
 Local opponents of Yushchenko dubbed his rule an “Orange plague’s” and created “anti-fascist’ movements and political alliances. Local opponents dubbed hisrule an ‘Orange plague'
 By the mid-2000s, Moscow started to address ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in the former Soviet republics . Moscow appealed to the memory of the Great Patriotic War as shared symbolic capital .
 After 1945, the symbolic capital of the Great Victory served as an entry ticket for the USSR into the club of great powers and legitimized its role in the European post-war order . The Soviet Union became the world's most powerful state of the Soviet Union .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the victory over Nazi Germany was Russia’s only remaining positive legacy of the era .
 The Great Patriotic War became a link connecting the pre-revolutionary imperial glory of Russia to the hope of a new revival . However, the pro-Western Yeltsin leadership made little use of it .
 The victory over Nazi Germany was instrumentalized by Moscow to legitimize Russia’s right to participate . The victory helped shape the architecture of the post-Cold War order, especially of the future of Eastern Europe .
 A politics of memory focusing on Russia’s fight against Nazism during World War II served to counteract efforts towards a ‘de-colonization of memory’ in the former Soviet countries .
 Russia's soft power looks to the past, mobilising the memories and legacies of an imagined and real history . By contrast, Russia’s soft power is more focused on the past than the past .
 Russia's political elite has considered the post-Cold War order on the European continent unfair and inattentive to Russia’s geopolitical interests .
 The Maidan Revolution, the mass uprising against the corrupt and authoritarian Yanukovych regime, has been described as a fascist putsch . The new Ukrainian government is a fascist junta and pro-Russian separatism in eastern Ukraine .
 The conflict in and around Ukraine has become a reincarnation of the Great Patriotic War . From the Russian perspective, the conflict has thus become a rebirth of the war .
 Once again, Russia has turned to its eternal historical mission of preventing the return of fascism . Russia has been trying to prevent the return to fascism once again .
 This is only one symptom reflecting the total confusion between past and present that haunts Russia’s society and politics .
 In other words, Russia was supposed to move forward even if looking back nostalgically . In other Words, Russia should move forward, even if it looked back nostalgic .
Hard-core ‘restorative nostalgia’ became the driving force of Putin’s politics . Well, this is evidently not true anymore after the ‘Russian Spring’ 2014, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 We have seen how quickly harmless war re-enactments as a collective hobby can turn into a real war . We have also seen how quick harmless war-re-enacts can turn to launching a war .
 Historical re-enactments of World War II battles have become so popular in the post-Soviet space in recent years, they have been far from innocent .
 It was not by chance that the first generation of pro-Russian fighters was recruited from this milieu . The first generation was formed from the same milieu.
 This new temporality that results from the fusion of the past and present, of the real event and its theatrical performance, is another horrific feature of the war in Donbas . The film is set to be screened at the end of the year on October 31 .
 The liberation of Donbas was celebrated in Donetsk on 8 September 2014 as a victory over fascist Kyiv after the defeat of the Ukrainian army .
 Another example is the infamous ‘parade’ of Ukrainian war prisoners in August 2014 in Donetsk, which imitated Stalin’s parade of German POWs in 1944 in Moscow .
 This performative character of the war in Ukraine – as a re-enactment of the Great Patriotic War – disguises the real causes of the conflict and helps to deny responsibility for its consequences .
 Serguei Oushakine has analysed the re-enactment of the historical military parade of 7 November 1941 on Red Square . The annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Donbas can be seen as a version of this “affective management’s
 The resentment and fear triggered in the Russian-speaking regions in the east and south of Ukraine by the overthrow of the Yanukovych regime served as one of the domestic factors of separatism .
 The pro-Russian “referendums’ were first in Crimea and later in Donbas . These emotions were amplified by Russian media and instrumentalized during the pro- Russian “Referendum’s’. The Russian media was instrumental
 Russia's new memory politics is the destruction of Ukrainian national identity, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The post-Cold War European order is unfair, from the Russian perspective, as the new post-Soviet border cuts through a unified Orthodox civilization, the centuries-old Russkiy Mir .
 Russian politicians deny the legitimacy of an independent Ukrainian state and Ukrainians’ right to decide their geopolitical future themselves . Russian politicians speak about the “brotherly Ukrainian people’s‘brotherly Ukraine people'
 In the Russian geopolitical imagination, contemporary “Ukrainian fascists’ are those who insist on a separate Ukrainian identity and want their country to become part of the West .
 Russia's own population and Russophones in the near abroad on the one hand, and the West on the other . Russia’s own population. Russia”s own people andRussophones.
 Russia’s crusade against “neo-fascism’ in Ukraine and the Baltic states serves to mobilize and consolidate Russian society around a nationalist agenda . It resonates with the still-powerful narrative of the Great Patriotic War .
 New Russian nationalist / imperialist discourse associates revival of fascism and neo-Nazism in Ukraine with a Western conspiracy .
 Accusing the West of silent support for neo-Nazism is part of a rhetoric that has its roots in the anti-Western propaganda of the Soviet era .
 "Russia’s fight against fascism" in Ukraine and the Baltic states is a strong message to the West, above all to Europe, but also the United States and Israel .
 Russia presents the pro-western political elites in the post-Soviet states as fascist . Russia presents those states as a failed experiment in nation building .