 Hromadske explored who could be affected by these sanctions . The list of businesses and individuals has not yet been specified .
 The Russian decree "On special sanctions for unfriendly actions by Ukraine" consists of three points . The decree includes three points.
 Putin has instructed the Russian government to prepare a list of individuals and firms in Ukraine . Putin has ordered the government to decide on the measures and ensure their implementation .
 Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev specified that this included blocking assets as well as prohibiting the withdrawal of funds and supplies of certain goods .
 The sanctions would apply to "hundreds of individuals and entities" that were harming Russia . He added that the list would be made shortly .
 Andrey Movchan, an expert at the Carnegie Moscow Center, believes that the lists will be created by lobbyists .
"These will be political players who, one way or another, need to prove their worth," Movchan told Hromadske .
 Ukrainian companies are still working with Russia. Despite annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbas, Ukrainian companies still working.
 The trade turnover between Ukraine and Russia decreased by nearly 4 times between 2013 to 2016 .
 Ukraine increased its trade turnover with Russia by almost 15 percent – to more than $ 2. billion . During the first three months of 2018, Ukraine increased their trade turnover by almost 10 percent .
 exports from Ukraine to the European Union increased by 26. percent, to $4 billion . It is worth noting that over the same period, exports from Ukrainian to the EU increased by 25 percent .
 Ukraine largely exported mineral and chemical products as well as machinery and equipment to the Russian Federation .
 It is likely that these goods and enterprises could be subjected to Russian sanctions .
 The Kyiv School of Economics says it is too early to predict Russian companies from the Russian government .
 Russia rejected products from Roshen – the confectionary company of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . In August 2013, citing a "violation of sanitary norms," Russia rejected Roshen .
 Russia introduced a trade blockade, stopping all Ukrainian exports for several days . Russia also introduced a blockade of Ukraine's exports .
 At the time, up to 90 percent of Russia's machinery went to Russia . The Russian industry was one of the most dependent industries .
 After 2014, producers redirected flows to Latin America, Southeast Asia, China and Vietnam . But after 2014, flows were redirected to Asia, Asia and China .
 Ukraine's economic sanctions against Russia have been in force for a long time . Ukraine’s economic sanctions are in force against Russia .
 Gazprom head Alexey Miller, Russian billionaires Oleg Deripaska, Igor Rotenberg, Suleyman Kerimov, Vladimir Bogdanov, Viktor Vekselberg among those added this spring .
 The Ukrainian oligarch-fugitive Serhiy Kurchenko was added to the list of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine . For the first time, the Ukrainian oligarchs were added to a sanctions list .
 Ukraine imposed special sanctions against a number of transport companies in Russia that worked with companies in the occupied Donbas .
 Russian companies and individuals entered into "foreign economic agreements" with transport companies in the occupied Donbas . The SBU then stated that during 2018, a number of Russian companies, and individuals, entered into 'foreign economic deals' with transport firms .
 They transported goods from Russia to Donbas and vice versa through closed Luhansk customs border-crossing points Izvaryne and Dovzhanskyi .
 Russian Railways Logistics, Promkompleksplast, Gazgolder and others were also placed on the sanction list . Russian companies Russian Railway Logistics and other Russian companies also put on the list .