 Russia’s ongoing conflict against Ukraine flared up once again on Tuesday . The conflict has flared up again in Ukraine .
 A bridge across the Kerch Strait connecting the Crimean Peninsula with mainland Russia . The latest escalation was evidenced by the completion of the bridge .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin leads a convoy across the newly opened Kerch Strait bridge . Putin was behind the wheel of a big-rig truck on Tuesday .
 The United States and the European Union levied economic sanctions on Moscow in 2014 . In 2014, the U.S. and the EU levied sanctions on Russia .
 Moscow touted the new bridge as proof that Russian rule over Crimea is permanent . This week, Moscow touted it as proof Russian rule is permanent.
 The U.S., EU, and Ukraine roundly condemned the Kerch Strait bridge, calling it a further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty . The bridge was built on a bridge between Ukraine and Russia .
 Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, North Korea, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe are among the 10 countries . The 10 countries are Afghanistan, Bolivian, Cuba and Nicaragua .
 Ukraine and its Western partners swiftly protested Tuesday’s opening of the Kerch Strait bridge .
 Minister for Europe Sir Alan Duncan said in a statement on the opening of the Kerch Strait bridge .
 This constitutes another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by Russia, the European Union says .
 Ukrainian forces remain engaged in a low-intensity, static war against a combined force of about 35,000 pro-Russian separatists, foreign mercenaries, and Russian regulars .
 combined Russian-separatist forces fired mortars at the Ukrainian government-controlled village of Novhorodske in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military reports one soldier killed in action, two others wounded . That day, the Ukrainian military reported one soldier dead in action .
 Ukrainian military said combined Russian-separatist forces had attacked Ukrainian positions 66 times in the preceding 24 hours . On Thursday, the military said the attacks were on Ukrainian positions .
 Russian-separatist forces shelled an elementary school in the town of Svitlodarsk on the Ukrainian government-controlled side of the front lines . Also, on Thursday, combined Russian-Sepatist Forces shelled a school on the Ukraine government- controlled side of
 The relief of Crimea-related sanctions will only occur after Russia returns control of the territory to Ukraine, officials say .
 This week’s volley of diplomatic jabs underscores what will likely be the status quo for the time being . This is a war of words fought through the media, according to the media .