 The U.S. and India Need a Digital Handshake Mistrust and disagreements over privacy have impeded a partnership that could transform the global digital economy .
 Russia's Military Anders Fogh Rasmussen speaks to FP about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine, the future of NATO and more .
 Belgium's King Philippe is visiting Congo this week . The country still has much to do to make amends .
 The battle for the Donbas could well be the deadliest phase of the war, says Howard W French Civilians on Ukraine's Front Lines .
 The Cable The Cable goes inside the foreign policy machine, from Foggy Bottom to Turtle Bay . The cable goes into the White House, Turtle Bay and Embassy Row .
 Russia Vetoes Last-Ditch United Nations Effort to Prevent Crimea Annexation . This article has been updated to reflect new developments at the United Nations Security Council on Saturday .
 This article has been updated to reflect new developments at the United Nations Security Council on Saturday, March 15 . The U.N. Security Council will meet on March 15 for the first time on March 14 .
 Russia on Saturday vetoed a U.S.-drafted Security Council resolution declaring Crimea's upcoming secession referendum invalid . The move threatens to plunge U.s.-Russian relations into their worst state since the Cold War . The vote could inflict lasting damage on Moscow's relations with Europe .
13 of the council's 15 members left Russia politically isolated at the United Nations . Today's vote on a resolution supported by 13 of the 15 members was supported by a group of 13 members .
 Even Moscow's closest ally, China, abstained - though it criticized the United States push for a resolution as needlessly provocative .
 Crimea's pro-Russian leaders to press ahead with a vote on Sunday, March 16, on whether Crimea will leave Ukraine and become absorbed into Russia . It also set the stage for Crimea's Pro-Russian leader to hold a vote in Crimea on Sunday .
 This article has been updated to reflect new developments at the U.N. Security Council on Saturday, March 15 . This article is an updated version of this article .
 Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that Moscow intends to respect the outcome of the vote . But he said that President Vladimir Putin will not make a decision on next steps, including on whether to annex Crimea, until after Sunday's referendum .
 Russia's U.N. envoy Vitaly Churkin defended his government's action . He said Moscow was upholding the Crimeans’ ""right to self determination" as enshrined in the United Nations Charter .
 Churkin also asserted that Russia can lay a historical claim to Crimea . He said Russia can also lay a historic claim to Ukraine .
 It is "useful to recall here that until 1954 Crimea was part of the Russian Federation," he told the council .
 The U.S. and European diplomats mocked Churkin’s legal reasoning . But they mocked the legal reasoning of the Russian politician .
 France’s U.N. ambassador Gerard Araud says Russian diplomats are so formalist they are looking for a legal case for the deployment of troops in Crimea .
 Russia's "pathetic effort" to justify its action lacks even the "embryo of legal reasoning," Araud said . Russia’s pathetic effort to justify its action lacks even the embryos of legal reasoning.
 The United States and European governments are planning on Monday to announce a series of targeted sanctions against Russia’s political and economic elites . The sanctions include the freezing of assets and travel bans .
 Ukraine's referendum is in violation of Ukraine’s constitution, they claim . They claim that the referendum is a violation of the constitution .
 Secretary of State John Kerry told reporters in London that the United States and European governments would not recognize the results of the referendum . Kerry urged other states not to recognize Crimea’s change of status .
 China’s abstention exposed a rare ray of diplomatic daylight between Russia and its closest Security Council ally .
 China's U.N. enovy Liu Jieyi made clear his government's break with Russia should not be construed as a show of support for the U.S. initiative in the council . He said it would only result in confrontation and "further complicate" efforts to resolve
 Liu presented a highly hedged, and opaque, statement that underscored China's long-standing commitment to the principle of non-interference in the affairs of countries . Liu expressed sympathy with Moscow’s claims about the threat posed by Ukrainian extremism in Kiev .
 The situation in Ukraine has played out against a "complex" historical reality, Liu says . The situation is a result of "accidental and inevitable" forces, he says .
 Liu blamed "foreign interference" for triggering a wave of violence that led to the ouster of Ukraine’s pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych .
 All parties need to consider their next steps, he says, and not take any hasty action that could inflame passions on either side . But he added that all parties needed to carefully consider the next steps .
 Liu outlines three proposals for easing the political standoff . Liu calls for all parties to refrain from any action that could escalate tensions .
 He also urged international financial institutions to explore ways to stablize Ukraine’s fragile economy .
 Russia has been unwilling to engage in talks with political leaders in Kiev, whom it views as illegitimate . So far, Russia has not engaged in talks.
 backers of the U.N. resolution say they have essentially given up hope that Crimea's pro-Russian leaders can be persuaded to back down from Sunday’s vote . With Lavrov saying his government will respect the results of the referendum, Lavrov said his government would respect the result .
 Russia is trying to convince Russia that the political and economic costs of absorbing Crimea into the Russian Federation are too high . They are now channeling their efforts into convincing Russia that it is too high to absorb Crimea .
 The referendum is going to go ahead and we can't stop that," says one council diplomat . "Obviously, the referendum isgoing to go forward and we cannot stop that"
 The Russian veto underscored the limits of U.N. diplomacy in a place where a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council can act at any time to preserve what it considers to be its vital national interests . The veto underscores the limits to United Nations diplomacy, however .
 The Security Council has no direct leverage, either through an appeal to dialogue or the threat of economic sanctions . In the face of Russian opposition, the Security Council can't influence the outcome .
 A senior U.N.-based diplomat dismissed the notion that a flurry of meetings, diplomatic initiatives, or the threat of resolutions could embarrass Russian President Vladimir Putin enough .
 United Nations diplomacy on Ukraine is beginning to resemble a Kabuki dance, a U.N. official said . But the official said it is not possible to halt Putin's gradual annexation of Crimea .
 The veto of the new resolution caps weeks of often-impotent U.N. diplomacy aimed at heading off a split of Ukraine .
 The United Nations Security Council has convened a total of six emergency sessions on Ukraine . Washington, Kiev, and other foreign capitals to joust with Churkin over the nature of events unfolding .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk appealed to Russia in the Security Council to reverse course and engage in political talks with Kiev . He said Russia was committing an act of military aggression in Crimea .
 He said Russia is trying to balance two competing principles of territorial integrity and the right to self-determination . He said that Russia is attempting to balance territorial integrity with self- determination .
 Russia has refused to negotiate a resolution to the crisis with Yatsenyuk or other Ukrainian leaders . Russia says they still recognize Ukraine's ousted president, Viktor Yanukovych, as the country’s lawful leader .
 Russia has also been cool to U.N. offers to mediate the crisis . Russia has said it is not interested in mediating the crisis.
 U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has sent multiple senior envoys to Ukraine . He hopes to initiate talks between Kiev and Crimean separatists .
 U.N. human rights official Ivan Simonovic refused entry into Crimea . Simonovic was refused entry to Crimea on Thursday .
 Ban’s special envoy, Robert Serry, was previously chased out of Crimea by pro-Russian mob .
 The diplomatic logjam at the U.N. has shifted the diplomatic center of gravity to Berlin, one of Russia’s main trading partners .
 Kerry said he made it clear that the U.S. viewed Crimea's referendum as a violation of the Ukrainian constitution . Kerry said the international community would refuse to recognize its results .
 Ukrainian prime minister has assured President Obama that he will be prepared to "provide additional autonomy" to Crimea . He also informed Lavrov that he would address Russia's concern about rights of ethnic Russians in Crimea .
 Ukrainian officials point to tens of thousands of troops massing on their borders as evidence of a coming Russian push to conquer the region . Ukrainian officials, by contrast, point to the tens of Thousands of troopsmassing in Ukraine .
 The U.S. is now working to impose its own additional sanctions on Russia . The United States, meanwhile, is now trying to impose additional sanctions .
 Asking whether to appease or not appease Putin is completely beside the point . Putin is the world's most powerful leader .
 Iranian, Russian, and Chinese warships practice a joint military drill in the Indian Ocean . The drill is part of a joint naval exercise.
 The U.S. Can't Afford to Stay Entangled with China's war shows paying the price of decoupling now is worth it .
 Shanghai lockdown as China's Economy Falters. Be Careful What You Wish For Why Western schadenfreude about Beijing’s economic troubles is misplaced .
New Topography of Terror information and exhibition center behind photograph of Adolf Hitler shaking hands with Heinrich Himmler on Jan., 2008 .
 Calls to inflict a decisive defeat on Russia are misguided and won’t necessarily prevent Putin or others from using force . Putin or other Russians will not be able to use force.
 Churkin said Crimea had been forced to take the &quot; extraordinary measure&quot . He also asserted that Russia can lay a historical claim to Crimea .
 Crimea was given to Ukraine in violation of the norms of that time under Soviet law . U.S. and European diplomats mocked Churkin's legal reasoning .
 The U.S. and European governments are planning on Monday to announce a series of targeted sanctions against Russia's political and economic elites . The sanctions include the freezing of assets and travel bans .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry told reporters in London on Friday that the United States and European governments would not recognize the results of the referendum . Kerry urged other states not to recognize Crimea's change of status .
 Liu blamed &quot; foreign interference&quot, for triggering a wave of violence that led to the ouster of Ukraine's pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych . Liu blamed the U.S. and Europe for the violence .
 Liu outlined three proposals for easing the political standoff, including a call for all parties to refrain from any action that could escalate tensions . But he added that all parties needed to carefully consider their next steps, and not take any hasty action .
 He urged international financial institutions to explore ways to stablize Ukraine's fragile economy . He proposed the establishment of an &quot;international coordinating mechanims .
 Russia has been unwilling to engage in talks with political leaders in Kiev . Crimea's pro-Russian leaders can't be persuaded to back down from Sunday's vote .
 The Russian Federation is trying to convince Russia that the political and economic costs of absorbing Crimea into the Russian Federation are too high . They are now channeling their efforts into convincing Russia that they are too expensive to absorb Crimea .
 The referendum is going to go ahead and we can't stop that, says one council diplomat . We are now looking at the Russian reaction to the referendum .
 The U.S.-drafted resolution would have effectively ignored the results of the coming referendum . The Russian veto underscored the limits of United Nations diplomacy in a place where a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council can act at any time .