 Finally, Ukraine is closer to dealing with its top-corrupt than ever before . Ukraine is now closer to the world's most serious corruption crisis .
 The High Anti-Corruption Court is expected to be launched in 2019 . It is the final link in the chain of anti-corruption institutions called to bring Ukraine's corrupt leadership to justice .
 President Petro Poroshenko resisted the idea till the very last moment . President Poroshenko is the author of Ukraine’s judicial reform .
 The pressure of society and Ukraine’s western partners made him change his mind, he says .
 attempts to render the court powerless continued till the last moment . But attempts torender the court helpless continued till a last moment.
 The launch of the High Anti-Corruption Court is a huge step forward for Ukraine . The court is the first in the country's history.
 The country's civil society has been fighting for this for more than two years . The country’s civil society is fighting for the right to have a voice in the public .
 The creation of the court offers the opportunity to finally prosecute those involved in high-level corruption . First and foremost, the creation of a court offers a chance to finally prosecuted those involved.
 Ukraine has also confirmed that it is keeping to its international commitments . By taking this step, Ukraine is also confirming that it will keep to its commitments .
 As a result, this will open the doors to additional international funding . This will also open the door to more international funding for the UK .
Today marks the fifth anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution . Where is the Yanukovych regime five years after the Eurmaidan revolution?
 Yanukovych turned his back on the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement five years ago . President Yanukovych trumped the pro-European dreams of many Ukrainians .
 Yanukovych’s rule, often called a regime, sparked the revolution, but its underlying reasons went deeper . The revolution was sparked by a general dissatisfaction with the Yanukovych's rule .
 Yanukovych’s inner circle had a hand in almost every area of life, blocking opportunities for the development of fair business, youth, civil society . Yanukovych's inner circle also blocked opportunities for fair business.
My promise to slain Euromaidan activists is to bring bad judges to justice . My promise to murdered Eurom Maidan activists will bring bad Judges to justice.
 On the fifth anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution, we have sought out activists who joined the protests back then and are still actively involved in building the country today .
 Roman Maselko went from banker to judicial reform activist and advocate of the families whose family members were killed by the Berkut during the protests of 2013-2014 . This is our first story about the lawyer, who was killed in the protests .
 He says he won't stop until the judges prosecute innocent activists of those days are brought to justice . He won’t stop until judges prosecuting innocent activists are brought into justice .
 On 11 November, phony elections were held once again in the Russia-occupied parts of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 Voters lured in by promises of cheap vegetables, they took place despite condemnation by Western countries and their cautions to refrain from voting .
 The results were known in advance, just like at the sham 2014 referendums in Crimea and the Donbas . The previous elections in occupied Donbas back in the fall of 2014 .
 Russia ready to take over Interpol. Human rights defenders raise alarm as Russia prepares to take control of Interpol .
 Interpol has elected South Korean Kim Jong-yang as its president . It was widely expected Alexander Prokopchuk would take the post . It has been widely expected that Russian frontrunner Alexander ProKopchuk.
 The Sakharov prize clearly indicates solidarity and undeniable support for Oleg by European politicians, as well as their readiness to continue pressure on Russia on international platforms .
 EU representatives have livened up hopes for possible release of Oleg and all Ukrainian political prisoners . Such a move is totally welcomed by all EU representatives .
 The Sakharov prize alone is not enough for Putin to trigger this process, says the Russian president . Putin has not yet made a decision to step up the process, he says .
Dozens of cultural actors in France appeal to free Sentsov and all Ukrainian political prisoners . Dozens of French cultural actors appeal to freed Sentsov.
 Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov and all Ukrainian political prisoners in an editorial in the French newspaper Le Monde . Intellectuals and cultural figures from around the world call upon western leaders to demand from Russian President Vladimir Putin to release them .
Among the signatories of the letter are such famous cultural figures as philosopher Slavoj Žižek, historian Galia Ackerman and philosopher Pascal Bruckner . Other well-known people include writer Emmanuel Carrère and politician Daniel Cohn-Bendit .
Acclaimed film director Godard declines Russia visit over imprisonment of Oleg Sentsov . Acclaimed filmmaker Godard declined Russia visit.
Acclaimed director Jean-Luc Godard has declined an invitation to visit Saint Petersburg’s Hermitage Museum . Oleg Sentsov was detained in Ukraine by Ukrainian authorities .
 Britain urged towards Magnitsky-style sanctions against torturers of Ukrainian political prisoners of the Kremlin . Britain urged to impose sanctions against the torturers.
 Magnitsky-style sanctions could be a step towards freeing the 70 Ukrainian political prisoners of the Kremlin . Ukrainian human rights activists said they passed a list of those responsible for torturing political prisoners to British MPs .
 Ukraine’s new UN General Assembly resolution is important for returning Crimea and political prisoners .
 The document was backed by 67 UN member states, 26 voted against it, 82 abstained . The document has been backed by 26 member states .
 Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia, Cambodia, China, Cuba, North Korea, Eritrea, India, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russia, Serbia, Syria, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe . South Sudan, Sudan,
 Hungarian government is actively blocking NATO-Ukraine cooperation and Ukraine’s integration into Western structures on all levels to protest the new Ukrainian language law . The Hungarian government has voted for the European sanctions’ regime against Russia multiple times .
 The overt Hungarian diplomatic reaction plays right into the Kremlin's geopolitical effort to destabilize Ukraine along ethnic lines and the East-West geographical divide . Hungarian concerns are based on legitimate human rights grounds .
 Lessons Learned to Move Forward was held during 7-8 November 2018 in Kyiv .
 This war won’t end while current Russian authorities hold power in the Kremlin – Horbulin . This war will not end as current Russian officials hold power.
 Lessons Learned to Move Forward Successfully was held over 7-8 November 2018 in Kyiv .
 Volodymyr Horybulin, Director of the Institute of National Security Problems at the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine, told about the key features of Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine and the West .
 Duma vice-speaker sees Azov Sea inland Russia’s. Russia thinks Black Sea not European, Duma says .
 Russian state propaganda media would benefit from updating their skills in political geography . Russian state media would be able to update their skills.
 Two government outlets manipulated geography in support of key messages in their reporting . This became apparent last week when two leading government outlets decided to manipulate geography . This is the latest example of the manipulation of geography in government reporting .
 The Ukrainian set himself on fire protesting the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . He was protesting the invasion of the country .
 November 6th marked 50 years since the violent death of young Vasyl Makukh . The death of the young man marked the first anniversary of his death on November 6 .
 On November 5, 1968, Vasyl Makukh committed an act of self-immolation on Khreshchatyk Boulevard in Kyiv . The act took place on November 5.
 The man ran through the street, his clothes and body ablaze. He appealed to his countrymen to fight for an independent and free Ukraine . The man's body was ablaze and his clothes were burned .
 Traditional Ukrainian costumes from 17 regions reconstructed in video project . The costumes were reconstructed in a video project.
 Every ethnographic region at different times had its own peculiarities of the national garment .
 The project ‘Spadok’ shows the originality of the Ukrainian regional traditional dress .