 Russian President Vladimir Putin has stated that Russia will “do everything to defend the rights of believers in Ukraine’s Ukraine .
 Moscow began ‘defending’ rights of Russians and Russian-believers in both Crimea and Donbas .
 This supposed 'Russian world' includes Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova, according to both Putin and Kirill .
 The Kremlin and the Moscow Patriarchate reacted very angrily to the decision of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople to support an autocephalous Orthodox Church in Ukraine . The Patriarchate has been in power since the end of the reign of Constantinople .
 Putin immediately called a meeting of his Security Council . A few days later, the Russian Orthodox Church announced it was severing relations with the Church in Constantinople .
Members of the Church seen blessing prominent militants such as Igor Girkin and Igor Plotnitsky .
Russian Orthodox ‘priest’ Vsevolod Chaplin said his personal guard was made up of monks and priests from the Svyatohorsk Lavra .
 2015 study ‘When God becomes the weapon’ provides evidence of religious persecution by militants in Donbas . Russia and armed criminal 'Orthodox crusaders' in crimes against humanity in the region .
 The emergence of a united Ukrainian Church will seriously diminish Russia’s political and cultural influence on Ukraine . Russia's influence will be diminished by the emergence of the Ukrainian Church .
 The Church under the Moscow Patriarchate until quite recently had the largest number of parishes of any Church in Ukraine . Many have already joined the Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
Both the Kremlin and Kirill have condemned what they refer to as ‘political developments’ in Ukraine .
 Putin spoke of the close “brotherly inter-church links’ which have alleged served to develop equal relations between Russia and many foreign countries .
 He expressed regret that Constantinople should have been “drawn in’ to what he claims is about a struggle for power . He said he was disappointed that Constantinople had been ‘drawn in' to the struggle.
 Putin condemned what he claimed was “blatant interference in church life’ in Ukraine . Putin, a former KGB officer, was a KGB agent for many years .
 Dennis Kristensen is the first of many Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned on ‘extremism’ charges in Russia . His words were clearly not intended to refer to occupied Crimea where over 30 Crimean Muslims have faced persecution .
 No, Russia “reserves the right to defend’s believers in mainland Ukraine, where there is no evidence that they need to be defended, says CNN .
 Nothing to warrant the dire claims from Russian leaders and the state-controlled media about bloody conflict, mass persecution, etc.
 The same claims have been constantly made about the conflict in Donbas . The conflict is said to be between the two countries .
 There was no evidence of persecution or imminent bloodshed in either part of Ukraine to back such claims . No evidence of imminent bloodshed was found in Ukraine .