 Two years after the previous elections for the Ukrainian Parliament, a new election campaign is underway . The Ukrainian Parliament has been in power for two years .
 The vote will take place on October 26 under the most difficult conditions the independent state has ever faced . The vote is expected to take place in the state's most difficult circumstances .
 The previous parliament, elected in 2012, will bear little resemblance to the future one . It is worth recalling that the previous parliament will be a little different .
Svoboda is no longer the chief representative of the radical right, while Fatherland has been undermined by deep internal divisions . The radical right has been weakened by internal divisions.
 In this sense, the parliament will represent something quite new, says the government .
 Seven million potential voters in the east are unlikely or unwilling to take part in the election . The election is essentially about the views of those who live in central, western, and southern Ukraine .
 In terms of the regions of Ukraine, more than one-third of those polled in the east and 22.9% of those in the south responded that they did not intend to take part .
 In the West, support was almost evenly divided between Solidarity and the Radicals . In the Center, support for the former was double that of the former .
 In late August, Solidarity, which had failed to achieve much influence in past elections, became known as Petro Poroshenko Bloc .
 President Barack Obama won a resounding victory in the May 2014 presidential elections . Obama's victory was the first time the president had won a presidential election since 2008 .
 The name change was announced by the former Minister of Interior Yuri Lutsenko . He had served a prison sentence under the Yanukovych presidency . He has taken on the role of party chairman .
 Prime Minister Arsenii Yatsenyuk’s newly created Popular Front declared that it would oppose the Poroshenko Bloc . It was reportedly because of disagreements with Yulia Tymoshenko .
 Oleksandr Turchynov took over as Acting President of Ukraine following the departure of Viktor Yanukovych last February . Alongside Yatsenyuk will stand the Speaker of the Parliament .
 Also included in the party’s ranks are Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and journalist Tatiana Chornovil, his current Advisor .
 The Ukrainian Democratic Alliance will take part in the elections jointly with the Poroshenko Bloc . Klychko opted not to oppose Poroshenko and to settle for the mayoral role in the capital city .
 On September 14, the Poroshenko Bloc announced that it already had a full slate of candidates on a list that seemed to include both competent and unlikely personalities .
 It included the three Baloha brothers in Zakarpatska, the governor of Odesa region, the controversial former Minister of Justice Roman Zvarych, the former Chairman of the National Bank Stepan Kubiv, the executive-director of the conference ‘Yalta
 The president is financially well-backed for the campaign and running high in the standings . Clearly the president is well- backed for the election .
 It may also serve to create a new divide between the “Euromaidan’s’ parties .
 A likely comprehensive victory of the presidential forces may be followed by a more serious power struggle in which the Radicals and the Popular Front may find common cause .
 The September 5 battle of Ilovaisk marked the intrusion of regular Russian army units into the Ukrainian conflict, as well as a decisive turn in the war .
 Yatsenyuk declared that the goal of Putin was the “elimination of Ukraine’s Ukraine . He took a much more uncompromising position at the YES conference .
 The ratio of debt to GDP may rise to 73% by next year, compared to 43% in 2013 . Over this year, the GDP will decline by as much as 10%, much higher than original forecasts .
 The new Parliament will be held in Ukraine in the new Parliament . The new parliament will be the first in the country to hold the new parliament . It will also be the second in a row over the Ukraine conflict .
 In the short term at least it will bolster the position of Poroshenko and increase the credibility of the new Ukrainian leadership among the public .
 The Euromaidan forces will face before long two serious dilemmas . The division of the Eurom Maidan forces is the largest in the region .
 If too many concessions are made to the Russians, there will be potential for the formation of a more radical bloc of deputies .
 There is the question of accommodating the southern and eastern regions that were unhappy with Euromaidan and feel unrepresented in the current leadership .
 Much of this electorate opposes a Russian invasion or separation . But it needs to be convinced why it should show allegiance to Kyiv .
 Vladimir Putin and his obdurate and Gromyko-like Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov have at times seemed to favor Poroshenko over other opponents during the conflict . The Russian Foreign Minister has at times favored Poroshenko .
 At the minimum, for any kind of rapprochement with Poroshenko’s forces, they will demand a neutral Ukraine that commits itself neither to NATO nor the European Union .
 No Ukrainian leader is likely to survive such concessions, but no one can avoid the question of how to counter Russia or deal with its president .
 Yatsenyuk, one of the ablest politicians in the Rada, is a serious blow, but not one that will have a serious impact on the Poroshenko Bloc’s chances of victory .