 Russia’s ’Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the United States Marine Corps 5a. The U.S. Marine Corps is a Marine Corps.
 The London-based company is based in Arlington, Virginia . It is based on a series of successful business practices . The company is also known as CNA Analysis & Solutions .
 Phases of Russia’s ambiguous warfare 5 CNA. This page intentionally left blank .
 CNA Introduction has been just over a year since “little green men’s’ surged into Crimea and drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority .
 War rages in Ukraine's eastern region of Donbass, where Russian-backed separatists wielding Russian weapons, driving Russian tanks, and reportedly fighting alongside unacknowledged Russian troops .
 The Russian Federation and its armed forces have used so-called “ambiguous warfare” to great tactical and operational effect . In annexing the Crimean peninsula and supporting instability in Ukraine’s eastern provinces, the Russian Federation has used ‘ambiguous Warfare’
 This brand of warfare involves rapidly generating highly trained and disciplined forces who enter the battle space out of uniform . They use psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery to undermine resistance .
 It is unlikely that U.S. Marines will directly confront Russian Federation forces in the near future . Other nations and non-state actors are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare .
 The U.S. Marine Corps is learning lessons from Crimea and Ukraine . It behooves the Marines to understand the lessons from Russia’s success .
 This paper presents a summary of that discussion, which was held under the Chatham House rule of non-attribution to encourage a candid exchange of views .
 The term applies in situations in which a state or non-state belligerent actor deploys troops and proxies in a deceptive and confusing manner . The term is used in situations where the belligerent’s direct participation is obscured .
 Russia’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine clearly align with this concept, though numerous participants pointed out that it is not a new concept for Russia .
 General Gerasimov urged the academy to study and engage in the formulation of new doctrine and tactics to win the wars of the 21 st century .
 Experts agreed that the “Gerasimov Doctrine’s’ evolved out of necessity, driven by Russian vulnerability rather than strength .
 The revised Russian Military Doctrine signed by President Vladimir Putin in December 2014 identifies NATO and NATO enlargement as a fundamental threat to the Russian homeland .
 Gerasimov advocates the use of a modern version of partisan warfare that targets an adversary’s weaknesses and avoids direct, overt confrontations . The Russian Federation's largely conscript forces would not prevail against NATO in conventional combat .
Gerasimov proposes correlation of non-military to military measures of 4 to 1 . Gerasimov also proposes a correlation of military measures to non- military measures .
 His non-military measures include efforts to shape the political, economic, and social landscapes of the adversary state through subversion, espionage and propaganda .
 The Soviet doctrine of denial and deception keeps opponents wondering and hesitating by resolutely denying Russian involvement .
 Third-party deniable agents included pro-Russian loyalists and local paramilitary commanders, as well as gangsters who spotted opportunity for profit and power .
 Russia's application of Gerasimov’s concepts as proceeding through six main phases. One of the experts in our discussion described Russia”s application ofGerasimov's concepts as progressing through six major phases .
 In the first phase, Russia uses ethnic Russian populations in target states as a “fifth column,” fomenting protests and resistance to the country's government .
 These actions have the potential to generate backlash and discrimination against ethnic Russians by the government and majority populations, which in turn can escalate the situation .
 In essence, Russia can activate a self-reinforcing mechanism to generate conflict . Russia can generate conflict, according to the Russian government .
 In the second phase, Russia uses economic warfare and diplomatic/political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states as a 4 CNA means of further weakening them . Russia is using economic warfare to intimidate and coerce and punish governments .
 In the third phase, Russia infiltrates ambiguous military and security personnel into the target country . Russia activates cri min al and other networks to further foment unrest and ignite open conflict .
 Russia's military engages in a campaign to isolate government positions, seize key terrain, and destroy the defense and security apparatus of the target country . In the fourth phase, Russia’s military engage in a bid to isolate the government positions.
 In the fifth phase, Russia conducts information operations to deny involvement and seed doubt and discord in the minds of other foreign governments as to what is occurring and how they might respond . The fifth phase is to deny any involvement in any of the countries involved in the incident .
 Russia consolidates its gains in the target country, takes actions to de-escalate the conflict and reduce tensions . Russia installs a government amenable to Russian influence .
Russia has been adept at maintaining a carefully calibrated balance between low-intensity, ambiguous actions and credible, highintensity threats . Another expert commented that credible escalation do min ance is a key to making this form of warfare work .
 Russia's military has put Gerasimov’s ideas to good practice in Crimea and Ukraine . Crimea has not been entirely mirrored in events to date in eastern Ukraine .
 nuclear weapons still play a central role in Russia’s strategic thinking, says one expert . Russia's armed forces still have a strong presence in Russia's strategic thinking .
 Russia has put forth a significant threat as part of its fourth phase of ambiguous warfare . They allow Russia to maintain a credible deterrent against Western action, as well as to put forth an significant threat .
 Russia still maintains a sizeable military force with a sizeable reserve . Russia also maintains a sizable military force.
 Russia's military is spread thin over the longest land border of any single country . That said, Russia's army is spread thinner over the length of the border .
 Russia’s military is aligned into different military districts. As participants in our event discussed, Russia's military is aligning into different districts .
 The Western District is the one concerned with Ukraine . It has a large share of Russia’s air force and air defense assets arrayed against possible NATO air threats .
 The Southern District contains forces in a high state of readiness, and the Eastern District has forces arrayed to protect the largely unpopulated eastern flank of Russia against potential threats from China .
 Russia's military has limited ability to mass forces in any one direction without leaving gaps in the nation's defense elsewhere . The result of this posture is that Russia’s military is limited to mass force in any direction .
 Russian armed forces make ambiguous warfare an attractive option. From a resource perspective alone, the over-stretched nature of the Russian forces makes ambiguous warfare a attractive option . This approach does not require the higher resource demands of a sustained conventional campaign .
 It uses organizational constructs that place fighting power in support of forces for political impact . The organization says it thinks about its forces as primarily geared toward “fighting power” or “political impact’s.
 One of Russia’s 7 CNA major forces for political impact is the Spetsnaz, which one expert discussed in more detail .
 The Spetsnaz have played a significant role in Russia’s operations in Crimea and Ukraine . The Spetnaz are Russia's special forces .
 Historically, the Spetsnaz were mostly concerned with deep reconnaissance, nuclear missions, and disrupting adversary command and control structures .
 In more recent years, they have gone through a painful but ultimately successful adaptation process to fight “small wars’s” more effectively . In more recently years, the process has been successful .
 Historically, the Russian military lacked a doctrinal base for small wars, which led to significant challenges in Afghanistan and Chechnya . The Russian military has been criticized for its lack of doctrinal bases .
 The military began to purposely evolve the Spetsnaz to have a more deliberate role in small wars . But in the wake of the latter operations, the military started to evolve the military to more deliberate roles .
 The Sochi Olympics and threats of terrorism were used to justify a major expansion of the Spetsnaz . All of the units were brought up to full strength .
 One expert said that the Spetsnaz are best thought of as political instruments, vice military units . Another said that they are not political instruments .
 GRU is a risk-taking organization that routinely works with unorthodox agents and engages in unorthodox operations . The GRU also engages in unconventional operations .
 The GRU employs private sector individuals, warlords, mercenaries, and organized crime syndicates . The Spetsnaz are perhaps its most important actor and will continue to be so going forward .
 "Spetsnaz" participants pointed out that, contrary to popular belief, not all Spetnaz are "Tier 1’s" operators . All that said, we pointed out, our participants said, that, despite the popular belief.
 One expert described the Spetsnaz as being akin to the U.S. Army Rangers—light infantry intervention forces . Another expert described it as being like the United States Army Rangers .
 The Crimea operation in late February 2014, apparently long planned as a military option, went relatively smoothly . Russia's Crimea operation went relatively well .
Information warfare techniques were applied to persuade Ukrainian forces to switch sides . Simultaneously, information Warfare techniques were used to persuade Ukraine forces to change sides .
 Russia's operations in Crimea were very successful, resulting in the annexation of key terrain for the Russian military at very low cost . Ultimately, Russia’s operation in Crimea was very successful .
 The operations surprised the West and have served as a wake-up call regarding Russia’s future intentions in the region .
 In April 2014, a pro-Russian insurgency erupted in the Donbass coal-mining region in southeastern Ukraine . The insurgency quickly increased in speed and intensity .
 Russian GRU officers took control of government institutions and infrastructure in Luhansk and Donetsk . They proclaimed them independent people's republics .
 The operation did not go exactly as experts in our event believe it was planned . Despite many factors favoring Moscow’s designs on the Donbass, the operation didn't go as planned .
 The Russians found less support for the separatist agenda in the Donbass than they had expected .
 The deniable agents who were first handed power in the “Luhansk and Donetsk Republics’ were harsh, erratic administrators who often alienated the local population .
 Military coordination among separatists was poor, and they used sophisticated Russian-supplied equipment recklessly, as seen in the shoot-down of Malaysian Flight MH-17 .
 Donbass residents have been able to escape the fighting by moving to safer areas in Ukraine . Residents have moved to Russia or to safer parts of Ukraine .
 Russian forces were able to move back and forth across the border at will, frequently under the cover of white-painted “humanitarian’ convoys .
 In August 2014, the Ukrainian military re-grouped and began to close in on the separatist strongholds in the Donbass .
 Sixty-five towns and villages were retaken, and it looked as though the military endgame was approaching . It looked like it was approaching the endgame .
 The Russians were forced to take on clearly visible roles to prevent the defeat of the self-proclaimed republics .
 Moscow continues to deny Russian military presence in eastern Ukraine and to employ an unrelenting media campaign to reinforce the narrative that the Russian-speaking population in Ukraine needed to be rescued from right-wing “fascist” extre mi sts and chaos .
 Representatives of Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the Donetsk People’s Republic, and the Luhansk People's Republic signed a protocol known as Minsk I It failed .
 A second ceasefire agreement, negotiated under OSCE auspices at Minsk in February 2015 and known as Minsk II, is currently in place in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine remains unable to control its border with Russia, and Russian resupply of the separatists continues . But the ceasefire is imperfectly observed, and Ukraine is still unable to take control of its border .
 Some analysts are predicting further escalation of tensions in the coming months . Russia-backed push to create a land bridge between the Russian border and Crimea .
 Others believe that Russia does not have the wherewithal to expand the conflict zone substantially but will continue to engage in low-intensity conflict in the Donbass region .
 Russian separatists have engaged in abductions, torture, assassinations, massed killings, rapes, and execution of prisoners . The separatists have put much of these activities on the internet .
 There is a direct, observable correlation between these convoys and increases in separatist activity . There is an observable correlation.
 Russia has observed that the latter do not fight as well and suffer disproportionate casualties . Russia is using a host of contract and irregular forces as its ground maneuver units .
 Reactive armor defeats most single-warhead infantry-fired anti-tank weapons . Reactive Armor defeats most of the infantry- fired anti- tank weapons .
 In combination with target acquisition capabilities provided by remotely piloted vehicles, such munitions have caused 85 percent of all casualties in Ukraine . They have proven their ability to reduce battalion-size units to combat ineffectiveness in a single strike .
 Russian ambiguous warfare requires fertile soil. Russian-sponsored operations have been more successful where they have had support from large ethnic Russian populations .
 Moscow may have similar plans for former Soviet states. Its operations in Ukraine were planned and prepared well in advance, according to reports .
 Russia’s lack of traditional state power should not be equated to a lack of serious threat . But Russia's lack of state power is not a serious threat, it is a threat to the country's future .
 Ukraine had underfunded its military since the end of Cold War, failed to modernize its forces, and constantly hobbled its own efforts .
 Steps taken to eliminate conscription had a negative impact on morale and military effectiveness, says military official .
 Potential target states should foster collaboration, cooperation, and connectivity between and within their military forces and their security services, says the U.S.
 States at risk of Russian aggression should work to better integrate Russian minorities . U.S. should better integrate Russia's minorities, states at risk.
 These populations are a clear entry point for Moscow into the internal affairs of neighboring states . The population of Moscow is the largest in the country .
 Russia’s overall aim, explained one European expert, is to replace the current Western-dominated world order with one in which great powers divide the world into internationally recognized spheres of influence .
 The Baltic States, formerly part of the Soviet Union and home to sizable populations of Russian speakers, are potential next targets . The three small Baltic Republics are potential targets for Russia .
 NATO's Article V views an attack on one NATO state as a attack on all . Russian aggression against the Baltics would likely take the form of ambiguous, destabilizing operations .
 Moscow's goal is to undermine the NATO Alliance. Sowing doubt about Western resolve to defend Baltic States contributes to Moscow’s goal of undermining the alliance .
 When Baltic Republics joined NATO, they were encouraged to develop niche military specialties rather than worry about territorial defense, which was thought unnecessary .
 The national armed forces of Lithuania currently have no mandate to intervene in internal affairs . That is the responsibility of the police and the Ministry of Interior .
 civilian forces would be the first to respond to an influx of "little green men" who suddenly appeared in Crimea in 2014 . These civilian forces will be first to response to the influx of the “little green man’s”
 Lithuania is seeking to develop a more comprehensive defense plan coordinating all national bodies of executive power . Lithuania is now seeking to create a more complete defense plan .
 The Lithuanian Ministry of Defense released a pamphlet titled ‘How to act in extreme situations or instances of war’ It was intended to instruct Lithuanians on how to survive foreign occupation and organize nonviolent resistance .
 Black Sea region Russian seizure of Crimea and continuing military operations in eastern Ukraine have changed the strategic balance in the region . Black Sea area has been the focus of Russian military operations for years .
 Moscow’s military presence no longer constrained by former legal agreements with Ukraine . Crimea can fully utilize Crimea as a platform for power projection .
 The Russian Air Force has gained access to former Ukrainian air bases in the peninsula . The Russian air force has been given access to the peninsula.
 Russian media reported that the Ministry of Defense plans to deploy to Crimea in 2016 ten Tupolev 22M3 bombers . Russian media said that the ministry plans to deployed ten bombers .
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol will add six new frigates, six new submarines, several smaller naval vessels, and possibly a Mistral amphibious assault ship .
 Enhanced anti-ship and anti-aircraft capabilities of the fleet and other military units in Crimea will create a strong line of defense for Russia .
 Russia’s air defense systems in Crimea reach nearly half of the Black Sea, and its surface attack systems reach almost all of Black Sea area . Russia's air defense system in Crimea reaches nearly half the Black sea .
 A Russian military build-up of this size on the northern shore of the Black Sea would be of great concern to Turkey . Historically, a Russian military building-up on the north shore would be a great concern .
 The prospect of Russian collaboration on energy may prove a critical factor in mitigating Turkish concerns . However, the prospect of Russia's collaboration with Turkey may prove to be critical .
 Vladimir Putin recently announced that he would abandon the plan to build the South Stream pipeline for Russian gas under the Black Sea to Bulgaria . He would instead redirect the pipeline construction to link with existing Turkish systems .
 Russian companies are investing in shipping companies and port facilities on the Turkish Black Sea coast . One of the experts at the event observed that Russian companies were investing in Turkish shipping companies .
Commercial ventures are useful for intelligence gathering and could also be entry points for Russian forces should the need arise . These commercial ventures are also useful for Russia's forces .
 All four countries are on the receiving end of active Russian influence operations . All four are in Russia's sphere of influence .
 Bulgaria is heavily dependent on Russia for energy supplies and maintenance of its military equipment . Washington and Brussels prevailed. Bulgaria was subject to intense pressure to go forward with its long-planned role as entry point for South Stream gas 14 CNA pipeline .
 The two enclaves just signed strategic agreements giving Russia formal control over their foreign and security affairs . Russia has been given formal control of its foreign andSecurity affairs .
Transnistria, South Ossetia, and Abkhazia are also focal points for Russia-linked organized crime in the region . Transnistrian, S.O.S. is also focal point for organized crime .
 The melding of local gangsters with Russian-backed forces has led to a metastasizing of organized crime in eastern Ukraine . One expert noted that we can anticipate further strengthening and utilization of criminal networks around the Black Sea littoral region .
 Participants discussed the implications for the U.S. Marine Corps with an understanding of Russia's use of ambiguous warfare in Crimea and Ukraine .
 Our event was designed to raise more questions than it answered, and this goal was certainly realized over the course of our discussion . Our goal was to raise the more questions we asked than we answered .
 The events in Crimea and Ukraine have a number of implications for the Marine Corps, according to participants .
 Marines should look at actions in other theaters through the lens of ambiguous warfare . China's use of coast guard and fishery vessels in the South China Sea is an example .
 The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine has shown that, while ambiguous, this type of warfare can be highly kinetic and extremely intense .
 Moscow has displayed its ability to launch covert and overt information operations on a mass scale . Moscow has shown it has been able to communicate to global, regional, and local audiences .
 Participants saw Russia’s use of population shaping measures in the pre-hostilities phase (to include leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries) Participants also saw Russia's use of special forces, militias, and criminal elements .
 Russia’s strategy and tactics as being generalizable to other regions of the world, to include China and Iran . Participants saw these elements of Russia's strategy as being broad and employable by other potential adversaries .
 Participants felt that the “ambiguousness of Russia’s approach to the Marine Corps is mostly at the strategic level .
 At the tactical level, the actions of Russia’s panoply of forces are no less ambiguous than what Marines have faced from insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Participants felt that the basic principles of Marine Corps warfighting remain valid in this kind of environment . As such, participants said they felt that basic principles remain valid .
 Participants also noted that the situation in Ukraine w hi le ambiguous in attribution still amounts to state-sponsored warfare . However, participants also said that there is still a high intensity battlefield.
 Answering this question is perhaps the best way for the Marine Corps to prepare for the employment of ambiguous warfare by other potential adversaries in the future .