 The Senate met at 1:02m. and was called to order by the Chief Justice of the United States . The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case on Tuesday .
 impeachment trial provides Senators with the assuring awareness of your powerful involvement. Almighty God, our rock of ages, be omnipresent during this impeachment trial .
 May they strive to have a clear conscience in whatever they do for You and country . May they try to have the same conscience in everything they do.
 May our Senators not permit fatigue or cynicism to jeopardize friendships that have existed for years . May we not allow fatigue to jeopardise friendships that've existed for decades .
 I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the RepubSenate THURSDAY, JANUARY 23, 2020 lic .
 The Journal of proceedings of the trial are approved to date . If there is no objection, the trial will be held to date. The trial is expected to take place next month .
 The Senate is sitting for the trial of the articles of impeachment against Donald John Trump, President of the U.S. All persons are commanded to keep silence, on pain of imprisonment .
 Mr Chief Justice's schedule will be similar to yesterday’s proceedings .
 We will take short breaks every 2 or 3 hours and will accommodate 30-minute recess for dinner . We will plan to take short break every 2 and 3 hours .
 The House of Representatives has 16 hours and 42 minutes remaining to present their case to the House .
 The Presiding Officer recognizes Mr Manager SCHIFF to continue the presentation of the case for the House of Representatives .
 Mr Chief Justice, I thank you, and I thank the Senators for 2 now very long days . He says he thanks them for 2 years .
 Chief Justice says he is greatly appreciative of Chief Justice . He says he has a lot of work to do at the Court .
 I want to thank the Senators for their long and considerable attention over the course of the last 2 days . I also want to, again, take this opportunity to thank them for their attention .
 Iam not sure the Chief Justice is fully aware of just how rare it is for the House Members to sit silently for hours .
 Sergeant at Arms warns you that if you don’t, you will be imprisoned .
 It is our hope that when the trial concludes and you have heard us, that you don’t choose imprisonment instead of anything further, we hope you don't choose imprisonment . It is the President’s counsel over a series of long days, says the
Two days ago we made the case for documents and for witnesses in the trial . Two days ago, we made a case for document and witnesses in trial .
 Yesterday we walked through the chronology, the factual chronology at some length . The chronology of the world's history is at some lengths .
 Today we will go through article I, the constitutional underpinnings of abuse of power, and apply the facts of the President’s scheme to the law and Constitution .
 This “bullet’s symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor . Of necessity, there will be some repetition of information .
 S487 S488 from yesterday’s chronology, want to explain the reason for it .
Hundreds of hours of deposition and live testimony from the House condensed into an abbreviated narrative of the facts . You have now heard hundreds of hours. The House is now hearing the House's version of the truth .
 We will now show you these facts and many others and how they are interwoven . We will also show you how many other things are interWoven .
 The President’s unconstitutional obstruction of Congress will be completed on article II, the President's unconstitutional obstruction. Tomorrow we will conclude the presentation of the facts and law on article I .
 The President’s counsel will then have 3 days to make their presentations, and then you will have 16 hours to ask questions . The President's counsel will have three days to made their presentations .
 The U.S. House of Representatives will hold a hearing on Capitol Hill on Tuesday . The hearing will be held in Washington, D.C., for the first time in a year . The hearings will take place in the United States .
After their testimony and after we have had closing arguments, then it will be in your hands . After their testimony, then we will have a decision to make a decision . After they have had a decision, then they will have to decide .
 Mr. Chief Justice, Senators, his fellow House managers, and counsel for the President .
 Articles of Impeachment against President Trump rank among the most serious charges ever brought against a President . The Articles ofImpeachment are among the more serious charges against a president .
 The President's attempt to block all witnesses and all documents from the U.S. Congress has been stonewalling, he says . As our recital of the facts indicated, the articles are overwhelmand I ingly supported.
 The first Article of Impeachment charges the President with abuse of power . The President is accused of abusing his power .
 President Trump used the powers of his office to solicit a foreign nation to interfere in our elections for his own personal benefit .
 The active solicitation itself is an abuse of power, but President Trump went further. Note that the active solicitation is just the ask itself .
 Ukraine's president withheld two official acts of immense value in order to secure his favor .
 Congress withheld $391 million in vital military assistance to Ukraine . Ukraine needed to fight Russian aggression, Congress says .
 President Trump withheld a long-sought-after White House meeting which would confirm to the world that America stands behind Ukraine in its ongoing struggle . Second, he withheld a meeting that would confirm that America stood behind Ukraine .
 It captures the worst fears of our Founders and the Framers of the Constitution . It captures our fears of the Founders.
 Since George Washington took office in 1789, no President has abused his power in this way . President George Washington has been President since 1789 .
 President used his office to compel a foreign nation to help him cheat in our elections . No President has ever CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE .
 Prior Presidents would be shocked to the core by such conduct, and rightly so, says the author .
 President Trump has largely failed to convince the country that his conduct was remotely acceptable . Now, he has adopted a fallback position, saying his conduct is not acceptable .
 He argues even if we disapprove of his misconduct, we cannot remove him for it . He argues that even if they disapprove of it, we can't remove him .
 It confirms that this President sees no limits on his power or on his ability to use his public office for private gain . It confirms this President is not limited to his power .
 President believes that he can use his power to cover up his crimes . Of course, he also believes that his power can be used to hide crimes .
 The President is accused of unlawfully obstructed the congressional inquiry into his conduct . That leads to the second article of impeachment, which charges that the President categorically, indiscriminately, and unlawfully Obstructed our inquiry .
 The articles and the evidence conclusively establish that President Trump has placed his own personal political interests first .
 He has placed them above our national security, above our free and fair elections, and above our system of checks and balances . He has put them above the system of check and balances, above the free elections .
 I just want to stress that if what we're talking about is not impeachable, then nothing is impeachable . If this is not what we’re talking about, it's not impeachmentachable, he says .
 This is precisely the misconduct that the Framers created a constitution, including impeachment, to protect against . The Framers' constitution was created to protect the Constitution against impeachment .
 All of the legal experts who testified before the House Judiciary Committee all agreed that the conduct we have charged constitutes high crimes and misdemeanors .
 Professor Jonathan Turley, called by the Republicans as a witness, agreed that the articles charge an offense that is impeachable . Turley: The articles charge the articles that are impeachable.
 None of that record can be seriously disputed, and none of it will be disputed . No record will be contested .
 We can predict what the President’s lawyers will say in the next few days .
 You will hear complaints about the process in the House and the motives of the managers .
Government-wide effort to extort a foreign government. You will hear that this all comes down to a phone call that was perfect, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President would be demanding additional witnesses to testify if he had any exculpatory witnesses . If he had a single one, he would demand their appearance here .
 First, we will examine the law of impeachable offenses, with a focus on abuse of power . We will focus on the law, with the focus on impeachment .
 The President has committed the high crimes and misdemeanors outlined in the first Article of Impeachment . They will demonstrate that the President has unquestionably committed high crimes. The President will be shown that he has unquestionable committed the highest crimes.
 The second Article of Impeachment will take the same approach to demonstrating President Trump’s obstruction of Congress . Once those presentations are concluded, we will take a similar approach .
 President Trump is guilty of the second Article of Impeachment as well . Then we will review the facts, and then we will apply the law to the facts. Then we'll apply the facts to the law, proving that President Trump was guilty .
 I will begin by walking through the law of abuse of power. With that roadmap to guide us, I will start with a roadmap to help us .
 Framers believed that any one of these offenses, standing alone, justified removal from office . The Framers believe that any offense standing alone is justified removal .
 Professor Noah Feldman of Harvard Law School explained this well before the House Judiciary Committee .
 The Framers created the impeachment power. Here is his explanation of why the Framers create the power .
 The Framers provided for the impeachment of the President because they feared that the President might abuse the power of his office for personal benefit . They feared that he might corrupt the electoral process and ensure his reelection .
President Barack Obama has been President of the United States since 2009 . President Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 . Obama was inaugurated in 2009 . Obama's first term in office was in office in 2009.
 We will show that President Trump abused his power when he used his office to solicit and pressure Ukraine to meddle in our elections for his personal gain . We will also show that he abused his office when he tried to pressure Ukraine for his own gain .
 We will show that he betrayed vital national interests by withholding diplomatic support and military aid from Ukraine, even as it faced armed Russian aggression, we will show .
 President Trump’s intent was to corrupt our elections to his personal, political benefit, he says .
 He put his personal interest in retaining power above free and fair elections . He also said Americans must govern themselves without interference from abroad .
 Article I thus charges a high crime and misdemeanor that blends abuse of power, betrayal of the Nation, and corruption into a single unforgivable scheme .
 The President must be removed from office, especially before he continues his effort to corrupt our next election . That is why this President should be removed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The charges set forth in the first Article of Impeachment are firmly grounded in the Constitution of the U.S.
 impeachment is the Constitution’s final answer to a President who mistakes himself for a King . The Constitution's final answer is the President who makes himself a King.
 The Framers had risked their freedom, and their lives, to escape monarchy . The framers had been in the midst of the monarchy .
 A nation committed to democracy and the rule of law. Together, they resolved to build a nation committed. The nation was a beacon to the world at an age of aristocracy .
 We would choose our leaders and hold them accountable for how they exercised power on our behalf . We would pick our leaders to be accountable for their actions. We would also choose our own leaders.
 The Framers recognized that we needed a Chief Executive who could lead the Nation with efficiency, energy, and dispatch . President Obama has been in charge of the White House since 2009 .
 The Presidency was created with immense public trust. So they created a powerful Presidency and vested it with public trust .
 Republics cannot flourish, and that people cannot live free under a corrupt leader. They knew that Republics can't flourish, they knew that they could .
 They foresaw that a President faithful only to himself would endanger every American . They fore saw that the President would endanger all Americans .
 Framers built guardrails to ensure that out-of-control Presidents would not destroy everything they sought to build . The Framers wanted to ensure the American people would remain free .
 The Federal Government divided the powers of the Federal Government across’ three branches .
 The President must swear an oath to faithfully execute the laws . They required the President to swear a oath to execute the law .
 To the Framers, the concept of faithful execution was profoundly important . The Framers believed that faithful execution is important .
 It prohibited the President from exercising power in bad faith or with corrupt intent . It ensured that CONGRESSIONAL RECORD would put the American people first, not himself .
 This minority feared vesting any branch of government with the power to remove a President from office . This minority fears vesting a branch of the government with power to take office .
 Constitutional Convention rejected at Constitutional Convention . But that view was decisively rejected at the Constitutional Convention.
 The Framers would not deny the Nation an escape from Presidents who deemed themselves above the law . The nation was formed in the shadow of rebellion.
 President would answer personally to Congress and thus to the Nation for any serious wrongdoing . Unlike in Britain, the President would not answer personally for wrongdoing .
 The Framers knew that threats to democracy can take many forms . As careful students of history, the Framers were careful students .
 Alexander Hamilton offered an especially striking portrait of the kind of leader who might menace the Nation . Hamilton's portrait is a striking portrait .
 Mr SCHIFF read this portrait in his introductory remarks and it bears repetition . The portrait is a portrait of a young man who was shot by a photographer .
 It may just be suspected that his object is to throw things into confusion that he may ride the storm and direct the whirlwind .
 Given the many threats they had to anticipate, the Framers considered extremely broad grounds for removing Presidents .
 Congress debated setting the bar at maladministration to allow removal for run-of-the-mill policy disagreements between Congress and President .
 They considered very narrow grounds, strictly limiting impeachment to treason and bribery . They also consideredvery narrow grounds .
 Presidents intended impeachments to reach full spectrum of misconduct that might threaten the Constitution . They did not want Presidents removed for ordinary political or policy disagreements . They intended our Constitution to endure for the ages .
 In England, the standard was understood to capture offenses against the constitutional system itself .
 From 1876 to 1787, the House of Commons impeached officials on a few general grounds . They were accused of abuse of power, betrayal of national security, corruption, treason, bribery, and disregarding the powers of Parliament .
 The phrase ‘‘High Crimes and Misdemeanors’’ thus covered offenses against the Nation itself .
 As scholars were shown, the same understanding prevailed on this side of the Atlantic . As scholars are shown, they were shown. As scholars showed, they had a similar understanding .
 In colonial period and under newly ratified State constitutions, most impeachments targeted abuse of power, betrayal of the revolutionary cause, corruption, treason, and bribery .
 History teaches that ‘high Crimes and Misdemeanors’ referred mainly to acts committed by officials using their power or privileges .
 Such great and dangerous offenses included treason, bribery, abuse of power, betrayal of the Nation, and corruption of office . The nation's most dangerous offenses include treason and bribery .
 Officials who abused, abandoned, or sought to benefit personally from their public trust faced impeachment and removal . Officials who threatened the rule of law if left in power faced impeachment, removal .
 This is exactly the understanding that the Framers incorporated into the Constitution . Abuse, betrayal, corruption and corruption are all part of the understanding .
 As the Framers created a formidable Chief Executive, they made clear that impeachment is justified for serious abuse of power .
 Americans who wrote and ratified the Constitution confirmed that Presidents may be impeached for abusing power entrusted to them .
 S490 To the Framers’ generation, abuse of power was a well-understood offense . S490 to the Framer’s generation, especially, was abuse ofpower .
 The first occurred when someone exercised power in ways far beyond what the law allowed, or in ways that destroyed checks on their own authority .
 The second occurred when an official exercised power to obtain an improper personal benefit, while ignoring or injuring the national interest . The second was when a official exercisedpower to obtain improper personal benefits .
 The generation that rebelled against George III knew what absolute power looked like . George III's generation knew what the absolute power was like .
 Most significantly they placed the President under the law, not above it . Most significantly, they placed him under the laws .
 That means the President may exercise only the powers vested in him by the Constitution . That means he can exercise only his powers by the constitution .
 A President who refuses to follow restrictions, by engaging in wrongful conduct, may be subjected to impeachment for abuse of power . President who egregiously refuses to following restrictions may be subject to impeachment .
 Two American impeachment inquiries have involved claims that a President grossly violated the Constitution’s separation of powers .
 The first was in 1868, when the House impeached President Andrew Johnson, who had succeeded Abraham Lincoln after his assassination at Ford's Theatre .
 In firing the Secretary of War, President Johnson allegedly violated the Tenure of Office Act, which restricted the President’s power to remove Cabinet members .
 The House of Representatives approved articles charging it with conduct forbidden by law . The House also approved articles charged it with Conduct forbidden by Law .
 President Johnson was charged with violating the Tenure of Office Act . The Supreme Court later accepted that the act was unconstitutional .
 A key Senator appears to have changed his vote at the last minute in exchange for promises of special treatment by President Johnson .
 Nixon case exemplifies the second way a President can abuse his power . But the Nixon case also exemplifies a President's second way of abusing his power.
 Both articles charged him with abusing the powers of his office with corrupt intent . Both of these articles charge him with abuse of powers of office .
 Each article enumerated specific abuses by President Nixon, many of which involved the wrongful, corrupt exercise of Presidential power . Many of the abuses were likely not statutory crimes .
 All Presidents account to some extent for how their decisions in office may affect their political prospects .
Elected officials can and should care about how voters will react to their decisions . Elected officials should be aware of how they will respond to decisions .
 They will often care about whether their decisions make it more likely that they will be reelected . They will also care about their decisions.
 There is a difference between political calculus and outright corruption, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There's a difference that matters" between political and corruption .
 Some uses of Presidential power are so outrageous, they are obviously high crimes and misdemeanors . If they are undertaken for a President’s own personal gain, then they are high crimes.
 The Framers sought to prohibit corruption that would have shocked the Framers, he says . But even the most egregious wrongdoing could be justified as disagreement over policy or politics, he writes .
 There should be nothing surprising about impeaching a President for using his power with corrupt motives, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To start, the Constitution requires that the President ‘faithfully execute’ the law .
 A President who acts with corrupt motives, putting himself above country, has acted faithlessly, not faithfully executing the law . A President of the U.S. has actedfaithlessly and has acted with corrupt motive .
Treason and Bribery are impeachable offenses that the Constitution enumerates . Each requires proof of the President’s mental state .
 For treason, he must have acted January 23, 2020 with a ‘disloyal mind’ according to the Supreme Court .
 The elements of bribery include corrupt motives and corrupt motives, according to the report .
 In sum, to the Framers, it was dangerous for officials to exceed their constitutional power . The Framers said officials should not exceed their power .
 Officials used their power to use their power with corrupt, nefarious motives . But it was equally dangerous, perhaps more dangerous, to pervert public trust for private gain .
 abuse of power is clearly an impeachable offense under the Constitution . Abuse of power can be impeachable under the constitution, according to the Constitution.
All prior impeachments considered of high office have always included abuse of power . All prior impeaches considered of a high office include abuse ofpower .
 All of the experts who testified before the House Judiciary Committee agreed that abuse of power is a high crime and misdemeanor .
 Professor Pam Karlan of Stanford Law School, joined by Professor Gerhardt, is testifying .
 Professor Turley, who testified at the Republican invitation, echoed that view . Turley testified at a Republican invitation .
 Another who comes to mind is Professor Allen Dershowitz -- at least Alan Derhowitz in 1998 .
 He had to say about impeachment for abuse of power . Back then, he had to tell the story about impeachment .
 If you have somebody who completely corrupts the office of President and who abuses trust, you don't need a technical crime, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You don’t need atechnical crime"
President Trump's key allies espoused this view in 1998 . But we need not look to 1998 to find one of President Trump's allies espousing this view .
Attorney General William Barr is known for his expansive view of Executive power . Barr is the current Attorney General of the United States .
 In Attorney General Barr's view, as expressed about 18 months ago, Presidents cannot be indicted or criminally investigated . That's OK because they can be impeached, he says .
 Attorney General Barr believes, along with the Office of Legal Counsel, that a President may not be indicted .
 We don’t need that safeguard against a President who would commit abuses of power, says CNN's John Sutter .
 That is the safeguard for abuses of discretion and for his misdeeds in office. That is a safeguard for abuse of discretion, he says .
 Everyone, except President Trump and his lawyers, agrees that Presidents can be impeached for abuse of power . Everyone, including President Trump, agrees.
 The President’s position amounts to nothing but self-serving constitutional nonsense, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the President's position is self- serving constitutional nonsense .
 A President who sees no limit on his power manifestly threatens the Republic . A President with no limits on his powers has threatened the Republic.
 Nobody is entitled to wield power under the Constitution if they ignore or betray the Nation’s interests to advance their own .
 Under the Constitution, he is subject to impeachment and removal for abuse of power . Under the constitution, he can be removed from the presidency .
 President Trump's abuse of power is charged in the first Article of Impeachment and supported by a mountain of evidence . The Constitution’s impeachment clause is the heart of the impeachment clause .
When they wrote our Constitution, they had only recently won a bloody war for independence . When they wrote the Constitution, the Constitution was still being written .
 Kings were seen scheming for power, promising fabulous wealth to spies and deserters . But as they looked outward from their new Nation, they saw Kings schemed for power .
 The young Republic might not survive a President who schemed with other nations, says John Sutter . Sutter: "The young Republic may not survive" He says the young Republic could not survive the President's secret deals .
 The Framers did not intend impeachment for genuine, good faith disagreements between President and Congress over matters of diplomacy .
 The Nation was explicit that betrayal of the Nation through plots with foreign powers must result in removal from office .
No such betrayal scared them more than foreign interference in our democracy. And no such betrayal scare them more. No such betrayal was more than Foreign interference.
As often as Elections happen, the danger of foreign Influence recurs, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Framers never suggested that the President's role in foreign affairs should prevent Congress from impeaching him for treachery in his dealings .
 The President betrays our national security and foreign policy interests for his own personal gain, he says . He is unquestionably subject to impeachment and removal .
 corruption has broken Rome, debased Britain, and threatened America, says Rome . They understood that corruption had broken Rome and threatened the United States .
 The Republic saw no shortage of threats to the Republic and fought valiantly to guard against them . They saw no shortages of threats.
 The Framers attempted to build a government in which officials would not use public power for personal benefits . So the Framers tried to create a government that wouldn't use the public good for personal benefit .
Four delegates to the Constitutional Convention listed corruption as a central reason why Presidents must be subject to impeachment and removal from office . Madison, plus Morris, Mason, and Randolph, were among those to list corruption as central reason for impeachment .
 Impeachment seen as especially necessary for Presidential conduct corrupting our system of political self-government . Impeaching was seen as particularly necessary for presidential conduct .
 The Framers foresaw and feared that a President might someday place his personal interest in reelection above our abiding commitment to democracy .
 The Framers reserved impeachment for situations where the President abused his office . That is, that is, used it for his personal advantage .
 President used his office to facilitate corruptly his own reelection, officials say . They were specifically worried about a situation where the President used the office to help his reelection .
President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 . Obama was inaugurated in 2008, but was not elected in 2012 . Obama won't be re-elected in 2012, but he was elected in 2010 .
 Professor Feldman’s testimony is grounded in the records of the Constitutional Convention . Professor Feldman's testimony is based on the records.
 William Davie warned that a President who abused his office might spare no efforts or means whatever to get himself reelected and thus, to escape justice . There, Davie said, "There is no way to get yourself reelected"
 He feared that Presidents would win election by improperly influencing members of the electoral college . He said he feared that President Obama would win by improperly influence the college .
 Gouverneur Morris later urged that the Executive ought to be impeachable for corrupting his electors . Morris later echoed this point, urging that the President should be impeached .
 The Framers knew that a President who abused power to manipulate elections presented the greatest possible threat to the Constitution . President who manipulated elections presented a great threat to Constitution .
 The Framers' project was a commitment to popular sovereignty . The project was the heart of the Framers.
 The Framers imagined a society where power flowed from and returned to the people . At a time when democratic self-government existed almost nowhere on Earth, the Framers envisioned a society .
 The President and Members of Congress must stand before the public for reelection on fixed terms, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says if the President abuses his power to corrupt those elections, he threatens the entire system .
 rawing a foreign government into our elections is an especially serious abuse of power because it undermines democracy itself, says Professor KARLAN . rawing the foreign government in our election is anespecially serious abuse.
 Our government, in James Madison’s S492 words, derives all its powers directly or indirectly from the great body of the people .
 The Supreme Court declared more than a century ago, voting is preservative of all rights . Elections matter, both to the legitimacy of our government and to all of our individual freedoms .
 A President who abuses his power in order to kneecap political opponents and spread Russian conspiracy theories is a President who attacks the foundations of our liberty . President who uses his office to ask for or, even worse, to compel foreign nations to meddle in our elections.
 It is a shocking corruption of the election process, and it is a crime against the Constitution, warranting his removal from office . It is without a doubt a crimeagainst the Constitution. The election process is a scandal against the constitution .
 The Framers expected free elections would be the usual means of protecting our freedoms . But they knew that a President who sought foreign assistance in his campaign must be removed from office .
 The President's lawyers argue that impeachment and removal are subject to statutory crimes or offenses against established law . They argue that the President cannot be impeached because he has not committed a crime .
 It has no support in constitutional text and structure, original meaning, congressional precedents, common sense, or consensus of credible experts . It is not supported by constitutional text, structure and structure .
 Professor Gerhardt succinctly captured the consensus view in his testimony . He said the evidence was consistent with his testimony.
 The history of impeachment reinforces the conclusion that impeachable offenses do not have to be crimes . " impeachment is not a crime, it is a crime," says President Obama .
 Republicans' expert witness, Professor Turley, testified in his written testimony . Turley's testimony was echoed by the Republicans’ expert witness in his testimony .
 Professor Turley is clearly right. Although I disagree with him on many, many issues, he's clearly right . He's right.
House Manager LINDSEY GRAHAM flatly rejected the notion that impeachable offenses are limited to violations of established law . I might say the same thing of then House Manager Lindsey GRAham .
 It is just when you start using your office and you’re acting in a way that hurts people, you have committed a high crime. It's just when your office is used to be a crime .
 There are many reasons why high crimes and misdemeanors are not and cannot be limited to violations of the Criminal Code . There are several reasons why such crimes are not.
 The House Judiciary Committee has filed a report on Articles of Impeachment . The committee's chairman says he wants to highlight some important considerations .
The Framers could not have meant to limit impeachment to statutory crimes . The Framers did not mean to limit impeaching to statutory crime .
 Presidents are to be impeached and removed from office for “treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors’’ bribery was not made a statutory crime until 1837 .
 The President's position is contradicted by the Constitution’s text, according to the Constitution . The Constitution's text is also contradicted by its text .
 The phrase ‘high crimes and misdemeanors’ had a rich history in England, where it had been applied in many, many cases that did not involve crimes under British law . It matters because the phrase 'high Crimes' refers to offenses against the State rather
 When the Framers added ‘high Crimes’ here but nowhere else in the Constitution, they made a deliberate choice .
 A few years later, James Wilson, a Constitutional Convention delegate, agreed with Hamilton . Hamilton was a Constitutional convention delegate . Wilson was a constitutional delegate .
 Impeachments, and offences and offenders impeachable, come not within the sphere of ordinary jurisprudence . Impeaches and offences, and offenders and offenders are impeachable .
 They are founded on different principles, governed by different maxims, and are directed to different objects . They are based on different rules and are governed by the same maxims .
 James Madison responded directly to Mason’s concern that the pardon power might be too broad . Mason was concerned that the President might misuse his broad pardon power to pardon his own coconspirators .
 The House of Representatives can impeach the President if found guilty . If the President is connected, in any suspicious manner, there is grounds to believe he will shelter him .
 James Iredell, who would go on to serve on the Supreme Court, responded to the same concern . The North Carolina convention is being held in North Carolina .
 In the early 1800s, this understanding was echoed by Supreme Court Justice Story . Story wrote a famous treatise on the Constitution .
 Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes said impeachable offenses are not limited to crimes but, instead, capture a broader range of misconduct .
 Historians have shown that American colonists before the Revolution and American States after the Revolution. But before 1787 all impeached officials for noncriminal conduct for non criminal conduct .
 Over the past two centuries, a strong majority of the impeachments voted by the House have included one or more allegations that did not charge a violation of criminal law . The House has voted to impeach the House for more than two centuries .
The Senate has convicted and removed multiple judges on noncriminal grounds . The Senate has also removed several judges.
 Judge Archbald was removed in 1912 for noncriminal speculation in coal properties .
 What is true for judges is also true for Presidents, at least on this point. What's true for Judges is alsotrue for Presidents.
 The House Judiciary Committee approved three Articles of Impeachment against President Nixon . The House judiciary Committee approved the Articles ofImpeachment .
 One of the articles involved no allegations of any legal violation of Congress . One article involved no alleged legal violation .
 The House Judiciary Committee approved Articles of Impeachment in July 1974 . The House judiciary Committee approved the articles in 1974 .
 Those articles passed with bipartisan support, although most Republicans stood by President Nixon . Most Republicans stood with President Nixon.
 The President was forced to resign because of what was revealed on the smoking gun tape . Within a week, almost everyone who supported the President changed his position .
 You must resign, or you will be removed from office because of the evidence on the smoking gun tape . You must resigned, or the evidence will be taken away .
 No law explicitly prohibited that conversation, but President Nixon had abused his power . No law specifically prohibits that conversation .
 He had tried to use two government agencies, the FBI and the CIA for his personal benefit . He had been trying to use the agencies for personal benefit.
 His impeachment and removal were certain, and he announced his resignation within days . He announced he had resigned within days of his resignation .
 There is overwhelming authority against restricting impeachments to violations of established or statutory law . There is, thus, overwhelming authority to restrict impeachment.
 Impeachment exists to address threats to the political system, and responds not by imprisonment or fines, but only by stripping political power . Impeaching is only to political officials, and applies only to politicians .
 A President who engages in horrific abuses must be allowed to remain in office unless Congress had anticipated his or her specific conduct in advance and written a statute expressly outlawing it . It would make no sense to say that a President who engaged in horrific abuse must be allow to remain
 It does not leave us stuck with Presidents who abuse their power in unforeseen ways that threaten our security and democracy . It doesn't leave us trapped with Presidents.
Until recently it did not occur to me that our President would call a foreign leader and demand a sham investigation meant to kneecap his political opponents, all in exchange for releasing vital military aid .
 Congress has passed no specific law to make this behavior a crime . No one anticipated that a President would stoop to this misconduct, and no one anticipated it .
 The Framers had in mind when they wrote the impeachment clause, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: This is precisely the kind of abuse that the Framers were in mind .
 You must judge for yourselves whether justice will be had for President Trump’s crimes against our freedom and the Constitution .
President Trump has been accused of misconduct by the White House of misconduct . President Trump is accused of being in violation of the law of impeachment . The president has been charged with misconduct in the past .
 The President's conduct must constitute, as Mason put it, a great and dangerous offense against the Nation . The President’s conduct must be considered a "great and dangerous" offense, Mason says .
 impeachable offenses involve wrongdoing that reveal the President as a continuing threat if he is allowed to remain in office . Second, impeachable offense involves wrongdoing that reveals the President is a continuingthreat if he's allowed to stay in office.
In other words, we fully recognize that impeachment does not exist for a mistake . In other Words, we Fully recognize that impeaching does not exists for a mistakes .
Impeachment is reserved for deliberate decisions by the President to embark on a course of conduct that betrays his oath of office and does violence to the Constitution . Impeachment can be a deliberate decision by the president.
 President has told us that it is OK to invite interference from foreign power into our next election . The case for removal from the President is at its peak when there is strong evidence that he will do so again .
 This is certainly the case when he invites, indeed, a foreign government to help him subvert the integrity of our next election . This is the case for him, writes David Frum .
 High crimes and misdemeanors involve conduct that is recognizably wrong to a reasonable, honorable citizen .
 The Framers adopted a standard for impeachment that could stand the test of time . The Framer's impeachment standard was adopted by the Framers in 18th century .
 At the same time, the structure of the Constitution implies that impeachable offenses should not come as a surprise . The Constitution says impeachable offense should not be surprise .
 Impeachment is aimed at Presidents who S493 act as if they are above the law . It's aimed at presidents who ignore right and wrong in pursuit of their own gain .
 The President’s abuse of power, his betrayal of the national interest, and his corruption of our elections plainly qualify as great and dangerous offenses, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: President's abuse ofpower, betrayal of national interest and corruption of elections are dangerous offenses .
 President Trump has made clear in word and deed that he will persist in such conduct if he is not removed from power .
 He poses a continuing threat to our Nation, to the integrity of our elections, and to our Democratic order, says John Avlon .
 Mr Chief Justice, Senators, President's counsel, will walk through the President's abuse of power, the corrupt object of his scheme, his attempted coverup and exposure, and the harm to our Nation .
 Senators, we have provided handouts that you can follow along in our slides . Senators, you can also follow along with their handouts .
 We will walk through first how the President wanted Ukraine to help in his reelection campaign . We will also walk through how he wanted the President to help with his reelection bid .
 President Trump later confirmed this intent in public statements . President Trump himself later confirmed it in public statement .
 We will explain how we know these investigations were solely for President Trump’s personal, political gain . We will then explain how they were only for Trump's personal gain .
 President Trump made clear he cared only about the announcement, not the actual investigations .
 Giuliani used his personal attorney, Mr Giuliani, who repeatedly told us he was pursuing the investigations in his capacity as the President’s personal lawyer and that this wasn’t about foreign policy .
 Fourth and fifth, there is no real dispute that these investigations were never part of an official U.S. policy . They went outside official channels.
 The Department of Justice S494 even publicly confirmed that they were never asked to talk to Ukraine about these investigations . The Justice Department never asked Ukraine to talk about the investigations .
 Six officials who knew what was going on repeatedly reported these concerns to supervisors and even the NSC legal advisors . Six, multiple officials who were aware of the concerns, said they knew what had happened .
 Ukraine expressed concerns multiple times that these were political investigations . Ukraine didn’t want to get involved in domestic U.S. politics .
 President Trump himself told us what he really wanted and cared about in his own words, in many public statements . Nine, President Trump told us about his own life in many statements .
 The evidence makes clear that President Trump did not care about anticorruption efforts in Ukraine . The President's counsel's attempts to justify his actions have been unsuccessful .
 The Constitution grants the President broad authority to conduct U.S. foreign policy .
 The President's first and only objective should be to get foreign leaders to do what is best for the U.S. national interest, he says . President's oath of office should be consistent with official United States policy .
 President Trump called the President of Ukraine on July 25, but President Trump did the opposite . President Trump has been in Ukraine since July 25 .
 President Trump’s actions harmed our national security, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the investigations diverge from United States national interests .
 In putting himself above our country, he put our country at risk, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says his actions are so dangerous, that's why he's so dangerous .
 President Trump sought from Ukraine, which are at the heart of the President's scheme, and how he stood to benefit politically from Ukraine's announcement of each .
 The first investigation was of former Vice President Biden . As you can see on the slide, the first investigation is of former VP Biden .
 President Trump stated clearly each of these investigations he wanted. Let’s go straight to that July 25 telephone call again where President Trump said he wanted .
 Vice President Joe Biden and the removal of a corrupt prosecutor in Ukraine will take place .
 The first investigation related to former Vice President Joe Biden and the Ukrainian gas company Burisma Holdings . His son Hunter Biden used to sit on the company's board .
 President Trump himself summarized the theory behind his request in broad strokes in his July 25 call with President Zelensky .
 There’s a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped the prosecution . The other thing, is that there's a lot to talk about that, that he stopped the prosecutions .
 President Trump was asking for and what it was based on. Now let’s look carefully at the investigation he asked for .
 President Trump asked for the investigation into Biden based on a made-up theory that no one agreed with—no one .
 Biden pressured Ukraine to remove the then-prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, by threatening to withhold approximately $1 billion in loan guarantees if he was not removed . The allegation is that late in 2015, Biden pressuredUkraine to remove Shokin .
Vice President Biden did this in order to help his son in a company called Burisma .
 Vice President Biden tried to remove Ukraine’s prosecutor, all to make sure the prosecutor wouldn’t investigate Burisma because his son was on the board .
 Senators, if that doesn't sound farfetched and complicated to you, it should. Then, senators, if it doesn't seem farfetched, they should do it . Then, Senators.
 Vice President Biden’s son Hunter joined the board of the Ukrainian natural gas firm Burisma Holdings .
 At the time, Burisma’s owner, a Ukrainian oligarch and former government minister, was under investigation . Burisma's owner was a former Ukrainian government minister .
 In 2015, Viktor Shokin became Ukraine's prosecutor general, a job similar to Attorney General in the U.S. Shokin is the country's first prosecutor general .
 Shokin vowed to keep investigating Burisma amid an international push to root out corruption in Ukraine . He allowed the Burisma investigation to go dormant .
 Vice President Biden publicly called for the removal of Mr Shokin because of his failure to adequately combat corruption .
 The European Union, our European allies, and three reformers inside Ukraine also wanted Mr Shokin removed to reform the Ukrainian prosecutor general's office .
 Reforming the prosecutor general’s office was also supported on a bipartisan basis by the Ukrainian Caucus in the Senate .
 Vice President Biden had urged removal of Mr Shokin but before the Ukrainian Parliament voted to remove him . A bipartisan group of Senators, including Senators PORTMAN, DURBIN, SHAHEEN, RON JOHNSON, and SHERROD BROWN sent a
 Vice President Biden called for the removal of this prosecutor at the official direction of U.S. policy . The prosecutor was widely perceived as corrupt, and with the support of all of our international allies .
 His actions were supported by the executive branch, Congress, and the international community . His actions are therefore supported by Congress, Congress and the International community .
 Common sense would tell us that this allegation against Joe Biden is false and that there was no legitimate basis for any investigation . Common sense is that the allegations against Biden are false and there is no legitimate reason to investigate .
 President Trump wanted Ukraine to announce the investigation into Biden was solely for his own personal benefit . There are several other reasons you know that the only reason Trump wanted the investigation was for his personal benefit.
 None of the 17 witnesses in the House’s inquiry said there was any factual basis for this allegation .
 Former Vice President Biden tried to remove was widely considered to be corrupt and failed to investigate corruption in Ukraine . Former prosecutor general tried to take over from Biden, but failed to do so, he says .
 Burisma would only increase the chances that he would be investigated for possible corruption .
 Vice President Biden calling for his removal was also at the direction of official U.S. policy . Biden called for the prosecutor's removal because the prosecutor was so corrupt, he said . Biden also called for a change in U. S. policy and the unanimous support of
 Vice President Biden’s son didn’t do anything wrong in connection with Burisma. Fourth, the successor to the fired Ukrainian prosecutor general admitted that he did nothing wrong in the case .
 The entire premise of the investigation that the President wanted Ukraine to pursue was simply false . So the entire premise that the investigation was simplyfalse was false .
 Vice President Biden has the largest head-to-head lead against President Trump . President Trump didn't care about any of this until 2019, when Biden became the frontrunner .
 Vice President Biden’s conduct was uniformly validated by the witnesses in the House investigation, who confirmed his conduct was consistent with U.S. policy .
Every single witness who was asked about the allegations against Biden said it was false . Every single witness in the Biden case said they were false .
Every witness with knowledge of this issue testified that Vice President Biden was carrying out official U.S. policy in calling for Shokin’s removal .
 The U.S. is not alone in this view, witnesses say .
 There is simply no evidence— nothing, nada, in the record to support this baseless allegation .
 The prosecutor general at the time, Shokin, was not at that time pursuing investigations of Burisma or the Bidens .
 All of our allies and other institutions were involved in Ukraine at the time . And not just us but all of our friends and allies and others who were involved .
 Official United States policy was endorsed and was the policy of other international stakeholders, other countries, other monetary institutions, and financial institutions .
 Williams also confirmed that they are not aware of any credible evidence to support the notion that Vice President Biden did anything wrong . Williams also said they were unaware of any evidence that Biden did any wrong .
 Shokin was removed from the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine in 2016, a senior official testified . Shokin has been accused of being corrupt and not investigating corruption in the country .
 Shokin was not investigating Burisma, according to reports . Shokin is not investigating the Burisma .
 Under Shokin, the investigation into the owner of Burisma for earlier conduct had stalled and was dormant .
 The U.S. and other countries wanted to remove Shokin. That was part of the reason why the United States and other nations wanted to removed Shokin .
 Shokin's replacement would actually increase the chances that Burisma would be investigated . Burisma's replacement is confirmed by witness testimony .
 Vice President Biden calls for Shokin's removal and advocating for his replacement would increase chances of Burisma's investigation . Shokin was corrupt and not investigating allegations that Burisma was corrupt, Biden says .
 President Trump and his allies have tried to justify President Trump’s withholding of military aid and a White House meeting unless Ukraine announced the investigations he wanted by saying it is the same thing the Vice President did .
 Vice President Biden followed official U.S. policy, followed official policy .
 He went through official channels to remove the prosecutor that was corrupt. He did it with the support of our allies, he says . He says .
 He pushed Ukraine for an investigation that has no basis, that no one agreed with, that was not at all U.S. policy, and that only benefited him . He pushed the Ukraine for a probe, but that only benefit him .
 Mr Kent and Mr Taylor, the defenders of the President's behavior, have made a big deal out of the fact that Vice President Biden encouraged the Ukrainians to remove a corrupt former Ukrainian prosecutor in 2016 .
 Former Vice President Biden requested the removal of a corrupt prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin . Shokin had undermined a program of assistance that we had spent U.S. taxpayer money to try to build an independent investigator unit .
 Shokin was a former driver who had made a prosecutor . Shokin destroyed the entire ecosystem that we were trying to help create, he says .
 There is no comparison between what he did and President Trump’s abuse of power. So there's no comparison at all.
 President wanted Ukrainians to investigate Vice President Biden . President's own statements to see that the President wanted Ukrainian officials to investigate Biden .
There is a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution . The other thing, there is a lots of talk of Biden's son, which Biden stopped .
 The President was clearly asking President Zelensky to investigate Joe Biden . The President is clearly asking the President to investigate Biden .
 The Bidens have been accused of corruption in the past . They are accused of failing to pay up to £1.5million in a bid to cover up the scandal .
 The President wanted an investigation S496 of Hunter Biden, but there is no basis for that either .
 Ukraine's former prosecutor general admitted that the allegation against Vice President Biden’s son was plainly false .
 The long and short of it is that there was no basis for the investigation that the President was pursuing and pushing— none . There was no reason for the President to pursue and push the President, says the author .
 President Trump simply wanted a political benefit from Ukraine’s announcement of this investigation and didn't care about the underlying conduct .
 The allegations against Vice President Biden were based on events that occurred in late 2015 and early 2016 .
 President Trump increased military support to Ukraine in 2017 and the next year, 2018 . They were all well publicized at the time, but as soon as President Trump took office, he increased support .
 Vice President Biden called for Shokin’s removal over 3 years ago . President Trump started pushing Ukraine to investigate that conduct .
 President Trump suddenly cared for his health in 2019 . The president's health care is expected to improve in the coming months .
 Vice President Biden announced he would run for President in 2020 . On April 25, he announced he'd run for president in 2020.
 President Trump pushed for the investigation in 2019 because that is when it would be valuable to him, he said .
 He pushed for it when it started to become clear that Vice President Biden could beat him . He had good reason to be concerned, and he was concerned .
 polling had consistently shown the former Vice President handily beating President Trump by significant margins in head-to-head matchups .
 The chart shows that from March to December, Biden had consistently led President Trump in national polls by significant margins .
 Vice President Biden is beating the President in the polls, even on FOX News . Biden has been on the winning side for more than a year .
 In April, Biden officially announces his candidacy, and that is when the President gets worried .
 President Zelensky's personal lawyer says he is planning to travel to Ukraine to urge newly elected President Zelenky to conduct the two investigations .
 The FOX News poll showed Biden beating Trump by 10 points . By July, right before President Trump’s call with President Zelensky, where he asked for the investigation into Biden.
 President Trump asks for an investigation in his political rival in the 2020 election . President Trump has not cared about what Vice President did, but does he ask for investigation .
 The investigation into the Bidens would be helpful to President Trump, according to the White House .
 The mere announcement of such an investigation would immediately tarnish the former Vice President’s reputation . Even if charges were never pursued, just the mere announcement would tarnish his reputation .
 If a foreign country announced a formal investigation into those allegations, it would give allegations against the Bidens an air of credibility . It could carry through the election.
 Biden called for the removal of Shokin for any illegitimate reason . Everyone knew that there was no merit to the allegation that he called for his removal .
 Biden asked for it because it was consistent with U.S. policy because Shokin was corrupt . It was with the backing of our allies, he said .
 Shokin has been in Ukraine for years . He was removed from the Ukraine government after the country's president was ousted . Shokin is a former member of the Ukrainian government .
 It wasn't until Biden began beating him in the polls that he called for the investigation .
 President Trump had the opportunity, and the means to commit this abuse of power, says CNN's John Sutter . President Trump has the motive, he says .
 President Trump wanted a second investigation that he wanted. Now, let's turn to the second investigation he wanted .
 A widely debunked January 23, 2020 conspiracy theory that Ukraine, rather than Russia,interfered in the 2016 U.S. election to benefit President Trump’s opponent .
 The allegation that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 elections has no basis in fact, says CNN's John Sutter . As we will explain, the allegation that Biden improperly removed the Ukraine prosecutor has absolutely no basis .
 The theory ignored unanimous conclusions of the U.S. intelligence agency, the congressional Intelligence Committees, and Special Counsel Mueller . In fact, this theory ignored the unanimous conclusions, he says .
 Senate Intelligence Committee report finds no evidence that Ukraine attacked our elections . No witness support the theory that Ukraine attacks our elections.
 Even President Trump's own advisers told him the claim was false, he said .
 Russia had everything to gain by deflecting the blame from its attack on Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Trump was actually suggesting Ukraine investigate. Let’s look at what he was actually saying .
 New theory says it was Ukraine that interfered in the election to help Hillary Clinton and hurt Donald Trump . Instead of listening to our entire intelligence community, the new theory says Russia interfered in our 2016 election .
 CrowdStrike, which had helped the DNC respond to Russia's cyber attack in 2016, moved a DNC server to Ukraine to prevent the FBI from examining it .
 President Trump said about this conspiracy theory during the July 25 call .
 Once again, if this sounds farfetched and crazy, it should be because it is, it is . Once again. If this soundsFarfetched andcrazy, it shouldn't be a problem .
 Russia did it to help Donald Trump and hurt Hillary Clinton, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Russia, not Ukraine,interfered in the 2016 elections, and Russia did.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an influence campaign in 2016 aimed at the U.S. Presidential election .
 Russia’s goals were to undermine public faith in the U.S. democratic process, denigrate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and potential Presidency . Russia's goal was to undermine the United States democratic process.
 Putin and the Russian Government developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump . We further assess January 23, 2020 Putin.
 The Committee found the Russian government tasked and supported the IRA’s interference in the 2016 U.S. election . The Committee also found that the Russians were tasked with supporting the IRA's interference .
 The Special Counsel’s investigation established that Russia interfered in the 2016 presidential election principally through two operations . The report was released on Tuesday .
 A Russia entity carried out a social media campaign that favored Donald J Trump and disparaged Hillary Clinton .
 Second, a Russian intelligence service conducted computer-intrusion operations against entities, employees, and volunteers working on the Clinton Campaign . Second, the service released stolen documents and then released them .
 President Trump's own FBI Director Christopher Wray said there is no evidence to support the theory that Ukraine interfered in our election in 2016 . Wray also said there was no evidence of Ukraine interference in 2016 election .
 We have no information that indicates that Ukraine interfered with the 2016 presidential election. We are not aware of any interference .
 There's all kinds of things out there, says CNN's John Sutter . "There's all kind of people saying all sorts of things," Sutter says .
 I think it’s important for the American people to be thoughtful consumers of information and to think about the sources of it and to consider what they hear .
 The U.S. is being well protected against malign foreign influence, says John Sutter . Sutter says the public is resilient and has appropriate media literacy .
 The President himself said he wanted the CrowdStrike portion of this whole conspiracy in the Ukraine investigated . "There’s no evidence to support that as far as you know," the President said .
 The FBI has no information that would indicate Ukraine tried to interfere in the 2016 presidential election . As I said, we have no—We have no evidence that Ukraine tried.
 There is no real dispute that Russia, not Ukraine, attacked our elections. So to be really clear, there is noreal dispute, it's clear . It's clear that there is not a real dispute over Ukraine's elections .
 There is no evidence to support his conspiracy theory; it is more dangerous than that . It is not just that there is no proof to support the conspiracy theory .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Russian intelligence services perpetuated this false, debunked conspiracy theory . The theory was debunked by the Internet .
There is no dispute among the intelligence community that Russia attacked our 2016 elections. Now remember, there was no dispute that Russia attacks our 2016 election .
 The Senate's own Intelligence Committee published a report telling us that as well as the Senate’s own report . The Intelligence Committee also published the report .
 President Trump even said that President Putin is the one who told him it was Ukraine who interfered in our elections .
 Russians are promoting to interfere, yet again, in our democratic process and deflect blame from their own attacks against us. In short, this is a theory that the Russians are trying to interfere with the democratic process .
 President Trump is helping them perpetuate this. But what is so dangerous is that he's helping them perpetrate this, says CNN .
 Our own President is helping our adversary attack our processes, all to help his own reelection. Our own president is helping his own President attack our process .
 Hill, an expert on these matters, explains it in more detail as to why this is very concerning . Hill: "It's very concerning"
 Some of you on the committee appear to believe that Russia and its security services did not conduct a campaign against our country . Ukraine did, but perhaps somehow, for some reason, Ukraine did .
 This is a fictional narrative that is being perpetrated and propagated by the Russian security services themselves . The narrative is being perpetuated by the security services, says the author .
 Russia was the foreign power that systematically attacked our democratic institutions in 2016 . The unfortunate truth is that Russia was a foreign power.
 This is the public conclusion of our intelligence agencies, confirmed in bipartisan and congressional reports . This is a public conclusion, says the intelligence agency .
 Some of the underlying details must remain classified . It is beyond dispute, even if some of the details must be classified .
The impact of the successful 2016 Russian campaign remains evident today . The impact of this year's election campaign is still evident today.
 Our highly professional, expert career Foreign Service is being undermined, says the Foreign Service . The Foreign Service's highly professional career has been undermined .
 United States support for Ukraine which continues to face armed Russian aggression is being politicized . U.S. support for the Ukraine has been politicized, according to the United States .
 The Russian Government's goal is to weaken our country, to diminish America’s global role, and to neutralize a perceived U.S. threat to Russian interests . The Russian government is trying to weaken America's global role.
 President Trump continued to promote this fake conspiracy theory just because it would be beneficial and helpful to his own reelection campaign . Despite the lack of any evidence to support this debunked conspiracy theory, President Trump continues to promote the fake conspiracy theories .
 Even President Trump’s own senior advisers told him these allegations were false .
 Tom Bossert, President Trump's former Homeland Security Advisor, stated publicly that the CrowdStrike theory had been debunked .
 retired former Senator Judd Gregg wrote a piece in The Hill magazine saying the three ways or the five ways to impeach oneself .
 The president's legal team is repeating that debunked theory to the president, he says . "I am deeply frustrated with what he and the legal team are doing," he adds .
 George: "For clarity here, George, let me just again repeat that it has no validity. And for clarity, George says it's no validity"
 A server inside the DNC was not relevant to our determination to the attribution. So a server in the DNC wasn't relevant to this determination to our decision .
 The DNC hack has nothing to do with the U.S. government’s attribution of Russia to the DNC hack .
 McMaster spent a lot of time refuting the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory to President Trump .
 Hill testified that Russia's interference in U.S. election was to deflect from Russia's systematic interference in our election . Hill said Russia has succeeded beyond his wildest dreams .
 The alternative narrative of Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election has now been picked up by the President’s defenders and the conservative media .
 It has muddied the waters regarding Russia’s own interference in our elections, as we have learned this week . Russia hacked Burisma, which is a Russian-owned company .
 Putin's own words. S498 S498 . S498 If there were any doubt about how President Putin feels about the President’s conduct .
 Nobody is accusing us anymore of interfering in U.S. elections. Thank God nobody is accused of interfering with elections .
 President Trump knew there was no factual basis for the theory that it was Ukraine that interfered in the 2016 election . He still wanted President Zelensky to pursue the investigation .
 Putin and Russia stood to gain by promoting this conspiracy theory about Ukraine, so did Donald Trump . Trump.
 An announcement of an investigation by Ukraine would have breathed new life into a debunked conspiracy theory that Ukrainian election interference was there in 2016 . It lent it great credibility.
 It would have cast doubt on the conclusions of the Intelligence Committee and Special Counsel Mueller that Russia interfered in the 2016 election to help Trump .
 Donald Trump was only elected because of the help he received from President Putin . It would have helped eliminate a perceived threat to the legitimacy of Donald Trump's Presidency .
 Mr Chief Justice, I am going to recommend that we take a 15-minute break at this point .
 A few of the points that she made, in listening to her presentation, leapt out at me in a way they hadn’t leapt at me before . Iam going to pick up where my colleague from Texas left off, but I want to begin by underscoring a few of
 Joe Biden went over political investigations to undermine someone he was deeply concerned about, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Biden's motive was to undermine a person he was concerned about .
 The House managers take no position in the Democratic primary for President. This is an appropriate point for me to make the disclaimer that the House managers took no position.
 I CONGRESSIONAL RECORD: SENATE don't want to lose a single more vote than necessary . I CON GRAPHIC RECORD — SENATE doesn’t want to lost a one more vote. I CONGESSIONal RECORD.
Donald Trump allowed aid to go to Ukraine without complaint or issue in 2017 or 2018 . But polls do show the powerful motive that Donald Trump had, a motive that he didn’t have .
Joe Biden took a sudden interest in Ukraine and Ukraine funding and the withholding of that aid . It was only when he had a growing concern with Joe Biden’s candidacy that he took the interest .
 I also want to underscore what the President said in that July 25 call. I also wants to underscore the President's comments .
 The server was whisked away to Ukraine and hidden there so investigators and the FBI couldn’t look at this server . The server is believed to have been hacked by Ukraine .
 Donald Trump was raising questions with President Zelensky about his relationship with the president . Trump was talking about his meeting with Zelenski .
 We are not talking about generic interference. But it is important to point out that we are not discussing generic interference . We should not be talking about Generic interference.
 Some of my colleagues in the House have equated it with systematic interference of the Russians . We are not talking about it, as we heard from some of their colleagues .
 The President is talking about a very specific conspiracy theory going to the server itself, meaning that it was Ukraine that hacked the Democratic server, not the Russians .
Donald Trump wanted to investigate or announce this completely bogus, Kremlin-pushed conspiracy theory . At least, that is what Donald Trump wanted .
 Former homeland security adviser for President Tom Bossert talks about how completely debunked and crazy this conspiracy theory is .
 Rudy Giuliani admitted that he was glib, but made a point about the three or five ways to impeach himself . The third way was to hire Rudy Giuliani, he said .
 Rudy Giuliani is not some Svengali here who has the President January 23, 2020 under his control, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The President just couldn’t shake himself of what he was hearing from Rudy Giuliani, he said .
 Rudy Giuliani is not led by the nose by President Trump, says Rudy Giuliani . Giuliani is a former New York City mayor .
 If he is willing to listen to his own lawyer over his own intelligence agencies, his own advisers, then you can imagine what a danger that presents to this country . If he's willing toListen to his personal lawyer over himself, then he can be a danger to this nation.
President Obama is the President of the United States . President Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 The President of the U.S. is the President of America .
 The President of the U.S. says it is a danger if it is patently false and it is promulgated by the Russians . It is one thing if someone off the streets says it.
 The President wanted the CrowdStrike portion of this whole conspiracy investigated, he wanted it investigated . There is no evidence to support this, says President Obama .
 The President of the United States believes this Russian propaganda against the advice of all of his advisers . It would be bad enough, of course, but it is worse than that .
 Russia withheld $400 million in military aid to a nation Russia was fighting, our ally. On the basis of this Russian propaganda, he withheld the money, he said .
 President Obama is withholding aid from a nation at war, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: He is not only pushing Russian propaganda, he is also withholding aid. He says it's not only misleading Americans about who interfered in the last election, but that he is doing the
 The Russians not only got him to deflect blame from their interference in our democracy, but they got he to withhold military aid . The Russians got him.
There was this convergence of interest between the Kremlin and the President . Now, of course, there was this converging of interest .
 The President wasn’t pushing Kremlin talking points just to do Vladimir Putin a favor .
 He was doing it because it helped him, because it helps him, and because it could get these talking points for him in his reelection campaign, he said . He said it was because it was helping him and because he could get this talking point for him .
 GARCIA’s presentation was just a couple of months ago . But nothing struck more from Representative GARCia's presentation than that quote from Vladimir Putin .
 Vladimir Putin has made a religious man out of Vladimir Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he doesn't think we really want Vladimir Putin to be thanking God for the President of the United States .
 We do not want them thanking God for our President and what he is pushing out . We don't want them to thank God for what he's pushing out.
 We don't want them thanking God for withholding money from our ally, although we can understand why they may . We don’t want them to thank God for withholding money from their ally .
 President Trump's scheme to get Ukraine to announce two political investigations that would help benefit his reelection campaign . The two investigations would help the President's reelection campaign.
 Just looking at how baseless and fabricated the allegations behind him were made plain his corrupt motive. And just looking at the allegations were made clear his corrupt motives .
 President Trump directed his scheme with corrupt intent, according to the White House . There are at least 10 other reasons we know that Trump directed the scheme .
 President Trump was interested in his own personal gain and not the national interest in pressing for these investigations . There are at least 10 other reasons we know that President Trump is interested in personal gain .
 The President only wanted these investigations to be announced publicly, not even conducted .
 The President's only interest in Ukraine was the ‘Big Stuff’ that mattered to himself, not issues affecting Ukraine or the United States .
 Rudy Giuliani's personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, was tasked to pursue investigations on his behalf, not government officials . Giuliani's lawyer was also tasked with pursuing investigations on behalf of the President . Rudy Giuliani is a former White House aide to Rudy Giuliani .
 Fourth, both before and after the July 25 call, were never part of U.S. official foreign policy .
 Other witnesses confirmed the investigations, in fact, diverged from official policy .
Ukrainian officials understood that the investigations were purely political in nature . Sixth, Ukrainian officials understood.
Multiple administration officials reported the President’s July 25 call .
 President Trump confirmed he wanted Ukraine to conduct investigations in his own words . President Trump also said Ukraine will be investigated in his words .
 President Trump did not care about anti-corruption efforts in Ukraine, according to reports .
 President Trump wanted these investigations done solely to help his personal political interests, not the national interest . He merely wanted a public announcement of the investigations, not an assurance that they would actually be done .
 If he wanted to assist Ukraine’s anti-corruption efforts, someone actually investigating the facts underlying the investigations would have been most important. If he was worried about the larger issues of corruption in Ukraine, he would have had been more important .
 He just wanted the political benefit of the public announcement of an investigation that he could use to damage his political opponent and boost his political standing .
 Ambassador Gordon Sondland, who was at the center of this scheme, made this quite clear in his testimony .
 Giuliani said that President Zelensky desperately wanted to have that Ukraine would have to initiate these two investigations . Giuliani said in order to get that White House meeting that he wanted to get it, he said .
 I never heard from Mr Goldman, anyone say that the investigations had to start or had to be completed . Anyone say that they had to begin or have to complete the investigations . Mr Goldman never said anything about the investigation .
 The only thing I heard from Mr Giuliani, or otherwise, was that they had to be announced in some form and that form kept changing .
 The other evidence gathered by the House's investigation confirms Ambassador Sondland’s understanding of the House investigation .
 The House received documents from Lev Parnas, an associate of Rudy Giuliani’s, in response to a subpoena . For example, the House got documents from an associate.
 Parnas apparently took some time in 2019, according to the documents . The documents are part of the documents that Parna turned over .
 A document appears to be a conspiracy writing down the object of the conspiracy . It is not every day that you get a document like this. Now, it is not all every day.
 President Trump directed a scheme to coerce Ukraine to announce an investigation of the Bidens . The Bidens' scheme ultimately was directed by President Trump, according to a report .
 President Trump made this clear himself in early September . Giuliani and Ambassadors Volker and Sondland had tried but failed to issue a public statement .
 Ambassador Sondland relayed to you that the White House meeting and security assistance were conditioned on the announcement of these investigations . President Trump was saying repeatedly that there is no quid pro quo .
 President Trump was asking for President Zelensky to very publicly commit to these investigations, says Ambassador Sondland . "This needed to be a very public statement," he says .
 The President only wanted a public announcement and not the investigations to actually be conducted . The President's desire for investigations was simply and solely to boost his reelection efforts .
 President Trump never expressed any interest in U.S. anti-corruption policy toward Ukraine, nor did he care about Ukraine's war against Russia .
Senior official at U.S. Embassy in Kyiv confirms testimony of David Holmes . Holmes is a senior official at the United States Embassy inKyiv . Holmes was the senior official in charge of the embassy in Ukraine .
 The day after the July 25 call, Holmes overheard a conversation between President Trump and Ambassador Sondland, who was in Kyiv .
 The only topic they discussed related to Ukraine was as to the investigations . The only topics they discussed were investigations .
 Ambassador Sondland's demeanor changed and understood he had been connected to President Trump . It appeared that he was being transferred through several layers of switchboards and assistants .
 While Ambassador Sondland's phone was not on speakerphone, I could hear the President’s voice through the ear piece of the phone .
 The President’s voice was loud and recognizable, and Ambassador Sondland held the phone away from his ear .
 Ambassador Sondland greeted the President and explained he was calling from Kyiv . He was called to greet the President .
 I heard President Trump then clarify that Ambassador Sondland was in Ukraine . I heard him say he was there .
 Ambassador Sondland confirmed to Holmes that the investigations were the President’s sole interest with Ukraine because they benefit the President .
 Ambassador Sondland remarked that the President was in a bad mood after the call ended . The President was often the case early in the morning .
 Ambassador Sondland asked for his candid impression of the President’s views on Ukraine . The President's views on the country were revealed in an interview .
 Ambassador Sondland asked if it was true that the President did not give a statement about Ukraine .
Ambassador Sondland agreed that the President did not give a about Ukraine . Ambassador Sondlands agreed that President didn't give a statement on Ukraine .
 I noted there was big stuff going on in Ukraine, like a war with Russia . I noted that there was a big thing going on, like the Ukraine war .
 Ambassador Sondland replied that he meant big stuff that benefits the President, like the Biden investigation .
 Ambassador Sondland is independently confirmed by President Trump’s own interactions with Ukraine . This understanding is independent of President Trump's own interactions.
President Trump did not refer to any anti-corruption efforts or the war against Russia . During his two telephone calls with President Zelensky, President Trump didn't refer to the war .
 If they were honest about it, they’d start a major investigation into Bidens .
 The only thing President Trump cared about with Ukraine was his investigations in order to benefit himself, he says .
 Presidential head-of-state calls are normally used for presidential calls . To see this even more starkly, it is helpful to remember what Presidential calls are usually used for .
 The disparity in power between the President of the United States and other heads of state is vast. Talk to any former occupant of the Oval Office .
 Presidents from both political parties have made good use of this disparity in power in their telephone calls with foreign leaders . Since World War II, presidents from both parties have used this disparity to make good use in their phone calls .
 The U.S. has used those calls to secure commitments that have bolstered American security and prosperity . They have used that calls to bolster American security, prosperity .
 President Reagan used his calls to our European allies to rally the world against the Soviet threat . President Reagan was our chief diplomat .
 His calls laid the foundation for landmark nonproliferation agreements that averted nuclear Armageddon . He called for the end of nuclear nuclear weapons .
 W Bush learned that Mikhail Gorbachev intended to resign as Soviet Premier, marking the end of the Soviet Union . W Bush also learned that he was planning to step down.
 Historians credit his deft diplomacy, including numerous one-on-one phone calls, for bringing about a peaceful end to the Cold War .
 President George W Bush used his calls with heads of state to rally global support for the U.S. campaign to defeat alQaida . The United States will work with our allies to protect and defend national security and combat terrorism .
 President Obama used his calls with foreign leaders to contain the fallout from the global economic crisis . Obama also used his call to assemble an international coalition to fight the Islamic State .
 No matter what you think of the policy views or priorities of these prior Presidents, there is no question that they are examples of the normal diplomacy that happens during Presidential telephone calls . When you are the President of the United States and you call a foreign leader, that you are on the clock
 A President’s first and only objective is to get foreign leaders to do what is in the best interest of the U.S.
 President Trump used a head-of-state call with the leader of Ukraine to help himself . He asked the leader to investigate the President's political opponent in order to help his reelection campaign .
 President Trump abused his authority as Commander in Chief and Chief Diplomat to benefit himself . He betrayed the interests of the American people when he did so, he said .
 The President put his interests first, according to CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the President's interests were first .
 Giuliani has never had an official role in this government but was at all times representing the President in his personal capacity . The third reason that the investigations were politically motivated is the central role played by Mr Giuliani .
 Zelensky is private counsel to President Donald J. Trump . He is the president's private counsel .
President Obama is a private citizen, not a President of the United States . President Obama has been in the U.S. since 2009 .
 The duties and privileges of a President and a private citizen are not the same under U.S. law . This is quite common under American law .
 The President is using his personal lawyer to ask January 23, 2020 Ukraine for investigations that aren’t ‘foreign policy’ but that will be very, very helpful to the President personally .
 Let’s go to the fourth reason that these investigations were never part of U.S. policy .
 President Trump used his personal lawyer as a personal lawyer . It was also that what he was asking for was never part of U.S. policy .
 Witnesses told us that President Trump’s investigations were not in his official, prepared talking points or briefing materials . Witnesses said they were not prepared to prepare talking points .
 To the contrary, they went against official policy and diverged from our national security interests, he says .
 President Trump demanded that President Zelensky investigate the Bidens . President Trump had completely departed from the talking points they had prepared for him . All three witnesses said he had left talking points he had prepared .
 He is not obligated to use his talking points, and he is not obliged to follow the recommendations of his staff no matter how sound they may be . He is also not obligated.
 It was not U.S. policy that he was conducting, it was his private, personal interests . It was his personal interests that he had been conducting .
 If it were U.S. policy, it would have been in the talking points and briefing materials . But, of course, it was not .
 Colonel Vindman is the National Security Council’s director for Ukraine . He is also the head of the Ukrainian government's national security council .
 They were reviewed and edited by multiple senior officers at the NSC and the White House . They were then reviewed by several senior officers.
 The U.S. National Security Council was not told either by the President or CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, says NUNES .
 The President has not said anything specific about 2016 and Ukraine, says the President .
 I’ve seen him say plenty of things publicly, but I was not given a directive . I've seen him saying lots of things public, but he didn't have a directive, he says .
 Ambassador Bolton gave a directive on July 10 to stay out of domestic politics .
 President Trump asked for investigations based on an official U.S. policy . He was not asking for them based on official United States policy, he said .
 His top official advisers had not even been told about these investigations . His top officials were not told about the investigations .
 President Trump ignored official U.S. policy and the talking points he was given . It was that what he was doing was actually contrary to and harmful to United States policy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine's President Zelensky wants to help Ukraine fight its adversary, Russia, in any way that we can . The goal should be to help President Zelenky’s anti-corruption reforms.
 President Trump’s own national defense strategy stated that the United States and its European allies ‘will deter Russian adventurism’ It was a clear reference to Russia's usurpation of Ukrainian territory and sovereignty .
Around 68,000 troops are stationed in Europe . We currently have approximately 68,00 troops stationed in the region .
 Roughly 10,000 U.S. troops are deployed on NATO’s eastern border with Russia . Poland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Bulgaria are among the countries deployed .
 The U.S. forces are holding the line against another land grab by Vladimir Putin .
 Russia brazenly and implausibly denies its actions and we have failed to impose sufficient costs . We have not imposed sufficient costs on Russia, we have not done enough to impose enough costs, we say .
 The Kremlin’s confidence is growing as its agents conduct their sustained campaigns to undermine our confidence in ourselves and in one another .
 We need to stand up to them, and that is why we support Ukraine, says David Cameron . "We need to help defeat Russian aggression," he says .
 President Zelensky spoke with President Trump on July 25 . He was hoping that he would discuss how we can support Ukraine in its fight against a huge adversary .
 President Zelensky was most worried about when he got on the line with the President on July 25, he says . He was worried about whether Ukraine could have confidence in the United States support .
 Nearly 7 percent of Ukraine’s territory had been annexed by Russian-backed forces . Nearly 7% of Ukraine's territory was annexed by Russia .
 More than 15,000 troops have been lost in the hot war over the past 5 years . More than 10,000 soldiers have been killed in the war over five years .
 President Zelensky raised the issue of U.S. military aid needed to confront Russian aggression . President Trump did nothing to reassure the Ukrainian leader of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 President Trump’s investigations went against official U.S. policy. It is for these reasons that President Trump's investigations go against official United States policy .
 Witnesses confirmed that President Trump’s requests actually diverged from our own national security policy .
 President Trump did this to advance his reelection, not to advance U.S. national security goals, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: President Trump's political errand and national security diverged . He says he did it for no good reason but the political one .
 The President attacks another of the United States strengths, that of our ideals and our values, says President Obama .
 It is a fundamental American value underlying our democracy that we do not use official powers to ask for investigations of our political opponents to gain a political advantage . It's a fundamental U.S. value that we don't use official power to investigate opponents .
 President Trump asked a foreign leader to investigate his political opponent . President Trump abused the broad authority provided to the President of the United States .
 Vice President PENCE's adviser, Jennifer Williams, was concerned by the President's focus on domestic political issues rather than U.S. national security .
 During my closeddoor deposition, members of the committee asked about my personal views, and whether S502 I had any concerns about the call .
 The July 25th phone call was unusual because it involved discussion of what appeared to be a domestic political matter . It was unusual, in contrast to other Presidential calls, he said .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman also thought the call was improper and unrelated to the talking points he had drafted for the President .
 It is improper for the President to demand that a foreign government investigate a U.S. citizen, and a political opponent . It is also clear that if Ukraine pursued an investigation into the 2016 elections, the Bidens and Burisma, would be interpreted as a partisan play .
 Ukraine would use bipartisan support, undermining U.S. national security, and advancing Russia’s strategic objectives in the region . This would undoubtedly result in Ukraine using bipartisan support .
 It is improper for the President of the United States to demand a foreign government to investigate a U.S. citizen and a political opponent .
 Colonel Vindman was so concerned that he warned Ukraine not to get involved in our domestic politics .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman grew concerned by the pressure campaign he witnessed in the media . In May, he grew concerned about Rudy Giuliani's pressure campaign .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman warned President Zelensky to stay out of U.S. politics . The Ukrainian president met with President Zelenky on May 20 .
 To be particularly cautious with regards to Ukraine, the U.S. has been particularly cautious in regards to Russia . The second one was to stay out of United States domestic policy .
There were actors in the U.S., public actors, nongovernmental actors that were promoting the idea of investigations and 2016 Ukrainian interference, chairman says . Chairman: "There were public actors" in the United States.
 U.S. policy to advise any country, any country in the world, to not participate in domestic politics, he says . "It was consistent with United States policy," he adds .
 George Kent testified that the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD had nothing to do with American anticorruption efforts in Ukraine . Kent said that if we do ask countries to do our political errands, it entirely threatens our credibility as a democracy .
 You also testified on October 15th, in the deposition, about fundamental reforms necessary for Ukraine to fight corruption and to transform the country .
 U.S. foreign policy has been predicated on advancing principled interests in democratic values, says Kent . Kent: Freedom of speech, press, assembly, religion; free, fair, and open elections .
 I believe it makes it more difficult for our diplomatic representatives overseas to carry out those policy goals, yes . I believe that makes it harder for our diplomats overseas to do so .
 U.S. diplomats hear diplomats on the ground saying one thing, and they hear other leaders saying something else . They hear other United States leaders.
 Ukraine is one of the country's greatest adversaries, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama: "What was in the best interest of our country was to help Ukraine, to help them"
 President Trump put himself above the best interests of our country, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: When what is best for the country and what was best for Donald Trump diverged, President Trump's actions were diverged .
 President Barack Obama put himself first in the White House . Obama's first inauguration was inaugural ceremony in 2009 .
 The Department of Justice disclaimed any knowledge or involvement in the President's political investigations . President Trump told President Zelensky that he should speak to Giuliani and Attorney General Barr .
 Department of Justice statement from the day the July 25 call was reJanuary 23, 2020 leased says this . The Department of justice statement says this.
 The President has not spoken with the Attorney General about having Ukraine investigate anything relating to former Vice President Biden or his son .
 The President has not asked the Attorney General to contact Ukraine on this or any other matter . The Attorney General has not been asked to contact the President .
 The Attorney General has not communicated with Ukraine on this or any other subject . He has not been in contact with Ukraine.
 The Attorney General has not discussed this matter, or anything relating to Ukraine .
 Attorney General says he never looked to pursue something he thought was not in the President's interest .
 I suspect the Attorney General can recognize a drug deal when he sees it, too, and he wanted nothing to do with this . I suspect he can recognize the drug deal, too .
 If this were some legitimate investigation, you would think the Department of Justice would have a role. Now, if this were a legitimate investigation.
 An international investigation with an international component would work, but this wasn't the case .
 The simple answer is that, as we see so clearly, they were against U.S. official policy and national security . The simple answers are that they were not against United States official policy .
 The Justice Department wanted nothing to do with it, and by asking for these investigations, the President was abusing his power . The President was abused his power, the Justice Department says .
 President Trump put himself first in the White House . The president has a history of putting himself first . He has a long history of being first .
 It wasn't just that these witnesses told us about this being wrong. It wasn’t just that they told us what these witnesses said . It was just that the witnesses told them about this was wrong .
 The President's conduct is not just that they came forward later, it is not that they come forward later . They came forward in realtime to report the President’s conduct .
 Tim Morrison, former Republican staffer, and Colonel Vindman were sufficiently concerned by what they heard President Trump solicit . They immediately went to speak to the lawyer, John Hisenberg, the NSC Legal Advisor .
 NSC legal advisor, John Eisenberg, testified that he alerted the NSC's legal advisor . Mr Morrison, shortly after you heard the July 25th call, you testified that you alerted him .
Mr. Hisenberg indicated in his opening statement, or at least from his deposition, that he went to Mr Hisenberg out of concern over the potential political fallout .
 Mr Morrison clearly recognized that the request to investigate Biden and Burisma was about U.S. domestic politics and not national security .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman reported his concerns to the White House counsel . He reported the concerns to White House.
 John Eisenberg said that he took notes while he was talking, and he would look into it . He said he will look into the notes .
Following a postmeeting meeting, I had a short conversation, following the meeting, in the Ward Room . The meeting was held in a Ward Room in New York .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman reported concerns twice, and Mr Morrison did so multiple times as well . In fact, Mr Morrison reported concerns.
 Mr Kent reported his concerns about the State Department’s failure to respond to the House's document request . Mr Kent said he was concerned about the Department of State Department.
 The President’s demand for poCONGRESSIONAL RECORD was improper, inappropriate, and wrong, according to the President's demand . The request was not about anything except Donald Trump's political gains .
 President Trump put himself first in the White House . The president has been in charge of the National Security Council since 2009 .
 American officials weren’t the only ones who recognized the political nature of these requests .
 This was against our national interests. That brings us the seventh reason we know that this was against the national interests . This is not the first time this has happened .
 Ukrainian officials expressed concern that corrupt investigations would drag them into U.S. domestic politics . Ukrainian officials themselves expressed concern about corruption in the United States .
 President Zelensky's reluctance to become a pawn in U.S. politics . Ambassador Taylor texted Sondland and Taylor in mid-July, and explained the president’s reluctance.
 Sasha Danyliuk is one of the top advisers to President Zelensky . He says his President wants to be taken seriously .
 A foreign leader has to communicate to this country that they want him to take him seriously and not just as some kind of political pawn for political purposes . It is pretty extraordinary when a foreign leader must communicate with this country .
 Americans didn't want to be used as a pawn. They understood this wasn’t American policy, as much as we do .
 If it looked like they were getting involved with the other side, it would hurt their support with the President, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There was no benefit to Ukraine by this, but they also didn’t want to be viewed as a pawn . Ukraine was also not interested in being viewed as pawn .
 Vladimir Putin needs to be taken seriously, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: If the U.S. isn't going to take him seriously, you can darn well bet Vladimir Putin will not take him serious .
 President Zelensky is accused of being a pawn in a rift with the U.S. President .
 Ukrainian officials understood that this was just wrong. In other words, Ukraine officials understood, just as our officials understood .
 Morrison goes on to say that he is no legal expert and can't really opine on the legality of what happened on this call . But they all knew it was wrong, he says .
 Ukrainians who understood this was a pure political errand they were being asked to perform . It was the Ukrainians who also understood it was apure political Errand .
 There is no serious dispute that the White House tried to bury the call record, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the president put himself first .
 President Trump has repeatedly insisted that his July conversation with President Zelensky “was perfect’’ The White House apparently believed otherwise .
 Following a head-of-state call, the President issues a summary or readout to lock in any commitments made by the foreign leader .
 The White House instead provided reporters with a short, incomplete summary that omitted major elements of the conversation . The president's White House also gave reporters an incomplete summary .
 President Donald J Trump spoke by telephone with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine to congratulate him on his recent election .
 President Trump and President Zelenskyy discussed ways to strengthen the relationship between the U.S. and Ukraine . The two discussed energy and economic cooperation .
 Both leaders also expressed that they look forward to the opportunity to meet . Both leaders said they hope to meet in the future .
 "I don't know about you, but that does not seem like an accurate summary of that call. Now, I don’t know about me, but it does not appear like a accurate summary," says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Trump's mention of a debunked conspiracy theory about the 2016 election did not mention a debunked theory .
 The summary did not mention President Trump’s demand that Ukraine announce an investigation into his domestic political rival, former Vice President Biden .
 The summary did not mention that President Trump praised a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor . Rudy Giuliani continues to feed false claims to the President through Rudy Giuliani .
 Sanitizing the call readout wasn’t the only step taken to cover up the President’s wrongdoing .
 The White House Counsel's office also took irregular efforts to hide the call record away on a secure server used to store highly classified information .
 It remained on the system until at least the third week of September 2019 . However, mistake or no mistake, it remained on that system until September 2019.
 This was a corrupt action and it was hidden, and they knew it was, and that is why they hid it. This was an act of corruption, and this is why it was hid, says the author . This was the corrupt action that was hidden.
 President Trump put himself first in the White House . The president has a history of putting himself first . He has a long history of being first.
 President Trump confirmed his desire for these investigations in his statements to his agents . The clearest reason that we can tell that all that President Trump CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE cared about was the investigations. The most important reason is that the investigations were revealed to the American people
 President Trump spoke with Gordon Sondland, who was in Ukraine . The very day after he solicited foreign interference to help him cheat in the 2020 election, Trump spoke to Sondlands .
 President Zelensky doesn't want to be used as a pawn in U.S. politics . He feels he has no choice .
 The President asked about the President's phone call to the White House . President Barack Obama asked the President about the phone call .
 Sondland says he is going to do it, adding that Zelensky will do ‘anything you ask him to do, including, apparently, be his pawn. Sondlands says he will do it .
 Sondland didn't remember the details of his conversation with Holmes . He did not dispute Holmes’ recollection of it .
 Ambassador Sondland had an interesting take on it, which you should hear .
 President Trump had not mentioned investigations, particularly given what we are hearing from Mr Giuliani about the President’s concerns .
 "We are all in the loop here. Yeah, frankly, I would have been surprised if it was something different," he says .
 Everybody understood what this President wanted, and apparently everybody also understood just how wrong it was, and how damaging it was . It was just how badly it was.
 President Trump's scheme was in danger of becoming publicly exposed, he said . In September 2019, he would not give up, even after President Trump learned that his scheme would be exposed .
 Ukraine is expected to announce investigations into Joe Biden and his alleged Ukrainian interference in 2016 . He still expected Ukraine to announce its investigations into Biden and Ukraine .
 The President's primary object is helping his reelection campaign, he says . He says it's helping his campaign to cheat in the reelection campaign .
 The Russian interference in our election was at it again, unrepentant and undeterred. After all that we have been through and after all that, we went through with the Russian interference, and all that cost, he was atit again .
Russian-hacked materials were used in the last election, and unconstrained . If anything, he was emboldened by escaping accountability from his invitation and willful use of Russian-hacking materials .
 President feels that under article II he can do whatever he wants, and that includes coercing an ally to help him cheat in an election . This is a President who truly feels thatunder article II. This is the President who really feels that he can does whatever he want.
 A remedy in which the President can cheat is no remedy at all, which is why we are here . A remedy is not a remedy, says the President .
 President has argued that his corrupt conduct in soliciting sham investigations from Ukraine was driven by his concerns about corruption in Ukraine .
 Trump's attempt to legitimize his efforts is simply not credible and not the least bit believable given the mountain of evidence in the record of President Trump's corrupt intent .
 There is no evidence that President Trump cared one whit about anti-corruption efforts at all .
 President Trump's own public statements make clear that he is only talking about alleged corruption in Ukraine . The President's own political interests, specifically two investigations, would benefit his reelection .
 President Trump emphasized his understanding of corruption to relate to the Biden investigation . He said he doesn't want to be a pawn at U.N. General Assembly .
 Biden’s son walks away with millions of dollars from Ukraine, and he knows nothing, and they’re paying him millions. Now, when Biden's son walked away, that's corruption, says Biden .
 President Zelensky says he doesn't want to be a pawn in American politics . He says the man who doesn't wants to be pulled into American politics is not a pawn .
 The President is trying to draw his nation in, even while they have a war to fight . In January 23, 2020 there is the President at it again .
 There was a lot of corruption having to do with the 2016 election against us. But there was a a lot todo with the election against them .
 We want to get to the bottom of it, and it’s very important that we do, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's very important we do. And we want toget to theBottom of it"
 This is, of course, again, bringing up the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory . This is the latest in a long line of conspiracy theories .
 He is not concerned about actual corruption cases, only about matters that affect him personally . He says he is not worried about actual cases, but about matters in his life .
 President Trump tried to link corruption with the Biden investigation . Two days later, President Trump again tried to connect corruption with Biden investigation.
 The only thing that matters is the transcript of the actual conversation that I had with the President of Ukraine .
In 1999, there was a corruption act or a corruption bill passed between both countries . In 1999, the bill was passed between the two countries, and signed .
 The President equated corruption with actions by others to hurt him politically . Just 2 days after that, the President again equates corruption with others to hurting him politically.
 If we feel there’s corruption, like I feel there was in the 2016 campaign, there was tremendous corruption against me, he says . We have a right to go to a foreign country, he adds .
 The President is pushing out the Kremlin talking points of Ukrainian interference in 2016 and the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory .
 President Trump is talking about perceived efforts by political opponents to hurt him . He is also speaking about perceived attempts to hurt the president .
 It is personal, and it is political, but it is not anti-corruption policy . It's personal and political. It is not political . It is political .
 Fighting corruption in Ukraine, when used by President Trump and Giuliani, refers to the investigation of the Bidens in 2016 .
 Others saw the idea of investigating possible corruption involving Burisma as equivalent to investigating former Vice President Biden . In hindsight, I now understand that others saw it as a similar idea .
 The evidence, including the President’s own statements, makes clear that this is simply code for the specific investigations that President Trump wanted Ukraine to pursue .
 President's purported concerns about corruption in Ukraine make it all the more suspect . President’s timing of his purported concerns in Ukraine makes it more suspect.
 President Trump showed no interest in Ukraine before news of Vice President Biden's candidacy broke .
 He gave Ukraine hundreds of millions of dollars under a regime that lost power because of mounting concerns about corruption . He gave the Ukraine government hundreds of thousands of dollars .
 Zelensky runs against President Poroshenko in an underdog campaign against him . Poroshenko is viewed as corrupt, and Zelenski comes and runs against him.
 That Poroshenko’s government is corrupt, and he is running to clean it up, he says . Poroshenko's government is a corrupt government, he said .
 He succeeds because Ukrainians really want to clean up their government, he says . He succeeds as he succeeds because he wants to clean the government .
 President Trump had no problem giving money appropriated by Congress to Ukraine under the corrupt regime of Poroshenko . Corruption had existed during Poroshenko, according to President Trump .
 A reformer gets elected, devoted to fighting corruption, and suddenly there is a problem . But a reformer is elected, and there's a problem, he says .
 President Barack Obama's campaign was the central pillar of his campaign . President Obama was a key figure in the campaign .
 Marie Yovanovitch was and is a devoted fighter against corruption . No one disputes that she was and was a dedicated fighter against Corruption .
 The President is badmouthing this person fighting corruption, the President says . The President's July 25 call was a good call for the President .
 There was no problem supporting the former regime with corruption problems but problems supporting a reformer trying to clean it up . U.S. Ambassador who has devoted her life to this country.
 President Trump’s campaign welcomed Russian assistance in 2016 that President Trump, we are to believe, suddenly developed an interest in anti-corruption reforms in Ukraine . It wasn’t until 2019, after Biden emerged as a considerable opponent and after Special Counsel Mueller conS
 Defense Department said they were meeting all the benchmarks . Defense Department says they are meeting all benchmarks .
 This new administration, the reformer, was doing exactly what we wanted him to do, says Obama . Obama's new administration was doing what he wanted, he says .
 The President never raised the issue of corruption with the Ukrainians, the President never did .
 The word ‘corruption’ never crosses his lips, just the Bidens and CrowdStrike . Despite at the request of his staff, the word 'corruption' never crossed his lips .
 President Zelensky was supposed to bring up corruption when he first spoke to him on April 21 .
 Readout of congratulatory call actually said that he brought up corruption . Go back and check, but I think the readout of that congratulation call was actually a joke .
 President Zelensky doesn't bring it up, but you know the readout says that he did . In the congratulatory call to President Zelenky, he doesn’t bring up.
 The readout for the second call was far more misleading because there was more to mislead about than the first call .
 President was concerned about Ukraine, according to the Bidens . We are to believe that, apart from Bidens, this is what our President was worried about .
 Those were the recommended talking points that were cleared through the NSC staff for the President, yes. Those were those that were approved by the President .
 President Trump also did not mention the word ‘‘corruption’ on the July 25 call .
 The good work of my staff. Well, actually, that slide is what I was referring to earlier . Well, it's what I'm referring to.
 President Donald Trump spoke to President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky to congratulate him on his victory in Ukraine’s S506 April 21 election .
 The President wished him success and called the election an important moment in Ukraine’s history . He noted the peaceful and democratic manner of the electoral process .
 President Trump underscored the unwavering support of the U.S. for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . He expressed his commitment to work together with President-elect Zelensky and the Ukrainian people to implement reforms .
 President Trump had the ear of President Zelensky during the April 21 and July 25 calls . He did not raise the word 'corruption' a single time .
 White House officials made clear to President Trump that President Zelensky was anti-corruption . President Trump should help him fight corruption, they said .
 The Defense Department and State Department certified that Ukraine satisfied all anti-corruption benchmarks before President Trump froze the aid . President Trump has frozen the aid to Ukraine .
 It establishes clearly that President Trump did not care about corruption . It establishes clear that he didn't care about Corruption .
 In fact, it was inconsistent with and diverged from American national security and American values .
 He has made it clear he didn't care about corruption; he cared only about himself . He has also said he didn’t care about the corruption he was involved in .
 It's up to us to do something about it, to make sure that a President cannot pursue an objective that places himself above our country . Now it is up to our President to dosomething about it .
 Those sham investigations were to advance his personal political interests, not the national interests of America, he says . "Those sham investigations are to advance my political interests," he adds .
 Let’s drill down on the how the President abused the power of his office and executed his corrupt scheme. Let's drill down.
 The original abuse was President Trump’s solicitation of election interference from a foreign country — Ukraine .
 He tried to get an announcement of investigations designed to help him in the 2020 Presidential election . So let’s start there.
 President Trump’s corrupt demands of President Zelensky in the July 25 phone call were not just a spontaneous outburst . They were a dramatic crescendo in a monthslong scheme to extort Ukraine into assisting his 2020 reelection campaign .
 President Trump also delegated his authority to his political agent, Rudy Giuliani, to oversee and direct the Ukraine investigation .
 Mr Giuliani and his associates discussed the investigations with the then current and former prosecutor generals of Ukraine .
 The fear was that President-elect Zelensky would replace the corrupt prosecutor Giuliani had been dealing with .
 President Trump removed Ambassador Yovanovitch because his agents believed she was another roadblock to the corrupt scheme they were undertaking on his behalf .
 President Trump directed a team of handpicked political appointees who were supposed to work in the public interest . In her place, the appointees worked with Giuliani to advance the President's personal interests .
 President Zelensky resisted Mr Giuliani's overtures. But even with Ambassador Yovanovitch gone, President Zelenky still resisted him .
 Giuliani ratcheted up public pressure on Ukraine to announce the investigations . At the President's direction, at the President’s direction, throughout May and June, Giuliani ratchetted up pressure .
 President Trump used the Oval Office meeting to pressure Ukraine to get the deal done . It was only then that Mr Giuliani could not get a deal done, and he turned to the White House .
 Giuliani assumed leadership role in scheme that applied pressure on Ukraine to announce investigations helpful to the President’s political interest .
 The evidence shows Mr Giuliani and President Trump were in constant contact in this time period .
Both U.S. and Ukrainian officials knew Mr Giuliani was the key to Ukraine . Both U. S. and Ukraine officials knew he was key to the country .
 No one disputes that Mr Giuliani was and is President Trump’s personal lawyer .
 President Trump at all times directed and knew about Mr Giuliani’s actions. Second, he knew about his actions .
 Mr Giuliani wrote to President-elect Zelensky on May 10, 2019 .
 Rudy Giuliani made it clear that it was in his role as the President’s counsel . Giuliani is not a government official .
 Mr Giuliani didn't just tell a foreign leader that; he also told the press .
 Giuliani said his trip was to pressure Ukraine to initiate investigations into false allegations against the Bidens and the 2016 election .
 President Trump repeatedly admitted knowledge of Mr Giuliani’s activities and to coordinating with him about Ukrainian activities .
 Trump said he didn’t know much about Giuliani’s planned trip to Ukraine, but wanted to speak to him about it .
 President Trump knew and directed Mr Giuliani’s activities in May 2019 when he planned his visit to Kyiv .
 Even as President Trump faced impeachment, he was coordinating with his personal attorney on the Ukraine scheme .
 The evidence also shows that Mr Giuliani and the President were in frequent contact .
 During the investigation and in response to a lawful subpoena, the House got call records . The House received call records during the investigation .
 The White House, Giuliani and other people involved in the President’s scheme. They show contacts, not content, between Giuliani, the White House and others .
 Rudy Giuliani learned President Trump had decided to fire Ambassador Yovanovitch on April 23 .
On that day, Giuliani had an 8minute-and-28-second call with a White House number .
 For example, he had one 8-minute-42second call with a White House number .
 White House call lasted 3 minutes and 15 seconds, with White House . An hour and a half later, he had another call, with the White House.
 Rudy Giuliani remained in close contact with the White House after the disclosure of his planned trip to Ukraine in mid-2019 . Giuliani is expected to make the trip in the mid- 2019 .
 Giuliani and the President's own statements about his role as President Trump’s personal agent advancing the Ukraine scheme .
We know from their comments and documentary evidence about the frequency of their contact . We know from the comments and the documentary evidence. We know about their comments.
 Mr Giuliani's contact with Mr Giuliani was significant, but it wasn't just the frequency of Mr Giuliani’s contact that is significant .
 President Trump directed U.S. officials to work with his personal agent, who was pursuing investigations not at all related to foreign policy . The agent was not interested in foreign policy.
 United States officials, including the President's own National Security Advisor, knew there was no getting around Rudy Giuliani when it came to Ukraine .
 Witnesses repeatedly testified to the constant presence of Rudy Giuliani on TV and in the newspapers . Witnesses repeatedly testify to the presence of Giuliani on television and in newspapers .
Ambassador Bolton issued guidance for the National Security Council staff to not engage with Rudy Giuliani . Hill testified that Ambassador Bolton issued the guidance to the council's staff .
 Mr Giuliani was not conducting official U.S. foreign policy. He was doing a domestic political errand for President Trump .
 Rudy Giuliani’s role in Ukraine policy is yet another topic that Ambassador Bolton could speak to .
Several other administration officials confirmed Mr Giuliani’s central role in the administration .
 Giuliani was seen as the key to changing the President's mind on Ukraine . It was apparent to everyone that the key was Giuliani .
 The President ordered U.S. diplomats to ‘talk to Rudy’ about Ukraine, the scheme got worse .
 The evidence shows that Ukrainian officials also came to recognize the important role of Mr Giuliani . The evidence also shows that Ukraine officials also recognized Mr Giuliani's role .
 On July 10, 2019, Andriy Yermak, the top aide to President Zelensky, sent a text to Ambassador Volker about Rudy Giuliani .
 I feel that the key for many things is Rudi and I'm ready to talk with him at any time . I'm looking forward to seeing Rudi again, and I'll be ready to speak with him. I'm happy to see him again, I feel
 The President used his personal agent to conduct his scheme with Ukraine . So the President's personal agent conducted his scheme for Ukraine .
White House officials and Ukrainian officials had no choice but to deal with Giuliani . Everyone, including Ukrainian officials, knew there was no choice.
 Giuliani's focus was to get investigations into President Trump's political rival to help the President's reelection .
 Let’s just line up briefly because it makes the story so clear . We have walked through some of the timeline of Mr Giuliani's actions .
 At the time of Biden’s announcement and for months after, public polling showed that Biden would beat Trump .
 Mr Giuliani tweeted on June 21 and urged President Zelensky to pursue the investigation .
 Mr Giuliani has tweeted about Joe Biden over 65 times since September . President Trump told you himself .
 He has made this clear to U.S. officials and to Ukrainians, he has made it clear to United States officials .
 The evidence shows President Trump and Rudy Giuliani were in constant contact during this period .
 Rudy and his associates pressed Ukraine for investigations into the President’s political rival .
In late 2018 and early 2019, Rudy Giuliani and his associates Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman were busy soliciting information from corrupt Ukrainians to help President Trump .
 In late 2018 and early 2019, Parnas, Fruman, and Giuliani met with two corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors, Yuriy Lutsenko and Viktor Shokin, to gather information they believed would help Trump .
 Vice President Biden had urged his removal of Shokin . Shokin was corrupt, Biden had said .
 Shokin blamed the former Vice President for his dismissal by the Ukrainian Parliament . Shokin blames the former vice president for the dismissal of him .
 Giuliani wanted to revive his political fortunes in Ukraine by assisting with Giuliani’s effort . He wanted to help with Giuliani's effort by assisting in Ukraine .
 At the end of January, Giuliani, Parnas, and Fruman participated in a conference call .
 Shokin falsely claimed that Ambassador Yovanovitch had improperly denied him a United States visa and that she was close to Vice President Biden . Shokin also falsely claimed to have been close to VP Biden .
 Lutsenko held a grudge against Ambassador Yovanovitch because she and the broader State Department were critical of her failures .
 Lutsenko gave Giuliani and his associates false information on Biden and Burisma . This was the motivation for Lutenko to give Giuliani and associates false info on Biden .
 Lutsenko and Shokin had grudges against Biden and Ambassador Yovanovitch . The pair had been in a row over the past few months .
 Because they were implementing U.S. policy to fight corruption in Ukraine, they were trying to stop corruption in the country .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch and anyone else who got in the way of their efforts to smear Biden. They had motive to remove Ambassador Yovovitch or anyone else.
 Lutsenko wanted Yovanovitch removed from her post in Kyiv . Parnas recently gave to Congress in exchange for derogatory information about Biden .
 ‘B’ could either be Biden or Burisma or both, but ‘Madam’ is Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 In the March 22 text, Lutsenko implied that if Parnas wanted dirt on Biden, he needed to do something about Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 Parnas assured Lutsenko that his efforts were being recognized in the United States and that he would be rewarded . Days later, on March 28, Parna assured Lutenko that he was being recognized .
 I was asked to personally convey to you that America supports you and will not let you be harmed no matter how things look now. I was told that America support you and that America will not be harmed .
 People are talking about you as a true Ukrainian hero. Just so you know, here people are talking.
 Lutsenko was providing derogatory information on the Bidens in exchange for Parnas pushing for Ambassador Yovanovitch's removal .
 Yovanovitch entered a more public phase through a series of opinion pieces published in The Hill . Now, in late March and throughout April 2019, the smear campaign against the Bidens and against Ambassador CONGRESSIONAL RECORD .
 The public airing of these allegations was orchestrated by Giuliani, Parnas, and Lutsenko . The public aired the allegations were orchestrated by the trio .
 Parnas played an important role in getting derogatory information from Lutsenko and his deputy to John Solomon, who wrote the opinion pieces in The Hill .
 Vice President Biden's efforts in 2015 to remove Shokin were among those to remove him . Hunter Biden’s role as a Burisma board member was also removed . Three, Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election in favor of Hillary Clinton, four, the misappropriation and transfer of
 Mr Giuliani was very open about this, and here is a clip worth watching. Now, Mr Giuliani is very open.
 A group of people in the Ukraine that were working to help Hillary Clinton were colluding with the Clinton campaign, CNN's John Sutter says .
 It stems around the ambassador and the embassy, being used for political purposes . The ambassador and embassy are being used by the embassy for political reasons .
 I began getting some people that were coming forward and telling me about that . So I began to get some people coming forward. So I started getting some of them coming forward, telling me that .
 Burisma and Biden’s son is the son of Vice President Biden . Biden's son is Burisma's son .
 Giuliani got laughed at on FOX News for advancing the crowd source conspiracy theory . The clip shows that he had been trying to get derogatory information from the Ukrainians on behalf of his client, President Trump .
 I would suggest a dinner break at 6:30 for 30 minutes . I understand the presentations will continue for a while, and I'd suggest a meal break for a few minutes .
 Chief Justice Roberts, Senators, and the President's counsel for the President, at this point, everything was going to plan . Roberts: "Everything was going on to plan"
 Mr Giuliani was scheming with the corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors who were offering dirt on Biden that would help President Trump get reelected .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch has been accused of tarnishing her reputation . She was accused of making false and baseless claims that she had tarnished the ambassador's reputation .
 On April 21, President Zelensky won a landslide victory in Ukraine’s Presidential election . On January 23, 2020, he won the presidential election .
 United States officials unanimously testified that President Zelensky’s mandate to pursue reform would be good for our national security .
 As a reformer, he would be less amenable to announcing sham investigations . He would be more amenable.
 Zelensky would not want to get dragged into U.S. domestic politics . He would rather not be dragged into domestic politics.
 The election of a new Ukrainian President raised the concern that Lutsenko, with whom Giuliani had been plotting, would be replaced by a new prosecutor general .
 A new prosecutor general, especially one appointed in an anti-corruption regime, would likely be less willing to conduct sham investigations .
 Lutsenko pressed President Trump to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch, which would keep him happy . He pressed the President to remove the ambassador .
New Ukrainian leader's commitment to press the investigations . He tried to get a meeting with Zelensky to secure the new leader’s commitment .
 Parnas and Fruman were in Israel trying to arrange a meeting between Giuliani and the newly minted Ukrainian President Zelensky .
 I was going to say it would be difficult to hear, but I am sure you cannot hear it at all. Well, I'm sure you can't hear it, says the author .
 According to phone records, Parnas and Giuliani had a 1-minute-50-second call .
 Mr Giuliani placed three short phone calls to the White House after they hung up .
 Giuliani spoke with someone at the White House for 8 minutes and 28 seconds . Giuliani spoke to someone for eight minutes and eight seconds .
 Intelligence Committee did not know whether 8-minute-28-second call was from the White House .
 We have since received information from a telecom company that it was indeed the White House .
 Neither the White House nor Giuliani produced any information to Congress about what was discussed . The White House and Giuliani did not produce any information about what they discussed .
 The White House has refused to cooperate in any way, as you already know, to cooperate .
Phone records prove Giuliani was keeping President Trump informed about what was going on when he was trying to meet President Zelensky and get Ukraine to commit to investigations .
 President Trump removed Ambassador Yovanovitch from U.S. Embassy in New York .
 Following the call between Mr Giuliani and the White House on April 238, Parnas asked for an update .
 Lutsenko offered derogatory information about Hunter Biden . Her removal would no doubt please the corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch received two frantic phone calls from Ambassador Carol Perez on April 24 . The next day, the State Department received a frantic phone call .
Ambassador Yovanovitch got a frantic phone call to get on the next plane . Within hours of Mr Giuliani saying he prayed Ambassador Yovanovaitch would get fired, he got a call .
 Giuliani appeared on ‘Fox & Friends’ and promoted false conspiracy theories about Ukraine and Vice President Biden that were all part of this agreement .
 A lot of the dirty work was done digging up the information in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I think you’d get some interesting information about Joe Biden from Ukraine . I think it would be interesting to see him in Ukraine .
 A company he was on the board of for years may be one of the most crooked companies in CONGRESSIONAL RECORD . He was on a board of a company that may have been a crooked company .
 Biden bragged about the fact that he got the prosecutor general fired .
 Prosecutor general was investigating his son and then the investigation went south . The prosecutor general's son was investigated by his son .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch was never provided a justification for her removal . She was never given a reason for the removal .
 The manner and circumstances surrounding the Ambassador’s removal were unusual and raised questions of motive .
 Every witness who testified confirmed that there was no factual basis to the accusations Lutsenko lodged against Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 Under Secretary of State David Hale testified that Maria Yovanovitch was an outstanding Ambassador and should have been permitted to remain in Kyiv .
 President Trump's decision to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch undercut U.S. national security objectives in Ukraine . Several witnesses testified that President Trump’s decision was critical .
 Many of the key U.S. policies toward Ukraine were being implemented by the United States Embassy in Kyiv . Hill, for example, explained that many of the policies were being carried out by the U. S. Embassy .
 Hill labeled ‘a period of uncertainty’ as to how our government was going to execute U.S. policy . This created what Hill labelled ‘‘A period of uncertain’’ Hill said .
 President Trump removed Ambassador Yovanovitch because she was in the way . President Trump said she was "in the way"
 Former Vice President Biden wanted to undermine the Mueller investigation into Russian election interference . He also wanted to help him cheat in the 2020 election, he said .
 Rudy Giuliani admitted that he personally told President Trump about his concern that Ambassador Yovanovitch was an obstacle to securing Ukrainian cooperation on the two bogus investigations they solicited from Ukraine .
 Rudy Giuliani confirmed that S509 President Trump decided to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch based on the bogus claim that she was obstructing his scheme to secure Ukraine's cooperation .
 Giuliani and his agents worked with corrupt Ukrainians to get dirt on President Trump’s political opponent . Mr Giuliani worked on behalf of President Trump, the U.S. President .
 He texted about it with his agents, and he repeatedly called the White House . He repeatedly called his agents and repeatedly called White House.
 President Trump was willing to go to get his investigations. That is how far he was willing. That's how far President Trump would go.
 To smear a highly respected Foreign Service officer who had served this country unselfishly for his own selfish political interests is disgraceful . To smear the highly respected, dedicated Foreign Service Officer is disgracefully.
 President Zelensky's election victory threw a wrench into the President’s scheme . Ambassador Yovanovitch was removed from the President's scheme .
 Ukrainian officials publicly pushed back on suggestions of corruptions proposed by Giuliani . Giuliani was working on behalf of the U.S. President .
 Giuliani canceled his trip on May 10 and claimed on FOX News that President Zelensky was surrounded by 'enemies' of President Trump .
 I'm not going to go because I think I’m walking into a group of people that are enemies of the President. I am not going. I'm walking into the group. I think he’s walking into an enemies of President, he says .
 Giuliani's statement influenced President Trump’s view of Ukraine, as well as Ukraine .
 At an Oval Office meeting on May 23, U.S. officials learned of Giuliani's influence .
 Ambassador Volker testified that President Trump ‘didn’t believe’ the positive assessment government officials gave the new Ukrainian President .
 Giuliani and the President knew that they were going to have S510 trouble with President Zelensky . The President wanted investigations that would benefit President Trump's reelection campaign .
President Trump doubled down on his scheme to solicit investigations for his personal benefit . The Ukrainian election yielded an anti-corruption reformer, but the results were unexpected .
 President Trump enlisted U.S. officials to help to do his political work in Ukraine . Ambassador Yovanovitch was removed in May of 2019 .
 The scheme grew from false allegations by disgruntled, corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors to a plot by the President of the United States to extort the new Ukrainian President into announcing his political investigations .
 President Trump directed Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and Secretary Perry to work with Mr Giuliani on Ukraine . The meeting took place on May 23 .
 Giuliani had made clear he was pursuing investigations for President Trump in a personal capacity . Giuliani had previously said he was interested in the President's personal affairs .
 He said publicly that he was only working for the President in a personal capacity and not on foreign policy . He said on numerous occasions, he was working for him in his personal capacity .
 President Trump told White House officials that they had to work with Mr Giuliani to get anywhere on Ukraine . Yet President Trump still told officials that he still told them that they must work with him on the Ukraine .
 President's directive to talk with Rudy was not happy with the President’s directive. Let me say again, we weren’t happy with it, he says .
 The men and women of the State Department, not the President’s personal lawyer, should take responsibility for Ukraine matters, he says . I believe then, as I do now, that the men and woman of the state Department should be responsible for Ukraine .
 The President's direction was based on the President’s direction, we were faced with a choice . The president's direction, based on his direction, was the best choice .
We could abandon efforts to schedule the White House phone call and visit between Presidents Trump and Zelensky . We could do as President Trump had directed and talk with Rudy.
We chose the latter, not because we liked it, but because it was the only constructive path open to us . We chose the second, of course, because we chose it, because it's the onlyconstructive path open.
 U.S. officials charged with CONGRESSIONAL RECORD were directed to advance President Trump’s personal interests, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "We're supposed to act in our country's interest"
 From that point on, they worked with the President's personal agent on political investigations to benefit the President’s reelection .
 President Trump’s behalf to solicit foreign interference in our elections continued throughout all of June . Their work on President Trump's behalf continued throughout June .
 Giuliani tweeted on June 21 that President Zelensky had not yet publicly committed to two politically motivated investigations .
 Giuliani's public efforts and his tweets didn't move President Zelensky to announce investigations .
 Giuliani canceled his trip to Ukraine in May and commented that President-elect Zelensky had enemies of President Trump around him .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko will be removed as soon as the new Parliament convenes . His primary Ukraine connection had already been informed that he would be removed .
 President Trump gave him U.S. diplomats and directed them to work with Mr Giuliani on his scheme . So President Trump told them to help him work with him .
 President Trump told Ambassadors Sondland and Volker to talk with Rudy and work with Rudy on Ukraine .
 Giuliani tried to use Ambassador Sondland and Volker to gain access to President Zelensky and his inner circle through their official State Department channels .
 Ambassador Taylor had just arrived in Ukraine a few weeks beforehand . Ambassador Sondland brought Ambassador Taylor up to speed on Ukraine .
 Ambassador Sondland explained that President Zelensky needed to make clear that he was not standing in the way of the investigations that President Trump wanted .
 Ambassador Sondland said President Zelensky needed to make clear to President Trump that he was not standing in the way of investigations . The ambassador told him that Zelenski needed to be clear to Trump .
 Ambassador Taylor relayed this conversation to one of his deputies, U.S. Diplomat David Holmes . Holmes testified that he understood the investigations to mean the ‘‘Burisma-Biden investigations that Mr Giuliani and his associates had been speaking about’
 Mr Giuliani and his associates had been speaking about in the media since March . I understood that this meant the Biden/Burisma investigations that Mr Giuliani had been talking about since March. I understood this meant that this was the Biden-Burisma investigation .
 President Zelensky did not announce the investigations. Even with the addition of President Trump’s political appointees to aid Mr Giuliani's efforts, he did not announced the investigations .
Ukrainian President was resisting President Trump’s pressure, according to Giuliani .
 There is overwhelming and uncontradicted evidence of the President's scheme to solicit foreign interference in this year's Presidential election . Senators have covered a lot of ground, but as we have shown, there is overwhelming evidence of this.
 Some of his defenders say that the Democrats are only doing this to win the next election . Each time that we remind this body of the President’s scheme to cheat, to win, some say that we are only concerned about winning .
 The trial is much bigger than any one election, and it is much larger than any other election . But you know better because this trial is more important than any election, says CNN.
 Whether a maid or a janitor, whether a nurse, a teacher or a teacher, or a truck driver, this moment is about ensuring that their votes matter . American elections are decided by the American people .
 He abused the power of his office by ordering U.S. diplomats to work with his political agent to solicit two politically motivated investigations by Ukraine .
 The investigations were designed solely to help his personal interests, not our national interests . The investigations are designed to help him, not his national interests.
 Neither investigation had anything to do with promoting U.S. national security or promoting foreign policy .
 The President's scheme to secure Ukraine’s interference was a threat, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Both investigations and the President's broader scheme to protect Ukraine were a threat .
 The only person who stood to benefit from the abuse of office and solicitation of these investigations was Donald Trump . Trump is the 45th President of the United States .
President Trump chose himself to choose between the national interests of the country and his own personal interests . This was a violation of public trust and a failure to take care that the laws be faithfully executed .
 The President is now back in town. So, to be honest, I thought to myself, Well, well, I think to myself .
 The U.S. Constitution is the sanctity and continuity of the United States Constitution . The Constitution was created in 18th century .
 As House managers, we are here in this august body because we believe it is necessary to defend our democracy . House managers are in charge of the House of Representatives .
 We thank you for your courtesy and for your patience in extending our case with dignity to you and to the American people . Some of you may agree with us at the end of the day, and others most likely will not .
 President Trump used to corruptly abuse his power, he says . He withheld an official Oval Office meeting with the President of Ukraine . He also withheld a meeting with Ukraine's President .
 President Trump refused to schedule the Oval Office meeting until the Ukrainian leader announced the phony political investigations that he demanded on July 25 .
 President Zelensky needed the meeting to show Vladimir Putin that he had the support of Donald Trump, but President Trump exploited that desperation for his own political benefit .
Members of this committee often frame complicated issues in the form of a simple question . I know that members of the committee frequently frame these complicated issues.
 The White House has requested a White House call and the White House meeting . The answer is yes, according to the testimony .
 The phony political investigations that President Trump demanded from Ukraine were part of a scheme to sabotage a political rival, Joe Biden, and cheat in the 2020 election .
 The President used his awesome power to help himself and not the U.S. people .
 The President's defenders may argue that quid pro quo arrangements are a common aspect of U.S. foreign policy .
 There are situations where official U.S. acts are used to advance the national interests of the United States . There are cases where official United States acts, like head-of-state meetings or the provision of foreign assistance.
 President Trump sought to advance his own personal political interests, facilitated by Rudolph Giuliani, the human hand grenade . Giuliani was the man behind the grenade .
 President Trump withheld an official White House meeting, which was vitally important to Ukraine, as part of a corrupt scheme to convince President Zelensky to announce two phony political investigations .
 First, the Oval Office meeting President Trump corruptly withheld constitutes an official act . Second, the White House says the meeting was a meeting between the president and the president .
 It was one of the most powerful tools he could wield in his role as the leader of the free world . It was a powerful tool he could use as a leader in the world .
 It would have demonstrated U.S. support for Ukraine’s newly elected leader at a critical time .
 Ukraine under relentless attack by Russian-backed separatists in Crimea and in the East . Ukraine is under constant attack by Russians in Crimea, in the east and in Crimea .
 Ukraine desperately needed an Oval Office meeting, and President Trump knew it, and knew it . Ukraine desperately needs a meeting.
 President Trump withheld that Oval Office meeting to increase pressure on Ukraine to assist his reelection campaign . Second, he withheld that meeting to raise pressure on the Ukrainian government to help his campaign .
 This is a classic quid pro quo. As my colleagues have detailed extensively throughout the day, this is aclassic quid Pro quo .
Multiple administration officials confirmed that a corrupt exchange was being sought . President's own handpicked supporters and appointees were among those sought .
 The President corruptly abused his power to advance the scheme to try and cheat in the 2020 election, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This for that. This for that"
 Let’s explore whether the granting or the denial of an Oval Office meeting constitutes an official act .
 An abuse of power occurs when the President exercises his official power to obtain a corrupt personal benefit while ignoring or injuring the national interests . The abuse occurs when he exercises his office power to get a corrupt benefit .
 Article II grants the President wide latiS511 tude to conduct diplomacy and to receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers .
 The President decides which head-of-state meetings best advance the national interests . Foreign leaders are deserving of an official reception in the Oval Office .
 Meetings between heads of state are make-or-break moments that can determine the trajectory of global events . A meeting with the President of the U.S. in the Oval Office is unquestionably monumental .
 The Oval Office is where foreign leaders face challenges at home go, like a war with Russia, says Julian Zelizer .
 The decision to grant or withhold an Oval Office meeting to President Zelensky has profound consequences for the national security interests of both Ukraine and the U.S.
 President Trump's corrupt demands to the Ukrainian leader. To understand the full context of President Trump’s corrupt demands, it is important to consider the geopolitical context .
 The United States and other European countries rallied to Ukraine’s defense . U.S. and other countries provided economic assistance, diplomatic support, and later, lethal aid .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch's testimony explains just how important the U.S. is to Ukraine .
 The U.S. relationship for Ukraine is the single most important relationship . President Zelensky, any president, would do what they could to lean in on a favor request .
 I'm not saying that that’s a yes, I’m saying they would try to lean in and see what they could do, I'm saying that . I‘m not say that that's a yes. I”m saying that. I
Ukrainian government has been in talks with Ukraine's government over security issues . "We are an important relationship on the security side and on the political side," he says .
 Ukraine's president has to make sure the relationship with the U.S. is rock solid, he says . The president of Ukraine has a key role in making sure that the relationship is solid .
 It was a public meeting in the White House that would show United States support for Ukraine .
 A meeting with the President of the United States in the Oval Office is one of the most forceful diplomatic signals of support that the U.S. can send . The United States can send a strong message of support to the President .
 New leaders see a meeting with the U.S. president in the Oval Office as the ultimate sign of endorsement and support from the United States .
 President Trump sought strong U.S. support, particularly from President Trump . Zelensky sought in the form of a White House meeting, which he sought .
Political counselor to the Embassy in Kyiv described the importance of a White House visit to Ukraine in the context of its war with Russia . David Holmes described the particular importance of the visit to Kyiv .
 A White House visit was critical to President Zelensky. It is important to understand that a visit to the White House is critical to the president .
 President Zelensky needed to show U.S. support at the highest levels in order to demonstrate to Russian President Putin that he had United States backing . He also needed to advance his ambitious anticorruption agenda at home .
 Donald Trump launched the scheme at the center of the abuse of power charge in the spring of 2019 .
 During this time period, Vladimir Putin was preparing for peace negotiations with the new Ukrainian leader .
 Putin could choose to escalate or deescalate Russian aggression . He could also choose to de escalate or he could deescalated Russian aggression.
 President Trump's decision was an assessment of whether President Trump had Ukraine's back . The decision was made by the President of Ukraine .
 An Oval Office meeting would have sent a strong signal of support that President Trump had Ukraine back .
 Ukraine made very clear to the U.S. just how important a White House meeting between the two heads of State was for its fragile democracy .
 National Security Council director recalls meeting with Ukrainian officials following President Zelensky's inauguration .
 Ukrainians had reason to be optimistic that a White House meeting would be promptly scheduled . Initially, the Ukrainians were optimistic that the meeting would happen .
 President Zelensky asked about a White House visit three times . On April 21, during his first call with President Trump, the new Ukrainian leader CONGRESSIONAL RECORD was asked about the visit .
 President Trump himself did extend an invitation to the White House .
 Ukraine’s dependence on the U.S. and its desperate need for a White House meeting created an unequal power dynamic between the two Presidents . Ukraine's dependence on U. States and its need for White House meetings created a power dynamic .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testified it is that unequal power dynamic that turned any request for a favor from the President into a demand .
 President Barack Obama asked President Obama to give a speech at the White House . President Obama said the President's request was "a demand, this favor that the President asked"
 The military culture is not to be taken as a request, it’s to be take as an order. Chairman, the culture I come from, the military culture, is not a polite and pleasant question .
 President Zelensky would have to deliver these investigations to the White House, he says . In this case, the power disparity between the two leaders is a problem .
 Ambassador Gordon Sondland acknowledged the importance of this disparity and how it made President Zelensky eager to satisfy President Trump’s wishes .
 President Zelensky will do anything that you, meaning President Trump, ask him to. And then you added that President Zelenky will be asked to do anything .
 President Zelensky was very, ‘‘solicitous’ is not a good word. I probably said something to that effect because I remember the meeting, the President was very—‘’’
 He was just very willing to work with the U.S. and was being very amicable . He was very amicably, he said. He was also very amiable, he added .
 Trump said he would work with us on a whole host of issues . He said he loves your ass .
 Ukraine depends on the U.S. as its most significant ally . Ukraine is a key ally of the United States .
 Any request President Trump made to Ukraine would be difficult to refuse, he said .
 President Trump asked Ukraine to investigate Joe Biden, as well as the wild conspiracy theory about the 2016 election . President Zelensky and his staff were interpreted as a demand by President Trump .
 Ukraine did not immediately cave to Rudy Giuliani in the spring and announce the phony investigations . President Trump ratcheted up the pres January 23, 2020 sure .
 President Trump dangled during his April 21 call to Ukraine . He chose the meeting because he knew how important the meeting was to Ukraine.
 Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and Secretary Perry met with President Trump . Each of them encouraged the President to schedule the meeting .
 We advised the president of the strategic importance of Ukraine and the value of strengthening the relationship with President Zelensky .
 First, a working phone call between Presidents Trump and Zelensky, and second, aWorking oval office visit . The first, the second, the third, the working oval office trip .
 Both were vital to cementing the USUkraine relationship, says the U.S. State Department . Both were key to cemented the relationship, they say . They were also vital to advancing broader U. S. foreign policy interests, they said .
 President Trump ignored all of his policy advisers and expressed reluctance to meet with the new Ukrainian President . The meeting was critical to both Ukraine and America .
 President Zelensky signed a letter reiterating his earlier invitation to visit the White House on May 29 . He still did not specify a date .
 Ukrainian officials became concerned when President Trump scheduled that face-to-face meeting with Vladimir Putin at the G20 summit in Japan .
 Mr Holmes testified on this particular point and the troubling signal that meeting sent to our friend, Ukraine, to our ally .
Russian President Putin met with Russian President Putin at the G20 Summit in Osaka, Japan . He sent a further signal of lack of support to Ukraine .
 President Trump used the withholding of the White House meeting to pressure Ukraine for his phony investigations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Trump's quid pro quo scheme is his quid Pro quo scheme .
 The pressure exerted on Ukraine by delaying the White House meeting didn't just occur right before the July 25 call . It is important to understand that the pressure exerted by Ukraine didn’t just occur before the call .
 That pressure existed during the entire scheme, and it continues to this day . That pressure exists during the whole scheme. That pressure is still there .
 Ukrainians are trying to lock down a date for a meeting with the Ukrainian government . Administration officials have been trying to secure the meeting and from Ukrainians to secure a date .
 President Trump expressed reluctance about Ukraine on May 23 . White House officials continued working to secure a White House meeting .
 Mr Yermak and Ukraine’s national security advisor met with John Bolton at the White House on July 10 .
 The Ukrainians would have on their agenda, inevitably, the question about a meeting. And then we knew that the Ukrainians would be on their agendas .
 As we get through the main discussion, we are going into the wrap-up phase . The main discussion is about how much to go before the end of the debate .
 The Ukrainjians, Mr Danylyuk, starts to ask about a White House meeting . Ambassador Bolton was trying to parry this back .
 President Zelensky didn't just raise the Oval Office meeting on his April 21 call, he raised the meeting on the July 25 call with President Trump .
 The Ukrainians continued to press for the meeting, but that meeting never happened . After the July 25 call, the Ukrainians continued the call, but the meeting never occurred .
 President Trump and President Zelensky met face-to-face for the first time on September 25 . The House announced its investigation into the President's misconduct as it relates to Ukraine .
Public release of July 25 call record that occurred the day before . It was dominated by public release of the July 25 calls record .
 It was a far cry from the demonstration of strong support that would have been achieved by an Oval Office meeting . It is a farcry from a demonstration of support.
 President Zelensky recognized that a face-to-face talk on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly was not the same as an official Oval Office meeting .
 "I'm sorry, but I think you forgot to tell me the date," he says . "You invited me, but you invited me," he adds . "I think I'm sorry. You invited me. I think I think it was a mistake," he said
 President Trump was not just withholding a small thing; the Oval Office meeting was a big deal .
 President Trump still refuses to meet with President Zelensky in the Oval Office . As a result, the pressure on Ukraine not to upset President Trump continues to grow .
 Ukrainian Government wants an Oval Office meeting even after release of security assistance . U.S. national security objectives would also benefit from such a meeting, Holmes testified .
 The hold on the security assistance may have been lifted, but there were still things they wanted that they weren't getting .
 The Ukrainians understood that that’s something the President wanted and they still wanted important things from the President . Whether the hold, the security assistance hold continued or not, the Ukrainians understood.
 President Zelensky is trying to arrange a summit meeting with President Putin in the coming weeks . It's his first face-to-face meeting with him to try to advance the peace process .
 President Putin needs to understand that America supports Zelensky at the highest levels . He needs President Putin to understand the U.S. supports him at highest levels, he says .
 Ukraine still needs us, and as I said, still fighting this war this very day . Ukraine still need us, as we said, but we are still fighting it this day .
 President Trump made clear that a White House meeting was conditioned on Ukraine announcing two phony political investigations that would help with President Trump’s reelection in 2020 .
 President Trump’s pressure campaign to solicit foreign election interference wasn’t working, it was clear .
 President Zelensky had been elected and was rebuffing Mr Giuliani’s overtures .
 President Trump directed his official staff to work with Mr Giuliani in an effort to get President Zelensky to announce the two phony political investigations, that didn't work .
 President Trump apparently realized that he had to increase the pressure on the president .
 President Zelensky made clear to Ukraine that it would not get the desperately sought after Oval Office meeting unless President Zelenky publicly announced the phony investigations that President Trump sought. That is when he explicitly made clear that it wouldn't get the sought after meeting .
 Ambassador Volker personally communicated the need for investigations directly to President Zelensky during a meeting in Toronto .
 President Zelensky told the Ukrainians that it was just a scheduling issue . After weeks of reassuring the Ukrainians, he decided to tell the President that we had a problem with the information .
 I did so in a bilateral meeting at a conference on Ukrainian economic reform in Toronto on July 2, 2019, where I led the United States delegation .
 I suggested that he call President Trump directly in order to renew their personal relationship . President Zelensky had based his Presidential campaign on his presidential campaign .
 President Trump still harbored a negative perception of Ukraine that President Trump harbored . I was convinced that getting the two Presidents to talk with each other would overcome the negative perceptions of Ukraine .
 Ambassador Volker instructed President Zelensky in Toronto on what to do, he updated Ambassador Taylor on his actions . After the meeting, Volker updated President Zelenky on what he did .
 Ambassador Sondland continued to apply pressure during two White House meetings that took place on July 10 .
 Fiona Hill, LTC Alexander Vindman, Secretary Rick Perry, Ambassador Volker, and Ukrainian Presidential aide Andriy Yermak were all present .
Ambassador Sondland broached the subject of the phony political investigations . Ambassador Sondlands discussed Ukraine’s national security reform plans .
Ambassador Volker also recalled that Ambassador Sondland raised the issue of the 2016 election and Burisma investigations .
 Ambassador Volker found Ambassador Sondland’s comments in that meeting to be inappropriate . Ambassador Volkers found Ambassador Sondland's comments to be 'inappropriate'
 I participated in the July 10 meeting between National Security Advisor Bolton and then-Chairman of the National Security Defense Council, Alex Danyliuk .
 Ambassador Sondland made a general comment about investigations . As I remember, the meeting was essentially over, he said .
 The exchange underscores that by early July, President Trump’s demand for investigations had come to totally dominate almost every aspect of U.S. foreign policy toward Ukraine .
 Securing a Ukrainian commitment to do investigations was a major priority of senior U.S. diplomats, as directed by President Donald John Trump .
 The July 10 meetings also confirmed that the scheme to pressure Ukraine into opening investigations was not a rogue operation . It was one blessed by senior administration officials at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue .
 Mr Majority Leader, based on the statement that we should break at around 6:30m., I ask your indulgence . Mr Majority leader, based upon the statement, is based on a statement that he should break .
 This may be a natural breaking point in connection with my presentation. This may have been a natural break point for my presentation .
 Chief Justice asks unanimous consent that we have a break for 30 minutes . Mr Chief Justice: I ask unanimous consent .
 Mr Chief Justice, after consulting with Congressman ScHIFF, it looks like roughly 10:30 tonight .
 President Trump withheld an Oval Office meeting with the President of Ukraine . President Trump used his power to corruptly abuse his power, says Chief Justice .
 President Trump withheld an official White House meeting that was vitally important to Ukraine as part of a corrupt scheme to convince President Zelensky to announce two phony political investigations . Trump withheld this official meeting, the White House says .
 These investigations were entirely unrelated to any official U.S. policy and solely benefited President Trump .
 The meeting was so significant to our ally Ukraine. We talked about why withholding the meeting was too significant to Ukraine .
 Ukraine is a fragile democracy, under relentless attack from Russian-backed separatists in the east . Ukraine's fragile democracy has been under constant attack from Russia- backed separatists .
 President Trump had immense power over Ukraine, and knew it . Because of this vast power disparity, President Trump knew it, he had the power of Ukraine .
 President Trump asked President Zelensky for a favor on a July 25 call . He knew that President Trump would feel incredible pressure to do exactly what he wanted .
 President Trump used his agents to make clear to Ukraine, even in early July, that the much needed White House meeting would only occur if they announced these phony political investigations . President Trump's administration appointees and his personal attorney, Rudolph Giuliani, made clear to the White House they requested,
 Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and Secretary of Energy Rick Perry are among those involved . That includes acting chief of staff Mick MulVaney and Mike Pompea .
 Even ahead of the July 25 call, Ambassador Sondland was in close contact with these officials .
 The new Ukrainian leader would personally commit to do the phony investigations sought by President Trump in order to unlock a meeting in the Oval Office .
 President Trump called Ukrainian leader prior to parliamentary elections scheduled for July 21 . Ambassador Sondland emailed National Security Council official Timothy Morrison .
 Ambassador Sondland said the ‘sole purpose’ of the call was to assure President Trump that investigations would be allowed to move forward .
 President Zelensky had to move forward on the phony political investigations . This is part of the scheme to cheat in the 2020 Presidential campaign .
Ambassador Sondland spoke directly with President Zelensky on July 19 .
 He spoke directly with President Zelensky to prepare him for a call with President Trump . He spoke to him directly to prepare for the call .
 Ambassador Sondland coached President Zelensky to use key phrases and reassure President Trump of Ukraine's intention to bend to President Trump’s will with respect to the phony investigations he sought .
 Ambassador Sondland told Kurt Volker that he gave the Ukrainian leader ‘a full briefing.’
 Ambassador Sondland emailed top administration officials, including Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Perry, to summarize his conversation with Zelensky .
 Ambassador Sondland said Zelensky is ‘prepared to _ receive POTUS’ call . In that email, Zelenski said he is ’prepared’ to receive the call .
 Both Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney and Secretary Perry responded to the email, noting that the head-of-state call would be scheduled . The email was sent by the acting chief of staff .
 Neither Mulvaney nor Perry took issue with the fact that Sondland coached Zelensky to yield to President Trump's pressure campaign .
 President Trump intended to solicit foreign interference in the 2020 election, he said . He pressed Ukrainian leader to announce investigations into former Vice President Biden and CrowdStrike conspiracy theory .
 There was no focus on advancing America’s foreign policy or national security objectives .
 The only priority was President Trump’s corrupt demand for phony investigations in exchange for an Oval Office meeting . This for that.
 Everyone was informed via email on July 19th, days before the Presidential call . The Presidential call was scheduled for July 20th .
 I told President Zelensky in advance that assurances to run a fully transparent investigation and turn over every stone were necessary in his call with President Trump .
 July 25 is the day of the infamous phone call . The phone call was the culmination of a monthslong campaign to engineer a corrupt quid pro quo .
 President Trump provided guidance to Sondland before the call took place .
 President Zelensky should be prepared to announce the investigations in exchange for the White House meeting, he says .
 Sondland’s call with President Trump on July 25, Sondlands urgently tried to reach Kurt Volker . SONDland tried to contact Volker on the morning of July 25 .
When he could not reach Ambassador Volker by phone, he sent a text that said, ‘Call ASAP,’ and he left a message .
 Russian-inspired fake, phony, and false conspiracy theory about Ukraine having been involved in interfering in our 2016 elections . That refers to the Russian- inspired fake, fake, and phony, or false conspiracy theories .
 Ambassador Volker then conveyed that message approximately 30 minutes before the Trump-Zelensky call to Zelensky’s top aide .
 Ambassador Volker texts Yermak, Zelensky’s guy, and says, ‘assuming President Z convinces Trump he will investigate/get to the bottom of what happened’
 Volker talks to President Zelensky’s aide Yermak, and then the July 25 call occurs . Volker also talks to the President's aide and then to the president's aide .
 Kurt Volker sent this text message to January 23, 2020 Andriy Yermak . President Zelensky spoke very similar to what was in the text message . President Trump had a phone call with Zelenski .
 President Zelensky was ready with the magic words when President Trump asked for a favor on July 25 .
I want to ensure you that we will be very serious about the case and will work on the investigation . On the other hand, I want to assure you that the case is very serious, I say .
 The transcript is damning evidence of a corrupt quid pro quo. We have read the transcript, and it's damning evidence .
 During our presentation, we walked through the serious issues presented in the plain reading of the July 25 call, but now you can see the entire content of how this corrupt parade of horribles unfolded .
 The quid pro quo was discussed in text messages, emails, voicemails, calls, and meetings with top Ukrainian officials . The quids pro quo were discussed in texts, emails and calls .
 President Zelensky understood exactly what needed to be done. Before that fateful call on July 25, President Zelenky understood what was needed .
 The evidence of President Trump’s grave misconduct does not end with that July 25 call .
 President Zelensky was on notice that it was President Trump himself who demanded those two phony political investigations .
 Ukrainians followed up with President Trump's direction and began to coordinate with Rudolph Giuliani, the President's political bagman .
 U.S. diplomats, including Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador Volker, worked with Mr Giuliani to continue pressuring Ukraine to announce the phony investigations .
 Giuliani directed Ambassadors Sondland and Volker to negotiate a public statement for President Zelensky announcing the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD .
 President Trump wanted a public statement from President Zelensky committing to investigations of Burisma and the 2016 election . Mr Giuliani conveyed to Secretary Perry, Ambassador Volker and others that PresidentTrump wanted a statement .
 Mr Giuliani expressed those requests directly to Ukrainians and Mr Giuliani also expressed those request directly to us . Mr Giuliani has also expressed that requests to Ukrainians .
 The White House meeting reflected President Trump’s desires and requirements. We all understood that these prerequisites for the White House call and the meeting reflected Trump's desires .
 Giuliani’s efforts to gin up politically-motivated investigations were now infecting U.S. engagement with Ukraine, he says .
 U.S. diplomats responsible for Ukraine policy understood that Giuliani had de facto control over whether the Oval Office meeting would be scheduled .
 Giuliani had been given that level of authority by President Trump, and it was infecting official U.S. policy toward Ukraine .
Top Ukrainian officials knew they had to meet with Mr Giuliani . John Bolton described Mr Giuliani as a human hand grenade who was going to blow everybody up .
Giuliani met with President Zelensky’s top aide, in Madrid, on August 2 .
 Mr Giuliani made clear in that meeting that President Trump needed more private assurances that Ukraine would pursue the investigations .
President Trump did not require that Ukraine conduct the investigations in order to secure that White House meeting . Ambassador Sondland says this is very important . President Trump didn't require Ukraine to conduct investigations to secure the meeting .
 The Ukrainian Government only needed to announce the investigations because they were phony . They were simply designed to cheat in the 2020 election, solicit foreign interference, and corrupt our democracy . President Trump has the benefit of President Trump .
 President Trump would receive as a result of these announcements. So the goal was not the investigations themselves but the corrupt political benefit would be a benefit .
 He also wanted to shake ‘this Russia thing’ and instead blame Ukraine with the fairytale that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 election . He also wants to shake the Russia thing.
 The facts didn't matter for President Trump; he only cared about the personal political benefit of these S515 investigative announcements .
 President Zelensky to issue a public statement . Ambassadors Sondland and Volker worked with Mr Yermak to draft a statement .
 Ambassador Volker was also in frequent contact with Rudy Giuliani regarding the content of that statement . The statement was released on Monday .
 He was working in the political personal interests of President Trump, interacting with Ukrainian officials . He was also working with Ukraine officials .
 Ambassador Volker texted Mr Giuliani and requested a call to update him on the progress of the negotiations for the statement .
 Ambassador Sondland suggested to Ambassador Volker that they obtain a draft statement from the Ukrainian Government ‘to avoid misunderstandings’
 Ambassador Sondland also reiterated that President Trump would not be satisfied by a vague statement . President Trump is not satisfied by the statement .
 The Ukrainian leader needed to commit to the phony investigations in explicit terms in order to secure the soughtafter Oval Office meeting .
 Call records subpoenaed by the House show multiple communications between Ambassador Sondland and Mr Giuliani on the one hand and numbers associated with the Office of Management and Budget and the White House on the other .
 Mr Giuliani communicated repeatedly with the White House, sending or receiving six text messages and completing several calls .
 Mr Giuliani called the White House in a highly distinctive pattern . Most notably, late in the evening on August 8, he called it in a very distinctive pattern.
 Mr Giuliani attempted to return the call, trying an Office of Management and Budget number, and then the White House Situation Room . Two minutes later, Mr Giuliani tried to return a call to the Office of management and Budget .
 Mr S516 Giuliani tried to call the White House back, Giuliani and the -1 number connected for 4 minutes 6 seconds . At 10.28, 16 minutes after the call, Mr Giuliani called the WhiteHouse back .
 We do not know who was on the other end of that mysterious call with the -1.1. The call was made in the early hours of the morning .
 President Trump refused to produce documents and ordered key witnesses not to testify, hiding part of the truth from American people .
 Rudolph Giuliani frantically called the White House late into the night. But we do know that he frantically called it late into night .
 Mr Giuliani likely talked about the drug deal that John Bolton characterized . We do know that he talked to someone at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, and we know that Mr Giuliani spoke to someone .
 President Zelensky’s aide exchanged drafts of the public statement with Ambassadors Volker and Sondland .
 Giuliani’s specific language about the phony political investigations in exchange for the Oval Office meeting .
 Yermak texted Volker that the Ukrainians were willing to make the statements but only if they received a date for the White House meeting first . On August 10, Yermk texts Volker said the Ukrainians would make the requested statements .
 He later wrote that the statement would come out ‘after we ‘receive a confirmation of date’ for the White House visit . He later said the statement will come out 'after we’re received a confirmation.
 President Zelensky would iron out the statement in private, use that to get the date for the meeting in the Oval Office .
 Mr Yermak sent the draft statement, but the statement did not reference Burisma or the 2016 election . Two days later, he sent a draft statement but did not mention Burisma .
 They sought a call with Rudolph Giuliani to see if the statement would suffice . They sought the call with Giuliani to hear if he would make a statement .
 Mr Giuliani was leading the charge to lock down the corrupt quid pro quo . He needed to check in with Mr Giuliani.
 This is the first draft of that from Mr Yermak after the conversations that we had with him . The first draft is from the first conversation he had with Mr Yerak .
Sondland and Giuliani had a conversation about this draft after you received it . Giuliani testified in your deposition that you and Ambassador CONGRESSIONAL RECORD had a discussion .
 Mr Giuliani said that if the statement did not include Burisma and 2016 election, it would not have any credibility .
Ukrainians had to target Vice President Biden, for reasons outlined earlier today . Mr Giuliani, acting on behalf of President Trump, made clear that the statement had to focus on Ukraine .
Ambassadors Volker and Sondland texted Mr Yermak and requested a call to convey that message . Mr Giuliani conveyed this on the telephone call, Ambassadors Volkers and SONDland texted him .
 Ambassador Volker made clear to Mr Yermak that the statement needed the two key items Mr Giuliani required for the President . Now, ambassador Volker has made clear that the President needed the statement .
 It is about the need for us here in this great Chamber to have a fair trial with witnesses and January 23, 2020 evidence . The Chamber of Representatives will hold a trial in January 2019 .
In America, for all of us, what keeps us free from tyranny is the sacred principle that in this great country no one is above the law .
Inescapable documentary proof that clearly proves a corrupt quid pro quo. You also saw inescapable documentaries that clearly prove a corrupt pro quo .
 It comes in many forms, from people who are lifelong public servants with no motivation to lie . It comes from many individuals who have no motivation.
 Some career public servants' testimony state they too believed it was a quid pro quo . It is really powerful to hear directly from them, he says .
 President Zelensky wanted to meet with Burisma, and alleged Ukrainian interference and the 2016 U.S. elections . The meeting was scheduled for mid-July .
 It was also clear that this condition was driven by the irregular policy channel I had come to understand was guided by Mr Giuliani .
 Ambassador Sondland said so at the July 10 meeting. We know this too, he said so .
 Fiona Hill described the scene in Ambassador Bolton’s office where the quid pro quo was made clear .
 Ukrainian Mr Danylyuk starts to ask about a White House meeting . Ambassador Bolton was trying to parry this back .
 The National Security Advisor is not in charge of scheduling the meeting . He's not the National Security Adviser .
We have input recommending meetings, and this goes through a whole process . We have input recommended meetings. This goes through the whole process, we say .
 He likes to leave the details of these meetings to the appropriate staff for this, he says . He does not as a matter of course like to discuss the details.
 I was sitting behind him in the chair, and I saw him sit back slightly like this . I was sat behind him, and he sat back slightly, like this, he said .
 For me, that was an unmistakable body language, and it caught my attention . And for me, it was a body language. And, for him, it caught his attention .
 He looked up to the clock and then looked at his watch, or at his wrist in any case . And then he looked up and looked at the clock, and then, you know .
 The actor said it was great to see him . He said he was sitting behind him . and basically said, ‘Well, you know, it’s been really great.’
 Hill's recollection of the July 10 meeting was made clear that the deal for the White House meeting was investigations . Hill’s recollection is clear that it was clear the deal was investigations.
 I want to move now to that July 10th meeting that you referenced, Colonel Vindman . The meeting will take place on July 10, 2013 .
Ukrainjians would have to deliver in order to get these meetings, he said . As he recalled, he referred to specific investigations that the Ukrainjians had to deliver .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman is a former soldier who served in Afghanistan . He says he would have to deliver in order to get these meetings . He is a retired Lieutenant Colonel .
 It was also clear that this wasn’t about general investigations about corruption . This wasn't about general investigation about corruption, it was about corruption.
 Ambassador Sondland directed everyone to reconvene in the Ward Room . He discussed the arrangement he had reached with Mr Mulvaney in more detail .
 He made clear that it was about specific investigations that would benefit President Trump personally . He said the investigations would benefit the President personally .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testifies that Ambassador Sondland referred to the Bidens, Burisma, and the 2016 election, which had nothing to do with national security policy .
 Ambassador Sondland referred to investigations into Bidens, Burisma, and 2016 . The Bidens and Burisma were also investigated by the ambassador .
 I said that this request to conduct these meetings was inappropriate . These investigations were inappropriate and had nothing to do with national security policy . I said this request was inappropriate.
 President Trump’s scheme was for his personal Colonel CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE interest, not national security . President Trump's scheme is for his own personal Colonel ConGRESSIONal RECORD .
 Gordon Sondland was basically saying, "Look, look, we have a deal here"
 There will be a meeting if the Ukrainians open up or announce these investigations into 2016 in Burisma .
 Giuliani said Burisma was code for the Bidens, because Giuliani was laying it out there . By this point, having heard Mr Giuliani over and over again on the television and all of the issues that he was asserting, by this point it was clear that Burisma.
 Ambassador Sondland told us, everyone was in the loop . It became clear that President Trump was directing this, he said .
 Gordon Sondland was acting on the President's orders and coordinating with other senior officials, says Hill . Hill, who at one point confronted him over this arrangement, further reached the conclusion that he was coordinating with others .
 I was upset with him that he wasn’t fully telling us about all of the meetings that he was having. So, I was angry with him . He wasn't fully telling them about all the meetings he was had .
 Ukraine has a robust interagency process that deals with Ukraine. And the point is that we have a robust Interagency process .
 It includes Mr Holmes, it includes Ambassador Taylor as, the Charge in Ukraine . It includes a whole load of other people .
 Ambassador Sondland said he was 'absolutely right' when he put up on the screen . But it struck me when he said that he was absolutely right .
 "Because he was being involved in a domestic political errand, and we were being involved with national security foreign policy," he says . "Because of the domestic political Errand, he was involved in national securityForeign policy," says the author .
 The White House meeting would only be scheduled if Ukraine announced the investigations . It is understood to be purely political efforts to benefit the President .
 The only way to come to a different conclusion is to ignore the evidence, says the author . The only thing to do is ignore evidence.
 U.S. officials didn't just testify about this in impeachment proceedings . The conduct is truly corrupt, and not United States foreign policy as usual .
 Both parties have the White House. Their reactions illustrate that this was not the kind of thing that both parties do when they have White House .
 Ambassador Sondland's characterization was 'insidious' to use later testimony . This was something different, something corrupt, something ‘insidious,’ to use Ambassador SONDland’s characterization .
 The officials who instinctively recoiled from the corrupt deal that Sondland blurted out were distinguished patriotic public servants . The officials were distinguished public servants.
 Ambassador Sondland made clear the agreement that the White House meetings were conditioned on the investigations .
 Ambassador Bolton gave her, as she put it, a ‘very specific instruction’ to report this conduct in realtime . She did .
 National Security Council counsel says he is not part of the drug deal that Mulvaney and Sondland are cooking up . He says he was told by Ambassador Bolton that he was not in the deal .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman reported what he had learned through the lawyers . Hill’s recounting, after both the July 10 meeting and the July 25 call, was recounted .
 Vindman said he acted as he did out of a sense of duty . He said he would be protected for doing the right thing even if it angered the President of the U.S.
 His father fled the Soviet Union to come to this country, worried about his son fulfilling that duty . His father, who fled the USSR, now lives in the United States .
 The U.S. has been in the Soviet Union for 40 years . The United States is S518 of America in search of a better life for our family .
 "I'm struck by the word ... that phrase, ‘do not worry,’ you addressed to your dad, he says . And I’m struck by it, he adds, that phrase.
 He deeply worried about it because in his context it was the ultimate risk, he says . He deeply worries about it.
 This is the country I’ve served and defended, that all of my brothers have served, and here right matters, he says . This is my country I've served, I've defended, and this is my brother's country, he adds .
 President Trump has suggested that all of the witnesses are Never Trumpers . President Trump said that all the witnesses were never Trumpers.
 U.S. officials are brave public servants, we just saw. As we just see, these United States officials are courageous public servants .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testified. It is wrong to suggest they were doing anything other than testifying out of a sense of duty, he says .
 U.S. officials' reactions show that this was wrong; it is also clear how corrupt this scheme was because Ukraine resisted it . But it wasn’t just United States officials whose reactions show it was wrong .
 Once I arrived in Kyiv, I discovered a weird combination of encouraging, confusing, and ultimately alarming circumstances . But once he arrived, he discovered a strange combination of confusing, confusing and ultimately disturbing circumstances .
 He appointed reformist ministers and supported long-stalled anti-corruption legislation . He also appointed reformists and supported anti- corruption legislation .
 He took quick executive action, including opening Ukraine’s High Anti-Corruption Court . He took quickly executive action.
 President Zelensky changed the Ukraine Constitution to remove absolute immunity from Rada deputies . The change comes after a new parliamentary majority stemming from snap elections .
 This time could be different, a new Ukraine finally breaking from its corrupt, post-Soviet past . The new Ukraine could be a new country.
 President Zelensky was a reformer, fighting corruption, fighting for reform . He got started early, as soon as he was sworn in .
 President Zelensky's agenda was in our U.S. national interest, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We know that President Zelenky’s agenda is in our national interest .
Every witness testified that President Zelensky deserved America’s support CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE .
 President Zelensky and his aides were saying behind closed doors. So keeping that in mind, it is extremely telling .
 The President's corrupt scheme is a political peril of going along with the President’s corrupt scheme .
 Some of the evidence shows that now. We know that was the case for many reasons, but let’s look at some of it .
 Ukrainians made their concerns clear directly to U.S. officials .
 Ambassador Taylor spoke with President Zelensky’s national security advisor on July 20 .
 Mr Danyliuk understood that these investigations were pursuant to Mr Giuliani’s request to develop information about Burisma.
 Mr Giuliani made this point clear in several instances in the springtime .
 Mr Danyliuk indicated that President Zelensky certainly understood it, that he did not want to get involved in these type of activities .
 Ambassador Sondland reinforced the importance of President Zelensky to reassure President Trump of his commitment to investigations .
 The ‘pretext’ that Ambassador Sondland referred to was President Trump's requirement that Ukraine announce investigations that would benefit him personally and politically .
 Yermak was very uncomfortable when this was raised with him . He suggested that if that were the case, it should be done officially and put in writing .
 President would go through official U.S. channels, but as we have seen here, he didn’t . Normally, if something is actually about official United States policy, the President would have gone through official channels .
President Trump's personal attorney says foreign policy was something that would benefit President Trump personally .
 There was undisputed testimony that the investigations were not part of U.S. policy . There was also undisputed evidence that the investigation was not a part of the policy .
 In fact, they diverged with the U.S. national security and our Nation’s values, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The Department of Justice has made this crystal clear in public statements . The Justice Department has made it clear in the public statement .
 There has never been an official asked officially to do any of these investigations . There has been no official asked for any investigations .
 Even Ukraine, a_ struggling, new country, knew this was wrong, and they stood up to President Trump and said no .
Show us you are willing to stand behind the legitimacy of what you are asking. Show us you're willing to support your claims, we ask .
 President Trump’s political investigations were solely to help his reelection and had nothing to do with foreign policy .
 President Zelensky tried in different ways to resist the pressure of becoming January 23, 2020 a “pawn’’ in U.S. politics .
 The Oval Office meeting was important, but Zelensky repeatedly tried to find a way around committing to the investigations .
 President Trump's second official act was not enough to make Ukraine do his dirty work . This is what you saw in the negotiation over the statement in August, and this is why this is not enough .
 Senators are coming to the end of a section of the presentation regarding the withholding of the White House meeting . Senators are holding a meeting on the issue .
We have covered the central points of the world's most important points in recent weeks . We have covered some of the key points that we have covered in the past .
 President Trump conditioned that Oval Office meeting on Ukraine's investigations would help him politically . Trump conditioned the meeting on the Ukraine investigation that would help his politically .
 President Trump directed U.S. officials who were supposed to work for the American people to work with his personal agent, Rudy Giuliani, and focus only on his political interests .
 Giuliani worked with those United States officials to carry out the President’s scheme .
 Ukrainian Government pressured Ukrainian Government to act as personal opposition research firm for President Trump . They pressured the Ukrainian government to act.
 Former Vice President Biden tried to dig up dirt on his client’s rival, former President Biden, an American citizen . He tried to use a foreign government to dig out dirt on President Trump .
 A President corruptly exercises official power to obtain a personal benefit in a way that ignores or injures the national interest . An abuse of power occurs when a President is corruptly exercising official power, says the author .
 By withholding a White House meeting, President Trump used official power to corruptly pressure Ukraine . By withholding the meeting, he used official powers to influence Ukraine .
 The entire campaign to use the Oval Office meeting as some kind of asset for the President’s reelection campaign was corrupt . The entire quid pro quo, the ‘this for that’
 I think, deep down, we all know it, and I think the U.S. people know it. I think that we all have a deep-down knowledge of it, I think . I think it's a good thing that the American people know,
 If any other public official did that, he or she would be held accountable . He or she will be held responsible for their actions .
 The only way to hold this President accountable is right here in this trial. President Obama is on trial in the United States .
President Obama should use the Oval Office and the country's prestige and power for himself instead of for the U.S. people, he says . He says .
 If we allow this gross abuse of power to continue, this President will have free rein to abuse his control of U.S. foreign policy for personal interests, so would any other future President .
 A President could take the powers of the greatest office in this land . He could use those powers not for the country, but for him or herself .
In this country, no one is above the law. I ask you to make sure this does not happen because, in this country,. No one—no one—isabove the law, I ask .
 In the morning, there will be a coronavirus briefing for all Members at 10:30 .
 Chief Justice Roberts, Senators, and counsel for the President, have now been through the first two official acts by the President .
 Neither of those official acts got the President what he wanted—help in his reelection campaign . But neither of those acts got him what he needed.
 Ukraine is withholding nearly $400 million of vital military assistance to Ukraine in exchange for investigations . President Obama turned to another act to turn up the pressure even more .
 Withholding military assistance to Ukraine made the original abuse of power, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Withholding military aid to Ukraine makes the original abused of power"
 The Government Accountability Office concluded that President Trump's hold on security assistance violated the Empowerment Control Act . Congress enacted the law to curb President Nixon’s own abuse of power .
 President Trump may not like it, but once a law is passed, the President cannot change that law without coming back to us, the Congress .
 President Trump did not just break the law, he jeopardized our national security . Ukraine’s national security is our nationalSecurity. S519 and President Trump broke the law .
 Because a free and democratic Ukraine is a shield against Russian aggression in Europe, it is a protect against Russia, says Ukraine . Ukraine is also a shield from Russia's aggression, says the EU .
 President Trump’s improper withholding of military assistance was clearly done to pressure Ukraine to announce the two baseless investigations. Let us now explain how President Trump's improper withholding was done .
 The military aid was to Ukraine’s defense against Russian aggression, which affects our security. First, we will briefly describe how important the aid was .
 President Trump used the power of his office to freeze military aid to Ukraine in a way meant to conceal it from Congress . Second, we will explain how he used his power to freeze the aid to conceal the aid .
 Let us start with the importance of the aid to our—the United States’s—national security. Let us begin with the important aid to the U.S.
 The U.S. has supported Ukraine since it secured independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . The United States has supported the country since 1991 .
 Our support was critical to convince Ukraine to forgo its pursuit of a nuclear arsenal in 1994 . We supported Ukraine's pursuit of nuclear arsenal.
 Ukraine revolted against its Russian-friendly President, Viktor Yanukovych. But our support became truly vital in 2014 .
 Ukrainian citizens rose up in protest, demanding democratic reforms and an end to corruption . Ukrainian citizens demanded democratic reforms.
 The protests, rightly known as the Revolution of Dignity, removed the pro-Kremlin President . The protests were called the 'Revolution of Dignities'
 Russia responded by using its own military forces and proxies in Ukraine to invade Ukraine . Russia used its own troops and proxies to invade the country .
 Approximately 7 percent of Ukraine’s territory is now occupied by Russia .
 Approximately 15,000 people have been killed as a result of the conflict, and over 1. million have been displaced . Over 1.m. people are displaced by the conflict .
 U.S. and allies imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and entities and agreed to provide billions of dollars in assistance to support Ukrainian sovereignty and democratic development .
 Ukraine’s safety and security was directly tied to our safety, security. We understood immediately, Democrats and Republicans alike, that Ukraine's safety and safety was directly linked to its security .
 The U.S. has delivered roughly $1. billion in security assistance to Ukraine since 2014 . The United States has also provided $1 billion in other assistance to our ally Ukraine .
 Our allies in Europe have provided approximately $18 billion in loans and grants since 2014 . Our allies have provided about $18billion in loans, grants and loans since 2014.
 U.S. assistance comes partially from the Department of Defense, which provides important military support .
 It comes partially from the State Department, which helps Ukraine purchase military services or equipment manufactured by American companies .
 Ambassador Taylor explained how security assistance counters Russian aggression and can help shorten the war in the east .
Ukrainian military assistance allows the Ukrainian military to deter further incursions by the Russians against Ukrainian territory . These weapons and this assistance allow the Ukraine military to defend its territory .
 If that further incursion, further aggression, more Ukrainians would die, more would die . If further incursions were to take place, more Ukrainian would die.
 Ukrainians can negotiate from a position of a little more strength when they negotiate an end to the war in Donbas . It's also the ability to negotiate with the Russians .
 This also is a way that would reduce the numbers of Ukrainians who would die . This also would be a way to reduce the number of people who would be killed .
 DOD must conduct a review and certify to Congress that Ukraine has done enough to fight corruption . To release all of the funds, DOD, in coordination with the State Department, must conduct the review .
 President Trump may argue that the conditions imposed by Congress are similar to the hold he placed on aid to Ukraine .
 These types of conditions are often included in appropriations bills . They are designed to promote official U.S. policy, not policy of one individual or one President .
 Vice President Biden required that Ukraine fire its corrupt prosecutor general before getting loan guarantee . This is exactly the type of permissible condition on aid that Biden was implementing when he was implementing .
 Prior to 2019, the Trump administration provided security assistance to Ukraine without incident .
 President Trump allowed $510 million in 2017 and $359 million in 2018 to flow unimpeded to Ukraine . Even under the previous Ukrainian administration of President Petro Poroshenko, which suffered from serious corruption.
 President Trump abruptly withheld the security assistance for Ukraine in the summer of 2019, without any explanation .
 The Department of Defense had certified that Ukraine was meeting the required anti-corruption reforms .
 DOD had begun to spend the funds. In CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, DOD had started to spend funds .
 The Mueller investigation concluded that Russia interfered in the 2016 U.S. elections to assist the Trump campaign . The investigation also concluded that the campaign had extensive contacts with Russians and even took advantage of some of the Russian efforts .
President Trump withheld the aid was to undermine threats to his political future, he says . The evidence shows that the only reason, and we deal in what is reasonable, is the only logical reason, he writes .
Security assistance to Ukraine has broad bipartisan support from Congress, as well as every agency within the President’s own administration .
 Witness testimony revealed that this money was 10 percent of Ukraine’s defense budget —10 percent . The money was in the defense budget.
 President Trump just decided without cause or explanation to hold 10 percent of our own defense budget .
 President Trump had to sign the bill into law in September of 2018 . He signed the bill in September 2018 .
 The White House did not express any concerns about the funding or the program itself . At no time the White House expressed any concerns.
 President Trump signs the bill authorizing aid to Ukraine for fiscal year 2019 . It shows President Trump signing the bill.
 President Trump's own Department of Defense certified that Ukraine had met all of the anti-corruption requirements necessary to receive aid . On June 18, President Trump’s own department of defense certified the country had met the requirements .
 The Department of Defense announced that the money was on its way, just as we, the United States of America, had promised .
America continues to live up to its promise. So let us make certain that America continues to living up to it .
 Mr Chief Justice and Senators, thank you so much for the attention that you have given to our presentation throughout this day .
 You are here without your cell phones or any access to other information . You are not allowed to use your cell phone or other information.
 It is not easy, but you are paying attention, and the country and the managers thank you for that . It's not easy. You are paying Attention, and you arepaying attention, says the manager .
 Congress has agreed that the aid should be released to Ukraine . President Obama has said the aid will be released .
 DOD announced its intention to provide the $250 million in security assistance to Ukraine . In fact, January 23, 2020 by June 18, after having certified that Ukraine had met all the anti-corruption reform requirements to receive the aid .
 President Trump quickly moved to stop the aid from flowing after June 18 press release .
 He did this with no explanation, against the clear consensus of his advisers and his agencies, and against our Nation’s security interests, he says .
 Ukraine's president was determined to pressure Ukraine to do his political dirty work . He was willing to violate the law, something his own officials were well aware of and worried about .
 The hold on security assistance to Ukraine was a unilateral official act by the President . The President's decision to hold security assistance is a unilateral act .
 President Trump started asking questions about the funding program after the DOD’s June 18 press release .
 Laura Cooper from DOD and Mark Sandy from OMB testified about the sudden interest in Ukraine security assistance . Cooper called it unusual .
 OMB and DOD have received no documents from OMB because of President's obstruction . President Obama's obstruction has caused no documents to be released .
 Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and hard-working reporters. We know a little from the documents that we do have . We don't know, but thanks to Freedom of information Act lawsuits.
 President asked for information about Ukraine aid day after the DOD press release, the President said .
 The President has asked about this funding release, and I have been tasked to follow-up with someone over there to get more detail . The President is asking for more detail about the funding release .
 Robert Blair, Mick Mulvaney's deputy, called Acting OMB Director Russell Vought to discuss Ukraine’s security assistance .
 The hold was actually directed impulsively without any policy or agency review . President Trump learned about the hold from a press release .
 President Trump gave a phone interview with Sean Hannity on FOX News . The President's mind was on Ukraine that day .
 During the interview, he mentioned the so-called CrowdStrike conspiracy theory that blames Ukraine rather than January 23, 2020 Russia for interfering in the 2016 election .
 President Trump raised the CrowdStrike theory a month later during his July 25 call with President Zelensky .
 The theory has been completely refuted by U.S. intelligence agencies, as well as the President’s own handpicked senior advisers .
 Blair, who previously worked for Congress, knew Congress would be “unhinged’’ because there was overwhelming bipartisan support for Ukraine .
 DOD had already told Congress and the world that it was going to spend the $250 million on Ukraine security assistance .
 Mark Sandy, the senior career official at OMB responsible for this type of aid, couldn't recall any other time in his 12-year career at the agency .
 President's counsel lists other times that aid has been held, ask yourself three questions . Later, if the President’s counsel starts listing other times, ask you three questions about aid .
 There was nothing new or important in Ukraine to disrupt the aid, says the author . The true anti-corruption reformer was elected.
 Many documents are being hidden from you about how the hold began .
 If he has a legitimate executive privilege claim, he could follow the rules and make each claim . If he had a legitimate privilege claim he could make every claim .
 Jennifer Williams, special adviser to Vice President PENCE for Europe, learned about the hold on July 3 .
 She said it came ‘‘out of the blue’ and hadn’t previously been discussed by OMB or the National Security Council . She said she said it had been discussed with the NSC and OMB .
The hold was never discussed with any policy experts in any of the relevant agencies . The hold was not discussed with anyone in the relevant agency .
 President Trump ordered a hold on congressionally appropriated funds without the benefit of any interagency deliberation, consultation, or advice .
 The evidence shows the President’s hold was an impulsive decision unrelated to any American policy .
 The career officer at OMB got a copy of the email . This is according to Sandy, the career officer.
President Sandy's description of the email, as well as testimony from other witnesses. Now, we don't have a copy of it because of the President’s obstruction .
We do know it was not the result of a policy debate about what was best for America . We do know that we should not have been debating what is best for the country .
 The President said ‘we need to let the hold take place’ and then ‘revisit’ the issue with the President . Instead he said he needed to ‘let the hold’ take place .
 Blair either didn't know the reason or wouldn’t share the real reason because it was corrupt . Blair either wouldn't share the reason.
 Blair knew about the reason for the hold and what Duffey knew . It sure would be nice to know what Blair knew .
We had hoped that the Senate would authorize subpoenas before our arguments were made . Now, we had hoped, as we said, that we would get subpoenas . We had hoped it would happen before the Senate made a decision .
 We hope that your decision will be informed by the arguments we are making to you over these days . But we know that you will have another opportunity to call witnesses, to require documents .
 The President did what he did when he was in office . The President's actions were not to blame for the President's decision .
 It wasn’t because of any policy reason to benefit America or any concern about corruption in Ukraine or any desire for more burden-sharing from other countries .
 President was upset that Ukraine was not announcing the investigations that he wanted because he wanted to ramp up pressure to force them to do it . It was because the President was unhappy that Ukraine wasn't announcing investigations .
 From the very beginning, it was clear the hold was not in America’s national interest .
 Support for aid and against the hold was unanimous, forceful, and unwavering . Support for the aid was unanimous and forceful, forceful.
 The President's $521 policy was developed by the President himself . It was also a product of congressional action .
 President Trump’s own politically appointed senior officials also opposed the hold . President Trump's own political appointees also opposed.
 The President wasn’t persuaded by arguments about national interest . But the President wasn't persuaded by the President's views on national interest.
 The demand for Ukraine to announce these investigations was not a policy decision but a personal decision by the President to benefit his own personal interest . The President's decision to announce the investigations was a decision to benefit himself .
 OMB announced that President Trump had directed a hold on Ukraine security assistance on July 8 .
 Ambassador Taylor testified that he and others on the call ‘sat in astonishment’ when they learned about the hold . He testified that they were 'sat in astonishedishment'
 There was unanimity about this security assistance to Ukraine, it was in our national interest, it just surprised all of us . Since there was unanimousity about the security assistance, we were surprised .
 OMB, which was following the direction of the President, supported lifting the hold . The exception of OMB was followed by the President .
 He provided no credible explanation for it, not from the day the hold was made until the day it was lifted .
 Witness after witness testifies they weren’t S522 given any reason for the hold while it was in place . Hale, Vindman, Croft, Holmes, Kent, Cooper, Sandy testified they weren't S522.
 OMB officers in OMB were saying it should be lifted. Even as OMB was implementing the hold, officers were calling for it to be lifted . OMB is still trying to implement the hold .
 Mr Sandy testified that his team drafted a memo on August 7 to OMB Acting Director Russ Vought . Mr Sandy said the memo was sent to Mr Vought.
 It recommended lifting the hold because of, one, the assistance was consistent with national security to support a stable, peaceful Europe . Two, the aid countered Russian aggression; three, there was bipartisan support for the program .
 Michael Duffey, the senior political appointee overseeing funds, approved the memorandum . Duffey is a senior political appointmentee .
 Senior advisers in the administration tried over and over again to convince President Trump to lift the hold over summer .
 Ambassador Bolton had a one-on-one meeting with President Trump about aid .
 Ambassador Taylor expressed concerns about withholding aid from Ukraine at a time when it was fighting Russia . The hold on the aid became public in August .
 Ambassador Taylor stressed the importance of the hold not just as a message to Ukraine but to Russia as well .
 Russia sent a message to Russia about U.S. support of Ukraine . Ukraine was in the midst of a hot war with Russia .
 Ambassador Taylor felt so strongly about the harm withholding the security assistance that for the first time ever in his decades of service at the State Department, he sent a first-person cable .
 In the cable, he described directly the ‘folly’ that Taylor saw in withholding the aid . The cable was written by a CNN correspondent .
 Ambassador Taylor never received an answer to the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD . Ambassador Taylor was told that Secretary Pompeo carried it with him to a White House meeting about security assistance .
 Secretary Pompeo, Secretary Esper, and National Security Advisor Bolton discussed the hold with President Trump shortly after Ambassador Taylor sent his cable .
 This was 2 days after the hold was publicly reported and after the President was briefed on the whistleblower complaint . This was the first time the President had been briefed.
 On August 30, Michael Duffey sent an email to Elaine McCusker, the DOD comptroller . Duffey's email was sent August 30 .
 President Trump has refused to produce this or any other email to Congress . The president has not sent any emails to Congress.
 The administration was forced to produce it in a freedom of information case in response to a court order . This critical passage was actually blacked out .
 The President finally released the hold on September 11, but again, there was no credible reason given for it .
 On the day it was released, OMB still didn't know why President Trump had ordered the hold .
 17 witnesses in the House impeachment inquiry say President Trump insisted on holding the aid and provided no reason . President Trump's handpicked top advisers, including his handpicked chief advisers, were among the witnesses .
 The aid had the clear support of career officers and political appointees in President Trump's administration as important for national security .
 DOD had already certified to Congress that Ukraine had met the anti-corruption conditions for the aid . Ukraine had already met the law, and it planned to begin implementing the expenditures January 23, 2020 .
 The President ordered a hold on the aid without any explanation against the unanimous advice of his advisers . Even after, for weeks, the administration continued to try to get him to release the hold .
 President Trump took a position contrary to his senior advisers, counter to congressional intent, and adverse to U.S. national security interests in Ukraine . Trump also violated the law by ordering the hold, according to the law .
 From the start of the hold in July, compliance of the Impoundment Control Act was a significant concern for OMB and DOD officials .
 Mark Sandy raised concerns with his supervisor, Michael Duffey, that the hold might violate Impoundment Control Act . Duffey's supervisor, Mark Sandy, said the hold may violate Impounds Control Act.
 Congress had been notified of the release of the funding. She testified that there was no legal mechanism to use to implement the hold .
 The DOD would have to start spending the funds on or about August 6 .
 He kept the hold for no legitimate purpose and without any congressional notification for long enough to violate the law . He was so determined to turn up the pressure on Ukraine that he kept it for a legitimate purpose .
 Government Accountability Office found that President Trump broke the law by implementing the hold and in failing to notify Congress about it .
 DOD was ultimately unable to spend all the $250 million in security assistance before the end of the fiscal year . The President’s hold means DOD was not able to spend the money on security assistance .
 The Constitution grants the President no unilateral authority to withhold funds from obligation . GAO explained that the Constitution grants no unilateral power to withhold money from obligation.
Faithful execution of the law does not permit the President to substitute his own constitutional priorities for those that Congress has enacted into law. Faithful execution does not allow President to replace his own priorities with that of Congress .
 OMB withheld funds for a policy reason, which is not permitted under the Impoundment Control Act .
 The bottom line, President Trump froze the aid to increase pressure on Ukraine to announce investigations he wanted .
 He violated his constitutional duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed . He violated the law by not taking care of the law, he said .
 President didn’t just violate the Impoundment Control Act while pressuring Ukraine to announce investigations he wanted .
This is really telling because he is still not telling the truth about it even now. This is really tell because he's still not tell the truth, says the author . This is because he has not told the truth on the subject.
 There was no ongoing interagency process after July 31 after it became clear that the entire interagency, including Cabinet offices, unanimously agreed the aid should be released .
 There simply was no debate or review in the interagency regarding the best use of such funds . The truth is, there simply is no debate and review of the funds .
 President's reason given by the President was not only illegal, it was false too. So the reason given was not just illegal; it wasfalse too .
 The dishonesty in the budget documents weren't the only steps that the President's men at OMB took to cover up his misconduct and enable his scheme .
 OMB went so far as to remove the authority to approve the budget documents from Mark Sandy, a career officer, and gave it to Michael Duffey, a political appointee without experience managing such documents .
 It occurred less than 2 weeks after Sandy raised concerns that the hold violated the law .
Sandy was not aware of any prior instance when a political appointee assumed this kind of funding approval authority . Sandy was not unaware of any previous instance of this type of funding authority .
 Duffey’s explanation that he simply wanted to learn more about the accounts doesn’t make sense to Sandy .
 The White House did not assert any privileges or immunities when it directed Duffey to defy Congress’s subpoena . The House didn't assert any rights or immunity when it ordered Duffey.
 If Duffey knew about any legitimate reason for the hold, I will bet he would not have been blocked from testifying . If Mr Duffey was aware of any legitimate reasons for the delay, he would be able to testify .
 The fact that he was blocked CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE — might lead you to infer that his testimony would be damaging to the President . The hold was solely used to ratchet up pressure on Ukraine, he says .
 OMB says it could no longer guarantee it would be able to spend all $250 million that Congress had directed before the end of the fiscal year .
 DOD determined that time had run out on August 12 . Not long after this August 12 email, DOD determined time had ran out .
 DOD estimated that as much as $100 million of aid might go unspent, even if the hold was immediately lifted . Cooper testified that DOD estimated $100m of aid may go un Spent .
 DOD refused to certify that it would be able to spend the funds by September 30 . As a result, DOD refuses to certify the funds .
 On August 20, OMB issued the first of six budget documents and removed the language providing legal cover for the hold . The language provided legal cover was removed from the document .
 The White House knew that DOD would not be able to spend all the funds, which was what the law required before September 30 .
 President Trump continued the hold for another 23 days without telling Congress . He knew the hold would violate the Impoundment Control Act, but didn't tell Congress .
 DOD had only 18 days to spend the remaining $223 million, which is about 89 percent of the total . After the President lifted the hold on the evening of September 11, DOD had just 18 days.
 $35 million would have expired and would have been forever lost to Ukraine had Congress not stepped in to pass a law to roll the money over to the next year . The money would have gone to Ukraine.
 As of today, more than $18 million of that money has not yet been spent . But even as of today. More than $ 18 million has yet to be spent .
 President Trump knowingly and willfully violated the law when he withheld aid from Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "All of this shows, clearly, that President Trump knew he was violating the law"
 Articles of Impeachment do not charge Donald Trump with violating the Impoundment Control Act . But just to be clear, it does not charge him with violating Impoundments Control Act.
We are not arguing that, but understanding this violation of the law is important to understanding the broader scheme of his abuse of power . We are not argues that, or not arguing, that we should be concerned about the violation of law .
 President was willing to go to Ukraine to pressure Ukraine to do his political dirty work . It shows the great lengths the President would go to in order to pressure his country to do its dirty work.
Security assistance wasn't something the law allowed him to give or take at his discretion . The security assistance wasn’t something he was allowed to give.
 No, he was legally obliged to release the money, but he simply didn’t care . He simply didn't care .
 S523 was the most important thing for Ukraine to hold the aid to force Ukraine to do that . He was so determined to get the announcement from Ukraine to smear his opponent that holding the aid for Ukraine was most important .
 The power is in the hands of the people, not of an unaccountable executive, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Keeping that new order is what we are charged to do .
 Mr CRow will outline information about the President’s intentions .
 Mr Chief Justice, Members of the Senate, counsel for the President, just bear with us a little while longer .
President's own political appointees have confirmed it, including the President's own senior appointees .
 The President's own Chief of Staff said it at a national press conference. We know it because the President’s own chief of staff said it .
 The President asked President Zelensky for a favor on July 25, and we know what that favor was .
 Two, multiple U.S. officials with fact-based knowledge of the process have confirmed it . The process is believed to have been done in the past .
 President Trump lifted the hold only after his scheme was exposed . Trump lifted it only after it was exposed.
 Four, there were no other legitimate explanations for the release of the hold . The hold was released on Monday .
 There are no facts that show that the President cared about any of those things, says CNN .
 President was a businessman who saw congressionally approved, taxpayerfunded military aid for Ukraine, our partner at war, as just another business deal .
 Military aid in exchange for fabricated dirt on opponent's political opponent . Military aid was used to help his political opponent's campaign .
 Let's start with the President's own words to President Zelensky on July 25 call .
President Trump linked military aid to his request for a favor . President Zelensky has a hold on his mind .
 I would also like to thank you for your great support in the area of defense . I would like to thanks you foryour great support. I would be happy to see how much you have done .
 We are almost ready to buy more Javelins from the United States for defense purposes. We are ready to continue to cooperate for the next steps . We are also ready to purchase moreJavelins for defense.
 The ‘great support in the area of defense’ included the $391 million in military aid . DOD had publicly announced its intent to provide $250 million of that aid .
 President Zelensky was showing gratitude to the President for the aid that DOD had just announced that DOD would be on its way .
 President Zelensky said Ukraine was almost ready to buy more Javelin antitank missiles . President Trump pivoted to what he wanted in return .
Ukrainian political investigations were the two specific political investigations that he wanted to announce to help his own political campaign . It was the two political investigations he wanted Ukraine to announce.
 President Trump’s quick pivot from the critical military aid that he knew Ukraine desperately needed to the investigations that would benefit him personally speaks volumes .
 President Zelensky raised the issue of military support after raising the issue . He linked the two issues with military support .
 United States officials listening to the call also made that connection . U.S. officials also made the connection .
 You said it shed some light on possible other motivations behind the security assistance hold . You said that it shed a light on potential other motivations .
 Mr Chairman was asked during the closed-door testimony how he felt about the call . It was the first time he had heard internally the PresiCONGRESSIONAL RECORD .
 It was not clear whether there was a direct connection or linkage between the ongoing hold on security assistance and what the President may be asking him to undertake in regard to investigations .
 It raised the question in your mind as to whether the two were related . But it raised a question as to if the two are related .
 It was the first time I had heard of any requests of Ukraine which were specific in nature . It was first I had seen any requests for Ukraine that were that specific in Nature .
 The hold was formally implemented by OMB the very day of the call . In fact, the hold was officially implemented by the very Day of the Call .
 Duffey sent an email to senior DOD officials instructing them to put a hold on the security aid . The email was sent hours after President Trump and President Zelensky called .
 President Trump has obstructed Congress’s ability to get answers from Congress .
 White House meeting was held to put additional pressure on Ukraine, witnesses say . No explanation for the hold, unanimous support for its release .
 The U.S. Embassy in Kyiv is located in the country's capital, Kyiv . The embassy is in the Ukraine .
 Mr Holmes testified that by late August you had a clear impression that the security assistance hold was somehow connected to the investigation that President Trump wanted .
 President Zelensky had received a letter from the President saying he'd be pleased to meet him following his inauguration in May .
 The security hold came up with no explanation. And we hadn't been able to get that meeting .
 I’d be surprised if any of the Ukrainians ... you said earlier, we discussed earlier, he said . When they received no explanation for why that hold was in place, they wouldn’t have drawn that conclusion .
 Ambassador Sondland didn’t reach that conclusion based only on common sense .
 Secretary Pompeo knew about the link between the investigations and the aid . So let’s begin with what Pompeo knows about the investigations .
 Sondland sent an email to Secretary Pompeo in which he proposed a pull-aside between President Zelensky and President Trump . President Trump canceled his trip to Warsaw to meet with President Zelenky .
 President Zelensky would be prepared to tell President Trump that his new justice officials would be able to announce matters of interest to the President, which could break the logjam .
 When you say matters of interest to the President, you mean the investigations that President Trump wanted .
 Secretary Pompeo didn't ask any questions and didn’t show any surprise or confusion in response to the email .
 Secretary Pompeo understood that security assistance was conditioned on the investigations . This shows that Pompeo, who also listened to the July 25 call as well, understood that the security assistance is conditioned on investigations .
 Sondland raised the issue to Vice President PENCE during a meeting to prepare for the Warsaw trip .
 Sondland was referring to the military aid and the White House meeting . The meeting was held at the National Security Council .
Vice President PENCE had a conversation with Vice President Pence before the meeting in Warsaw . PENCE: "I want to go back to that conversation that you had with him"
 The delay in the aid was tied to the issue of investigations, he said . He said he was concerned that the delay in aid was linked to investigations .
 This was a briefing attended by many people, and I was invited at the very last minute . This was the last minute of the briefing, and it was an important moment for me .
 It looks like everything is being held up until these statements get made, he says . But I think I spoke up at some point late in the meeting, and that’s my personal belief .
 Vice President PENCE wasn't surprised, nor did he ask what Sondland meant, because they all knew .
 Sondland’s understanding that the President had indeed conditioned the military aid on the public announcement of the investigations . This meeting also confirmed Sondlands’Sondland's understanding of the President's understanding .
 The Secretary of State and Vice President confirmed the conclusion . This was a commonsense conclusion, confirmed by the secretary of state and the Vice President .
 Sondland pulled aside Yermak, the top aide to President Zelensky, immediately after the Pence-Zelensky meeting . With that confirmation in mind, the president's top aide pulled aside.
 He was the one who resisted the public statement about the specific investigations in August . Now, recall, he's one of the ones who resisted a public statement .
 Ambassador Sondland described what he told Yermak in that short meeting . Ambassador SONDland described the short meeting with the ambassador .
Based on her previous communication with Secretary Pompeo, I felt comfortable sharing my concerns with Mr Yermak .
 It was a very, very brief pull-aside conversation that happened within a few seconds . The conversation was brief, but it was not long enough .
 I told Mr Yermak that I believed that the resumption of United States aid would likely not occur until Ukraine took some kind of action on the public statement that we had been discussing for many weeks .
President Obama's top advisers were not involved in an internal scheme, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 President Trump, through his agents, communicated the quid pro quo clearly to Ukraine . President Trump's agents communicated to Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ambassador Sondland told President Zelensky’s top aide on September 1 that Ukraine would not get the military aid unless it announced the investigations .
 Morrison watched Sondland’s conversation with Yermak and then received an immediate readout from Sondlands after that meeting . Morrison watched the conversation and received an immediately readout.
 Ambassador Bolton told him to go tell the NSC lawyers. Morrison urgently reported the interaction to Ambassador Bolton on a secure phone call .
 When someone says ‘call me,’ it says stop putting this in writing . And as everyone knows, when someone says 'call me,' it says.
 Taylor, who took contemporaneous notes of the conversation, explained that call .
 President Trump wants President Zelensky to state publicly that Ukraine will investigate Burisma and alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election . Ambassador Sondland told him that President Trump had told him he wants him to state public that Ukraine is investigating Burisma .
 Ambassador Sondland also told me that he now recognized that he had made a mistake by telling Ukrainian officials that only a White House meeting with President Zelensky was dependent on a public announcement of the investigations .
 Ambassador Sondland said everything was dependent on such an announcement including security assistance . In fact, the ambassador said.
 President Trump could only get the political benefit if it was public . A private commitment wasn’t enough for President Trump, he said .
 President Trump has been accused of weaponizing investigations for political purposes . He has a history of using investigations as a political tool .
 That is actually the exact opposite of how law enforcement investigations are conducted . That is exactly the same way law enforcement is conducted .
 If they are legitimate, law enforcement does not announce to the world they are investigating before actually doing it . If they're legitimate, they don't announce they're investigating before they do it . They do not announce that they're doing it before they're actually investigating .
 The President didn't actively want S525 a legitimate investigation . But the President didn’t actively want the investigation to take place .
 Taylor asked Sondland to speak to the President to see if he could change his mind . Taylor asked him to talk to him about changing his mind.
 Morrison testified that he had a conversation with Sondland on September 7 about the President’s discussion with the President .
 Third, Sondland and Taylor had a conversation on September 8 about the conversation that Sondlands had the day before .
 Sondland texted Taylor and Volker on September 8 that he had conversations with ‘‘POTUS’ and “Ze’’ — meaning President Trump and President Zelensky .
 The conversations must have happened before the morning of September 8, when that text was sent .
 Sondland asked President Trump an open-ended question about what he wanted from Ukraine . He also recalled that on that call, he simply asked him about Ukraine .
 The President had just learned about the whistleblower complaint in the Washington Post editorial linking the military aid to investigations just 2 days before .
 The fact that the President immediately blurted that out speaks volumes . The President's comments were not the first time he made the comments .
 Sondland testified no one in the world told him that there was a quid pro quo, including President Trump .
 People engaging in misconduct don’t usually admit it, says CNN’s John Sutter . Sutter: ‘I’m not sure what happened to me, but I’d like to know what happened .
 Sondland testified that his own conclusion that there was a quid pro quo was confirmed by his conversation with President Trump . We know it because Sondlands testified that he testified his own conclusions .
 Sondland relayed the exact message to President Zelensky right after he spoke to President Trump .
 Sondland does not take notes, and he readily admitted that if he could have seen his own documents prior to testifying, he would have remembered more . S526 Keep in mind that Sondlands doesn't take notes .
 Morrison and Taylor took extensive notes at the time and testified based on those notes . Sondland said he did not dispute any of the accounts of Morrison andTaylor .
 Let’s look at what Morrison and Taylor said about that September 7 phone call . Let's look at the call .
 Ambassador Sondland told you that he had just gotten off the phone with President Trump . Now, a few days later, he spoke again to the ambassador .
 President Zelensky had to make the statement and that he had to want to do it . Ambassador Sondland said there was no quid pro quo .
 Ambassador Taylor described his understanding of the call . The ambassador described the call as a 'call'
 President Trump told Ambassador Sondland he was not asking for a quid pro quo . President Zelensky said he is opening investigations of Biden and 2016 election interference .
 Ambassador Taylor explains what Sondland himself told Taylor about what took place on the day he called Trump .
 President Zelensky confirmed that he had talked to President Trump, as I had suggested a week earlier . President Trump was adamant that President Zelenky himself had to clear things up and do it in public .
 Taylor and Morrison testified that President Trump said that he did not want a quid pro quo . But they both testified that he followed that statement immediately by describing perfectly an exchange of this for that .
 Sondland had reached the conclusion that the aid was being held until the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE public announcement of the investigations . The President had called the President before the announcement .
 President Trump called President Trump on Monday night to discuss his plans for the White House . The president called the president on Monday morning and said he would call him again .
 I don't ever recall because that would have changed my entire calculus. I don’t ever recall. I’m not sure what happened to my calculus, but I think it would have been a change .
Security assistance was conditioned on the investigation after you spoke to President Trump. I'm just saying, you still believed that the security assistance wasConditioned on the probe .
Sondland relayed the message to President Zelensky right after his conversation with President Trump . Sondland had spoken to President Trump before he spoke to him .
 Ambassador Taylor’s recollection of what Sondland told Zelensky based on his notes .
 Ambassador Sondland also said that he had talked to President Zelensky and Mr Yermak and had told them that this was not a quid pro quo . If President Zelenky did not clear things up in public, we would be at a stalemate, Ambassador S
 I understood a ‘stalemate’ to mean that Ukraine would not receive the much needed military assistance . I understood it to be a 'stalemate' to say that Ukraine wouldn't receive much needed assistance .
 Ambassador Sondland confirmed that Taylor’s memory of this call was accurate . There would be a stalemate without the investigations .
 President Zelensky told Ambassador Taylor it was required for him to clear things up in public or there would be a stalemate . Ambassador Taylor also told him that if President Zelenky had told him, rather you told him it was not a quid pro quo.
Nothing would happen with the aid unless President Zelensky publicly announced the investigations . Nothing would happen without the aid.
 Morrison received a readout from January 23, 2020 Sondland immediately after the call and testified based on his notes . Second, Morrison received the readout on January 23.
 Sondland relayed the message to the President of Ukraine and told Ambassador Taylor about it . President Trump agreed that President Trump had confirmed a quid pro quo, Sondlands said .
 Sondland President Zelensky said he had finally relented after a long conversation with President Zelenky . He said that he had relented .
 President Zelensky had resisted making the announcement of the corrupt investigations for months .
 Giuliani and other agents of the President made it known that President Trump required it . He resisted when Giuliani and others of President Trump made it know that PresidentTrump required it.
 He resisted when the White House meeting he so desperately desired was conditioned on that announcement . He resisted being conditioned on the announcement .
 Ambassador Taylor was worried that even if President Trump wanted, President Trump might continue to hold the military aid .
 The nightmare is that they make the announcement but President Trump doesn’t release the aid . In other words, the nightmare was that they made the announcement .
 The U.S. would be withdrawing its support for Ukraine . Russian propaganda would be adopted by the United States .
 Ambassador Taylor reiterated his concerns about the President's quid pro quo in another series of text messages with Ambassadors Volker and Sondland .
 The message to Ukrainians (and Russians) we send with the decision on security assistance is key. The message is to the Ukrainians and Russians, we send .
I think it is crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign. As I said on the phone, I think it's crazy to withholding security assistance.
Security assistance was so important for Ukraine as well as our own national interests, says Goldman . He says the decision to withhold that assistance for no good reason other than help with a political campaign made no sense . Goldman: "I meant that the importance of security assistance"
 I mean that the United States was trying to support Ukraine as a frontline state against Russian attack. I mean the U.S. was supporting Ukraine as an "frontline state" against the Russian attack .
 The whole notion of a rules based order was being threatened by the Russians in Ukraine . And, again, the whole notion was being threats by the Russian government .
 The investigation of Burisma and the Bidens was clearly identified by Mr Giuliani in public for months as a way to get information on the two Bidens . I meant that the investigation of the Burisma. and the bidens were clearly identified.
 Sondland repeated again the false denial of a quid pro quo . In response to Taylor’s text message that it was ‘crazy to withhold security assistance for help in a political campaign’
 If you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or S. Pompeo a call to discuss them directly . That is Secretary Pompeo.
 Sondland's testimony revealed this text and the President’s denial were false . The President's denial was false, according to the testimony .
 Ambassador Sondland thought he was getting caught, and wanted to deny it in writing . He wanted to cover his tracks .
 Sondland’s denial in the text was false because later, when he was under oath, under penalty of perjury, he actually said a quid pro quo did exist .
 President Trump himself confirmed that the aid was conditioned on the public announcement of the investigations that the President wanted .
 The President of the United States violated the law by withholding nearly $400 million of taxpayer dollars intended to fight Russia . The money was intended to help Ukraine with his reelection campaign .
 He put his own interests over the country, and that is why we are here, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he is proud of his efforts to help the country .
 Chief Justice and Members of the Senate will give a brief recap of today's events . The Senate will begin again in the morning .
 The Chaplain asked for empathetic listening, and that is certainly what you have delivered for us today . We started out out the day with the Chaplain asking for emPathetic listening .
 When you leave this Chamber, you are bombarded again by members of the press. I know you have been bombarded with information all day, and when you leave, you will be bombarded by press . I know that you have had to be told what to do
 The President's counsel has an open mind for the President’s counsel, says President Obama . Obama says he wants to keep a "open mind" about all issues that we are presenting .
 Having watched you now for 3 days, whether it is someone you are predisposed to agree with or not to, it is abundantly clear that you are listening with an open mind . We can’t ask for anything more than that, so we are grateful.
 At the beginning of the trial, you may have seen the President’s tweet .
 The President's request that you reread the transcript reveals a lot more of the facts of this scheme, it reveals more about that conversation .
 The transcript is not really a transcript because it is not complete . It is not a transcript. It is a transcript .
 Let me tell you a few things that may have escaped your attention about that call record . Let me just tell you some things that might have escaped you.
 He wants investigation of Bidens. There are pivotal sections where he talks about CrowdStrike and he asks for that favor . He also wants investigation into Bidens .
 A few things that really struck my attention. Now that you know so much more about that scheme, let me just point out some of the things that struck me .
Not the old politicians, not the typical politicians, because we want to have a new format and a new type of government . We want a new form of government, not a new style of government.
 President Zelensky wants to impress upon President Trump he has brought in new people . He wants to convince him that he is a reformer .
 Ukraine is bringing in new people. So if there had been any concern about corruption in Ukraine, he's bringing in people .
 You can better well believe that he is prepared for this call because he needs that White House meeting . He needs that meeting.
President Obama wants to make sure that he lets the President know he is a reformer .
 The U.S. has been very good to Ukraine. I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal necessarily because things are happening that are not good, but the United States is very good.
 This is very interesting that he brings up very early in the conversation this relationship is nonreciprocal . He brings up the relationship very early, he says. This is a very interesting way to talk about the relationship .
 Ukraine has been ‘very good to Ukraine,’ but, you know, there is much coming the other way. We’ve been 'very good' to Ukraine.
 Bill Taylor had this reaction to Gordon Sondland . Now, you will remember that Bill Taylor's reaction to the former president .
 Ukraine doesn't owe us anything, says Taylor . Ukraine doesn’t owe us any, he says . Before he writes a check, he likes to get what he is owed .
 Donald Trump does think he is owed. Well, in this call you can see that Donald Trump is owed . In this call, Donald Trump says he is not owed .
 "I don’t see much reciprocity here. You want to get this military, you want this meeting," says President Obama .
 Mr S528 Giuliani will be able to travel to Ukraine and we will meet once he comes to Ukraine . I will personally tell you that one of my assistants spoke with Mr Giuliani just recently .
 This may be the first mention of Giuliani . You should read this carefully yourself, but this may be a first mention .
 We know he was rebuffed or something happened because he didn’t get that meeting. And we know that something happened to him .
 Zelensky is prepared for this call, and he knows it will resonate with Donald Trump if he says he would like to meet with Giuliani .
Third time he wants to underscore what great friends they are. That is the third time he has said they're great friends .
 I guarantee as President of Ukraine that all the investigations will be done openly and candidly . I also plan to surround myself with great people and in addition to that investigation, I guarantee all the investigation will be carried out openly .
 The President needs to hear what the President wants to hear is there will be no stone unturned in that investigation . He needs to assure the President that he is going to get his deliverable .
 A head of state to head-of-state call. That is pretty remarkable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 You know a couple of other things that you know at this point. Now, bear in mind a few other things.
Bear in mind that there was a whistleblower complaint before this call record was released . Bear in mind there was an earlier whistleblower complaint .
 The law requires that a whistleblower complaint that is designated to go to Congress must go to the intelligence committees . The law that we passed and you passed requires that the complaint must be designated to Congress .
 If inspector general finds it credible and urgent, it has to go to Congress soon . The inspector general has to find it credible. If the inspector general found it credible, it must go to congress .
 He contacts the White House, and he contacts Bill Barr’s Justice Department . He also contacts the Justice Department, and contacts the Obama administration .
 The Justice Department is telling you, Bill Barr’s Justice Department, you don’t have to do it .
 The Office of Legal Counsel will write some opinion. We will get our guys to write some opinions .
 "They are supposed to turn it over to you, and I don't know what to do about it," he says . "I need to tell you, to meet my obligation, they are not doing what they should," he adds .
 The Director of National Intelligence will have to come before Congress in an open hear January 23, 2020 . He will be the first Acting Director to refuse to turn a complaint over to Congress .
 It is the same call record that mentions the Attorney General of the United States, but it fails . It is also the same phone call record.
 The effort to cover up, to conceal the whistleblower complaint, fails, and it comes out . That effort to hide the complaint comes out.
 Attorney General's name would have never come up in this call record, and there would have been no necessity to distance himself from the President’s actions .
 President Zelensky says he or she will have a new Prosecutor General . He says he will look into the company that you mention in this issue .
 Two witnesses who were on that call that Burisma was mentioned. There is no company mentioned in this issue in the call record, but of course, you have heard now .
 The mention of Burisma didn't make it into the call record . That call record went to that highly classified server .
 The issue of the investigation of the case is actually the issue of making sure to restore the honesty . The investigation is actually a matter of ensuring the honesty.
 We will work on the investigation of the case. So we will take care of that, and we will be working on the case . We will be looking into the case, but we will not comment on the matter .
 Zelensky feels the need to assure the President that he is going to do those political investigations that the President wants .
 I will have Mr Giuliani give you a call, and I am also going to have Attorney General Barr call . We will get to the bottom of it.
 Rudy Giuliani tells us something. Don’t take my word, but I think there is no one who comes up more in this call record than Giuliani .
 I want to assure you that we will be very serious about the case, and we will work on the investigation . On the other hand, I also want to assured you that they will bevery serious about it, and that we are very serious .
 I January 23, 2020 also want to assure you we are serious about doing the investigation . I January 21, 2020, will be the first time I have spoken to the president of the U.S.
 Rudy and the Attorney General will be called to the White House, says President Obama . "Any time you want to come to theWhite House, just call," says Obama .
 Zelensky goes into that call with his wanting the meeting . He also wants the meeting with his wife .
 He knew what he had to promise, and that was the visit, he said . He said he wanted what he wanted to obtain, and the visit was a visit .
 I can tell you something, and this is what is so frightening about these circumstances, says CNN's John Sutter . "This is what's so frightening," he says of the situation .
President Barack Obama was caught in the White House's office . He was released after the President got caught . The White House says it will not release the President .
President Obama is charged with the president's crimes, but he has not been charged with any crimes . President Obama has been accused of lying to the White House about what he has done .
 Nobody is really making the argument ‘Donald Trump would never do such a thing’ because, of course, we know that he would, and of course he did .
 When all of them were telling him this Ukraine 2016 stuff was kooky, crazy, Russian propaganda, he chose not to believe them . He chose to ignore them .
 Christopher Wray was offering him something that would help him personally and what he was offering was merely the truth . Because he wanted to, because he wanted the help he was offered, he wanted it personally .
 Christopher Wray was offering him information he needed to protect this country and its elections . But that was not good enough, he said .
 My colleagues on the Intel Committees of the House and Senate are trying to find out what's happening . My colleagues are trying.
 Let’s say they start dumping documents to interfere in the next election. Well, let's say they get in, and let’'s says they start dumping documents . It's not clear if they will be able to do so .
 Burisma says they start dumping fake things they didn't hack from Burisma . But they want you to believe they did .
 Let’s say they start blatantly interfering in our election again to help Donald Trump . Donald Trump is the president of the U.S.
 Maybe you could have given him a freebee and said he was joking, but now we know better . He was joking .
 hours after he S529 did that, Russia did, in fact, try to hack Hillary's emails . Hours after he did, Russia tried to hack her emails .
 The U.S. people deserve a President they can count on to put their interests first . President Obama should put his interests first, he says .
 If right doesn't matter, it doesn’t matter how good or bad our advocacy in this trial is, it does not matter how well written the oath of impartiality is . It doesn‘t matter. how good the Framers were; it doesn't Matter how good
 The Framers couldn't protect us from ourselves if right and truth don’t matter, says John Sutter .
 Colonel Vindman's father came from or the old country that his great-grandfather came from . But here, right is supposed to matter .
 President Barack Obama has been in office for more than a decade . Obama's administration has been criticized for his handling of foreign policy . Obama is expected to be inaugurated on Friday .
 If you find him guilty, you must find that he should be removed. This is why, if you find he guilty, he must be removed . This is because right matters are important .
 Chief Justice asks unanimous consent that the trial adjourns until 1m., Friday, January 24, and that this order also constitute the adjournment of the Senate .
 Senate adjourned until Friday, January 24, 2020, at 1m. There being no objection, at 10:32 p.m., the Senate, sitting as a Court of Impeachment, is adjourned .