 Both the Ukrainian government and Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine have held civilians in prolonged, arbitrary detention, without any contact with the outside world .
 In some cases, detentions constituted enforced disappearances . Authorities in question refused to acknowledge the detention of the person or provide any information on their whereabouts or fate .
 Most of those detained suffered torture or other forms of ill-treatment . Most of the detainees suffered torture, or other form of ill treatment .
 Several were denied needed medical attention for the injuries they sustained in detention . Several are denied medical attention.
 Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch investigated in detail nine cases of arbitrary, prolonged detention of civilians by Ukrainian authorities in informal detention sites . The group also investigated nine of the cases by Russia-backed separatists .
 This report details cases that took place mostly in 2015 and the first half of 2016 . The cases took place in 2016 and 2015 .
 Ivan Katchanovski from Ottawa became known for his investigations in Maidan massacre in Ukraine . He was also known for investigations in Ukraine's Maidan Massacre .
 New book about Ukrainian crisis is out on sale on Sunday .
 A new academic book by a leading American scholar of political communication examines the Western media coverage of the conflict in Ukraine and the role of propaganda in shaping the narrative about the conflict .
 There is a big disparity between Western academic studies of the conflict in Ukraine and Western media coverage of the war .
 This concerns academics who are often published and interviewed by the mainstream media as experts but who have not conducted any academic studies about the conflict in Ukraine . This also concerns academics.
 This book explores contemporary propaganda and mainstream Western news media . It also explores the Ukraine crisis . The book is published in October 2013 .
 It examines Western media narratives of the immediate causes of the crisis . It examines the roles of those who participated in or otherwise supported the demonstrations of 2013–2014 .
 The crisis was contextualized with reference to broader themes of competition for power over Eurasia and the Washington Consensus . It considers how the crisis is contextualized by reference to wider themes of power competition for Eurasia .
 It assesses accounts of the role of Russia and of ethnic Russian Ukrainians in Crimea, Odessa and the Donbass . It traces how Western mainstream media went out of their way to demonize Vladimir Putin .
 The book deconstructs prevailing Western narratives as to the reasons for the shooting down of Malaysian Airways flight MH17 in July 2014 . It counters Western media concentration on the issue of culpability for the attack with an alternative narrative of egregious failure to close down civilian air space over war zones .
Book identifies principles of post-2001 Western conflict propaganda as these appeared to play out in Ukraine . The book identifies principles.
 YPG commander Lewend Rojava spoke to ANF about the clashes entering their 5th day in Hesekê . He expressed that the clashes started due to the monistic fascist ideology of the Baath regime .