 Customary it is appears to have become to regurgitate ‘most read’ or “favourite’ posts throughout 2015 . The year inevitably draws to a close – this blog won’t.
 This last entry of 2015 will take the opportunity to wish a Happy New Year each and every one of the 130,000 readers who either mistakenly or deliberately took their time – or indeed wasted their time .
 Of the 130,000 readers that visited more than once, then it is humbling, says author . There is such a limited commentary upon Ukraine in the English language that you were forced to return through lack of alternatives .
Politicians, local, national, and foreign have sought out this blog for off the record chats during 2015 .
 Ukraine's diplomats form an often under-acknowledged front line for Ukraine . The diplomats both domestic and foreign have been under-appnowledged .
 The erudite and informative conversations are always something of a joy – even when they simply can’t be repeated .
 publishers and editors that have requested essays from this blog after reading it can be offered . To the publishers and Editors that have asked for essays, then a humble thank you is all that can be given .
 To the think-tanks, GONGOs, NGOs and civil society people who sought an exchange of views during 2015. To those that jetted around Europe to take part in round-tables and sit on panels full of people far more enlightened and erudite, sincere
 There is no better outcome than to leave such events with new ideas, thoughts to ponder, or perhaps most importantly new and intellectually challenging friends .
 It is time for a confession to those who pressed the ‘Donate’ button on the blog Home Page during 2015 . It is also time for those who sent their hard earned money not really knowing how that money would be spent .
 A pittance from the far larger grand total received was spent on a banner/logo – self indulgence . The total of the grand total was a pittance .
 The blog is supposed to earn trust by donating money to causes and people far more in need . However, for those having somewhat blindly pressed ‘donate’ and sent money, then hopefully some integrity is projected .
 2016 will not see the princely sum of $24.95 spent on more blog aesthetics, so in all probability all “donations’ will be “further donated’s ad hoc to various needy causes/people .
 Ukrainian soldiers on the eastern front do their duty. When it comes to thanks, it would be entirely remiss not to thank those largely unknown soldiers . All those volunteers that work anonymously and tirelessly to support them – and support the other areas of Ukrainian life where the State is failing.
 Such people are a constant and perhaps troubling reminder of just how underutilised our time or abilities are .
 The people I deal with today will be meddling, ungrateful, arrogant, dishonest, jealous, and surly, says CNN's John Sutter . The people he deal with will be meddled, unGrateful, dishonest and dishonest, he says .
 Marcus Aurelius: "I have seen the beauty of good, and the ugliness of evil, and I have recognized that the wrongdoer has a nature related to my own"
 Normal service will resume in 2016, with the same aim of giving you something about Ukraine to read during your coffee break .
 31st December 2015 was the deadline set within the Minsk II Agreement for its complete implementation . The deadline was set in December 2015 .
 The deadline will pass without even a ceasefire having come into effect, let alone the return of control of the Ukrainian border to Ukrainians .
 Minsk II is all there is – and therefore bumping and/or ignoring the deadline was obviously going to happen unless there was a severe ‘or else’ as a consequence of failing to meet the 31st December deadline . There wasn’t and
 A Kremlin currently projecting the appearance of being happy to take any sanctions pain, suggests negotiations will continue to be in bad faith .
 Boris Gryzlov's appointment earlier this week signified a continuance of the process well into 2016 regardless of the obligated 2015 year end deadline . The appointment of Gryzov as Russian representative at the “Contact Group’s” "Contact Group" may signify .
 The process has been officially recognised and announced an extension of the process to occur . The process remains for an official recognised and an officially recognised extension to occur.
Rumour circulated that there would be a “Normandy Four’s’ leaders conference call on 30th December – 24 hours before the Minsk II deadline is due to pass far from implemented and killing the agreement .
Rumours confirmed after official disclosure of contact between Chancellor Merkel and President Poroshenko in preparation for the conference call .
 The parties discussed the fulfillment of the Minsk agreements and emphasized the necessity of their full implementation . The parties also discussed the fulfilment of the agreements .
 The President drew attention to the fact that pro-Russian militants violated the ceasefire regime more and more often and conducted open provocations, particularly the shelling of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission . The President also drew attention.
 Petro Poroshenko highly appreciated the EU’s joint decision on the continuation of sanctions against Russia .
 Minsk II is likely to see the official declaration of an extended deadline for the Normandy Four leaders . It is perhaps questionable whether any signatures will be on any supplemental or amended agreement .
 The penalty for The Kremlin failing to abide by a 2015 deadline it agreed to, is nothing more than extended existing sanctions . The penalty is seemingly nothing more.
 It would appear unlikely that any specific additional penalty for absolutely no Kremlin attempt to meet the 31st December obligations is going to be forthcoming .
 Minsk II implementation deadline is not yet agreed upon at all . This raises the question of the significants of any future implementation deadline .
 Few expect the Minsk II agreement to be fully implemented during 2016 . Very few expect it to be implemented in 2016 .
 2016 deadline set that does not have a cast iron or significant “or else’s” attached will probably prove to be as useful as the deadline that expires on 31st December 2015 .
 Russian TV channels have been citing 3 – 5 years to fully implement Minsk II . The perception is that there is not going to be a fix in the foreseeable future in the occupied Donbas .
 The current Kremlin regime through the Duma 2016 and Presidential 2018 elections without any requirement to change policy course in the occupied Donbas due to domestic public pressure .
 The Russian public are being conditioned to accept Russian involvement in the occupied Donbas until 2018 at the earliest, or perhaps until 2020 – or beyond .
 Minsk II will see the same complete absence of a deadline as Minsk 2 implementation . The complete absence will see a complete absence from a deadline .
 The deadline options in the absence of a significant and cast iron "or else" will be little more than hollow rhetoric agreed to by all parties . Each party will knowingly sell it to their peers and constituents, only to see another deadline come and go without consequences .
 Minsk II deadline set further into the future that will then see little effort during 2016, the absence of a deadline . The options then, a 2016 deadline that is as likely to see Minsk 2 implementation as that of the 2015 deadline.
 Smart money will probably be put upon an equally weak 2016 deadline – due to no ‘or else’ to concentrate minds .
 The original ranks of the ideologically driven far right/nationalists swiftly became diluted due to a lack of central control within the organisation . The organisation became a security blanket/organisation for those engaged in criminal activity .
 The blame for such dilution lies with the Right Sector leadership of the time . The rot within the organisation would bring it to a swift end .
 The far right Azov Battalion grew in number due to its reputation as a fighting unit that was accomplished and disciplined, regardless of its core ideology .
 The National Guard is now an incorporated unit within the National Guard . It also moved into the State institutional “mainstream’s’ mainstream, becoming an incorporation unit . It is also becoming an incorporated units within the Guard .
 There are distinct differences between nationalists and patriots. It is a mixture therefore of nationalists and of patriots – and there are different differences between them .
 Right Sector remained outside of the State institutions and failed to form any kind of outreach projection . It allowed criminality within its ranks, allowing criminality within the ranks .
 It was doomed to a relatively short existence from the choices and decisions it made . It was thus doomed to an extremely short existence .
 The exclusion of those that operate outside the law has no political future, says Right Sector . Right Sector has nopolitical future.
 Dmitry Yarosh, the now former leader of Right Sector, has announced that he and his team are leaving Right Sector . Mr Yarosh alluding to some of the aforementioned ‘issues’ for their departure from the organisation .
 Mr Yarosh can clearly see that the Right Sector vehicle will take him no further in politics – and he would be correct .
 The 5th and 8th battalions of the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps and the Hospitallers Medical Battalion are being reorganized into a Ukrainian volunteer army .
 A "Ukrainian Volunteer Army" fits institutionally with the Ukrainian Armed Forces . What legal protections can be lawfully afforded to these units by the State is somewhat unclear .
 It is unclear just how much longer Ukraine can or will put up with armed entities that are not fully under the control of the State .
 The State in all cases has control over, and the monopoly upon, violence. Let’s be quite blunt, whether the method of governance is dictatorship, autocracy or democracy, the author says .
 Without enforcing the rule of law, or indeed enforcing rule by law for dictators and autocrats, becomes problematic . Without it enforcing law for the dictators, it becomes problematic.
With the identifiably political and military elements moving on, that seems to leave only the pretenders, organised criminality and organised criminality behind . All of which could have been subjected to an internal cleansing long ago .
 Mr Yarosh alludes to the necessity to leave those that any internal cleansing would have ejected, behind . He says we categorically reject pseudo-revolutionary activity that threatens the existence of Ukraine as a state .
 We do not consider blood shedding, doomed-to-failure revolts against it as an option . We are in opposition to the incumbent government, but we do not considers blood shedding .
With all the above reasons, my team and I are leaving the Right Sector national liberation movement. With all theabove reasons, I am leaving the movement .
 We are initiating the creation of a new political movement whose founding congress is scheduled for February . The movement's founding congress will be held in February .
 We are now working on its development, the concept of our activity, programmatic guidelines . We are working on a programmatic framework for the project .
 Mr Yarosh's statement appears to suggest he felt unable to purge the ranks of Right Sector from pretenders, criminality and loony to control .
 The Right Sector brand disintegrates will be no surprise. That the pretenders will disappear into nothingness .
 Mr Yarosh pooh-poohs are baying for further revolt against the brand . The brand has been accused of being 'swivel-eyed' by some of its customers .
Ukrainian Volunteer Army is an appendix to a nationalist political movement . It tests the limits of political inclusion in a democratic, rule of law, political system . Ukraine's recent 2014 and 2015 national and regional elections make clear in Ukraine .
 Mr Yarosh's statement signals the overdue end of the Right Sector brand . The brand has long lost its way internally, he says .
 The question will be whether he can build another nationalist entity that avoids suffering the same weak internal management and membership issues that caused the internal slow creeping cancer within Right Sector within a few months of its creation .
Ukrainian far right has almost no voting constituency of note, and the swiftness of any new entity’s infiltration by the SBU and Kremlin alike .
 The new tax code reduces employers payroll tax from 41% to 22% . It is a radical reduction to a tax commitment of a tax that very few employers pay .
 SMEs and private entrepreneurs are being asked to pay a 22% tax that they generally don’t pay now – instead of a 41% tax they generally pay now . The SMEs are being told to pay the tax they usually don't pay now.
 Of those that pay it in an effort to be quasi-legitimate with the tax authorities, generally it is done based upon the minimum wage . Those that do pay it are paid in cash in an envelope .
 MPs of the Verkhovna Rada will also take their assistants and advisors ‘out of the shadows’ too . Readers may ponder whether the MPs will be paid cash in envelopes more often than not .
 The expectation is that the Ukrainian business world will begin to pay the 22% tax they generally haven’t paid instead of the 41% tax. The expectation hope is that they will pay the 21% tax rather than the 22%.
 In order to keep pace with the projected inflation for 2016, salary increases would need to be 12% to retain current salary purchasing power .
 Most of those who do not appear on their employers pay roll have not paid tax . The rest of the pay roll comes as cash in an envelope, with the rest coming as cash .
Employers pay the 22% tax instead of the 41% tax avoided, and employees pay 15% tax . The request is to SMEs and private entrepreneurs to become morally upstanding businesses/citizens .
 Ukrainian leadership appeals to each citizen to play his or her full part in that tax effort . In short, the “western world of universal suffrage is part of the ‘European integration’
Current investigations into Boris Lozhkin and money stashed in Austria will not find any evidence of money laundering . However, significant tax evasion is a different matter, according to the investigation .
 Mr Lozhkin is an example of the norm within the Verkhovna Rada and Bankova . He is not the exception, but he is not an exception .
There will be a severe lack of constituency trust when it comes to bringing the multi-billion UAH tax avoiders to account . Current leadership has failed to jail any famous personalities for the chronic corruption .
 Ukrainian constituency will want to see that the elite are paying their taxes . Ukrainian constituency wants to be held accountable for avoiding doing so .
 Government of Ukraine believes 22% employers tax is the place to start . It would help considerably if they would set the example too .
 The Kremlin has appointed a real decision maker in the occupied Donbas . For the first time since the “Contact Group’s” started meeting regarding the ‘issues’ and “solutions’ in the Donbas.
 A man who has made decisions about Ukraine that have led to historic outcomes before – but those historic outcomes were entirely wasted . The man is a man who made decisions that have been made before .
 Boris Gryzlov is a long time chum of Vladislav Surkov who remains overseer of the “Ukraine issue’s’ Ukraine issue . In 2004, he agreed with having another round of presidential elections that saw Viktor Yanukovych eventually beaten by Viktor Yushenko .
 In short he is a big name with significant political clout . He has direct access to The Kremlin and its innermost decision making conclave .
 Surkov is currently getting the better of Deputy Prime Minister Volodin within the Kremlin .
 Former President Kuchma and Boris Gryzlov sat together again around a table discussing outcomes that the Kremlin really doesn’t like, and Kremlin interference .
 It is one thing to communicate and arrive at mutually agreed and acceptable outcomes . However, it is another to communicate with the aim of obstructing mutually agreed outcomes by obfuscation .
 Mr Gryzlov has been appointed. A serious change of policy either before or immediately after those elections seems rather unlikely .
 Mr Gryzlov has been appointed to “impress’ not Ukraine with his political weight/name recognition – but the Kremlin proxies .
 The chances of a serious change in policy prior to the Russian presidential elections in 2018 seem somewhat unlikely too for the same reasons as those in the above paragraph .
 Mr Gryzlov changed the dynamic of the “Contact Group’s ‘Contact Group,’ he said .
 Prime Minister Yatseniuk says Ostchem has paid a due debt from 2010 of UAH 3 billion .
 A bad debt that should not have been written off – and wasn't – has been paid, and in full . The debt should not be written off, and wasn’t.
 The arrest of some of Mr Firtash’s assets in Ukraine was no doubt necessary . It took some of his assets to accomplish it.
 assets arrested specifically in connection with this particular debt have presumably been released . Presumably those assets are no longer subject to arrest now that the debt has been paid .
 A particularly robust and forceful method of credit control and debt recovery has seemingly paid off – Bravo . Bravo is a strong and forceful way to control debt recovery .
 Prime Minister Yatseniuk is attempting to frame the matter as part of the deoligarchisation of Ukraine . However, he says the matter is part of a fight against corruption .
 The recovery of a bad debt contributes to the deoligarchisation of Ukraine is somewhat unclear . Quite how the recovery of bad debts contributes to Ukraine is unclear .
 The percentage of national GDP controlled by the oligarchy has not reduced due to the repayment of this debt . The percentage has not been reduced by this debt.
 The percentage of national employment within oligarch controlled companies has not been reduced by the payment of this debt . The percentage is not reduced by this debt.
 The political influence and interference within national politics has not reduced with the payment of this debt . Political influence has not been reduced with this debt, according to the debt .
 The Ukrainian market place has not become a “free market’ with the payment of this debt . The “limited access’s” market place is not a free market, it has not been a ‘free market.’
 All arrested assets specifically arrested in connection with this debt will/should now be returned to the control of Mr Firtash .
 U.S. desires to subject oligarch to due process over other alleged corrupt activities . The debt was not written off, it is a token gesture toward fighting corruption .
 The signal it sends will prevent any further corruption amongst the oligarchy or any of the Ukrainian elite remains to be seen .
 Firtash’s Ostchem repaying the debt to release his assets back to his control in any way ‘deoligarchs’ Ukraine. It is even less clear how Mr Firtosh’'s Ostchem is repaying his debt .
 To deoligarch Ukraine requires an open free market with numerous competing entities in every market sector, market transparency and market transparency, a level business and legal playing field . There is no requirement that they be necessarily destroyed for the sake of destruction and removed from the market place
 It requires the privatising of State owned companies to as many foreign buyers as possible to diversify and dilute the national GDP contributers . It also requires an end to subsidies of state owned companies .
 Deoligarchisation also requires restrictions upon their odious interference and influence within politics . Deolgarchisation requires restrictions on their influence and influence in politics .
 Many of the debtors are not oligarch owned entities – but are debtors nonetheless . Many of those debtors aren't oligarch-owned entities .
 The Verkhovna Rada also passed legislation allowing the Ukrainian government the ability for reciprocity when the Kremlin trade embargo with Ukraine commences on 1st January 2016 .
 A Kremlin inspired embargo is timed to commence simultaneously with the full implementation of the EU DCFTA with Ukraine . The full implementation with Ukraine will begin simultaneously .
 The Government of Ukraine may now apply the same rules of the game to Russian produce as The Kremlin will do to that of Ukraine .
 Trade between Ukraine and Russia has plummeted following the annexation of Crimea and the occupation of parts of The Donbas in the east .
 The Kremlin applied embargo to Ukrainian products . There is really little further damage of significants any Ukrainian instigated trade warfare with Russia will do to its own economy .
 Ukrainian trade will expand with China, the EU, Turkey, Israel and several MENA nations . Ukraine's trade will also expand with the EU and the EU .
 Most economists predict economic growth of about 2% in Ukraine during 2016 . Most predict growth of 2% during the year .
Kremlin designed and controlled hostilities in eastern Ukraine will continue throughout 2016 . They may be right, depending upon the scale of Kremlin designed andcontrolled hostilities .
 The issue for Ukraine is not returning to growth in 2016. The issue is maintaining that growth in 2017, for that will require market reforms that have been glacial .
 necessity is the mother of invention – or perhaps better stated, mother of circumvention . However, necessity is not the mother.
 Belarus is a landlocked nation renowned for its seafaring abilities . It is possible to purchase Belorussian seafood products in Moscow supermarkets .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan have hardly been swift in publicly supporting Moscow . It is of note that since The Kremlin’s actions against Ukraine, fellow CIS and EurAsian Union nations have not publicly supported Moscow .
 Kazakhstan has recently seemed to have taken a more anti-Kazakh stance . But that will be perceived as somewhat anti-kazakh .
 Kazakhstan signed a political and trade agreement with the EU on 21st December . Despite the supposed trade rules of the EEU, Kazakhstan went ahead .
 Kazakhstan and Ukraine have some commonalities within The Kremlin . President Putin has inferred publicly that both are not truly sovereign/real States .
 The Kremlin distracted by busily making poor decisions over Ukraine, Syria, Turkey – notwithstanding even worse domestic decisions – now is the time to act and prudently insure its essential place in a Sino-European trade route now .
 Astana will be more than aware that President Putin looks set to remain in power for at the very least a few more years yet . The “collective Putin” even longer, Astana said .
 Some delicate decoupling is required, together with a swift coupling with Chinese and European interests to avoid any gaps .
 Kazakhstan is also receiving more than 10 times the Chinese FDI than Russia currently – much “Silk’s” related . Russia is also getting more than ten times more FDI.
 Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan particularly in Central Asia are looking east to China and also west to Europe along these trade routes . Turkey and perhaps Iran eventually will also be looking east.
 Moscow looks far less to Moscow, instead is turning a cool shoulder . It is becoming painfully obvious that Moscow is turning its cool shoulder.
 Kazakhstan has apparently reached agreement with Ukraine over continuing trade. It comes then as little surprise that Kazakhstan appears to simply ignore The Kremlin imposed trade embargo with Ukraine . The embargo theoretically should effect all EEU members .
 Some may opine that such an agreement simply underlines the hollowness of the EEU project . If not all EEU members are WTO members, then any trade block/major economy to trade block negotiations will not go very far at all .
 Kazakhstan and Ukraine have apparently agreed an intensified industrial cooperation too . Turkmen relations appear fairly warm, having mentioned Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Ukraine .
 Ukraine may ultimately be the final central/northern spur into Europe for the Chinese ‘Silk’ projects . Turkey services the southern European entry – all of which deliberately avoid the territory of Russian Federation entirely .
 The relationship between Ukraine and Kazakhstan may well be something worth keeping an eye upon . It will say as much about the Kazakh intent in the neighbourhood as it will of Ukraine .
 You are currently browsing the Odessablog's Blog archives for December, 2015 .