 Ukraine may have foiled a plot to assassinate President Poroshenko when it intercepted a large cache of weapons coming out of Russia-invaded and occupied Donbas .
 The Security Service of Ukraine or SBU revealed a plot involving Volodymyr Ruban, the Russian terrorist leaders Alexander Zakharchenko and Oleksandr “Tashkent” Timofeev, and operation co-ordinators in Moscow to potentially kill many
 A mass-casualty terrorist operation of the Putin regime against the Ukrainian people may just have been averted .
 Ruban was charged with the preparation of a terrorist act and illegal possession of weapons . He was charged in the Shevchenkivsky district court on March 9 .
 Volodymyr Ruban is widely believed to be an operative of Viktor Medvedchuk . He is believed to have been in charge of the Ukrainian government .
 Medvedchuk is a Ukrainian oligarch who is Putin’s ‘grey cardinal’ in Russia's war against Ukraine . He is Putin's “ grey cardinal” in Russia’'s war with Ukraine .
 Putin feigns to ‘consult’ with Medvedchuk, the figureheads of the so-called “LPR’ and “DPR” and Vladimir Gundyayev . He is determining his war policy against Ukraine .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is on the list of sanctioned individuals of both the U.S. and Canada . He is a former member of the United States and Canada.
 His actions during Russia’s invasion of Ukraine make him a grave threat to international peace and security . His actions made him a serious threat to the world's security .
 Medvedchuk’s negotiator, Volodymyr Ruban, held direct talks with the Russian terrorist group . The prisoner exchange ended up taking place on 27 December 2017 .
 Ruban also brought Nadiya Savchenko to Russia-occupied Makiivka on 24 February 2017 . Ruban was also brought to Russia in February 2017.
 Savchenko was a hostage of the Putin regime . She took up her role as a member of parliament in the Verkhovna Rada .
 Since her release, Savchenko has adopted the Putin-Medvedchuk policy against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . Savchenko was released from prison in April 2013 .
 Savchenko has said Crimea should be surrendered to Russia . He has said that the so-called “DPR’ and “LPR” should be treated as representative bodies of a pro-Russian, separatist Donbas .
 Ruban freed many Ukrainian P.O.W.s and hostages from the horrors of Russian captivity and torture . Savchenko because she spoke patriotic defiance while a hostage of the Putin regime . Ruban because he succeeded in freeing many Ukrainian hostages from Russian captivity .
 Savchenko is widely suspected of being a Putin agent – as Medvedchuk is known to be . Savchenko has been accused of being an agent for Putin .
 Ruban is now charged with terrorist offences – part of a conspiracy in which Ruban was acting as an operative of Medvedchuk and therefore Putin . Ruban has been charged with terror offences .
 Muscovy is waging total war against the Ukrainian people, and that includes using the temporarily occupied territory of Crimea and Donbas to launch attacks, send spies, infiltrate sabotage and disruption teams . Volodymyr Ruban was caught in on March 8 .
Ukrainian authorities will follow the conspiracy up from Ruban to Medvedchuk, and up to Putin .
 Russia's plot through Ruban against Kyiv will be the template for Russia’s plot against other Western capitals soon enough . Russia”s plot to win the game will be a template for the country's plot against the West .