 The Scrapbook Casual Editorials Articles War is a force that makes us plagiarize, the Bush league, and more Philip Terzian, epical exterminator Our 'Dead Broke' Leaders . Don't Go There Meet the New Boss The Cantor The Cantor succession Voters vs.
 As Hedges has grown more austere in appearance, his rhetoric has grown steadily apocalyptic . His prose has grown overwrought .
 The Scrapbook will give an idea of what The Scrabook is talking about . The Christian Right and the War on America will be on the front page .
 His dystopian view of his homeland, and overripe tone, has earned him awards from Amnesty International, teaching invitations from Princeton and Columbia . He has also been invited to teach at Princeton and Princeton .
 Hedges claims to subsist at the edge of the American ‘tinder-box’ But in fact, he lives and works very comfortably in the media .
 George Will wrote a column about how progressives have exaggerated the prevalence of rape on college campuses . This week, in the New Republic, author Christopher Ketcham Shut Up .
 The column was not well received by some or even, as a great many of the histrionic responses would indicate, well understood . The column is not well understood.
 A group called UltraViolet was touting the success of an online petition they’d That Makes Us Plagiarize chronicles a history of serial plagiarism by Hedges . It is so detailed that it is difficult to see how any but the most credulous members of the
 Ketcham was first alerted to Hedges's plagiarism when he discovered that his own wife's work had been pilfered . A fact-checker at Harper's discovered that Hedges had lifted long passages from a Philadelphia Inquirer story .
 When confronted with the facts, Hedges was characteristically evasive and bullying . Harper's, to its credit, declined to publish the piece .
 It will be interesting to see if the Times reviews Hedges’s Pulitzer Prize-winning work .
As we have said before, plagiarism ought to be a capital offense in journalism . As we've said before.
Whatever impels writers to steal language from other writers, and publish it as their own, also makes them vulnerable to discovery . Whatever impelsWriters to steallanguage from others, it makes them vulnerability to discovery.
 Hedges’s demons, which seem so obvious on the page, clearly represent something deeper than politics .
 The last thing serial plagiarists need is editors willing, in the name of ideology, to ignore their plagiarism. ♦ whipped up over the controversy.
 The Washington Post should take a stand against rape, says Nita Chaudhary, co-founder of UltraViolet .
 Nothing in Will’s column was remotely outside the lines of civil discourse .
 Chaudhary aggressively defended the organization’s infamous “General Petraeus is likely to become General Betray Us’ ad .
 Valerie Jarrett helped Lee propose to Chaudhary at a state dinner . In fact, Jarrett helped him propose to Lee at the dinner .
 In past administrations, 2/2 / The Weekly Standard June 23, 2014 LANDOV I'WAS. In past presidents, 2 / The weekly Standard, 2, and 2/3, 2014 .
 The National Organization for Women is also calling for the Post to drop his column .
 Four Democratic senators signed a letter to Will accusing him of “treating as a socially acceptable phenomenon’s a borderline libelous characterization . The letter was sent to Will by Will .
 We’re referring to actual free speech, not the increasingly common progressive view . The First Amendment pertains to government restraint of expressions so as to deflect criticism of your own Stalinist impulses .
 Real free speech implies a culture where we tolerate opinions that bother us, says John Sutter . Sutter: "This will make us a freer, more thoughtful, and, yes, tolerant people"
 Washington Post editorial page editor Fred Hiatt stood firm . Hiatt was editor of the Washington Post.
 Bush, 41 on 41, is celebrating his 90th birthday this month on CNN . Bush's 41st president has been in office for 41 years .
 David McCullough makes a charming observation, as he often does .
 Ronald Reagan would tell better stories, and wouldn’t Bill Clinton be more help cruising the roadhouses? But after seeing 41 on 41 you'll be likely to agree with McCullough .
 Bush reminds us of a vanished code, a long-gone approach to public life that sometimes seems, in a raw and inelegant time .
 Bush was the youngest man to serve as a fighter pilot in World War II . Bush carried himself throughout his career with the modesty and selfeffacement that were typical of his generation .
 The team who foiled a Hezbollah scheme in the US, Lara Edmond and Uri Levin, take on the Muslim extremists again in an action-packed, international chase .
 President Bush saw the documentary in a private screening not long ago, according to the documentary .
 It's a terrific movie, brisk and funny and touching, and he was apparently much moved by the 41 men and women who testify to their admiration . There were countless others who would happily do the same .
 The country that was led by such an honorable man was, for a time, pretty lucky too . The man was a good man.
 Epstein’s new book from Axios Press, A Literary Education and Other Essays. That charming, and not entirely accurate, appears in Epstein's new book .
 What Epstein deprecates as a dilettante is on closer inspection a polymath, and the range of his curiosity, as reflected in this collection, is simply astounding .
 The reader is borne from Bernard Berenson to Brando to Bob & Ray to Buber to Brooks Brothers . He hasn't even left the Bs yet .
 "They have a common enemy" and "a vast erudition served with the lightest touch," says the author .
 The fruit of a lifetime well spent, much weightier perhaps than the writer himself realizes . Here's the fruit of the life well spent .
 Periodicals postage paid at Washington, DC, and additional mailing offices .
For subscription customer service in the United States, call 1-800274-7293 . For subscription customer services in the U.S. Call 1- 800274- 7293 .
 The Weekly Standard is a written version of each week's Newsquiz . Please send new subscription orders and changes of address to the Weekly Standard, P.0.0 .
 Canadian/ foreign orders require additional postage and must be paid in full prior to commencement of service . Canadian/foreign orders require extra postage and may require additional payment .
 Canadian/foreign subscribers may call 1-386-597-4378 for subscription inquiries . Canadian/ foreign subscribers may calls 1- 386-597/4378 .
 Send letters to the editor to The Weekly Standard, 115017th Street, N.W., Suite 505, Washington, DC .
 No material in The Weekly Standard may be reprinted without I—t permission of the copyright owner . No material is published without I-t permission from the owner .
 Sif J UI The Weekly Standard is a registered worldwide trademark of Clarity Media Group . It is a trademark of the Clarity media group .
 I asked my alluring wife, whose fondness for such creatures is approximately the same as his own, how much she likes such creatures .
 Snakes, while hardly ubiquitous, are not uncommon where I live in Northern Virginia . A little more than a third of my property is woodland, bisected by a meandering stream .
I find them as creepy and disconcerting as the vast majority of humans seem to do. I find them to be as creepy as most people do .
 The specimens are nonvenomous and, no doubt, beneficial to the local ecology . But where I live, at least, the specimens arenonvenomously and beneficial to our local ecology.
In any event, snakes are more frightened of me than I of them, and slither away, he says .
 Lawrence is about to approach a trough to collect some water for breakfast when he notices that a snake has beaten him to it .
 After observing its movements for a minute or two (He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do), he reflects that ... voices in me said . If you were a man, you would take a stick and break him and finish him off .
 Lawrence is torn between admiration for what he perceives to be one of nature’s noblemen and self-loathing for his instinct to kill it .
 Lawrence is especially ashamed of responding to the voices of his accursed human education . He tosses a log at the snake, which beats a hasty retreat .
 Lawrence’s train of thought is reflected in him only in the sense that, depending on the circumstances, he equivocate about what to do .
 The author's customary habit is to leave snakes alone, but there is one mitigating factor, especially at this time of year .
 Our yard is full of nesting birds, with their eggs and young, and ratsnakes, which are capable of climbing trees and poles, will feed on them .
 A snake's head peered out from one of our birdhouses 20 years ago . A snake was seen peering out from a birdhouse, says author .
 It was too late to save the wrens, and I hadn’t the slightest idea how to extricate a snake from a birdhouse .
 The birdhouse's owner tried banging the birdhouse repeatedly from behind, dousing its interior with a garden hose . He even stuck a lit sparkler inside the hole in a vain attempt to draw the snake out .
After pulling the house down from the tree branch and persuading his wife to shake it from behind, he armed himself with an axe . He awaited what promised to be a dramatic climax to his clumsy efforts at vengeance .
 Lawrence, who encountered his serpent in solitude, was a scene unprecedented in his family’s history . His children would long remember the scene, he says .
 Daddy swung his axe with one mighty heave, and decapitated it .
 A rat snake in his driveway in the other day, he spied a rat snake and staged a preemptive strike . It's why, when I spied that rat snake, I succumbed to “the voices of my accursed human education”
 Virginia's 7th Congressional District voters chose not to renominate their seven-term representative . House majority leader had massively outspent his challenger .
 If you had to acknowledge it happened, pretend it was of no significance . Or if you had had to admit it happened. Or if it wasn't a big thing, pretend you didn't know it happened .
 If you had to acknowledge it was of some significance, pretend it was merely a product of unique and local circumstances . Or if you had had to admit it was a matter of some significant significance, pretending it was just a product.
 Don’t worry, nothing much will change, it will be business as usual in the House of Representatives .
 Team Cantor ran up a campaign tab of $168,637, more than the total campaign spending of his challenger Dave Brat . Brat was a mile away at competing steakhouses Bobby Van’s and BLT Steak .
 Hillary Clinton told Diane Sawyer she and her husband Bill were “dead broke’ when they left the White House in 2001 . The other party's apparently prohibitive presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton said she and Bill Clinton were ‘dead broke.
 The Clintons ‘struggled to, you know, piece together the resources for mortgages, for houses, for Chelsea’s education, for the Clintons . The Clintons’ $8 million book advance, already signed and sealed, was not enough .
 The Queen of the Democrats has a net worth of about $200 million . Her net worth is about $ 200 million .
 Other Americans are forced to buy insurance they don't want at costs they can't afford while their taxes bail out insurance companies in league with the Obama administration .
Terrorists are released from Guantanamo in return for an American who abandoned his fellow soldiers . Americans are abandoned when under attack by terrorists in Benghazi .
 Syria and Iran’s quest for nuclear weapons. Neither does he mean to do anything about the slaughter in Syria or Iran's quest for nukes .
 The opposition party isn't to contemplate memorials, but to change the course of the nation .
 The good news for Republicans is that while their D.C. leadership remains relatively clueless, there’s an unusual number of good Senate and House candidates who might actually shake things up . If elected this November, they may actually shake up things up.
 Republicans, for a change, aren't saddled with the prospect of an out-of-touch insider as their presidential nominee .
 The populist mantle, the reformist mantle, and the Main Street and Middle America mantles, are there for the Republican taking .
 The voters of the 7th District in Virginia have rendered a verdict of no confidence in the Republican establishment .
 This November, voters across America will render, we’re increasingly confident, a verdict of no confidence in the Democratic establishment . We're increasingly confident in November, we're more confident, we say .
 The North Korean regime has taken another American tourist hostage . Jeffrey Edward Fowle of Miamisburg, Ohio, was seized in May after a Bible was reportedly discovered in his hotel room .
 North Korea is ferociously repressive, as Paul Marshall notes elsewhere in this issue, it targets Christians . North Korea has a history of targeting Christians, he says .
 The U.S. continues to allow Americans to travel to North Korea without any restrictions .
 Fowle is in fact one of three Americans held there now, the other two being tourist Matthew Todd Miller, age 24, seized in April . Kenneth Bae of Washington state, accused of subversive proselytizing, is now serving a 15-year sentence .
 In the past five years alone, at least nine Americans have been imprisoned by the Stalinist state .
 Americans rightly object to their fellow countrymen being held captive in foreign lands and support strong actions to bring them home . Americans rightly oppose their fellow citizens being held hostage in foreign countries .
 Bill Clinton flew to Pyongyang to rescue two American journalists who had been sentenced to 12 years’ hard labor . In 2009, for example, in what was a major propaganda coup for then-Dear Leader Kim Jong-il, former president Bill Clinton.
 These gestures by important Americans greatly enhanced the prestige of North Korea . North Korea's prestige has been enhanced by the U.S. gesture .
 One can only conjecture how much money we handed over to the Kim regime to secure the release of our citizens .
 The U.S. should ban travel to North Korea by American citizens. The United States should also ban travel by Americans.
 The interests of the rulers are in direct conflict with the interests of their oppressed people, says the writer . The interests are in conflict with those of the oppressed people and the wider world .
 Kim Jong-un doesn't have money that can't be used to run labor camps or advance his nuclear weapons program .
 Pyongyang’s precarious financial position is not solely a result of decades of grotesque economic mismanagement, it's also the result of U.N. sanctions on the regime .
 The whole point of the sanctions is to starve the regime of funding through policies like banking sanctions, bans on cash transfers, and bans on the export of luxury goods to the country .
Without a travel ban, the sanctions are porous, even incoherent . Tourism stands out as a glaring exception, despite the ban .
 In so doing, they prop up an evil despotism that threatens the U.S. and allies like South Korea and Japan . The United States and allies of Japan and South Korea are among the worst offenders .
 The opportunity to kidnap Americans is too tempting to resist, says CNN's John Sutter . "They obviously put themselves at great risk," he says .
 As the Bowe Bergdahl brouhaha reminds us, our enemies are keenly aware that we’re willing to overpay to get our citizens back .
 Some may point to the ban on travel to Cuba, in effect since 1962, as an example of such a policy “failing’s after all, the Castro regime endures .
 The ban on travel to Cuba is so weak, the analogy is imperfect, erroneous even, because the ban is so strong . But it's not as bad as it should be, says the author .
 There are numerous ways into Cuba through Canada and Mexico . Millions of Americans have visited with no consequences .
 North Korea has only a few flights a week from Beijing to Pyongyang . This wouldn’t be the case with North Korea, with only a handful of flights.
 The U.S. regularly allows tour groups to visit Cuba on “cultural exchanges,” undermining the ban . The United States regularly allows tours of Cuba to visit.
 Cuban emigres are allowed to visit every three years, as more than half a million do each year . More than a million people visit Cuba every year .
 Properly designed, a North Korea travel ban would have no such loopholes . North Korea's travel ban has no loopholes .
 The State Department would make it clear that it wouldn't be bailing out any citizens foolhardy enough to get trapped in North Korea . Of course, rather than a travel ban, the government could adopt a ‘Travel at Your Own Risk’ policy .
 If and when an American were taken hostage, it's hard to imagine the State Department simply consigning him to his fate .
 The State Department did post a “travel warning’s about North Korea in November 2013 . It has manifestly failed to dissuade Americans from traveling there .
 A travel ban is not a policy to take lightly. It limits Americans’ freedom of movement, an essential liberty, says CNN’s Tom Charity .
 The interests of the U.S. national security and the well-being of the North Korean people outstrip the right of “misery tourists’ and Stalinist fellow travelers to visit a theme park of totalitarianism .
Tourists are on a tightly controlled itinerary in North Korea . Tourists are accompanied by minders, who ensure that no spontaneous interactions with local people occur .
 North Korea lies just south of the 38th parallel . North Korea is a thriving, beautiful, and democratic country .
 Fred Barnes K evin McCarthy won the race to replace Eric Cantor as House majority leader in the blink of an eye .
 McCarthy had amassed enough pledges to be confident of winning the vote for a new Republican leader, short of some unforeseen late challenge . Cantor’s defeat in a Republican primary in Virginia was a surprise victory .
 He had met with 30 House allies at 3m. The day after Cantor's unexpected loss, he met with House allies .
 At 3.45m., the meeting broke up and his supporters began lining up votes . At 3:45m, the meeting breaks up and the vote begins to take place .
 McCarthy was certain of winning and said so, though the official vote won’t be until June 19 .
Planning and organization are lost arts in politics, often seen as less important than money, television ads, and social media .
 McCarthy isn’t known for expertise on policy or deep ideological commitment .
 Pete Sessions of Texas had no chance of catching McCarthy . His opponent for majority leader, Pete Sessions, was a short-lived opponent .
 Fred Barnes is an executive editor at The Weekly Standard . When Republicans captured the House in the 2010 midterms, both men were eager to become majority whip .
 McCarthy locked up that post quickly, and Sessions thought better of challenging him . He had played an important role in Republicans’ gain of 63 seats in the House .
 Sessions withdrew from the race 48 hours after Cantor’s defeat .
 McCarthy, who represents the most Republican congressional district in California, began planning his bid for majority leader months ago .
 It was based on the assumption that House speaker John Boehner would step down as early as 2015 and Cantor would succeed him .
 McCarthy is in the position that Cantor would have been in. Now McCarthy, assuming Republicans hold the House with him as leader, is in a position that he would have had been in .
 He had an organization of deputy whips experienced in lining up votes . He deployed them the moment Cantor lost .
 He also had the backing of a number of senior Republicans, the so-called establishment . He was also backed by the Republican National Committee .
 The group of 30 at the 3m. meeting included committee chairmen Fred Upton of Energy and Commerce, Hal Rogers of Appropriations, and Dave Camp of Ways and Means, plus influential younger House members .
 There was another significant factor in the success of McCarthy’s blitz. There was also a significant factor.
 Jeb Hensarling of Texas, the chairman of the Financial Services Committee, decided against running for majority leader . Kevin McCarthy of the financial services Committee, the chair of the committee, decided not to run .
Sessions would have been a more formidable candidate than Sessions. Widely respected among Republicans.
 Given his differences with Boehner on issues, he concluded it would be too troublesome to be Boehner’s second in command .
 Hensarling is interested in the speakership, not being the party's floor leader in the House .
Hensarling would have been ready to run against Cantor for speaker. If the expected had happened, he would have run against him for speaker .
 Boehner told House Republicans last week he intends to remain speaker . But Boehner told Republicans he plans to stay as speaker .
 Without 10 to 12 Republican pickups in November’s midterm elections, Boehner may not have votes to win .
 Nine Republicans declined to vote for him in 2013, and more may in 2015 . More may be in 2015, according to reports .
 Democrats can be counted on to vote in unison against Boehner . Boehner may be facing defeat if he doesn't get enough votes .
 McCarthy would just be settling in as majority leader . Whether McCarthy would also run for speaker is unclear .
 Hensarling, by the way, is not inclined to challenge Boehner directly, preferring to wait until the speakership is open . He says he will not challenge directly .
 McCarthy's personality is one of his political strengths, perhaps his greatest . McCarthy’s personality is a political strength .
 He’s surely the best-liked Republican in the House, at least among Republicans . He's likely the most popular Republican in Congress .
 He was elected in 2006 along with Peter Roskam of Illinois and Michele Bachmann of Minnesota . He waselected in 2006. He was also elected in 2007 .
 For two decades, Bill Thomas worked for Bill Thomas, a brainy GOP House member, and ran his California office . Thomas was a Republican House member for two decades .
 He’s been called “pragmatic,” but that word is so vague as to be meaningless . The word was so vague that it's so vague it's meaningless .
 To me, he’s a conventional conservative like most Republicans, Ronald Reagan included . He's a traditional conservative, but he's also a conservative, like Reagan included.
 McCarthy was noted for his skill as a political strategist . Ryan was the policy guy, Cantor was on the leadership track .
 Republican voters don't much care for their own party’s politicians these days . GOP voters don’t much care about their own parties' politicians.
 In December 2013, Fox News asked voters what they thought of both congressional parties .
 The same night Eric Cantor lost his primary by a large margin, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina cruised to Jay Cost . Cost is a staff writer at The Weekly Standard .
 Being good at strategy doesn’t mean one is bereft of other skills, says McCarthy . McCarthy isn't good at Strategy, and McCarthy is not good at other skills .
 To be an effective GOP leader in Congress, a knack for selling conservative policies is necessary . But to be effective, a good strategy is necessary to sell conservative policies, big ones and small ones .
 If all goes well, McCarthy can change that, despite being often at odds with the conservative base . If all go well, he could change that .
 Much depends on the quality of the challenger’s campaign and the response of the incumbent .
 Cantor defeat and upsets that preceded it. But there is also a larger point to the defeat and the upsets .
 GOP Political parties are majority-seeking coalitions; they either win with sufficient regularity or they go out of business, as the Whigs and the Federalists did . They are the symptom of a problem in the GOP political parties, says John Avlon .
 A party’s chances of winning are very bad indeed when its own side thinks it is doing a lousy job . And a party's chance of winning is very bad if it thinks it's doing a poor job .
 Republicans should start by considering the rhetoric of their harshest critics .
 Democrats say that the GOP is in the pocket of big business, that it does not care about average people . They say its policies will hurt Main Street for the sake of Wall Street .
 This is hypocrisy, considering the tens of millions Democrats have collected from the likes of Goldman Sachs .
 The attack is more or less the one Dave Brat used on Eric Cantor in a Republican primary .
 When liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans agree on the political potency of a message, it's worth pausing to wonder if they're right .
 Republicans need not respond by adopting positions of Elizabeth Warren and calling for onerous regulations on private enterprise and a Thomas Pikettystyle redistribution of wealth .
Leftist prescriptions are susceptible to capture by the very “malefactors of great wealth” whom the Democrats malign .
 The GOP emphasis could be on limiting the reach of government in ways that protect and advance the middle class . It could also be on stopping needless handouts to nonworkers on the one hand .
 The farm bill has been an embarrassment for generations . The first is the farm bill, which has been a embarrassment for decades .
 The Kansas House delegation voted against Tim Huelskamp, who represents the rural, western half of the state . Even farmers do not seem to want it, but there is no populist revolt brewing .
 The farm bill can’t be killed because a fraction of wealthy farmers and agribusinesses profit from it . They have high-powered lobbyists with deep connections to the Republican establishment .
 Leaders The Republican base despises the Republican apex, by Jay Cost 10 . Michael Warren Bank is little more than a means to funnel taxpayer money to corporate heavyweights like Boeing .
Ex-Im Bank provides a hefty subsidy to industries with strong lobbying operations . There is no good reason for the Ex-Im bank, except that it provides a huge subsidy .
 The GOP-controlled House of Representatives dutifully voted to reauthorize it last year . The House voted to reinstate it in 2013 .
 Mitt Romney failed to capture the White House because of stinging defeats in the Rust and Farm Belts, not because he lost among Latino voters allegedly concerned with immigration reform .
 Congressional Budget Office predicted that Senate bill would depress wages and increase unemployment . There is a massive supply glut in today’s labor market .
 Ask your average voter about the farm bill, the Ex-Im Bank, or the CBO scoring of the immigration bill, and you will get blank stares .
 The Republican party stands not with the middle class, but with the wealthy and well connected . Even so, the dribs and drabs that voters hear about the Republican party do accumulate, creating a widespread impression .
 If GOP political class ever wants to return to a national majority, it needs to change that impression . The GOP political party needs to make a change .
 Talking points, clever slogans, and a handful of niche issues that target middle-class voters are insufficient. Talking points and clever slogans are insufficient .
 It has to cleanse itself of cronyism and clientelism, then call for a similar purification of the federal government .
 This process begins with the aforementioned policies, but it surely does not end with them . This process starts with the same policies .
 Republican voters will continue to use primary elections to knock off unsuspecting incumbents, and disaffected independents . The voters who so often decide general elections will keep favoring Democrats .
 She expected most of her fellow Republicans in the 7th District to do the same . The 7th district stretches from the northern suburbs of Richmond north and west into rural counties .
 Neighbor says she heard neighbor after neighbor said they were fed up with congressman .
 Brat became the first primary candidate ever to defeat a Michael Warren . Brat beat Cantor by 12 percentage points and more than 7,000 votes .
 Cantor lost even in his supposed strongholds in the Richmond suburbs . Hanover County cast the third-highest number of votes in the district by a whopping 36 percentage points .
 In 2012 Cantor sailed through his primary with 79 percent of the vote . It was all the more shocking since in 2012 Cantor won the primary .
 Had Cantor held on to the more than 37,000 votes he got in the 2012 primary, Dave Brat's name would be a footnote in the political history books .
 Brat's name rhymes with “cat’s’ name, and how he pulled off the political upset of the century . Brat is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Brat attended Hope College, a conservative school with Calvinist roots near Lake Michigan . Brat was born in Michigan.
 He graduated in 1986 with a degree in business administration . He worked for a year as a consultant for accounting giant Arthur Andersen .
 Brat then left the company to attend Princeton Theological Seminary . Brat graduated with a Master of Divinity degree in 1990 .
 Dave Brat and wife Laura on primary night, Ji June 23, 2014 The Weekly Standard /II 2005, he’s been the department chair of the economics department at Randolph-Macon College .
 The evidence for that claim was Brat's work in what was essentially an honorary advisory position to former Democratic governor Tim Kaine .
 Brat downplayed the connection in his election-night appearance with Fox News host Sean Hannity .
Following Republican and free-market principles doesn't necessarily mean supporting policies that benefit corporate America, Brat says .
 The majority leader was in the pocket of big business, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and other corporate interests . Cantor's most focused attack on Cantor was that he was in a pocket of business .
 Cantor had been vocal in the past about his desire to pass some kind of immigration bill . Opponents suggest amnesty to illegal immigrants in the country currently and in the future .
 Unlike some antiamnesty activists, Brat didn't go nativist in his criticisms . Brat is a former member of the National Security Council .
Cantor sent out a simple mailer with a photo featuring a smiling Cantor standing with Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook’s headquarters .
 Eric Cantor wants to give corporations another 20 million foreign workers to hire instead .
 It was a message of economic populism, but more broadly it was an antiWashington message . It was also an anti-Washington message, says John Sutter .
 Few House members more at home in R epublican primary challenges are all the rage these days .
 The GOP is reeling from House majority leader Eric Cantor's loss in Virginia to David Brat . Brat is a relatively unknown economics professor who campaigned on local issues and against the GOP leadership’s flirtation with immigration amnesty .
 Brat was outspent by as much as 40 to 1 and still beat a sitting majority leader . That hadn’t happened since Mark Hemingway is a senior writer at The Weekly Standard .
 A seven-term congressman, he rose rapidly through the ranks of GOP leadership . He gained a conservative voting record and a reputation as a Capitol Hill operator .
 Cantor was widely seen as a top pick to succeed John Boehner when the House speaker retires . Cantor was seen as the top pick for Boehner to succeed him .
 Cantor had spent more of his campaign cash at D.C.-area steakhouses than Brat had spent on his entire primary campaign .
As majority leader, Cantor likely expected Republican voters to appreciate his proximity to the center of power in this country .
 Nancy Russell heard from fellow Virginia Republicans. But that's not what she heard from her fellow Republicans .
 Cantor’s success in Washington was, back home, his ultimate undoing . Cantor was created in 1899 .
 GOP incumbents are feeling besieged by grassroots challenges. Other Senate Republicans, such as Mitch McConnell and Lindsey Graham, managed to fend off primary opponents .
 Todd Tiahrt, a longtime congressman, is trying A Referendum on Earmarks A curious challenge to a GOP incumbent .
 There did not appear to be any previous tensions between the two men . Pompeo did not unseat Tiahrt. There didnot appear to have been any previous tension between the men .
 Tiahrt relinquished his seat to run for the Senate after serving eight terms . He served eight terms in the Senate .
 Tiahrt said he'd ‘sleep well at night’ knowing Pompeo was replacing him . At the time, he said he’d “sleep well’s ‘ sleep well atnight’
 To the extent that GOP primary challenges have been successful, it’s because primary opponents have run to the right of incumbents .
 National Journal rated Kansas's congressional delegation the most conservative in the country . Pompeo isn't dragging down the delegation’s average .
 Pompeo, a West Point and Harvard Law grad, is any kind of knuckle-dragger . It’s also difficult to argue that Pompeo is a West point and Harvard law grad .
 Pompeo also has an impressive roster of supporters . The Kansas Farm Bureau, FreedomWorks, the Club for Growth, and Americans for Prosperity are among them .
 Robert Noland, Tiahrt’s campagn manager, tells The Weekly Standard . Tiahr was in office before, one of the main things he did was support the aviation and aerospace industries in the 4th District .
When Todd was in office he did a lot of work to try to keep jobs here, keep people going, and help the local economy . When Todd was on the job, he tried to keep people in the local community .
On May 30, Pompeo introduced an amendment to shut down the federal Economic Development Administration . The same day, the same agency announced southern Kansas was being labeled a manufacturing zone .
 There's a thin line between watching out for your district’s economic interests and the temptation to gorge on pork .
 The House Republican Conference instituted an earmark ban shortly after the GOP’s historic victory in 2010 . Tiahrt was on his way out of the House .
 Tiahrt doled out $33 million in earmarks to aviation companies alone . His last two years in office, he was in office for two years .
 The House Ethics Committee opened an investigation into Tiahrt’s ties to the PMA Group in 2010 . The lobbying firm was raided by the FBI that was arranging hefty campaign donations for defense appropriators .
 Tiahrt received $46,000 in campaign donations from interests receiving earmarks . It was the second-highest total in Congress .
 Moran made an issue of Tiahrt’s earmarks during his unsuccessful Senate bid . Moran made the issue during his failed Senate bid.
 The economic problems in Pompeo’s district are real. This opposition is not without political costs, it is real, says the author .
 Pompeo's office notes that the congressman previously worked in the aviation industry . Pompeo emphatically rejects the insinuation that he doesn't care .
 Pompeo introduced the Small Airplane Revitalization Act, which passed the House last year . The act was introduced by Pompeo .
 The bill would direct the FAA to streamline the process for aircraft safety approval . It would improve the regulatory framework to encourage innovation in the aviation industry .
 Pompeo still must contend with the reality that the aviation industry in his district hasn’t flourished on his watch . Pompeo's district has not flourished on the watch .
 Tiahrt’s betting that conservative primary voters will place anxiety about losing their jobs over a more principled desire to reject federal influence .
 Tiahrt’s also trying to outflank Pompeo on the right on some key issues . But he also wants to improve Pompeo's performance on the left .
 Pompeo accuses Pompeo of “support for numerous bills funding Obamacare’s Obamacare, which is a tendentious spin on routine budget votes.
 Tiahrt was formerly a member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence . But he was a former member of a House Intelligence Committee .
 Tiahrt was in a prime position to do something about NS A overreach . While still in office, he was in the prime position. He is now in a position to make a change .
 Tiahrt is “clearly just lost in terms of what to attack Mike on’s attack lines,’ says Richardson . Richardson says he is trying these different attack lines .
 Pompeo's camp also suggests there may be more to Tiahrt’s motivations than is readily apparent .
An independent expenditure group made a $15,500 ad buy on his behalf . Pompeo’s staff notes that a few days after Tiahrt announced, an independent expenditures group made the ad buy .
 Hartman, whose family owns Hartman Oil, burned through $2 million of his considerable fortune in his unsuccessful bid against Pompeo . Hartman's family owns the company Hartman oil .
 David Brat's upset victory over Eric Cantor is an opportunity for conservatives to reflect . Hartman floated the idea of running as a Libertarian in the general election to defeat T his year's turbulent primary season .
 Jim DeMint, a former Republican senator from South Carolina, is president of the Heritage Foundation . He is a former senator from the South Carolina state . He says Republicans failed to win power in the last national election .
 Mike Needham is president of Heritage Action for America, a grassroots advocacy organization . He is also president of the group's grassroots advocacy group .
 Since leaving Congress, the offices for Tiahrt’s consulting operation have been housed in a building owned by Hartman .
 Tiahrt sees an opportunity to get his old job back because he's intimately familiar with the electoral landscape and thinks Pompeo is out of touch . It may simply be that he sees a opportunity to return to his former job .
 Pompeo has already proven himself a formidable politician with a modest national profile . In just two terms in Congress, he has been in Congress for two years .
The messages most appealing to the conservative base do not resonate with the general public . The messages most likely to sway swing voters do little to energize conservatives .
 Not all of the concerns of today’s grassroots are fundamentally about left versus right . Not all political appeals to the center are bound to alienate conservatives .
 For too long, conservatives have substituted rhetoric about free markets and lower taxes for the hard work of identifying and eliminating structural obstacles to economic dynamism .
 conservatives have to come to terms with claims made more often by the left than the right about our political and economic systems . That work is uncomfortable, as it forces conservatives to come into terms with the left's claims .
 It is necessary, but not just as a corrective to the left’s misguided arguments, it will also lead to sounder public policy .
 Left-wing populists like Elizabeth Warren argue that the U.S. vision of democratic capitalism is incapable of living up to its ideal .
 Republican political professionals might prefer to dismiss such assertions, but most Americans are frustrated with the political economy . The economy seems to benefit the well-connected.
 Elizabeth Warren’s policy prescriptions may be unwise, but the critique of American capitalism has more resonance than we like to admit .
 Many voters who might be inclined to agree with us will stay home . Until we begin to address the tension between K Street’s clients and the interests of most Americans, many voters will remain home .
 Conservatives should recognize that there is nothing conservative about the status quo that has engendered such cynicism in so many Americans, says John Sutter .
Left errs is not in its frustration with our current system but in its diagnosis that the problem is the free market itself . Where the left errs are not in their frustration with the current system, they are in their own frustration with it .
 Many of big business’s greatest advantages over small competitors stem not from scale The Crony Capital Capitalism, Washington, D.C., style .
 "These decrees kill competition, and in so doing, they don't merely hurt small business," says author . "Everyone in the market suffers," he says .
 There's a reason most Americans are struggling to keep up with essential expenses such as housing and health care .
 Government policy directly insulates entrenched players from competition while providing them taxpayer-funded financial support .
 This nexus of big business and big government is a recipe for greater costs for most Americans, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A healthy conservative movement would be well positioned to highlight the link between big government and corporate cronyism .
 President Obama's stimulus package, supposedly passed to address unemployment, functioned primarily to line the pockets of well-connected unions and firms like Solyndra .
 Obamacare, professedly designed to reduce costs, has served instead to increase premiums, limit choice, and guarantee revenue .
 The Dodd-Frank reform has only exacerbated the problem of toobig-to-fail, and Wall Street profits have soared in subsequent years . The reform is billed as a measure that would protect consumers from future financial collapses .
 Corporate friends of the Obama administration and the Democratic party have done quite well in the Obama era . The economy has stagnated .
 There's nothing wrong with soaring profits, as long as they don’t come at the expense of the public weal. There’s nothing right with soaring profit, says author .
 In the Obama era, big business seems to prefer sure profits guaranteed by government to the risks of competition .
 Many voters still perceive Republicans as probusiness rather than pro-market . The party is poorly positioned to articulate this critique, says Julian Zelizer .
 Congressional leadership's obsession of late with amnesty for illegal immigrants has done the conservative movement no favors in this regard .
 Perceptions can change, but only if political leaders claim the mantle of Reagan make some difficult decisions .
 Congressional leaders have numerous opportunities to break with crony capitalism this year . But only if they are willing to upset powerful corporate interests in the process .
 The Export-Import Bank is up for congressional reauthorization this year . Consider the Export-import Bank, up for Congressional reauthoration this year.
 A New Deal program was created to make loans to the Soviet Union . It has been used for the last 70 years to make loan guarantees to help some American exporters compete in foreign markets .
 In 2012, one corporation, Boeing, took 80 percent of the guarantees—$12. billion . Boeing took $12 billion in guarantees in 2012 .
 Conservatives seeking to draw contrast with the left would allow the bank to expire and leave the defense of cronyism and corporate welfare to the opposition .
 Congress extends a block of short-term tax provisions in ostensibly temporary legislation . Each year, Congress extends the block of tax provisions.
 Included are minor, obscure tax breaks, such as railroad track maintenance and mine rescue team training . Other provisions include research and development tax credit .
 Many schemes that would never survive individual scrutiny are propelled on the popularity of bigger provisions with larger constituencies . The extenders tend to be considered as a group rather than separately .
 extenders are a way of doing business that encourages favortrading and rent-seeking . Like the nowdead earmarks, extender is a way to do business that encourage favortraading and renting .
 The annual extender package attracts more than its fair share of attention from lobbyists and other influence peddlers .
 Congress allows each extender to rise or fall on its own merits through individual votes or lets the entire package die . Congress allows all extenders to rise and fall on their own merits or die .
 Housing finance represents another area in which fealty to special interests has prevented right-leaning politicians from taking the high ground .
Few Americans are sympathetic to government-sponsored entities whose conduct triggered the collapse of the financial crisis of 2008 .
 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac remain, and the hedge funds that bet big on their taxpayer-backed recovery are emboldened . But they are still struggling to recover from their losses .
 National realtor lobbies have been no less active on the issue . Lawmakers who should know better have shielded Fannie and Freddie from extinction they deserve .
 The PATH Act would wind down Fannie and Freddie in five years . The House Financial Services Committee chairman would advance to a floor vote .
 Republican party will not be intimidated from reforming the system that brought about the greatest economic downturn since the Great Depression . It would send a powerful message that the Republican party won't be intimidated by reform .
 Obamacare remains the centerpiece issue of 2014, and conservatives cannot afford to ignore it . Obamacare, of course, remains the most important issue of the year .
 Insurance company bailout program designed to insulate insurers from the market dysfunction introduced by the law’s other provisions .
Candidates of any stripe looking toward November would be remiss in ignoring such a rare overlap in partisan interests .
 Most rank-and-file liberals despise the perceived soullessness and impunity of “big business,” and most conservatives despise government handouts in any form . Most conservatives despise handouts to say nothing of the constitutional issues involved .
 The only people remaining A time bomb does not have to be elegant . It just has to be lethal, primed, and in the right place when the moment comes .
 David Cameron will pay the full price for failing to have defused the revolt on his right . Cameron has been accused of failing to take action against the Prime Minister .
 Independence party is a poorly run protean mess, unhealthily dependent on the wit, zest and charisma of its leader, Nigel Farage .
 UKIP keeps confounding those who so eagerly draft and redraft its obituary . Farage has survived a plane crash, cancer, and being hit by a VW Beetle .
 The run-up to the election to the European parliament in May was not the party’s most glorious stretch . The European Parliament election was held in May .
 Andrew Stuttaford works in the international financial markets and writes frequently about cultural and political issues . To oppose reform are the leadership of both parties, he says .
 Even they can be shamed into action if inaction is made too politically expensive an option . But even they are shamed to take action if action is too costly an option, they say .
 conservatives have a sterling opportunity to reintroduce themselves to their countrymen as their legitimate advocates in Washington . Whether it’s ending Ex-Im, killing subsidies, or preventing further bailouts, conservatives have an opportunity at this moment of uncertainty .
 progressives can hold the feet of faux-populist progressives to the fire. They can expose them as the real shills for corporate interests, he says .
 The conservative movement is for real capitalism and against the Crony Capital . We know that the conservative movement was for real Capitalism .
Much of UKIP's emphasis on immigration control took a toll, and was reinforced by campaign missteps . Now is the time to prove it, says Julian Zelizer .
 UKIP took 16. percent of the popular vote, down from 23 percent the party had scored in the previous year . The elections were held in less UKIPfriendly territory than in 2013 .
 UKIP topped the poll with 27. percent, well up from the 16. percent it secured in the 2009 EU vote .
 UKIP became the first party other than Labour or Conservative to win a national election in over a century . UKIP may have been assisted by a low turnout .
 Labour had to make do with regaining the ground it had lost in 2009 . Labour government had been presiding over Britain's slice of the financial crisis .
 Liberal Democrats saw their vote cut by roughly half and their team of EU parliament members reduced from 11 to 1, a richly deserved fate marred only by its incompleteness . Their coalition partners, the hopelessly Europhile Liberal Democrats, saw their votes cut by
 A few days later UKIP ran into a reminder that one barrier remains unbroken . But a few days after UKIP's election victory, UKIP again ran into an unbroken barrier .
Newark, a pleasant Conservative-voting market town in New Jersey, looks promising . On paper, the constituency looks promising.
 UKIP had done well there in local elections in 2013 and had headed the poll in that part of Britain in the EU vote . UKIP had been in the polls in the UK in the past.
 Newark's Tory MP resigned following a lobbying scandal that fit neatly into UKIP narrative of establishment misrule . Newark’s Tory MP had just resigned following the scandal .
 UKIP chose as its candidate as a septuagenarian member of the European parliament . Instead the party chose as a candidate for a member of European parliament all too easy to caricature .
 UKIP took over a quarter of the vote, up from the 3 percent or so its candidate managed in 2010 . UKIP took more than a third of the votes in 2010.
 This was despite a concentrated Tory blitz (party workers, activists, and MPs by the hundred were shipped into Newark. This was Despite a concentrated Conservative blitz, the party could not hope to reproduce on the national scale that a general election would require .
 Farage spent the day before Newark vote at a tourism conference in Malta . This was only underlined by the convivial Farage’s decision to spend day before the vote .
 He was photographed in the early hours with a blonde who was not Mrs. Mrs.
10 Downing Street is an unsurprising response to both EU overreach and metropolitan liberalism of David Cameron's government .
 Conservative supporters are prepared to “lend’ a vote to UKIP in European and local elections, but will balk at doing anything that risks helping “Red Ed’s unsettlingly left-wing Labour party into government .
 Under Britain’s first-past-the-post voting system, a protest vote can prove expensive . Under Britain's first- Past-the post voting system.
 UKIP ballots cost the Tories an absolute majority in the 2010 general election . There's good evidence to suggest that UKIP ballots (around 3 percent of the total) cost the Conservatives a majority .
 UKIP now attracting growing numbers of former Labour voters . But a higher UKIP percentage would undoubtedly do even greater damage to the Conservatives in 2015 .
 David Cameron has committed to an in/out referendum on Britain's EU membership if he is reelected . Cameron has made the choice sharper still, making the choice clearer .
 Cameron will try to gull Brits into pro-EU camp with largely meaningless “concessions’ allegedly wrung from U.K.’s European partners . Euroskeptics ought to remain skeptical about this, well, as well, because Cameron's
 He will probably succeed, meaning that Britain's long European nightmare will continue . And he will probably succeeds, meaning Britain’s long European Nightmare will continue.
Right-of-center voters have another reason to be wary of voting for UKIP next year . UKIP is a British party that has been in the UK since 2010 .
 The UKIP leader’s conundrum now is somewhat similar to that faced by Cameron a little under a decade ago .
 Cameron tried to deal with that change by dragging the Conservative party to the center, calculating that the Tory right had nowhere else to go .
 Farage has harvested about as much of the right as he can, and thanks to the brutal math of first-past-thepost, that will not be enough to deliver the MPs to make the breakthrough he needs .
 UKIP's leader has attempted to widen his support by reaching out to what he has described as “patriotic old Labour’s” UKIP leader has called on the white working class to use immigration to get to Britain .
 This has been a success, but it has involved downplaying UKIP’s earlier free market vim . This is a success. It has been the first time UKIP has been able to make a success in a free market .
 Standing up for socialized medicine and generous state pensions plays pretty well with older, often far from affluent crowd .
 UKIP's once-Conservative or libertarian-inclined voters will return to the Tory fold, particularly with Ed dread f to push them there . But throw in some other leftish subcurrents, add the harsher edge to the party’s immigration rhetoric .
 Neither Miliband's failure to click with the wider British electorate is likely to save Cameron . But neither this, nor the U.K.’s improving economic performance, are likely tosave Cameron .
 Britain's outdated constituency boundaries favor Labour, which only has to win some 35 percent of the national vote to prevail .
 Liberal Democrats floundering in opinion polls. Labour can hit despite recent stumbles in the polls .
 UKIP's loyalty is now entrenched too deep for that of the party. UKIP is now in the middle of a long line of loyalists .
 The Conservative party is still the party that will miss its defectors most . It is still still the Conservative party that is missing its defector most .
 At this late stage, it's not clear what the Tories can do to entice enough of them back in time .
 Bowe Bergdahl played a key role in al Qaeda’s plans leading up to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks . Bergdah played a major role in the terrorist attacks on 9/11 .
 Mohammad Fazl served as the Taliban’s army chief of staff and deputy defense minister . He did not have a hand in planning the actual 9/11 hijackings .
 Fazl did help coordinate a military offensive against the enemies of the Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan the day before . The day before, he was a notorious al Qaeda leader .
 Osama bin Laden viewed that September 10 offensive as an essential part of al Qaeda’s 9/11 plot .
 The 9/11 Commission found that the hijackings in the United States on September 11, 2001 were the culmination of al Qaeda's three-step plan .
 First, on September 9, 2001, al Qaeda assassinated Northern Alliance commander Ahmed Shah Massoud in a suicide bombing .
 Massoud's death was a major gift to the Taliban because he was their chief rival and still controlled parts of the country . Massoud’s death was an important gift for the Taliban, as he was the chief rival .
 The assassination was also intended to weaken opposition to the Taliban and al Qaeda within Afghanistan . The U.S. could plan its retaliation for the most devastating terrorist attack in history .
 The following day, September 10, al Qaeda and the Taliban took their second step . The next day, the Taliban and al Qaeda took their first step .
 A “delayed Taliban offensive against the Northern Alliance was apparently coordinated to begin Thomas Joscelyn,’ the 9/11 Commission found . “A senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies as soon as was killed," the commission found .
 Fazl and one of bin Laden’s chief lieutenants, Abdul Hadi al Iraqi, played key roles in this setup for 9/11 . The pair played key role in the setup for the attack .
 At the time, al Iraqi oversaw what al Qaeda called the Arab 55th Brigade, which was Osama bin Laden’s chief fighting force inside Afghanistan .
 Al Qaeda viewed both the assassination of Massoud and the offensive launched the following day as necessary components of the 9/11 plot . Al Qaeda views both the assassinations and the attacks as necessary parts of the plot .
 At first, Mullah Omar and other Taliban leaders were said to be wary of any spectacular attack against the United States .
 The plan to attack the U.S. was controversial even within al Qaeda . Some senior leaders object to the idea .
 Osama bin Laden and other al Qaeda leaders believed, correctly, that the first two steps of their plan would ensure the Taliban’s continuing support . But bin Laden's plan would also ensure Taliban's continuing support.
 Mohammad Fazl’s cooperation with al Iraqi was part of the plan, KSM remembered . Mohammad's cooperation with the Iraqi government was also part of a plan.
Current and former Obama administration officials have sought to draw a sharp distinction between the Taliban Five and al Qaeda . Bergdahl has continued to swirl, current and former officials have said .
 It's up to those two countries to make the decision once and for all that these are threats to them. It’s up to them to make a decision once.
 State Department deputy spokesperson Marie Harf relied on this same talking point during a press conference on June 5 .
 The Taliban Five don’t directly threaten the U.S. Behind closed doors, other key Obama administration officials have said .
 Fazl and his Taliban colleagues have not directly planned 9/11-style attacks on the U.S. It is true that they did not directly plan the attacks .
 Most of al Qaeda wasn't a threat on 9/11 and isn't today, according to logic . But according to this logic, most of the group wasn’t a threat.
 Most al Qaeda operatives are not involved in spectacular terrorist plots against the West . Most al-Qaeda operatives aren't involved in a spectacular terrorist plot against West .
 The Taliban’s relationship with al Qaeda made it easier for Osama bin Laden and his lieutenants to plan their war against the United States . This nexus remains a threat, according to the Taliban .
 The Taliban’s Afghanistan “was the incubator for al Qaeda and the 9/11 attacks,’ the 9-11 Commission found . The Taliban's Afghanistan was “the incubator,” the commission found .
 Fazl, each of the other four members of the Taliban Five contributed to this alliance .
 Khairullah Khairkhwa oversaw one of the deceased al Qaeda master’s training camps in western Afghanistan . The U.S. government believes he was tied to Osama bin Laden .
 Al Qaeda trained terrorists for its plots against the U.S. It was in these same camps that al Qaeda trained terror groups for its plot against the United States .
 Norullah Noori was a Taliban military commander . In this capacity he coordinated operations with al Qaeda’s paramilitary forces .
 JTF-GTMO concluded that Mohammad Nabi Omari planned anticoalition attacks with al Qaeda and other affiliated forces .
 The Taliban Five may not plan any direct attacks against the United £ ur health care coverage .
 A story that could be told by millions of Americans will be told in hundreds of campaign ads this fall . It’s a story that can be told to millions of people .
 A candidate for the House of Representatives is running for a seat in the House . The words are not spoken by an average voter, but by a candidate .
 Elise Stefanik hopes the story of her family’s plywood distribution business will be told . John McCormack is a senior writer at The Weekly Standard .
 Al Qaeda terrorists have already strengthened the hand of al Qaeda terrorists who have planned such attacks in the past . But they have also strengthened their hand of the al Qaeda terrorist group .
 The administration once recognized the true nature of the Taliban-al Qaeda alliance .
 In December 2009, President Obama announced a surge of forces in Afghanistan to reverse the Taliban’s ‘momentum’ and “defeat’ al Qaeda .
 Democrats have won three consecutive elections as Republicans fought among themselves . The House seat was held by Republicans for decades . Obama picked John McHugh to serve as his Army secretary in 2009 .
 The 29-year-old would be the Insiders’ Outsider Elise Stefanik’s bid for Congress . She has already won a spot on the November ballot on the Conservative party line .
 Matt Doheny is the Republican nominee for the GOP nomination in the June 24 primary . He narrowly lost in 2010 and 2012 to Democrat Bill Owens . Doheny was a multimillionaire investor .
 Doheny declared his latest campaign after Owens announced his retirement this spring . Doheny has been campaigning since his retirement in April .
 Hoffman narrowly lost after the Republican dropped out and endorsed the Democrat . Hoffman narrowly loses after the GOP dropped out of the race .
 Hoffman is trying to use his clout to rally supporters behind Stefanik . But his campaign sent a powerful message to the Republican establishment that conservatives could only be pushed so far .
 I think she’s going to be a candidate that can unify the Republicans, the conservatives, and the independents,’ Hoffman told me . ‘I think she's going tobe a candidate,” Hoffman said .
 What Stefanik lacks is her Republican opponent’s name recognition and millions of dollars .
 She's been able to compensate by relying on a number of prominent Republicans at the national level to help boost her profile and fill her campaign coffers . But she's been unable to compensate for her lack of support for her campaign .
 Mitt Romney endorsed Paul Elise Stefanik Ryan's candidacy in May . Ryan attended a fundraiser in the district in June .
 American Crossroads, the super-PAC founded by Karl Rove, aired a television ad tagging her primary opponent Doheny as a loser . Doheny was charged twice for boating under the influence .
 Stefanik has spent several years working in politics and public policy . She is a former member of the House of Representatives .
 She later worked on the presidential campaigns of Tim Pawlenty and Mitt Romney . She was in charge of debate preparation for vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan .
 Ryan worked at a series of jobs at Washington think tanks and on Capitol Hill . He returned home to Wisconsin to run for Congress at the age of 28 .
 Doheny is working hard to turn her time in the capital into a liability . But she is trying to make her time a liability, she says .
 Doheny has attacked her as a ‘D.C. insider’ who grew up outside of the district, in nearby Albany . Doheny grew up in the same area as Doheny .
 Doheny even blamed Stefanik in a campaign mailer for the 2008 Troubled Asset Relief Program, aka the Wall Street bailout, because she worked at the White House at the time .
 Stefanik has distanced herself from some legislation sponsored by Paul Ryan . She has also distanced her from some bills sponsored by Ryan .
 She has attacked Doheny for saying he’d vote for the 2013 Ryan-Murray budget compromise . She supports the kinds of entitlement reforms Ryan has proposed .
 Stefanik highlighted the fact that she's the “only pro-life candidate’s in the race. When asked about abortion, Stefanik said she was the ‘only Pro-life Candidate’ in the election .
 Doheny attacked Stefanik for refusing to sign a tax pledge written by Americans for Tax Reform . Both candidates pledged they would not vote to raise taxes, but Stefanik said he would not sign it .
 Stefanik has incorporated her youth as a selling point of her campaign . Stefanik's youth has been incorporated into her campaign.
 I’ve put forth solutions to preserve and protect Medicare and Social Security for future generations,’ she tells me . ‘I’m putting forth solutions,” she says .
 It’s not a bad message for a party that has struggled badly to win the votes of young people and women . It's not a good message for the party that is struggling to win votes of younger people.
 Obama administration officials told reporters to expect a forceful defense of the exchange and an aggressive refutation of the criticism that has attended it .
 Hagel walked members of the House Armed Services Committee through the administration's well-worn talking points . The administration's talking points had already failed to satisfy many members of Congress .
On several occasions he contradicted explanations administration officials had offered over the previous 10 days . Some arguments he himself had made, including some that Hagel himself made .
 The administration defended the decision to not inform Congress about Bowe Bergdahl's health . The administration said it was not required to inform Congress .
 The captive soldier’s “health was deteriorating, Hagel said during a June 1 interview on Meet the Press .
 Administration officials had pressed this case aggressively in the days following the swap . The final proof of life video provided by the Taliban showed Bergdahl looking frail .
Spokesman for Director of National Intelligence James Clapper says Bergdahl's condition was a key reason for the urgency of the exchange . He says the intelligence community had “evidence that Sgt. Sgt. Bergdah’s condition is a key factor, he says .
 The video was shot in December, but intelligence officials had privately disclaimed any such evidence . The administration backed off 10 days later, after several news outlets noted that it was shot .
 In his June 11 testimony, Hagel sounded almost like an administration critic . In his testimony, he sounded like an Administration critic .
 The war in Afghanistan is just like other wars that the U.S. has engaged in, and that it is unlike any other war we’ve ever fought. Another problem for the administration is its insistence, simultaneously, that the war is like another .
 Hagel spent much of his testimony insisting that the Obama administration had not, technically, negotiated with terrorists . Hagel said the administration did not .
 The U.S. negotiated this deal with the Qataris, he argued, who merely served as an intermediary for the Taliban . Bergdahl had been held for much of his captivity in Pakistan .
 The U.S. government has “substantially mitigated’s threat that the freed Taliban commanders would pose to the United States, Hagel says . Two additional reports confirm that senior United States intelligence officials believe they will return to the fight .
 The potential damage the deal has done overseas is significant, according to the Obama administration . Much of the focus at home remained on the Obama Administration's shifting justifications for the swap .
 The Afghan government publicly embraced the exchange, but it had little choice . Afghan government has little choice.
 Hamid Karzai and other Afghan leaders are racing to find some reconciliation with the Taliban . The drawdown of U.S. troops well underway and full departure of combat troops scheduled to take place by 2016 .
 Administration officials have gone out of their way to say that they hope this deal revives those efforts . Administration officials say they hope that this deal will help those efforts.
 Obama administration has badly undermined the government in Kabul, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen says the Obama administration is badly undermined by the Taliban .
 Transferring five commanders sought by the Taliban was a bad idea, particularly these five commanders . The Taliban wanted to take control of the Taliban in Afghanistan .
Afghanistan's elected government needed to be involved in prisoner swaps . But if the administration was going to get into the business of prisoner swaps, the elected government in Afghanistan needed to get involved .
 To do it immediately after announcing the departure of all U.S. troops in 2016 was counterproductive, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It was counterproductive" to do it after all troops left the United States .
 To do it in the midst of the Afghan presidential campaign was malpractice, says Afghan official .
First time I visited Mosul was in August 2003 when a tenuous calm was maintained by the 101st Airborne Division . The first time I saw Mosul was August 2003.
David Petraeus opened the Syrian border to trade, struck deals with Syria and Turkey to provide electricity, restored telephone service, and held elections to elect local leaders .
 Along the way he also managed to kill Saddam Hussein’s poisonous offspring Uday and Qusay .
 The 101st pulled out in 2004, to be replaced by a smaller American unit . The smaller unit was less attuned to the demands of civic action .
 The Humvee in front of mine hit a bomb concealed in a big puddle, and insurgents opened machine gun fire from the left . The HumVEe in the front of the mine hit the bomb, and the bomb exploded .
 A bystander had his arm sliced off by a flying piece of the Humvee’s engine . No one in our unit was hurt, but a bystander was hurt .
 Blackclad fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria have stormed into Max Boot . Max Boot is a contributing editor to The Weekly Standard and senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations .
 An Epic History of Guerrilla Warfare from Ancient Times to the Present Mosul last week and seized control of the city .
 Many were so eager to escape that their discarded uniforms littered the streets . Many were too eager to leave their uniforms behind .
 ISIS freed more than 2,000 of its fighters from prisons and seized copious stocks of money, ammunition, and weapons . Many of the latter provided by the U.S. to Iraqi forces .
 extremist group has risen out of its grave to display dismaying strength in recent years . This was only the latest and most alarming advance for this extremist group .
 ISIS seized Fallujah and holds it still, a loss that, like Mosul, is particularly painful to American veterans .
 ISIS fighters advanced south to seize Tikrit, Saddam Hussein’s hometown, and Baiji, home to Iraq's largest oil refinery . The refinery supplies Baghdad with much of its electricity .
 ISIS has already inflicted devastating casualties with a series of car bombings in the capital . In the capital, ISIS has been responsible for a number of bombings .
 Iraq Body Count calculates that some 9,500 people were killed in Iraq last year . It is the highest total since 2008 .
 Shiite militant organizations such as Asaib Ahl al-Haq and Kataib Hezbollah respond to Sunni atrocities with atrocities of their own .
 ISIS has spread across the border into Syria, where it has been showing increasing strength . U.S. has done so little to aid the non-jihadist opposition to Bashar al-Assad .
 ISIS is well on its way to carving out a fundamentalist caliphate that stretches from Aleppo in Syria to Mosul in northern Iraq .
 Syria is being split into two entities, one controlled by Sunni Islamists, the other by Hezbollah and the Iranian Quds Force and their Alawite proxies . The two are controlled by both Sunni Islamists and Sunni Islamists .
 Kurdish state is a fundamentalist Sunni Triangle state controlled by ISIS . Shiite portions of the country are under the sway of militants backed by Iran .
 Quds Force has already sent troops to Syria and now reportedly to Iraq as well . It has also sent Quds force troops to Iraq.
 The new battle for Baghdad is likely to be even bloodier than the previous installment from 2003 to 2008 . The only thing that remains to be determined is whether Shiite or Sunni extremists will control the capital .
 It is hard to exaggerate how much of a disaster this is, not only for Syria and Iraq and their neighbors, but for the U.S. It's hard to say how much this is for the United States .
 Rising oil prices are just the start of a weak economic recovery, analysts say .
 Senior intelligence officials have testified recently that they fear Syria could become a launching ground for attacks against the U.S.
 The track record of Islamist militants suggests that whenever they control a piece of terrain, they immediately set up training camps for foreign jihadists . Some of them then filter back to their home countries to commit atrocities .
 At the least, neighboring states such as Jordan and Saudi Arabia will be destabilized by ISIS . At the worst, the U.S. homeland and Americans overseas will be threatened .
 Critics of Iraq war affix blame to President George W Bush’s decision to invade in 2003 .
 There is no guarantee that even absent American intervention, Saddam Hussein would have had any more luck staying in power than other Arab despots .
 A civil war might well have broken out in Iraq anyway, as has been the case in Syria and Libya .
 Bush’s mismanagement from 2003 to 2007 aggravated the situation, especially his foolish decisions to disband the Iraqi Army . The Iraqi Army was hijacked by Shiite militants such as Ahmad Chalabi .
 Both Sunni and Shiite extremists arose. This created the lawless conditions out of which both Sunni and Shiites arose .
 The “surge, however, turned the tide and created an opening for a more stable and democratic Iraq. The ‘surge’ has created an opened for more stable, democratic Iraq .
 Shiite militias such as Moktada al-Sadr’s Mahdi Army lost their rationale of protecting Shiites from Sunni terrorism .
Violence fell by more than 90 percent, and Iraqi politics began to function . Violence fell by over 90 percent .
 The U.S. troops pulled out of the United States at the end of 2011 . But that tenuous calm started to unravel the minute they pulled out .
 Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki gave full vent to his Shiite sectarian tendencies . He persecuted senior Sunni politicians and many of the Sunni commanders who had once fought against al Qaeda .
 Many Sunnis welcomed back ISIS as their defenders. Fearing that they no longer had a place in Iraqi politics, many Sunnis welcome back ISIS .
 The Iraqi military was unable to effectively combat the growing terrorist threat because it had been deprived of American military support . Maliki stuffed its senior ranks with incompetent party hacks beholden to him .
 The prime minister further politicized the military, and thus made it less effective, he said . He also circumvented the chain of command to issue dubious orders to lowerranking officers .
 Many soldiers now lack the confidence that they are fighting for Iraqi national interests rather than for a sectarian Shiite agenda .
 Sunnis are fanatically dedicated to their enemies, says Tom Charity . That helps explain why many of them are so willing to run from enemies .
 Iraq would have continued making progress if at least 10,000 U.S. military advisers were still present . It is hard to know for sure, but odds are Iraq would still make progress if they were still there .
 U.S. diplomats and generals would have allowed Maliki to exert pressure on him to curb his sectarian tendencies . They would have assisted the Iraqi forces to better find, fix, and finish the insurgents without causing collateral damage .
 Obama's supporters blame Maliki and other Iraqi politicians for not agreeing to give U.S. troops legal immunity from prosecution .
 ISIS fighters pose with the trademark Islamist flag after seizing an Iraqi Army checkpoint in northern Iraq . They also blame George W Bush for negotiating a previous Status of Forces Agreement in 2008 that expired at the end of 2011 .
 He waited to start the negotiations until the middle of 2011 even though the last round of talks in 2008 took a year . He refused to get directly involved in the negotiations. He pulled the plug on the talks when they hit their first major obstacle .
 He saw no good reason to prolong America's troop presence in Iraq . He had won the presidency largely because of his opposition to the Iraq war .
 Iraq does have an elected government but one that roughly half of the population doesn't represent them . Iraq does not have a elected government .
 In hindsight, the pullout from Iraq looks increasingly like the pull out from Vietnam a generation before . The pullout is increasingly like that from Vietnam.
 The U.S. rushed Hellfire missiles and ScanEagle drones to Iraq after Fallujah .
 Maliki continues to alienate Sunnis. None of them will do any good as long as Maliki remains in power .
 heavier weapons may aggravate the situation by allowing Maliki’s men to kill more Sunnis . In fact, heavier weapons could increase the number of Sunnis.
 T o break this worsening cycle of violence, Obama administration needs to do something it has never done before . Obama administration must get fully engaged in Iraq from the president on down .
 Iraq might be willing to accept the return of U.S. military advisers, intelligence personnel, Predators, and Special Operations Forces, along with enhanced military aid, in return for political reforms . ISIS’s base of popular support is believed to be at the center of the country's
 There is actually a point of leverage that Obama could employ if he chose to do so . Obama could use that leverage if he chooses to use it.
 Maliki’s Rule of Law slate emerged on top with 92 seats . Iraq held a parliamentary election on April 30 .
 To win a third term in office, Maliki needs the support of other parties, especially the Kurds and other Shiite factions . Maliki's third term will be his third in office .
 Maliki's reelection looked like a foregone conclusion before the fall of Mosul . But the collapse of the Iraqi security forces in the north is a major embarrassment for Maliki .
 A new prime minister could begin to heal Iraq's divisions rather than exacerbate them as Maliki has done . If Washington were to throw whatever weight it has on the side of Maliki’s opponents, there might just be an opportunity to select a new PM .
 Syria needs to roll back Islamist advances in Syria, say experts . This would need to be combined with action in Syria. This would provide more arms and training to the nonjihadist opposition to Assad .
 U.S. airstrikes could also be directed against ISIS and other Islamist organizations such as the Nusra Front .
 Obama is willing to act strongly and decisively in the Middle East instead of abandoning the region as he seems intent on doing . This is all a long shot because it presumes that the U.S. still has leverage that it can employ in Iraq after years of neglect, says Peter Ber
 Iraq’s descent into the abyss is the only chance to stop Iraq's descent further into its abyss . But it’'s only chance is to stop the country's descent into a abyss .
 If Obama doesn't act now, the loss of Syria and Iraq will hover like a dark cloud over his presidency . The early losses in the Iraq war loomed over his predecessor's presidency .
 This May’s elections were occasioned by a winter of urban protest in the capital of Kiev . The United States and much of the European Union lent moral support .
 Viktor Yanukovych fled the country after dozens were killed on Kiev’s main square, the Maidan, in February .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin declared Crimea again after a hasty referendum . Putin declared the historically Russian and strategically indispensable Crimean peninsula Russian territory again .
 The war was launched by Russiansympathizing Ukrainians in three eastern provinces .
 President Obama has been taunting Putin for months . Obama now finds himself in a pickle .
 The United States and the EU passed pro forma sanctions in March . Russia annexed Crimea in Crimea in March.
 Obama had a hard time rallying allies on the eve of the seventieth anniversary of D-Day . But in the flurry of European summits, Obama had hard time rally allies .
 London-based BP has just signed a big shale-oil deal with Russia’s state oil company, Rosneft .
 France spent the winter boasting about its willingness to cancel the sale of two advanced Mistral warships to Russia . Christopher Caldwell is a senior editor at The Weekly Standard .
German Marshall Fund of the U.S. has a principled stance with Britain's indulgence of Russia's oligarchic elites in London . He did reporting for this piece on a study tour organized by the German Marshall Fund.
 French president Frangois Hollande took a look at his country's economic statistics . But then he decided to make the deal anyway .
 Germany has grown more dependent on Russian energy since Angela Merkel’s decision in 2011 to phase out nuclear power .
 Washington has constructed its diplomacy as if the West were still united, confident, and economically invulnerable . These considerations have gone over the head of Washington.
 corruption has been, as one Western diplomat puts it, the “alpha and omega of Ukrainian politics’s politics. I n the quarter-century since the breakup of the Soviet Union, corruption has be, he says .
 An oligarchy was born out of communism’s fall, much as it was in Russia .
 Insiders took advantage of ‘privatization’ to corner natural resources, industrial plants, and networks that went with them .
 The mineraland coal-rich Donbass region became the main center of the country’s magnates, who have succeeded in befouling national politics .
 State authorities often do not meter the flow of gas through Ukrainian territory, making siphoning and overcharging possible .
 Ukraine’s government estimates $70 billion has been stolen from state coffers over the past three years .
 corruption was national, and Yanukovych had a genuine power base. But things were more complicated than that, because corruption wasnational, he says .
 The 'Orange Revolution' of 2004 happened when a court ruled Yanukovych’s election victory over reformer Viktor Yushchenko had been fraudulent . The “Orange Revolution’ of 2004’ed in Ukraine.
 Yushchenko was poisoned in the course of the campaign, horribly disfiguring him . He is now in a coma .
 A re-vote produced an 8-point margin for Yushchenko, but he could not do without Yanukovych . The Ukrainian president was re-elected by a narrow margin .
 Yulia Tymoshenko lost to Yanukovych in the 2010 elections, which international observers have called free and fair .
 Tymoshenko sought out political contact with oligarchs in both Ukraine and Russia . She began as a reformer and sought out contact with both Russia and Ukraine .
 Russia's naval base at Sebastopol on the Crimean peninsula, first built for the czars in the 18th century . He carried on the post-Cold War tradition of accepting rock-bottom rates on Russian gas and oil .
 Yanukovych was not categorically opposed to Westernization, nor can he be dismissed as a post-Soviet stooge . But he was not categically opposed, nor could be dismissed, he says .
 He favored closer ties to the European Union, despite a manifest unwillingness on the part of the EU to offer him full membership .
Only when Vladimir Putin offered a similar deal that included $15 billion in incentives did Yanukovych reject the EU deal . Only when Putin offered the same deal, Yanukovych rejected it .
 Protesters spent all of last winter there, and by the time they were done, the Maidan had given its name to a new revolution .
 Americans hope to use it as a springboard to a new European security architecture . Ukrainians, also the Russians and the Americans are gaining territory from it .
 On February 18, on the eve of Yanukovych’s hurried departure by helicopter from his palace, 26 people were killed in the Maidan, 10 of them police . 10 of the police were killed.
 Even in late May, armed irregulars were walking among tourists, the kvass carts, and the stillstanding barricades of tires and sandbags .
 What triumphed was a new regime better disposed to the European Union and the U.S. than that of the ambivalent Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych was corrupt, but not more so than most Ukrainian leaders since the Cold War ended . Most Ukrainian leaders were corrupt, though not more than most in the past .
 France’s Frangois Hollande was unpopular, but not more so than Barack Obama . He was unpopular in some parts of the United States .
 Ukrainian caretaker government chose to hold elections under international pressure . It is good that, under international Pressure, the government held the elections .
 Ukraine has held mostly democratic elections since 1991 . But it has not done much else democratic. Ukraine has not held much more democratic elections than in 1991 .
Until Ukraine can remove governments democratically as well as install them, we should reset to zero the dial on its status as a democratic nation . Until Ukraine can removed governments democratically, it should reset the dial.
 The late-May elections only put a fresh oligarchic face on the presidency and the Kiev mayor's office .
 legislative elections have not been scheduled, even though that was one of the uprising's demands . They did not replace the legislature, and legislative elections were not scheduled .
 The government that has run Ukraine for the past three months is dominated by forces associated with the Batkivshchyna party, led by the firebrand Tymoshenko . Yanukovych defeated at the polls in 2010 and then jailed .
 Arseny Yatsenyuk was one of three leaders to come out of the Maidan . He was the prime minister who led the Tymoshenkoite forces . The prime minister led the opposition forces in the Ukraine .
 His father, who died of cancer in 2011, was a Soviet Air Force colonel assigned to help clean up the Chernobyl nuclear meltdown in 1986 . His father died in 2011 of cancer .
 The most voluble of the three was the nationalist hothead Oleh Tyahnybok . Svoboda (formerly Social-National) party holds 37 seats.
 Tyahnybok was booted from Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine bloc during the 2004 election for his allusions to a ‘Moscow-Jewish mafia’ and other oratory .
 The present government has also relied on a brand-new nationalist movement called the Right Sector . The Right Sector was hanging around a polling station in the city of Irbin on election day .
Once unshackled from corruption, Ukrainian society will naturally align itself with the West . I t is a staple of post-Maidan opinion that, once unshacked from corruption.
 Anything Europe offers Ukraine is a welcome invitation, and anything Russia offers is a corrupting bribe . This is the usual view, but anything Europe offer Ukraine is an invitation, says CNN .
 In April, the West found itself matching Putin's “bribe’s” in the form of a $17 billion IMF loan . The West has been matching Putin’'s ‘bribe.’
 Only 22 percent of Ukrainians favored NATO membership in 2008, when Russia invaded Georgia . 53 percent opposed it, according to the Razumkov Center in Kiev .
Ukrainians have not been able to find themselves in the U.S. It might seem obvious to Americans which world a reasonable Ukrainian would rather find himself in, but it has not been obvious to Ukrainians .
 Crimea was overwhelmingly Russian in both culture and allegiance even before Russia laid claim to it in February . Crimea is overwhelmingly Russian, even before it was claimed by Russia .
 Nikita Khrushchev handed its population over to Ukraine in 1954 in hopes of doing a good turn to a country in which millions had starved under Stalin .
 Even if Russia's redrawing of borders sets a destabilizing precedent, it also undoes one of the crimes of communism .
 Russia would never allow Crimea to fall into the hands of a Ukrainian government sympathetic to a hostile West . It is a geopolitical absurdity to believe that Russia would ever let Crimea fall into Crimea into Ukraine's hands .
 Poroshenko announced on taking office that Crimea would always be Ukrainian . But it is rare to meet a Ukrainian who will say in private that he believes this .
Russophones have always been a majority not just in the Donbass but also in the country's biggest cities .
 Ukraine's greatest writers wrote in Russian . Vasily Grossman, Mikhail Bulgakov, Nikolai Gogol wrote in Russia .
 90 percent of college courses are in Russian . Most radio, TV, and newspapers, and almost all literary culture, are in Russia .
Prominent Ukrainian politicians have had to brush up on their Ukrainian or learn it from scratch . Many members of the parliament don’t speak it at all .
Despite a common language and culture, Ukrainians have their own governing traditions, as Canadians do with respect to the U.S.
Since the end of the Cold War, Europe has been Europe’s laggard . It endured the rule of the czars, suffered under the Communists, and suffered under.
 Moscow has a strong incentive not to see the place used as a base for those who wish Russia ill . That doesn't give Moscow a right to rule Ukraine, but it gives Moscow a strong incentives not to do .
 He made his fortune in chocolate, not natural resources, and has kept a relative distance from the Donbass power brokers . He has connections to all of them, though he has no connections to them .
 Klitschko is making use of UDAR, the reform-oriented force of which he is the most prominent member . He lacks a political party, although he is using UDAR to make use of the party .
 The Russophile rebels in the three eastern provinces are sophisticated, much better motivated than the central government . They are well enough armed to have neutralized Kiev’s air superiority, and probably aided by Moscow .
 Kiev has managed to do little, and so far Kiev has done little . The three provinces are opting de facto for an alignment with Moscow .
 The Ukrainian interior ministry is funding “national guard’s” units who have been seen in irregular combat garb . The interior ministry has been funding ‘national guard units’
 Pravy Sektor and Tyahnybok’s Svoboda party are sending volunteers there all the time . The party is sending volunteers to the party's headquarters .
 These men are not well enough trained or disciplined to counter the rebels along the Russian border . But they are not good enough to fight the rebels, they say .
 Ukrainian interior ministry announced on June 12 that three Russian tanks had crossed the border . Poroshenko has been shelling the stubborn Russophile city of Slavyansk .
 West could aid Ukraine against the Russophile forces through shipments of arms or provision of military advisers .
 Only if Putin had wide ambitions for territory, using the three eastern provinces as a beachhead would be worth the risk of escalation .
 One does not want to underestimate Putin, but he probably lacks the military resources for any larger imperial reconquest . He probably lacks a larger imperial Reconquest .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin sees his country as an existential military threat on his country's periphery . Putin's moves in Ukraine can be understood as defensive reactions to what he sees as a military threat .
 President Obama's use of gay rights to rally the world against Russia during the Sochi Olympics was not a casus belli, of course .
 There is always a nobility in the story of a plucky little nation striving to break free of a big one . But a number of illusions mar Ukrainian thinking .
 Ukraine's role as a buffer state is not a misfortune of geography, but a service to the world community for which, in a globalized economy, it deserves rent .
 Putin has in larger quantities than most of his interlocutors. But there is one resource that Putin has larger quantities that he has in bigger quantities than many interlocuts .
 This is legitimacy, which is not to be confused with liberality or punctiliousness or respect for international law . This is legitimate, but not to confuse it with freedom of speech or freedom of expression .
 When he speaks in the name of Russia, he does so confident of Russians’ backing, he says .
 Russia is, politically speaking, a more unified and resolute place than the countries they usually tangle with . But Westerners should bear in mind that Russia is politically speaking .
 Putin has been the most popular politician in Ukraine in the past decade . There have been moments in past decade when Putin was most popular in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian misconception is that Western Europe is a charitable institution . Ukraine's misfortunes will now goad the West to reward it for years of kleptocracy and political chicanery .
 Albania after NATO finished its Kosovo war in 1999. True, favors were lavished on Albania after the war .
 Ukrainians are building castles in the air. But it is a different world now, and Ukrainians are constructing castles in air .
 A 2004 memo called the European Neighborhood Policy held out the prospect of visa-free travel to the EU if Ukraine’s government cleaned up its act .
 Many Ukrainians assume that Europe will simply look the other way under the circumstances . Ukraine never made much progress on reforms .
 A rapprochement is farther off than ever, no matter what happens on trade . But a rapprochment is far off, no Matter what happens in the world, it's possible .
 The recent EU elections gave big victories to parties up in arms about the influx of Eastern Europeans to Western Europe . Most of them from Poland and the Baltic and Balkan countries .
 From a U.S. perspective, this community constitutes civilization and freedom. From a United States perspective, it constitutes civilization, freedom .
 From a Russian perspective, the international community consists of the demands of Western elites dressed up as neutral ground rules . The international community is demanding that Western elites dress up asneutral ground rules.
 Ukraine caught between Western interlocutors who are seductive but untrustworthy and Russian ones who are rude but nearby . Ukraine is caught between seductive and untrustable.
 As large businesses strengthen their cyber protections, small and mediumsize ones are increasingly targets of online criminals . Small businesses are increasingly targeted by online criminals.
 Small and midsize businesses may be vulnerable to attack by small businesses . Small businesses don't have the resources to adequately protect their networks and data .
 There are a number of innovative, cost-effective actions that all businesses can take to assess and improve their cybersecurity overtime .
 The U.S. Chamber of Commerce worked with industry partners and the National Institute of Standards and Technology to come up with a framework of existing standards and best practices to help companies start a cybersecurity program or improve an existing one .
Businesses can reduce network and system weaknesses and take steps to deter cyberattacks . By adopting the practices outlined in the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Security, all businesses can reduce system weaknesses .
Businesses can improve their cyber risk management by understanding common online threats that often lead to cybercrime . For starters, businesses can better understand common threats such as computer viruses, spam, and phishing schemes .
 The Chamber's Internet Security Essentials for Business Ztfguidebook explains the risks and provides tips for preventing or detecting them . The framework and similar riskmanagement tools, such as the Chamber's Web security Essentials, are available .
 Cyber experts generally agree that businesses can stop the majority of unsophisticated or untargeted malicious activity by implementing the elements of the framework .
 Companies must be realistic about their risks and continually improve their security efforts . But companies must also be realistic on their risks to improve security .
 Large businesses can't assume that they'll be safe by only adopting robust cybersecurity practices at the corporate level .
 Precautions must be taken at every step in the supply chain, which is often where criminals find points of vulnerability .
 Corporations that contract or work with small businesses should help inform their partners of threats and urge them to adopt forward-leaning cyber practices .
 Chamber has launched a nationwide campaign to make businesses aware of cybercrime and explain the framework for enhanced Internet security .
 The Chamber's efforts to equip businesses with cybersecurity tools and pursue meaningful policy solutions are on the rise .
 It is occurring on a massive scale, it is underreported, and in many parts of the world it is rapidly growing . It is happening on a huge scale, and it is being reported as well as underreported .
 Similar findings are reported by the Vatican, Newsweek, the Economist and the Christian support group Open Doors .
 Most people in the West are unaware of these facts, though that may be changing . Most people are unaware that these facts are changing .
 Meriam Ibrahim gave birth in a Sudanese prison just the other day . A few cases do get press coverage .
 She was raised a Christian, but was sentenced to death for apostasy for leaving Islam . Officials learned that her long-absent father was a Muslim, she was sentenced.
 These punishments will be dropped if she renounces her Christian faith, which she steadfastly refuses to do .
 North Korea's Kim Jong-uk sentenced to life with hard labor . North Korea sentenced a South Korean missionary to life in hard labor in North Korea .
 North Korea still holds Kenneth Bae, an American sentenced to 15 years’ hard labor . Bae is accused of trying to use religion to overthrow the political system . North Korea also still holds Bae.
 The Chinese government's demolition of the 3,000-member Sanjiang church in Wenzhou on April 28 was newsworthy partly because of the church's size . Sanjiang was not an “underground” church but an official, approved, government-registered “Three
 Some 20 other official churches in the area have had all or parts of their buildings removed or demolished . Hundreds more are threatened with destruction .
 The abduction into slavery of hundreds of schoolgirls in Nigeria on April 14 led news cycles and tweets for a time . The religious dimensions of the story were often played down .
 Most are Christians, seized in predominantly Christian area and now subjected to forced conversion . The kidnapped girls include Muslims (Boko Haram regards them as apostates)
 These events get media attention because they are particularly poignant, or dramatic, or involve foreigners . But our media miss countless other stories, and we miss many other stories .
 Since the kidnappings, Boko Haram has killed hundreds of people, many in the predominantly Christian Gwoza area of Borno State have been killed . At least 8 more girls have been kidnapped, and 36 churches have been destroyed .
 On June 1, it attacked a Christian area in neighboring Adamawa state, killing 48 people . The attack took place in the Christian area of the state .
 In Sudan, a second woman, Faiza Abdalla, has been arrested on suspicion of converting to Christianity . On April 8, a court terminated her marriage to a Catholic .
 Iran is imprisoning and torturing pastors from the rapidly growing house church movement, including an American citizen, Pastor Saeed Abedini .
 Eritrea holds more than 1,000 Christians in conditions so inhumane that prisoners die or are permanently crippled . Eritrea has been known to hold more than 2,000 Christian prisoners .
 In Somalia, in an ignored religious genocide, AlShabaab systematically hunts Christians and kills those it finds . The group also kills those that it finds.
 People of all religions suffer persecution for their faith or lack thereof . Baha’s and Jews in Iran, Ahmadis and Hindus in Pakistan, Tibetan Buddhists and Falun Gong in China, independent Buddhists in Vietnam, and Rohingya Muslims in Burma are particularly dire
 Traditionally, the U.S. has been regarded as the country that advocates religious freedom for all, often to the disdain of other Westerners .
 German chancellor Angela Merkel has repeatedly stressed that Christians are the world’s most widely persecuted religious group .
 Vladimir Putin is most outspoken of all is Vladimir Putin . He is stressing the matter .
 It is concerned with all religions, but its genesis was the upsurge in killings of Christians . Quite properly, it is.
 Former French foreign minister Bernard Kouchner established a similar agency in the Quai d'Orsay . Later the ministry gave financial backing to an ‘Observatory of Cultural and Religious Pluralism’ devoted to monitoring freedom of conscience .
 Canada now has an ambassador-at-large for religious freedom . The title was borrowed from the United States .
 The position of U.S. ambassador-at-large for religious freedom is vacant . It has been for over half of President Barack Obama’s tenure .
 Even when the position has been filled, in the last decade it has usually been marginalized . The position has often been marginalized.
 President Obama gave a great speech on religious freedom at the National Prayer Breakfast . But little action followed .
 On Easter morning in 2012, a church in Kaduna, Nigeria, was the target of a Boko Haram suicide car bombing that killed 39 and wounded dozens .
 There was no official comment from the Obama administration about the Kaduna massacre on Christians' holiest day .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton issued a press release celebrating the Romani people . Instead, she demanded that Europe become more inclusive of them .
 Christians are not just “a leading target,’ they are the leading target. Christians are also a leading target in the world .
 American officials seem to be scared of being accused of selectively defending Christians . They consistently overcompensate and minimize what is happening .
 T he Catholic and Orthodox churches are more outspoken now than they were in the past . The plight of their brethren, especially in the Middle East, is so stark .
 Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople has observed that “even the simple admission of Christian identity places the very existence of faithful in daily threat.’
There are signs that some Americans are again paying attention to the issue. Happily, there are signs.
 A wide coalition of Christian leaders was convened by the co-chairs of the Religious Minorities in the Middle East Caucus .
 China's Pledge of Solidarity focuses on the Middle East and specifically on Syria, Iraq, and Egypt . North Korea is the most repressive country in the world .
 In the last decade, half of Iraq’s Christians have fled the country . Many others have fled to the Kurdish region .
 Too often these communities in the ancient heartland of Christianity have been forgotten .
 Baghdad's Catholic Chaldean patriarch, Louis Sako, lamented, “We feel forgotten and isolated,’ he said . The patriarch was speaking in Rome in December .
 In Washington, pledges like this new one tend to have about as much staying power as campaign promises . In Washington.
 There are reasons to believe that the Pledge of Solidarity will have an effect . Still, there are reasons for believing that it will have a positive effect .
 Speakers included Cardinal Donald Wuerl, archbishop of Washington, Archbishop Oshagan Choloyan of the Armenian Apostolic Church of America . Leith Anderson, president of the National Association of Evangelicals, and Greek Orthodox metropolitan Methodios of Boston, also spoke
 The Pledge of Solidarity sets forth focused goals. The appointment of a special envoy on Middle East religious minorities has passed the House but is stalled in the Senate .
 The pledge will have its greatest effect if, rather than falling on deaf ears, it awakens rank-and-file Americans and others to the religious diversity of the Middle East and the plight of Christians .
 The concern expressed by these religious leaders and a handful of politicians is abundantly justified . The concern is expressed by some religious leaders.
 Still missing is any large-scale mobilization of free people on behalf of persecuted Christians around the world . Still missing.
There are few bright spots shinier than the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The stalemate was ended, but the debate goes on .
 Democratic and Republican reformers from across the country overcame the resistance, mainly of Southern segregationists, to pass legislation that broke the back of Jim Crow .
 In 1963-64, passage of the law appeared as complicated as it seems inevitable to us in hindsight . The law was passed by a vote in 1963.
 For activists and lawmakers determined to shatter the enduring injustices of racial discrimination in the South, the first challenge was getting whites outside the South to care enough to support strong new laws .
 Presidents shied from antagonizing powerful Southern members of Congress . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 Even would-be reformers had to grapple with the trade-offs inevitably posed by specific civil rights measures .
 Truman offered modest proposals and began desegregating the armed forces . Harry 34 / The Weekly Standard.
 Eisenhower pushed the 1957 and 1960 Civil Rights Acts, which were weakened in the Senate . Eisenhower pushed for the Civil Rights Act in the 1960s .
 Kennedy initially made civil rights a low priority, but it moved up his agenda thanks to the growing civil rights movement . The movement appears mainly in the wings of Purdum's account .
 That movement's marches, sit-ins, and boycotts, and the violent repression they sometimes provoked, persuaded many hesitant white Northerners that something had to be done to resolve the South’s terrible tensions . The South's terrible tensions were often provoked by the
 At Kennedy's urging, administration officials, congressional staffers, and civil rights activists pulled together a list of possible measures .
 In the wake of Kennedy’s assassination, Lyndon Johnson took up the cause .
 Johnson championed the bill as a tribute to his fallen predecessor . Johnson, a supremely complicated person, championed the legislation .
 The bill is proposed to ensure the universal right to vote in federal elections . It would also outlaw racial discrimination in private-sector employment and in access to ‘public accommodations’ such as hotels, restaurants and theaters .
 The trick was to push a bill that was strong enough to satisfy reformers but was able to survive a Senate that was often hamstrung by its vocal Southern minority . The trick to push the bill was to get a bill strong enough.
William McCulloch is the ranking minority member of the House Judiciary Committee . Purdum concludes that “the unsung hero of the tale’ is William McCulloch .
 This conservative Republican represented an Ohio district with few black residents and many voters who cared little about civil rights . The Republican represented a district with little black residents.
 McCulloch believed equal treatment followed from a straightforward and faithful understanding of the Constitution . But McCulloch believes equal treatment was followed from the Constitution.
 He brought along many House Republicans who respected him . He sent it off with a warning that he would oppose any substantially weaker version that might return from the Senate .
 This is only one example of the complicated game of perceptions and calculations that shaped the bill’s prospects . This is one of the complex game of perception and calculations .
 McCulloch has threatened to block any watered-down Senate version . He was trying to convince weak-kneed senators that their only choice was to accept a strong bill .
 The bill's promoters worked hard to give the impression that passage was inevitable in order to carry along senators who were otherwise skeptical of it .
 Northern conservatives had concerns about property rights and relentlessly growing federal power . Reform proponents had to calculate how much support they might lose from civil rights advocates .
 Dirksen's demand for several changes to the bill was his own demand for changes . It was that Humphrey, McCulloch and others were smart enough to accept .
 LBJ even gamed the question of whether to sign the bill on the Fourth of July .
 Purdum’s account is tightly focused on this story of politicians and pressure-group lobbyists .
 He tells it ably, breathing life into a number of protagonists and relating the suspense that somehow accompanied the dragged-out filibuster . He says it was a good time for the filibuster .
 Purdum’s focus on high politics in a narrow time period comes at a price . But Purdu's focus on the high politics is at a cost.
 The desegregation of almost all public accommodations, which some feared would take years, happened almost immediately and virtually without incident, constituting a revolution in Southern life .
 The act's provision for cutting off federal funds helped desegregate Southern K-12 education once those funds became sizable later in the 1960s .
 His account leaves out a larger story about the 1964 law’s limitations. Just as important, it leaves out the larger story.
 Purdum notes that progress toward racial equality only got so far after the 1960s . He says that progress in racial equality was only after the heyday of the '60s .
 He alludes to the GOP's turn to the politics of white backlash, rising opposition to affirmative action, and the current menace of voter ID laws . He cites durable racial disparities in income and in other life opportunities .
 It implies that if only bipartisan comity had lasted, other laws would have followed . Other laws might have solved deep-running problems, it says .
For some time now, it has been a more difficult thing to believe. That is an easy thing to say, but for some time, it's been more difficult to believe . It's been a hard time to believe, but it's not easy to say .
 The 1964 act was a bundle of provisions because it was the product of sprawling conversations that were well underway in the early 1960s . The Weekly Standard / 35 has been continuing ever since .
 African Americans have gotten the shaft in American history, and remain badly off in many ways, but do not propose how exactly to repair that history .
 Some reformers in 1963-64 thought progress would best be achieved by African Americans pursuing their own goals through the democratic process .
 Others hoped desegregating public accommodations could send a powerful signal about equality and inclusion . Others believed it more important to overcome the corrosive resentments that were institutionalized in Southern segregation .
 Others thought nondiscrimination would be more valuable to help blacks advance economically . But others thought it would be better to focus on the issue .
 These and other measures were mutually compatible and ended up in the 1964 act . The act was signed in 1964 .
 That did not necessarily mean that such provisions were the most effective means to achieve equality . But that did not mean that they were most effective.
 The 1964 law neither acknowledged other possible obstacles to racial equality nor offered means to address them . More important, the 1964 law did not acknowledge other possible barriers to equality .
 Daniel Patrick Moynihan first warned that family structure could impact social mobility . Liberals ran from the issue. It was in these same years that Daniel Patrick Moynihan warned of family structure .
 LBJ, Richard Nixon, and others tried to address such discrepancies with affirmative action hiring .
 The disparities in academic performance are still with us, confounding easy explanation or prescription . But decades later, important disparities in Academic performance arestill with us .
 It turns out that affirmative action admissions practices may have resulted in fewer, not more, minority lawyers, doctors, engineers, and scientists . "Mismatch" students and schools may have led to fewer minority lawyers and doctors .
 In some circles, it remains taboo to discuss these perverse effects . Yet, in some circles.
 The 1964 Civil Rights Act was a long-overdue measure empowering federal efforts to smash daily segregation . In retrospect, the 1964 Civil rights Act was an important measure .
 Some of the same figures and forces that most urgently pushed for basic civil rights went on to ill serve the national debate by attributing the basest of motives to political adversaries and interpreting every disagreement as a difference over ends .
 Nineteen sixty-four may have been a high-water mark not only for civil rights legislation but for goodfaith discussion on the subject .
 His line of inquiry, however, is not of the Socratic philosophical sort, he says . He is not a Socratic philosopher .
 An expert in computer science, he is collecting data on his bodily functions .
 To improve his diet and reduce his weight he tracks what he eats down to the calorie .
 He straps sensors to his body to measure his caloric burn while exercising . The sensors are attached to the body to monitor caloric burn .
It would be easy to wave off this news as nothing more than another sideshow in the human carnival . It would be easier to wave it off as a sidehow in a carnival.
After reading The Metamorphoses of Fat, the case of the coprological computer scientist seems less strange .
 Sanctorius, a professor at Padua during 1611-24, erected a ‘weighing chair’ and used it for 30 years . He attributed fluctuations to what he consumed and excreted .
 The quest to comprehend the relationship between eating and health is commonplace . The quest for the relationship is commonplace.
 George Vigarello shows, often amusingly, that the Western world has always drawn associations between the human constitution and the size and weight of the body .
 Whether being fat or thin or somewhere in between was desirable has depended on the basis for the judgment .
 The dearth of real knowledge as to the operations of the body invited conclusions based on a variety of factors . The body's operations are based on various factors, such as a lack of knowledge .
 At the dawn of the second millennium, overweight men were derided as womanly or weak . At the time of the first millennium, men were seen as weak or overweight .
 William the Conqueror was mocked for being so fat that he looked pregnant . The Conqueror had been mocked for looking pregnant .
 The French King Louis VI was ridiculed in 1135 for being too portly to mount a horse .
 The fat woman was the fertile woman; the thin one was imagined to be barren . The thin woman was thought to be a fertile woman .
 The scrawny were never considered powerful and were sometimes thought feeble or diseased . They were often thought feeble and diseased or thought feeble .
 Words were invented to distinguish between desirable and undesirable amounts of fat . They were invented in the 1930s.
 Rolls of heft indicated insatiability, an ‘infinity of oral desire’ that demonstrated moral degradation and slovenliness .
Not long after, depictions of potbellied bankers and plutocrats flooded paintings and cartoons . Not long after.
 The insight that food digested was converted into energy was not widely held until the 20th century . Bacchus depicted by Peter Paul Rubens .
 In the meantime, hypotheses about the causes of weight gain and loss were based upon metaphors, and ancient notions dominated . In the past, hypotheses were based on metaphors.
 The weight of the food he consumed exceeded the weight of his urine and feces, but his own weight remained steady . He continually found that the weight he consumed was too high for him .
 Vigarello demonstrates, eating a lot was viewed less as a sign of vigor and robust health than a condition worthy of abuse . Over time, Vigrello demonstrates.
 The stigmatization of fat fostered a market for tinkerers, quacks, and just about everyone else to peddle remedies . Combined with ignorance about digestion, it fostered the market for quacks .
 One eminent man of knowledge in the 16th century directed that fat people reduce the pain of swollen legs by cutting their toenails so low that blood flowed .
 This would, he postulated, lesson the excess of fluids responsible for the swelling . This would be a lesson, he said . He said .
 A physician, C.J.A Schwilgue, “proposed a cold bath’ with an electrical current running through it to tighten the body and force out excess fluids .
 Women were sold corsets and men used leather straps to depress their bellies . Women were also used to depress the bellies of men .
 One 17th-century actor took the stage with a ‘cerclage made of wide and rigid iron’ that flattened his girth .
 Settled systems of weights and measurements enabled the collection of data on body shapes and sizes . The data is based on data on weight, size, shape and size.
 These data were aggregated over time to develop averages, which could be used to create a baseline for ‘normal’ heights and weights for every age .
 Sometime after 1830 Adolphe Quetelet developed a formula for finding the ratio of weight to height that we now know today as the Body Mass Index .
 The Weekly Standard / 37 re-centered the popular discussion of excess weight on medical conceptions . The accumulation of scientific studies has June 23, 2014 .
 Nary a week passes without the press reporting on the latest study showing the increased probability of diabetes, impotence, and/or cardiac arrest from excess heft .
 Still, despite the march of science, old notions about body weight remain . Still, even though science is advancing, old ideas about bodyweight remain .
 Depictions of obese people as jovial and lazy live on, and the words ‘fat’ and “slob’ are often heard together .
 We all know people who have lost weight through exercise and diet changes, and we tend to attribute weight loss to force of will, to individual choice .
 Payne concentrates on the domestic history that produced the convulsion . Still, Payne concentrate on the history that led to the convulsions .
 Spain's empire was once the world's greatest in geographical extent . He controls territories from North Africa across the Western Hemisphere and the Pacific .
 Stephen Schwartz is a frequent contributor to CNN.com's iReporter.com.com .
 Payne also offers a reliable account of the main episodes of the 20th-century Spain’s armed torment . Payne also gives a reliable accounts of Spain's armed torment.
 These begin with the fall of the dictator Miguel Primo de Rivera in 1930 and the abdication of King Alfonso XIII in the next year .
 A republic was then proclaimed and a liberal and social-democratic coalition was elected, followed by the eruption of leftist extremism . A republic is then proclaimed .
 The Moscow-controlled Spanish Communist party was an alien force without significant roots . That last was evidenced by ferocious anticlericalism .
 In 1934, the most important of several failed leftist insurrections occurred . The most important was in 1934, when the most significant of several attempts to overthrow the government .
 The radicalized Socialists organized a full-fledged civil war with considerable preparation and thoroughness by the radicalized socialists .
Rightist government was defeated at the polls, which aggravated the crisis . But it was defeated, and enabled the victory of a rightist government .
 Elections in 1936 brought the liberals, leftists, and Communists of the People's Front to power . But the revolutionary tide ran ahead of them .
 The People’s Front won the balloting in part because of incidents of leftist violence that skewed voting results, but also thanks to the votes of the anarcho-syndicalists and Socialists .
 Revolution had seized the minds of the radical left, but a major opposing offensive was about to begin . The radical left had taken control of the world's largest political movement .
 It would come under the leadership of General Francisco Franco, and it would prevail . It would be under Franco's leadership, he says .
 No military intervention against the left had been organized between 1934 and 1936 . That is why, in Franco’s view, no military intervention was successful between 1934- 1936 .
 The electoral triumph of the People’s Front provoked further violent confrontations between the two ideological poles . The People's Front is dramatizing the disintegration of the state .
 The nationalists quickly seized most of the Spanish north with 38 / The Weekly Standard June 23, 2014 NEWSCOM .
 Franco himself was stuck in Morocco, as the Spanish Navy remained loyal to the Republic . But he was still stuck in the country, as he was in Morocco .
 Franco and colleagues went to Germany and Italy for airplanes and pilots, along with weapons, to evade the Republican closure of the Strait of Gibraltar . Franco and his colleagues went for airplanes, pilots, and weapons .
 Hitler and Mussolini obliged, sending their own combat personnel to assist the nationalists in beating the naval blockade . The nationalists were able to beat the blockade .
Franco ferried thousands of soldiers and Moroccan mercenaries onto the mainland . Franco ferried soldiers and mercenaries into the mainland.
 Madrid, the capital, is the main industrial center in the city of Barcelona . The city is also known as the capital of Madrid and Barcelona .
Without the swift capture of Madrid, the nationalists lost the initiative and condemned Spain to a war of attrition, according to Payne .
 Madrid became a global publicity symbol for the Republican cause . He deems the Battle of Madrid “the first turning point in that war’s war .
 Stalin chose to back the Republic, but Moscow's obvious desire to impose Communist dictation on the Spanish left made it the equivalent of the interfering fascist powers rather than a firm ally.
 In Barcelona, where the anarchosyndicalist union movement was a leading force, a distinct outcome emerged with the defeat of the military plot .
 The social demands of the left took precedence over the preservation of the Republican system . The left's social demands were more important than the GOP's .
 Catalonian nationalist president Lluis Companys submitted to system of dual rule alongside labor revolutionaries . Catalonian government submitted to dual rule.
 In Payne’s words, the anarchists “accepted a limited semi-pluralism,’ in contrast to Communist totalitarianism .
 The social revolution in leftist-controlled territory was “proportionately the most extensive, and also the most nearly spontaneous, worker revolution in a European country, Payne judges . Payne judges that the social revolution was ‘proportionly the most expansive,’
 It was carried out by genuine worker organizations on the local level, rather than the top down, like the Bolsheviks in Russia .
 Nin had been a functionary of the Communist International in Moscow from 1921 to 1930 . He fled Russia as a Trotskyist before fleeing as a Bolshevik .
With the Communists weak at the outbreak of the war, Stalin faced a ‘dilemma never fully resolved,’ according to Payne . The Communists were weak in the People's Front.
 For nearly two decades, the Soviet Union had preached revolution and civil war . The Soviet Union has preached revolution, civil war.
Civil war and violent revolution had broken out in Spain, but it was an anarchist and Socialist revolution . Suddenly, and paradoxically, against Soviet wishes, the revolution was against Soviet wish .
 Moscow turned to infiltration of existing Republican institutions. Challenged by the limited influence of the Spanish Communists .
 The Russian foreign minister warned Stalin that support for Spanish radicalism might prevent Russia from securing allies in the West .
 Soviet aid to the Spanish Republic diminished considerably as the war continued, leading Republican leaders to accuse Stalin of abandoning them .
At the beginning, Russian assistance to the Spanish left far exceeded what Franco received from Hitler and Mussolini, Payne argues . Payne argues that, at the start, Russia's assistance to Spain far exceeded that of the two leaders .
 Soviet deceit in Spain led to a “second counterrevolution’ by Communists against their leftist rivals. Soviet deceit led to ‘second counter revolution’
 Franco and his colleagues carried out a patient strategy of political consolidation within their movement and a successful campaign to break Catalonia away from the rest of Republican-held territory .
 Stanley Payne has included an argument that deserves emphasis . In this rich panorama of ideology and politics, he has included the argument that deserve emphasis .
 The Spanish revolution and civil war of 1936-39 remain relevant and worthy of study . This invaluable contribution reminds us that the Spanish revolution, civil war and Spanish revolution remain relevant .
 No one who watches as the camera pans over the massive concrete drums and cubes reflected in shimmering water can't be left without an urgent desire to be there .
 Paula Deitz is editor of the Hudson Review . Deitz: Architecture has become symbolically integrated into each community .
 Ayub Khan, the military ruler of Pakistan, sought to create two equal capitals with alternating parliamentary sessions . In his effort to preserve the troubled union of East and West Pakistan that followed the partition of India .
 Dhaka, the provincial capital of the east, is already fomenting under pressure to adopt Urdu as the official language . Military skirmishes aimed at crushing a growing nationalism are also under pressure .
 A projected National Assembly building gave them hope for independence . The building was expected to be built in a bid for independence.
 Louis Kahn met Muzharul Islam during his studies at Yale . He was already one of Dhaka’s prominent Modernists with his College of Arts and Crafts .
In 1962, Kahn accepted, and he came to Dhaka from Philadelphia for the first time . In 1962, he accepted and came to the city for the following year .
 The octagonal concrete citadel was originally intended for traveling MPs, and a hospital . The citadel is separated by calm waters from massive, fortress-like brick hostels .
 The complex was completed in 1983, but not without interruption . The complex possesses the richness of ancient marble and sandstone monuments .
 The 1971 civil war that created Bangladesh halted construction halted construction temporarily . After Kahn’s death in 1974, his associates oversaw the completion of the work .
 Dhaka, with a current population of 15 million, is teeming with markets in the old quarters along the Buriganga River . Dhaka's current population is 15 million .
 Thousands of green auto-rickshaws shoot in and out like threads weaving a jacquard pattern . The streets, permanently congested, resound with a cacophony of horns and bells .
 The National Assembly building at Sher-e-Bangla Nagar is in a park Kahn designed with avenues of trees bordering the water and parterres of marigolds .
 The symmetrical array of round and cubic towers, with their vertical slits and triangular, circular, and square apertures, recall the simplicity of forms Kahn collected in his 1950s travel sketches .
 The central cluster of four cylindrical forms containing the prayer hall is set slightly askew in order to face Mecca .
 Each five-foot segment of reinforced concrete (the predetermined limit) is separated from the next by a thin slab of white marble . A small shadow effect can be seen on each segment .
 Shamsul Wares says he will find irregularities in the workmanship but accepts them in good spirit .
 Kahn draws it through seven layers of interior walls through additional circular and crescent openings bridged by Piranesi-style crisscrossing staircases . Kahn is a master of layering light .
 As the once-crisp outside light is drawn through the building and its cavernous circular corridors 11-stories high, it becomes more diffuse at the same time that the eye adjusts to its new level .
Natural light from clerestory windows above is modulated by a concrete parasol stretched over the octagonal oculus .
 A small group viewing the chamber with me was suddenly moved to sing the Bengali national anthem . The song was written by Rabindranath Tagore .
Tree-lined streets shielding white bungalows set back in luxuriant grounds . The plans were laid down by Sir Edwin Lutyens .
 George V proclaimed Delhi the new capital at his Indian coronation in 1911 . The move was to remove the government from escalating religious strife in Calcutta .
 In 1912, Lutyens arrived with a planning commission to design New Delhi, succeeding the seven sequential historic cities, now mostly ruins, that comprised Old Delhi . The city was built in 1912, and is now largely ruins .
 Shah Jahan gave up Agra for Delhi when he built the Red Fort as the centerpiece of his empire . In the Mughal period, Agra was the centerpiece.
 He lost Shahjahanabad, as it was called, only 10 years later when his son imprisoned him . He was imprisoned by his son 10 years after his son was imprisoned .
 The British retained New Delhi for only 16 years after completing it in 1931 . The British kept the city for just 16 years .
 Lord Chelmsford asked Georges Clemenceau what he thought of the Viceroy’s House .
 The Indian government's twin Secretariat buildings and Parliament are flourishing in use under the Indian government . But to the contrary, the house is flourishing, even as they show their age .
At midnight on August 15, 1947, Lord Mountbatten handed over the government of India to Jawaharlal Nehru .
 Two military marching bands passed by in preparation for Republic Day. Then, as if in celebration, two military bands passed.
 The two-tone sandstone exterior of the Viceroy’s House is a tailored and not-too-exuberant mixture of motifs of the embellished Palladian style .
Chajja is a thin, projecting stone cornice that overhangs the entire structure . Not obvious from photographs is the shadow effect of the chajja, a thin and projecting cornice .
 The Mughal pavilions or chattris at either end of the roof were in perfect harmony with the dome based on the Great Stupa at Sanchi .
 The Corinthian-inspired capitals of the central colonnade drew on yet another culture . The stone Hindu bells decorating the capitals drew on another culture.
Inside the reception rooms for dining and entertaining had conserved all their refinements . marble patterned floors and long windows and mirrors were conserved .
 A staircase that takes visitors suddenly outside to a high loggia under an open sky. And then there are surprises, such as the staircase.
 The 10-acre Mughal garden is beautifully maintained behind the house . The best surprise of all, however, is the 10- acre garden behind the home .
 Designed in the traditional four-rivers style, the garden’s rectangular greenswards appear to float on the waterways .
With fountains of tiered, sandstone lotus leaves, pergolas, and clipped maulsari trees, the structures bring a fantasy element to abundant seasonal plantings .
 The northern Indian state of Punjab lost its capital, the great cultural center Lahore, to Pakistan . Lahore was the first new city in India since Jaipur in 1728 .
 Le Corbusier was selected as the chief designer on a team that included his cousin Pierre Jeanneret and the British architects Jane Drew and Maxwell Fry . The team brought an eclectic Modernism to the city's residential and public buildings .
 Sector 17 is the town center, including hotels and other commercial buildings of limited height, facing north to profit from the cross breezes . The town center is located in Sector 17 .
 Two-room terrace houses with linked fagades and walled front gardens provided homes near open parks in a neighborly environment . Some of these families might have lived in the villages where some of these homes may have lived .
 The Capitol Complex was built in the 1950s and ’60s, and nothing could be developed between it and the mountain ranges to the north .
 Le Corbusier’s dramatic reinforced concrete forms are calculated to protect the interiors from heat and sunlight .
 His mural-sized tapestries, woven in Kashmir, lend a magnificence along with acoustical qualities to the legislative chambers and courtrooms .
 The Capitol Complex is composed of three buildings on a vast plaza with reflecting pools . The Capitol complex is located in the heart of the Capitol Complex .
 A planned fourth, the Governor’s Palace, was originally sited at midpoint but was forbidden by Nehru . Nehru was against the glorification practices of previous regimes .
 There are plans to re-create this building in a slightly altered form as a Museum of Knowledge . Nothing has yet materialized.
 The Open Hand revolving in the wind is the famous symbol of Chandigarh . But rising from a square contemplation pit at the edge of the complex.
 A massive curved porch over the Palace of Assembly over the palace of Assembly, Chandigarh, is an iconography of Le Corbusier’s iconography .
With the cooling, tower-like, hyperbolic drum and glass-sided pyramid, this building possesses the soaring forms that instantly uplift the spirit .
 The High Court’s parasol roof, supported by colorful pylons, soars as well, and the syncopated pattern of brises soleils on the Secretariat fagade delineates interior functions, from ministerial offices to general workers .
 Once there were planted terraces on the rooftops, now there are more than two dozen terraces . Inside, systems of colorful ramps lead to the rooftop, where once there were plants .
 The Kahn building that prompted this pilgrimage was the building that led to this pilgrimage .
 Shamsul Wares was a frequent visitor to the National Assembly building . He had become accustomed to the innovative forms of the building .
After they go to the well too often with a formula that has gone flat, or after their messy personal lives get all mixed up in the characters they’re playing, stars become even slightly distasteful .
 Will Smith, for a decade the biggest star in the world, has lost it . Smith has been the world's biggest star for 10 years .
 Johnny Depp single-handedly earned Disney nearly $3 billion in the Pirates of the Caribbean movies .
 Adam Sandler is an incredibly reliable moneymaker in his self-produced fare for the better part of two decades . Sandler can't get audiences to the theaters .
 Tom Cruise has now fallen into the also-ran category as well. This past week has shown that he has now indisputably fallen into this category .
 Cruise has distinguished himself in his effort to make the best movies he can . The Cruise case is especially interesting because, of all the A-list Hollywood actors, he's been a star .
 Edge of Tomorrow is a genuinely inventive and thrillingly clever picture . Until a dull climactic sequence and a stupid coda, it's a genuine inventive and clever picture.
 John Podhoretz, editor of Commentary, is The Weekly Standard’s movie critic . He is also the editor of the Weekly Standard's movie critic.
 Edge of Tomorrow may well be the best American film of the past quartercentury . The film was directed by Doug Liman Tom Cruise .
 The director, Doug Liman, works off of a script by a rather large number of credited writers . But he manages to take it in new directions, including a new direction .
 The movie works almost exclusively because of Cruise, playing a slick PR executive who finds himself, untrained and unprepared . The movie is almost instantly decimated .
 Cruise deploys his famous smile in the movie’s opening scenes . But rather than making him seem winning and attractive, the grin exposes his character .
 Even the way he moves is a marvel, as we watch him repeat the day, we see him slowly grow in physical confidence . Even the ways he moves are a marvel .
 He is trapped in a metal body suit with weaponry built into it that he does not know how to manipulate . He is stuck in the suit with weapons built into the body suit .
In the first couple of scenes, he waddles and stumbles and is almost haplessly comic . In the first two of the scenes, the actor waddled and stumbled and is very comic .
 Edge of Tomorrow is a potent reminder of how good a movie actor Tom Cruise can be .
 In 2005, he went on Oprah Winfrey’s talk show and professed his love for his wife Katie Holmes . He jumped up and down on Oprah's couch in a display of heterosexual exuberance so false you might say he was growing a beard .
 Brooke Shields appeared on the Today show and got into a bizarre fight with host Matt Lauer . He said Brooke Shields took an antidepressant, a piece of a piece with his fundamentalist belief in Scientology .
 These images of the real Cruise, jumping on a couch and yelling about Paxil, have been superimposed on Cruise .
 You can’t really see the former without remembering the former, and those memories are uncomfortable ones .
 The event was an off-therecord Fellows seminar held by Ana Marie Cox, a political columnist on United States politics for The Guardian .
 Dan Savage, a relationship and sex advice columnist and founder of the It Gets Better project, is a guest speaker . Savage is also the founder of The It gets Better project .
 The incident occurred when Savage and Cox began discussing his persona history as a gay man .
First-year student and member of the LGBTQ community who asked to be identified as Hex. Savage used the slur t as an example of reclaiming words .
 "I used to make jokes about t—ies," audience members recounted .
 IOP: "A guest used language that provoked a spirited debate" The IOP says a guest used a "spirited debate"
 Hex asked Savage and Cox to use the term ‘T-slur’ instead of the actual word . Hex asked the pair to use “T-Slur” instead of ‘t-slurs’
Sara Rubinstein, executive director of QUIP, and Hex, Savage named other slurs . “Obviously [he attempted] to threaten me and make me feel uncomfortable in that space, which was pretty successful,’ Hex said .
 A dialogue about the usage of the slur between Cox, Savage, and Hex ensued, creating a tense atmosphere in the room, according to audience members .
 Hex ultimately apologized to Savage for misdirecting the conversation, but was further upset when Cox started talking about gender identification and left the room in tears .