 Poroshenko himself actively supported the Euromaidan protests between November 2013 and February 2014 in Kiev that resulted in the overthrow of Yanukovych .
 Poroshenko became the president after the illegal coup in Ukraine . As the current head of Ukraine, his statement seems strange at best .
 President of Ukraine should be forever protected by the country's law, says Poroshenko . Poroshenko might be insinuating that his own presidency is put in jeopardy .
 Alexei Pushkov, head of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Lower House of Russia's parliament, commented on Poroshenko's bizarre revelation . He said Poroshenko’s bizarre revelation was not surprising .
 Yanukovych became the scapegoat of Ukrainian politics last year . His government was accused of all the misfortunes in the country .
More than a year after the former president was gone, his legacy is still around . Now, more than a decade after his death, the president's legacy remains around .
 Ukraine will need 20 more years to reach the economic level of Yanukovych's government in 2013 . Mikheil Saakashvili, the new governor of Ukraine’s Odessa Region, said that in the best case scenario, Ukraine would need 20 years more .
 President Poroshenko entered office on 25 May 2014 after a U.S.-sponsored coup in Kiev . Arseniy Yatsenyuk was installed as Ukraine’s Prime Minister on 26 February 2014 .
 One pro-Russian part of Ukraine, Crimea, then seceded and joined Russia, and another, Donbass. Donbass was bombed by the Ukrainian Government during May through December 2014 . Donbass’s repeated requests to be allowed to join Russia were spurned by Vladimir Putin
 German intelligence estimates that “up to 50,000 people were killed in that bombing campaign . United States and other official estimates are only around 5,000 .
 The coup was followed by a violent ethnic-cleansing campaign to get rid of the residents in Donbass .
 Yet they vainly parade with their enormous deluded egos, patting each others’ backs, as our countries fall apart and their special forces kill those who want freedom .
 President of Ukraine Poroshenko offered Right Sector leader a position at the Ministry of Defense . President Poroshenko also offered a position in the ministry of defense .
 This was announced on the TV Channel 5 by Anton Gerashchenko, a Poroshenko advisor . This is the first time this has been announced by the Poroshenko adviser .
 I would be very pleased if Yarosh were to start working as part of the state administration . I would also be very happy with Yarosh working in the state government .
 The Volunteer Union for the Defense of Ukraine is based on the Estonian, Finnish, and Swiss systems, Gerashchenko says .
 If I were Yarosh I’d seriously consider it, though of course I'd be concerned about losing control over the Right Sector . The Right Sector should it become absorbed into some state structure .
 A territorial defense job would be something right up Yarosh’s alley . But a territorial defense jobs would be right up the alley .
 If he doesn’t like the carrot, he might have to taste the stick instead of the stick .
 Poroshenko aiming not at destroying but at isolating Kolomoysky. It's also becoming clear that Poroshenko is aiming not to destroy but to isolate Kolomoyssky .
 The arrests during the Cabinet meeting were of officials who gave state contracts to Kolomoysky’s companies .
 The offer to Yarosh is an effort to peel off the oligarch’s militant support . The offer is an attempt to peel away the oligarchs’ support .
I would not attribute any of it to the United States or any other outside force. Incidentally, I would not attributes any of the U.S. or any else outside force .
 Yes, Poroshenko can arrest Yatsenyuk’s ministers right from under his nose . Yes, he can arrest his ministers from the nose .
 He managed to neutralize Parubiy and Turchinov and, at least temporarily, secure the support of Avakov and Nalivaychenko whose star is rising .
 The United States and the EU are recognizing the reality on the ground, and that reality is Poroshenko as the clearly dominant force in Ukrainian politics . The U.S. and EU are, at most, recognizing that Poroshenko is the dominant force.
 What that "clearly dominant force" will do is another question, of course. What that “clearly dominate force’s’ will do?
 President Petro Poroshenko has introduced a bill to parliament to let foreign armed forces into Ukraine to take part in five joint exercises with Ukrainian forces .
 Ukraine plans three Ukrainian-American command post exercises, Fearless Guardian 2015, Sea Breeze 2015, and two Ukrainian-Polish exercises . Law and Order 2015, for this year, is the draft law .
 Fearless Guardian will take place in Yavoriv district, Lviv region, in the period from March to November . It will bring together a maximum of 2,200 troops .
 Sea Breeze will be a 25-day exercise held between June and October in the Black Sea and at training sites in the regions of Odesa, Mykolaiv and Kherson .
 Ukraine and the United States will each be represented by a maximum of 1,000 troops . Ukraine and U.S. will each have a maximum 1,00 troops .
 Law and Order is a one-week military police exercise in Yavoriv . 50 Ukrainians and 50 Poles will take part in the exercise .
 Permission from parliament is needed to allow foreign military personnel into Ukraine .
 The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko introduced a bill to the Verkhovna Rada to enlarge the maximum size of the national forces .
 During an emergency the military may be strengthened with conscription . However, it was noted that during an emergency, the military could be strengthened.
 The funds for an increase in the Ukrainian Armed Forces are provided by the budget of 2015 . The funds are provided for by the Budget of 2015.
 This comes a week after President Petro Poroshenko said that the new Minsk agreements on regulating the crisis in eastern Ukraine give hope . He is unsure whether they will be fully implemented .
 Poroshenko said last week that the Minsk peace agreements will be strictly implemented . "I don’t want anybody to have illusions and I don't want to seem naive," he said .
 The Ukrainian leader expressed hope that the situation will de-escalate, and peace will be achieved through ceasefire and withdrawal.
 A similar bill was introduced the Prime Minister of Ukraine Arseniy Yatsenyuk on behalf of the government in January . A similar legislation was introduced in January by the PM of Ukraine .
 President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, is now arranging to receive weapons via a less direct channel . This arrangement couldn't happen if the U.S. White House were opposed to it .
 This is called the IMF’s “austerity program, for looted nations such as Greece and Ukraine, and it holds sacred the thefts by aristocrats, while it transfers all of aristocrats’ losses off onto their respective publics, who pay it via their stripped governmental
 The U.S. aristocracy has, for at least 70 years, been allied with Sunni aristocracies, against, originally, the Soviet Union, and then Russia .
 Russia had been the chief supplier of oil and gas to the other Soviet republics . It was and is the local oil-and-gas giant .
 Russia's aristocrats bonded with Sunni Saudi Arabia, and with other Arab royals, in UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, etc.
 The Occidental Petreoleum bonded with Libya's pro-Soviet Sunni anti-imperialist and anti-Western Muammar Gaddafi . Western oil companies generally allied with the Saud family .