 Traumatized by ongoing fights in Ukraine, the Western community continues to challenge Russia diplomatically and with ongoing sanctions .
 In January alone separatists bombed Mariupol, took control of Donetsk International Airport . They announced plans to further increase the number of their soldiers .
 Two separatist republics in Georgia – Abkhazia and South Ossetia – gain momentum . When almost full attention is paid to Donbas, the two separatist regions in Georgia gain momentum.
 Russia is gaining new ground in Caucasus and it might be more and more difficult to return to the status quo . Russia has been in the Caucasus for more than a decade .
 Poland should lead the efforts of the Western community to strengthen NATO and the EU in order to deprive Moscow from its potential counter-legitimacy efforts . Poland should also lead the effort to deprive Russia of its potential Counter-Legitimism efforts .
 Sergey Lavrov denies Russia maintains 9,000 troops in Ukraine . He claims no proof of such Russian activity existed .
 There are voices claiming that Putin lost his ground and is now trying not to lose his face . The whole conflict has been a mistake and annexation of Crimea was miscalculated .
 Moscow is allegedly paying the price of its own adventurism. Humiliated with sanctions Moscow is alleged to be paying the cost of its 'adventurism' Moscow is accused of being 'humiliated' with sanctions .
 Kremlin does not seem to be in hurry to recognize two troublesome Donbas republics, not to mention their annexation . This may be the case because Kremlin doesn't want to mention the annexation .
 The fog of war should be considered as a purposeful strategy aiming to exhaust, confuse and win time . But it should be aimed at exhausting, confuse, confuse or win time, says the author .
 The Georgian example may in fact be the closest hint one has . It may be the most recent example of a Georgian example .
 The war in Eastern Ukraine broke out in March 2014. Here is what happened in Caucasus since the war began in March 2013 .
 Kremlin does not plan to introduce the wider use of annexation as a new political norm of conduct . The voices faded away and the Western community apparently became relieved .
 Abkhazian authorities discussed a “unified defense space’ with Russia in August 2014 . In August 2014, Abkhazi authorities discussed the topic .
 South Ossetia quickly became interested in the idea and its ambassador to Abkhazia, Oleg Botsiev, said that his country will be the part of the project as well .
 The agreement assumes boosting Abkhazian defense capabilities both by closer ties with Russian military and by modernizing the Abkhaziian armed forces . The agreement is expected to boost the country's defense capabilities .
 Once again Kremlin denies accusations of “creeping annexation’s” Kremlin says all it is doing is assuring security of independent state Russia recognized .
 The move infuriated Georgia and provoked condemning responses from NATO, the European Union and the United States . The move angered Georgia .
 South Ossetia announced that a similar agreement between Moscow and Tskhinvali is to be signed . Just one month later South Ossettia announced a similar deal with Moscow . The two countries are expected to sign an agreement this month .
 In the beginning of February this year the draft document was completed . The draft document has been completed .
 It allegedly assumes deep integration with Russia, most importantly in defense and security areas . It is alleged to have been in contact with Russia for years .
 The number is similar for combined Abkhazian and Russian population in Abkhazi . The total is similar to the number of people in the Russian city of Abkhazaria .
 In South Ossetia the Ossetian population alone accounts for almost 90 percent of the population . The Ossetians have a population of around 90 percent .
In Donbas around 70 percent of people speak Russian as their mother tongue . In Donbas about 70 percent speak Russian.
 Novorossiya, Abkhazia and South Ossetia would result in unification with Russia if this question was asked and backed with an electoral fraud . It is highly probable that the “referendums’ in the so called NovorOSSiya,
 The Western community would like to see Russian expansionism stopped by international isolation and sanctions . The West would also want to see Russia be isolated by sanctions .
 It is doubtful that Donbas, Abkhazia and South Ossetia did not share the fate of Crimea because of that . But it is doubtful they did not.
 Crimea is highly strategic because of the Black Sea Fleet and it was necessary for Putin to proceed with ‘surgical operation’ to finally take control over Sevastopol . Crimea is a highly strategic part of Crimea .
 The so called Novorossiya is likely to share the faith of Abkhazia and South Ossetia within completely different Russian strategy . It is aiming to undermine the role of NATO and the European Union in the region .
 Moscow is willing to propose its own version of integration. Caucasus example shows that Moscow is ready to propose own version .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia are no longer to be mere factors undermining Georgian integrity . Instead they aim to demonstrate that the sphere of prosperity and defense can as well be provided by Russia itself .
 Ten of G-20 members did not directly challenge Kremlin’s actions in Ukraine .
 The West should not use all of its pressure tools at once because it can quickly run out of bargaining leverage . The West shouldn't use all its pressure tool at once, it should use it at once .