 Since the end of World War II, the most crucial underpinning of freedom in the world has been the vigor of the advanced liberal democracies and the alliances that bound them together .
 Through the Cold War, the key multilateral anchors were NATO, the expanding European Union, and the U.S.-Japan security alliance . The U.N. Security Council was formed from the United States and Japan .
 With the end of the Cold War and expansion of NATO and the expansion of the EU to virtually all of Central and Eastern Europe, liberal democracy seemed ascendant and secure .
 Putin has been no more deft and brilliant player than Putin. On the global chessboard, he has been a brilliant player .
As the West gained friendships among post-communist states, Russia lost its friendships . Georgia, Ukraine, Moldova, and the Balkan states were forced back into the greater Russian orbit .
 Russia intervened militarily to back separatist forces in the enclaves of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . The first dramatic salvo came in the summer of 2008 .
 Russia’s military assault was brief but brutal, and involved bombing civilian populations in the disputed areas of Georgia .
 Mikheil Saakashvili was dealt a painful lesson courtesy of Putin . The two breakaway “republics’ remain under Russian occupation to this day .
 Russia's military violated the sovereignty of an independent state, but it would not be the last . It was the first time since the end of the Soviet Union that Russia’s military violated its sovereignty .
Putin has behaved as if obsessed with fear that the virus of mass democratic mobilization might spread to Russia itself . Since huge swaths of society rose up in color revolutions in the former Yugoslavia in 2000, in Georgia in 2003, and in Ukraine in 2004-2005, in
 Neither was prepared to condone the “loss’ of key parts of the former Soviet Union, such as Georgia and Ukraine, to any potential alliance structure with West .
 Putin won another victory in 2010, when the pro-Russian villain of the rigged election that prompted the 2004 uprising, Viktor Yanukovych, finally won the presidency .
 Yanukovych's authoritarianism and pro-Russia orientation led him to scuttle a much hoped-for association agreement between Ukraine and the EU . The Ukrainian people ousted him in a second people-power revolution in February 2014 .
 Russian troops without insignias infiltrated Crimea and, with sympathetic local actors, seized control of its infrastructure . Soon thereafter, Russian troopsWithout insignias infiltrate Crimea and take control of the region .
Ukraine watched helplessly as Putin consolidated his conquest with a pseudo-referendum that endorsed Crimea’s re-absorption into Russia .
 The boundaries of a European country had been altered by military aggression . It was the first time since the Nazis marauded across Europe in World War II that the boundaries were altered .
 Russia infiltrated its troops and equipment into the Donbas region of far eastern Ukraine, in support of separatist forces there . In a replay of its shadowy campaign of aggression against Georgia.
 Ukrainian armed groups used a Soviet-era missile system to shoot down Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 . It was one of those armed groups that used the missile system .
 Russia denies any involvement of its own soldiers, despite abundant evidence to the contrary . More blatant Russian military intervention followed, with Russia denying any involvement.
 A major swing state between West and East has been militarily violated and partially dismantled . The story isn't over yet, but it's not over yet .
 President Obama did not respond militarily to Georgia crisis in 2008 . Like President Bush with respect to the Georgia crisis, President Obama didn't respond to this aggression .
 The United States imposed several rounds of painful economic and financial sanctions on key Russian officials, banks, and businesses . The European Union, the United States and the European Union imposed the sanctions .
 sanctions have hurt important Russian elites and seriously impaired the functioning of the Russian financial, energy, and defense sectors . "Not exactly a great formula for making Russia great again," says Peter Bergen .
 Putin has been desperate to get out from under these sanctions so that his regime can thrive domestically and internationally . Putin wants his regime to be able to thrive internationally and domestically .
 He seeks to restore some form of Russian empire, with at least informal dominion over all the territories of the former Soviet Union . The West has to accept this new balance of power and treat Russia as a superpower once again .
He is smart enough to know that he cannot undermine it everywhere, but he will subvert, corrupt, and confuse it wherever he can . He is smart Enough to know he cannot undermined it everywhere .
 Putin’s regime has been embarked on an opportunistic but sophisticated campaign to sabotage democracy and bend it toward his interests . The regime is at the very core of the liberal democratic order, Europe and the U.S.
 Western intelligence agencies have been monitoring a Russian campaign on a Cold War scale to support a range of European parties and actors that are sympathetic to Russia and Putin .
 Hofer's defeat may temporarily slow the right-wing populist momentum across Europe . National Front leader Marine Le Pen endorsed Putin’s annexation of Crimea and has called for an end to Western sanctions on Russia .
 Putin is likely to be sitting pretty with the next French president if he loses .
 Francois Fillon recently won the conservative presidential primaries in France . He has for years been calling for an end to sanctions on Putin and a closer relationship between France and Russia .
 Nigel Farage has combined fierce demands for British independence from Europe with fawning admiration for Putin . This same spirit suffused the Brexit campaign in the U.K., whose longtime populist champion, Nigel Farage, has combined demands for UK independence with admiration for Russia .
 The damage to liberalism in Europe was also being driven by a more brutal form of Russian intervention in Syria .
 Russia’s bombing campaign has accelerated the flow of Syrian refugees into other countries, including European ones . Russia's bombing campaign in Syria has killed more civilians than either ISIS fighters or rebels .
 roughly 30 percent of European asylum-seekers last year were Syrian refugees . The human exodus from that civil war has also helped feed right-wing populist parties and movements .
 The destabilizing effects of the refugee crisis in Europe have been a kind of dividend of Putin’s campaign to defend his Middle East ally .
 Putin has also attempted to destabilize democracies directly through methods more reminiscent of the Cold War . But he has also tried to destabilise democracies directly by using methods reminiscent of Cold War.
Evidence emerged of a plot involving three Russian citizens and some 20 right-wing Serbian nationalists .
 Montenegrin authorities allege they planned to stage a terrorist attack that would discredit the election outcome, assassinate the pro-Western prime minister, and topple his government . Montenegrina authorities now allege they plan to stage the attack .
 Putin’s Russia has made brilliant use of old and new forms of propaganda to exploit political divisions . As these political dramas and tensions have unfolded in democratic Europe, Putin's Russia has used new and old forms ofaganda .
 RT is one of the most widely watched global sources of state television propaganda . It claims 70 million weekly viewers and 35 million daily . RT is also a vast social-media machinery .
 Russian trolls are paid to spread disinformation and Russian propaganda points by posing as authentic and spontaneous commentators . Added to this is the hidden influence of a vast network of Russian trolls .
 The army of Russian trolls started infiltrating U.S. media with conservative commentaries . They played up Clinton’s scandals and weaknesses, and widely diffusing other right-wing narratives against Clinton .
 Trump's margin of victory in the Electoral College might have provided Trump with his victory . It is easy to imagine that this intervention might have given Trump the victory .
There are still many more democracies worldwide today than when the Cold War ended . There are still more democracies today than at the time of Cold War .
 Turkey is in the grip of full authoritarianism, the Philippines is sliding in that direction . Korea and Brazil have seen their first women presidents disgraced in eruptions of public anger over corruption and misuse of power .
 Some 200,000 Muslim Indonesians have flooded the streets of Jakarta demanding that the Christian governor be arrested for insulting Islam .
 In much of Africa, the people still overwhelmingly want democracy, but leaders in many countries are dragging their systems in the opposite direction .
 Donald Trump’s election victory was an extraordinary political achievement for someone who has never held or sought political office .
 Russia's hacking of America's political process would not have happened without Russia’s hacking of the U.S. political process . It was on behalf of a candidate who had said he wanted good relations with Vladimir Putin .
 Enforcing the principle that established borders cannot be eviscerated by military aggression is a vital U.S. interest . Europe is a key part of the U.N. effort to protect its borders from military aggression .
 Ensuring that an authoritarian Russian regime does not replicate its values and expand its power is also a vital U.S. interest . Ensuring an authoritarian Russians do not replicate their values is a vital American interest .
 The most urgent foreign-policy question now is how America will respond to the mounting threat that Putin’s Russia poses to freedom .
 The Trump administration has been criticized for how it responds to the challenge of the president's administration .