 Golts notes that Russia’s new military formations must be understrength . New units are being formed while overall force personnel numbers are static .
 There are many Russian speakers living across the globe – in the U.S., Germany, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Ukraine .
 Notable essays by Krasheninnikov, Kholmogorov, Kolomeytsev and Miller . Miller's expose of Russia's treatment of Russia’s Donbass veterans is astounding .
Ukrainian Minister of Defense Poltorak states that Ukraine is prepared for a Russian invasion . Ukraine is preparing for an invasion by Russia, he says .
 OSCE is obstructed, and Russia pilfers Donbass coal, yet charges Ukraine for gas used by occupied Donbass . Donbass fires continue, while OSCE remains obstructed .
 DPRK debate continues – although much of it appears to be a deluge of MSM speculation, and creative appeasement proposals .
 United States agrees to consult RoK before any offensive operations conducted . U.S. agreed to consultRoK before offensive operations are conducted .
 China produces video skit mocking India, which sells poorly with Indian audiences . China produces skit mocked India's poor performance .
SDP leader tries to distract from Crimea deoccupation . SDP leader says Crimea is not a Crimea issue .
 Many local animosities are very old and run deep. Good precis of problems with multilateral alliance forming in Asia and Middle East .
 Four reports on cyber, one on propaganda, and one on GPS spoofing . One on Russian GPS spoofs . Four reports.
 Republican voter support for Putin and Russia claimed to be rising . Reagan would simply despair. Reagan would just despair .
 Later this year, Russia will launch what could be the largest military exercise since the end of the Cold War .
 It will test contingency plans for a full-scale conflict with NATO and interoperability with Belarus and the Commonwealth Security Treaty Organization .
 In the past, Russia has used military exercises as cover to invade neighboring states – as seen with Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014 . Russia has also used such exercises in the past as cover for invasion of neighboring states .
 CEPA StratCom is launching ‘The Road to Zapad 2017’ – an in-depth resource to track and analyze the lead up to ZapAd 2017 and its outcomes .
 Few people trust Putin to do the right thing when it comes to international affairs .
 South Korean President Moon Jae-in said there would be no second war on the Korean Peninsula . South Korean president said there will be noSecond war on Korean Peninsula.
 The vote marked the end of Russia’s rocky and tumultuous post-Soviet experiment with liberal democracy . It wasn’t entirely clear at the time, but that vote marked an end to Russia's turbulent post- Soviet experiment .
 From that moment on, power resided in Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . He says it didn't matter if Putin was the prime minister or the president .
 Institutions were steadily eroded and replaced by the cult of Putin the leader .
 A child born on that late summer Monday 18 years ago would know no other leader than Putin .
 Leonid Brezhnev ruled the Soviet Union for 18 years and one month . Putin will soon pass, making him the longest ruling Russian or Soviet leader since Josef Stalin .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel will have been in office for 12 years in November .
 Putin has ruled without the checks and balances and independent institutions that constrain and limit the powers of Western democratic leaders like Merkel . The problem is that Putin has rule without the check and balances.
 Putin, of course, longevity and unchecked power are two sides of the same coin . For Putin, longevity, unchecked power is the same side of thesame coin .
 He has used his time in power primarily to eliminate and make a mockery of any and all constraints on his power . He has also used his power to make the media, the Duma, to the courts, to civil society .
 Putin regime's ossification will be the Putin regime’s undoing. But it's also been a recipe for the stagnation and Ossification that will be Putin's undoing .
 Since August 9th, Vladimir Putin has not appeared in public, Dozhd reports .
 At the same time, there is no mention of Putin’s vacation this year, the message says .
 According to the channel’s report, the last time Putin appeared in public was on August 8th . The next time will be when he meets with journalists only on August 16th .
 Two people who are familiar with the Russian President’s schedule. This was relayed by two people who were familiar with his schedule .
 Putin worked in Abkhazia and Sochi, where he stayed for one day . On August 8th, Putin worked for a day in Sochi .
 All media outlets published only the pictures taken by Putin’s personal photographer .
 The 2018 budget is to reduce defense expenditure . But this will not affect the plans to retrofit the army and the navy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin made a statement to this effect at a meeting with United Russia party leader Vladimir Vasilyev in the State Duma .
 The president emphasized that close attention will need to be paid to the matters which always arise in the process of drafting the country’s primary financial document .
 Putin says defense, national security, economy, social sector and healthcare are key issues . He says these matters include not only defense, but also the economy and social sector .
 In Oliver Stone’s documentary film on the Russian president, Putin mentioned plans to reduce defense expenditure . Putin said he wanted to cut defense spending .
 President says economy is a priority for the country . Armed forces need to be modern and effective, but also compact, he says .
 The law would also limit foreign ownership in any company that owns an exchange point to 20 percent . The law also would limit foreign Ownership in companies that own exchange points .
 The sea-otter trade brought adventurers across the Bering Strait to Alaska and beyond, and remnants of their footprints remain .
 Belarus is holding joint Russian-Belarusian Zapad 2017 military exercises next month . Belarus has been the behavior of the country in recent months .
 Minsk appears determined that they not become a source of external friction . Moscow seems intent on using the exercises as something of a psyop to spook Russia’s neighbors and the West .
 Minsk has invited military observers from NATO and non-NATO countries, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Red Cross . The exercises are on Belarusian soil .
 Belarus has made a special effort to reach out to Poland, Ukraine, and the Baltic states . Belarus is trying to assuage the concerns of countries in the region like Poland and Ukraine .
 There has been much speculation and anxiety in Minsk that Russia will use the exercises to tighten its grip on Belarus .
 Belarus wants to distance itself from any attempt to use the exercises as a psychological operation to unnerve the West . Minsk’s surprising transparency stems from the fact that Belarus does not want to be drawn into a conflict between Russia and West .
 Alyaksandr Lukashenka wants to keep his options open and to play both sides . Belarusian president prepares to join Putin in presiding over the biggest wargaming exercises since Cold War .
 Russian-Belarusian West-2017 military exercises in Belarus start in September . The topic has become one of the main in the world media .
 The unusual nature of upcoming exercises was mentioned even when it became known that a record high number of railroad carriages were involved in the transfer of the Russian contingent to Belarus .
 Belarusian and European politicians as well as the military men believe that Russian troops will remain in Belarus after the exercises . Now many Belarusian, European politicians and military men now believe that Russia will stay in Belarus .
 Belarusians are outraged by their country's involvement in geopolitical games of an aggressive neighbour from the East .
 Warning Action demanding the abolition of the West-2017 exercises starts at 7pm on September 8 .
 Numerous comments on Charter97.org devoted to the West-2017 exercises testify to the mood of Belarusians .
 A huge column of troops near Pechy was seen in a train window . The Crimea was evaded by Crimea's military authorities .
 You can create guerrilla accounts under fictitious names, so as not to get fried . You can make guerrilla accounts using fictitious names .
 Intelligence and information gathering is a very important part of military operations, says the U.S. military .
 If the world community sees that all our people are against exercises, this will give us great moral support, says author . "If we see that we are against exercising, against occupation, we will be able to support us," says author.
 This will be the ground to remove our inadequate person from power. And this will be a ground for removing our inadequate people from power, says David Cameron .
 Belarusian soldiers will take the side of the people in order to defend our common interests and our homeland – Belarus. The Fight Is Required .
 If foreign troops do not leave Belarus after exercises, there will be problems . Belarus is home to around 1,000 foreign troops .
Workers wake up, young people make all kinds of bikers run away, they have no place in our country . Workers wake up to find out what's happening .
 We are peparing for aggression, and this is not a joke, or a stupid dream, we're pepared for aggression . We are not a jokes or a dream, and we are pepingaring for aggressive behavior, we say .
 The dictator replaced the chief of the General Staff and the head of the Transport Support of the Defence Ministry . The dictator has been in charge of the defence ministry for three years .
Some divisions of the Belarusian Defence Ministry had their heads changed . It became known that some divisions had been changed .
 The press service of Lukashenka reported on two new appointments at senior positions in the country’s military-defence sector .
 Aleh Mishchenka became the new chief of the communication department of the General Staff on August 16 . On August 16, he was appointed as the new Chief of the Communication Department .
 Other innovations are connected with the leadership of one of the Defence Ministry's departments .
 Yury Shaplauski is appointed to the position of the head of the Transport Department of the Defence Ministry . Shapluski is a former member of the National Security Council .
 Russian-Belarusian exercises “West-2017’s” begin in September on the territory of Belarus .
 A column of tented trucks has driven into the territory of the Foliush military unit .
 A journalist wrote about the "Kozaks from abroad" The journalist said they were bringing the “Kozak from abroad.
 The Russian troops arrived on tented trucks at the territory of the military unit in Pechy near Barysau .
 The Moldovan Foreign Ministry has denied media reports that the country’s authorities intend to introduce a visa policy with Russia .
 He called these initiatives provocations and noted that he saw no grounds for introducing a visa policy with Russia .
 The defense department will respond adequately to threats connected with these exercises, says the head of the defense department .
Up to 13,000 servicemen will take part in exercises, according to preliminary data . The exercises are expected to take place in the coming months .
 The General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces has designed a package of measures for the Ukrainian army in response to threats that may arise due to Zapad 2017 drills . The drills are due in Russia and Belarus this September .
 We understand what kind of threats may arise and will react in an adequate manner to the threats the military exercises may pose . The military exercises are scheduled to take place in the United States.
 The General Staff has identified a number of measures that would be adequate for these threats, Poltorak told reporters in Kyiv .
Poltorak: "We view everything happening at our border as an unfriendly act" The upcoming exercises potentially pose a threat because large numbers of Russian Armed Forces personnel are moving closer to the Ukrainian border, he said .
 The Air Force of the Armed Forces of Ukraine launched bilateral command post exercises Tuesday . The exercises include all types of aircraft, anti-aircraft missile units and radio-technical troops .
 The goal of the exercises is to plan and manage troops and provide all-round support during the preparation and conduct of combat operations in responsible areas .
 Militants launched 35 attacks on positions of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in ATO area in Donbas over the past day .
 Russia's hybrid military forces attacked Ukrainian army positions in Donbas 35 times in the past 24 hours . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and four as wounded in action .
 Four Ukrainian soldiers were wounded in fighting in eastern Ukraine in the past 24 hours, a defense ministry spokesman says .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine still has no access to Pikuzy in Donetsk region and Shchastia in Luhansk region . Mine clearance on these routes has not yet started, according to the mission's Facebook page .
 In the first half of 2017, Russian Gazprom delivered 1,389 billion cubic meters of gas to the separatist DPR and LPR (Luhansk People’s Republic)
 The price of Russian gas as of the first quarter of 2017 was $306. per thousand cubic meters, Gazprom's report for the second quarter .
 In the first quarter of 2017, 1.11 billion cubic meters of gas were supplied to separatist-controlled territories in the Donbas .
 Gazprom started supplying gas to uncontrolled territories on February 19, 2015 . Gazprom had started supplying the uncontrolled territories in February 2015 .
 Naftogaz of Ukraine has long stated that it does not intend to pay for gas delivered to the territories which are not under Ukraine’s control . Russia adds these deliveries to the debt owed to the Ukraine .
 Naftogaz stressed that it does not accept gas under a contract with Gazprom coming through Prokhorovka and Platovo gas-metering stations . Naftogsaz said it did not accept the gas under the contract .
 Gas deliveries cannot be paid for by Naftogaz . Data on gas supplies through these stations cannot be used in the preparation of reports on acceptance of gas .
 Certain changes in training have taken place, the Minister of Defense said . "Not all problems are solved yet," he said .
 They have to be trained during practical classes and exercises, says Stepan Poltorak .
 The Ukrainian Navy plans to establish a NATO doctrines and tactic center before the end of 2017 .
 A 37-year-old criminal was trying to sell four RPG-26 grenade launchers in the village of Hvardiiske of Novomoskovskyi district of Dnipropetrovsk region . The SBU Security Service of Ukraine and the Military Prosecutor's Office
 Ukraine could become a huge export base of fruits and vegetables, both fresh and processed . Thanks to a favorable climate and fertile chernozem, the black-colored soil contains a high percentage of humus .
 This was reported by the United States Department of Commerce in the report on the fruit and vegetable industry of Ukraine .
 Ukraine currently ranks fifth in Europe in terms of producing fruits, vegetables, and berries . Ukraine is eleventh out of 45 countries in Europe for organic farming .
 In 2016, the total volume of organic production in Ukraine was estimated at $22 million, 17% more than in 2015 . In 2015, Ukraine's organic production was 17% higher than in 2016 .
 Organic farming is one of the most attractive destinations for investment in Ukraine, the Ministry of Agricultural Policy and Food of Ukraine says . An average return on investment of about 300%, make organic farming a top destination for investment .
 The deterioration of trade relations with Russia gave impetus to the development and modernization of the industry . Russia's relationship with Russia has led to an increase in the industry's growth .
 Ukraine has reoriented the export of most fruits and vegetables from Russia to the European Union, South Asia, and South Africa . During the last two years, Ukraine has been reorienting its export of fruit and vegetables .
 Ukrainian companies must comply with higher production standards, the report notes . Such change in direction from East to the West requires Ukrainian companies to comply, it says .
 It's been more than three years since Ukrainians were driven in large measure by rampant corruption in Ukraine to retake their country .
 The organs of systemic corruption and deterrence for western investment remain in the hands of the same elites who drain these state treasures of their financial and material resources . State-owned enterprises are the organs of the systemic corruption.
 The unwritten system scares away further capital, expertise, and technology required to restart an economy which is moving away from Russia . Even worse, this unwrittensystem scares away more capital, experts and technology needed .
 Ukrainian economy is starved for capital and the GDP growth required to support its population .
 Privatizing Ukraine’s state enterprises would send a powerful signal to corrupt elites and foreign investors . Privatization of Ukraine's state enterprises is a powerful sign of corruption in Ukraine .
Major privatizations have been too difficult both technically and politically . So far, major privatizations haven't been too much difficult .
 The tradeable market value of Ukrainians SOEs in their current state is very low to zero . Even if the underlying fundamental value is high, the underlying value is low .
 Many of these SOEs are natural monopolies and should be producing attractive cash flow . Many of the SOEs should produce attractive cashflow .
 Romania's recent history shows how dramatic SOE reform can fix many facets of a broken economy . Romania’s recent history has shown how dramatic soE reform has been successful .
 Ukraine needs a program to supplement the current privatization effort, says U.S. Embassy in Ukraine . Romania is not ready for stock privatizations, says the embassy . Ukraine needs to reform other state enterprises which are not ready to privatize .
 Such a solution would keep the majority ownership of SOEs in the hands of Ukraine’s government, but incentivize these SOEs to adopt corporate governance reform . This would transfer operations and profits from corrupt elites into a properly functioning corporate entity .
 This means more profit and value for the state, combined with better operations for growth and investment at SOEs which dominate Ukraine’s economy . This means the state has more value and value.
 Former Odesa Regional Governor Mikheil Saakashvili will return to Ukraine from Poland on September 10 . He will be back in Ukraine for the first time since leaving the country .
 Saudi Arabia closed its land border with Qatar in June as part of an economic and political blockade . Saudi Arabia has been in a political and economic blockade since June .
 Moon Jae-in says the U.S. had promised to consult with South Korea before acting .
 Joint military exercises between the United States and South Korea are set to begin Monday . The exercises could provide an opening for efforts to reduce tensions over the North’s nuclear program .
 US President Donald Trump implied in one of his latest tweets that he forced North Korea to back down over its threat to Guam . The US President said he forced the North Korean government back down on Guam threat .
 It's a dangerous misperception that could cause the crisis to escalate and Trump to miss what could be the best chance he will have to halt the tests of missiles that can now threaten the American homeland .
Rex Tillerson reiterates that Pyongyang must show it is serious about denuclearization . He says he plans to continue working toward bilateral dialogue to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue .
 Tillerson was asked to assess the current situation with North Korea . He was at a press conference for the 2016 International Religious Freedom Annual Report .
 The world will need to get used to North Korea having nuclear weapons for now, says a former top U.S. intelligence advisor .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov urged all sides involved in the controversy over North Korea’s nuclear weapons program to avoid using force and exercise maximum restraint .
 Russian Security Council Chief Nikolai Patrushev claimed that “external provocateurs’ were pushing North and South Korea toward war . In a 26 April speech to the annual Moscow conference on international security, he said that ‘external provocations’
 If China won’t help us on North Korea, let’s try to get North Korea to help us. If China doesn't help us, let's try to help North Korea on China, he says .
 The Clinton, Bush and Obama administrations each tried to threaten or cajole North Korea into abandoning its weapons programs . The Clinton and Bush administrations each attempted to threaten the North Korea .
 North Korea’s leaders know that the U.S. would cheerfully topple their regime if it had the chance .
 As rhetoric escalates between President Trump and Kim Jong-Un, we asked an expert about the prospects for war, peace and anything in between .
 A former Department of Defense and State Department official explains why a hardline approach on North Korea will likely fail, as it did with Iran .
 A ban on North Korean seafood exports began to be felt this week . The ban is curtailing an easy source of cash for the North Korean government . Chinese wholesalers are angry at the ban, angering them with their wholesaler .
 Chinese video accusing India of committing seven sins in Doklam is an attempt to spread false propaganda . Chinese video accuses India of seven sins and claims India committed seven sins .
 German political parties campaigning for elections next month are competing to attract 2 million voters with roots in the former Soviet Union . There are concerns that Russian propaganda could sway votes.
 German Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel claims Christian Lindner is just trying to get headlines . He says the main task at present is to achieve an ceasefire in eastern Ukraine .
 We need to think about how to reach a ceasefire in the east of Ukraine, Gabriel said .
 The truce is a necessary condition for easing tensions with Russia, says Gabriel . In the Minister's opinion, Lindner does not make any contribution to achieving this goal .
 Lindner later clarified his position, saying that his party does not recognize the annexation of the Crimea .
 Russia's occupation is a major problem, but other issues should not be linked to it . It is impossible to solve the problem of occupation now, but it is not possible to achieve progress in relations .
 Pence wants the region to do more to isolate North Korea . He calls on countries there to “do more’ to address the situation in Venezuela .
 Kevin Mandia, CEO of FireEye, provided an in-depth review of tactics, techniques and procedures of the top adversaries facing the U.S. in cyberspace .
 GPS connectivity isn't guaranteed sure isn’t convenient but it may be entirely necessary. Preparing for a world where GPS connectivity is not guaranteed sure .
 Republicans are more likely than Democrats to have confidence in Vladimir Putin, and less likely to see Russia as a threat . Republicans are also more likely to believe Russia is a threat than Democrats .
 Caroline Gawlik says Ukraine is a world away from the Charlottesville events . She says that Ukraine is not the country that Charlottesville is in .
 Virginia residents are struggling to find common ground with their neighbors . It is even harder to look across the world for guidance than for guidance .
In this time of disorder, I think there is much that Americans can learn from Ukraine . But in this time, there's much to learn from the Ukraine, says John Sutter .
 Ukraine has never been the modern powerhouse empire that America once was . The country is now the world's most populous country .
 Ukrainians have long been the subaltern to various empires, particularly to the Russian Empire . In turn, Ukrainians have been in the Soviet Union, and in turn, they've been in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians began their modern advancement towards discovering their own national values, identity, and memories . The collapse of Communism in 1991 led to the rise of Ukrainians .
 The Soviet monuments were toppled by Soviet monuments. They marked the beginning of this transition by toppling Soviet monuments .
 Parliament member demands to know whether his country’s government targeted Trump in 2016 campaign .
 Hope Hicks, 28, will take the position after Anthony Scaramucci lasted just 10 days in the job, according to a report from the Daily Caller . The White House is expected to announce the new job on Monday .