 The Council adopted Decision 2014/145/CFSP concerning restrictive measures in respect of actions undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 The entry for one deceased person should be deleted, says the Council .
 Article 1 Decision 2014/145/CFSP is amended as follows: in Article 6, the second paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘This Decision shall apply until 15 March 2016’ The Annex is amended.
 Article 2 will enter into force on the day following the publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
 Oleksandr Turchynov's election was decreed unconstitutional on 1 March Serhiy Valeriyovych 2014 . His election was decreed unconstitutional by Oleksandra Turchy.
 He actively lobbied for the ‘re­ AKSYONOV (Сергiй ferendum’ of 16 March 2014 . He actively campaigned for the 're ­ AK SYONOV’s’ referendum .
 L 239/160 EN Official Journal of the European Union 15.9.9 2015 Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 9.9 .
 On 1 March 2014 Totoonov publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Addit­ ionally the Black Sea Fleet falls within the District's control . Addit ­ ionally, the Black sea Fleet falls in the District.
 Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Uk­ rainian authorities in Crimea .
 The Crimean referendum was held in Crimea in March 2014 . The vote was held on the Crimean peninsula .
 Russian system for signing referendum results is "sible under the Russian system" Respon­    “а ’s researchers sible under the Russian system for signing referendum results .
 Responsible for administer­ (Валерерий    Кирич Primorsky region ing the Crimean referendum. The Crimean referendum was held in Crimea in March 2014 .
 Bui, Kostroma and co-sponsor of recent legislative Dmitriyeva. region proposals in Russia would have allowed regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities' prior agreement .
 Bandurovo, for overseeing the integration of the region, was responsible for the annexation of Ukraine's Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Leningrad sible for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is an autonomous republic of Crimea .
 The Russian Federation is a Russian Autonomous Republic of Crimea . It is an an an­ nexed autonomous Republic of Crimea.
 Makiivka (Donetsk seizure and occupation of the regio­    regio­­ Пущишилiн, oblast) nal administration. Makivka (donetsk seizure) is a Russian city in
 The region of Crimea has been annexed into the Russian Federation . The region is part of the Crimea region of Ukraine .
 The annexation of Crimea and Sevas­  topol into the Russian Federation. Responsible for the adoption of legislation on Vologodsk Oblast .
 Skvortsovo village, systematic and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea Crimea . Skvortssovo is a village in Simferopol region.
 Putin sent in Russian troops Volodymyrovich to protect Sloviansk . Later asked him PONOMARYOV to supply weapons .
 Remains active in supporting separatist actions and support separatist actions . RemainsActive in (Вячеч    ’s ‘P’  -‘‘-’ “’
 Security Service of Uk­ raine's Office in Donetsk region build­ ing and afterwards seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka .
 Remains active in Russia, supporting separatist actions or poli­ Oleg Anatolevich cies. RemainsActive in   Царь  "Oleg Anatolesvich cie"
 Mikhailovka, menting Russia's annexation of Crimea, has led Russia to Crimea . He has been in charge of the Crimea region since 2007 .
 Shevchenko plementing Russia's annexation of Se. Actively im­ 12.5.5, shevchenko says .
 Remains active in supporting  separatist actions or policies, says  Ходак  -Хгрий . Remains active in supporting separate actions and proposals .
 Aleksandr Sergeevich KHODAKOVSKII (Алек    KDKVSKII) is the second highest ranking in the world . He is also known as the "KDSKII"
 Boris Vyacheslavovich DOB 15.12.1950 Permanent member of the Security 25.7.2014 GRYZLOV Council of the Russian Federation .
 Vladivostok is a member of the Security Council . He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Kuibyshev on 23.5.2014 he announced the in­   auguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised ‘Do­ netsk People's Republic’ in Moscow . He contributes to undermining or threatening the territorial integrity,
 Vyselki, Krasnodar was awarded the medal ‘for the  liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea .
 Her bank account is used to finance illegal separatist groups . In addition, her bank account was used to fund illegal separatist  groups .
 Igor Strelkov/Girkin is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity of Ukraine . Fedir Dmitrovych is associated with the Ukraine's independence .
 Former vice-prime minister of Do­­ (aka Vladimir SHEVTSOV, netsk People's Republic, responsible Vladimir Iurievici for security and law enforcement .
 President of Russia on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has under­ mined the territorial integrity of Ukraine 92 .
 He developed his fortune during Putin's tenure as Putin's president . He developed fortune during Pre­­ (Аркадий    Putin's tenure was previous to Putin's .
 Yuriy Valentinovich DOB 25.7.1951 Mr Kovalchuk is a long-time acquain­ 30.7 . KOVALCHUK tance of President Putin.
 Leningrad is the founder of the so-called Ozero Dacha, a cooperative society bringing to­ gether an influential group of indi­ viduals around President Putin .
 Belarus is home to the so-called Ozero Dacha, a cooperative society bringing to­ gether an influential group of indi­ viduals around President Putin .
 Debalcevo will continue their fighting in the rest of the country . Debalcvo will be fighting in   the rest of the country .
 Moscow is the capital of Russia's largest city, the Russian capital of the Russian city of Moscow . The city is home to the pro-Ukrai­ nian militias .
 Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.1971 So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister’ 12.9.8.2014 SHEREMET of Crimea .
 Dzhankoy (Миха    “iх   ’s in the organisation and implementa­  in the 16 March referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia. “Dzhank
 Yuri Leonidovich DOB 2.2.1948 Deputy Speaker of the Russian Federation 12.9.9 . 2014 VOROBIOV Council of Russian Federation.
 Krasnoyarsk (Юрий    Vorobiov publicly sup­ Ворой,  Krasnoysarsk publicly sup in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Uk­ r
 Alma-Ata supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexa­ tion of Crimea .
 Stefanidin Dar is the deputy of the State Duma . He is the head of the Rostov region Forces .
 Opochka is a Russian city in the Russian capital of Moscow . It is the capital of the Russian city of the city of Duma . The city is located in central Moscow .
 Kazakh SSR tries, Eurasian Integration and Links with Compatriots of the State Duma . Rudny, Kostanai (Олег    Rudny) is a Kazakh region .
 Ukraine's territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine, has been destabilised by Ukraine .
 He has actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine, he has said .
 In taking on and acting in this capa­ city, she has actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Eduardovych Mychaylov has taken on and acting in Ukraine's capital city . He has also been involved in the Ukraine's political crisis . His actions and policies un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Pavlo Leonidovych has actively sup­ DRYOMOV ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine . In this capacity, he has actively  sup­died of Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Krasny Luch has actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, he has said .
 Omsk (Анататолий    ‘ Иванович the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine’s Ukraine .
 Zhilino is the founder of the civil move. He ment ‘Krassnaya Moskva — Red Mos­ cow — Patriotic Front Aid’ which or­ ganised public demonstrations sup­ porting separatists .
 Prizrak brigade Armed separatist which has actively supported actions which 16.2.2015 undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .