 Insurgents affiliated with the Donetsk People's Republic, backed by Russian troops, opened a new front in the War in Donbass on 25 August 2014 .
 Government forces were forced to retreat from Novoazovsk to the city of Mariupol . DPR forces were in control of the city, leaving DPR forces in control .
 DPR forces stated their intention to  "fight their way to the Azov Sea" on 23 August .
 An artillery barrage rained down on the coastal city of Novoazovsk, in southern Donetsk Oblast . In line with this statement, an artillery barrage Rained down.
 A column of armoured vehicles crossed into Ukraine from Russia from Russia near Novoazovsk on 25 August . The Ukrainian army is known to be the largest military force in Ukraine .
 No insurgent formations within 30 kilometres of this area for many weeks . There were no insurgent formations in 30 kilometres .
 Heavy fighting took place in the village of Markyne, 7 kilometres from Novoazovsk .
 Directly prior to the appearance of the column, the area was heavily shelled. Directly before the column was seen in the area .
 The nearest insurgent artillery positions were beyond the range of this area. The nearest insurgents were beyond this area .
 DPR insurgents shelled Novoazovsk from across the Russian border on 26 August .
 Ukrainian border guards stationed at the Novoazovsk–Veselo–Voznesenka border-crossing showed craters that they said were caused by shelling from Russian territory .
 Russia denied any involvement, and said DPR forces had been acting on their own .
 According to the Armed Forces of Ukraine, this shelling was an attempt to take out Ukrainian artillery positions in the area .
 smoke could be seen rising over the city, whilst many residents fled in cars and lorries .
 Ukrainian government said they were in "total control" of Novoazovsk . Town mayor Oleg Sidorkin confirmed that the insurgents had captured it .
 He also said that "dozens" of tanks and armoured vehicles had been used by insurgents in their assault on the town .
Russian paratroopers captured by government forces in Ukrainian territory a few days earlier . They said these vehicles were marked with "white circles or triangles" similar to white armbands seen on Russian paratrooper .
Government forces retreated westward toward Mariupol . Government forces retreated toward Mari upol .
 NSDC later said that Novoazovsk had been captured by "Russian troops" Despite earlier denials by the Ukrainian government, the government later said it was captured .
 Ukrainian troops withdrew from Novoazovsk to save lives, NSDC says . They were instead preparing defences in Mariupol .
 Ukraine and western governments say Russian troops either facilitated or took part in the attack on Novoazovsk . Ukraine and Western governments say that Russian troopseither facilitated or participated in attack .
 By the time that the city fell to the attackers, NATO said that there were at least 1,000 Russian soldiers operating on Ukrainian soil .
 By 1 September, Russian troops seemed to have vanished from the town . The town was then being guarded by DPR insurgents .
 Some locals said that there were "little green men" outside the town . The term was used to refer to the unmarked Russian forces that took over Crimea in February 2014 .
 NSDC released a video showing a T-72 tank in Novoazovsk, Russia . The NSDC is fighting a battle against the government in the city .
 The government of Ukraine said that this was proof of the presence of Russian troops on Ukrainian soil . The government said this was evidence of Russian forces on Ukraine soil .