 The demise of the regime was brought about by bitter protests that had erupted in Kyiv’s Maidan Square in late 2013 . The government had rejected closer relations with the European Union .
 Moscow's pro-reform government is a pro-Western government . Russia is committed to addressing the need for serious reform, and determined to draw closer to Europe .
 Ukraine remains far from achieving the political and economic stability and internal security sought by the Maidan supporters . Despite the current Kyiv government’s commitment to reform, the pro-Western political andEconomic orientation, and the presence of a vibrant, yet frustrated, civil society dedicated to the
 2016 has already proven to be a very unsettling time for the government . frustrations have mounted over the slow pace of political reform and economic progress by pro-reformers .
 Ukraine's economy minister and deputy prosecutor resigns after a series of shortcomings . IMF chief says Ukraine risked losing international financial support if progress was not made .
 When two political parties quit the coalition government, a new crisis was created . The crisis was triggered when two parties quit.
 President Petro Poroshe nk o to ask for the resignations of Yatsenyuk and Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin . Many accused of running a corrupt office .
 Shokin offered his resignation, which was accepted in March, but Yatsenyuk took his case to the Rada (Ukraine's parliament) and barely survived a vote of no confidence on February 16, 2016 .
 Despite surviving the vote, Yatsenyuk could not reconstitute a new coalition government . The vote was not enough to form a new government .
 Yatsenyuk’s term as prime minister ended on April 14, 2016 . The Rada voted to support Volodymyr Groysman, the Speaker of the Rada, as the new prime minister .
 The confluence of these factors, according to some, has stifled the implementation of democratic best practices, says some . It also exacerbated long-standing problems in attracting financial support and foreign investment .
 The IMF estimated Ukraine could require $40 billion to address the needs of the country . In 2014, the new government in Kyiv sought international financial assistance .
 The IMF and Ukraine have agreed on a loan package of close to $22 billion over four years . Some $6. billion of which has been disbursed. Since then, the IMF and Ukrainian government have agreed.
 The European Union has committed over €11 billion in aid for Ukraine . The EU is considering further assistance for the country .
 In January 2016, a new free trade agreement between the EU and Ukraine went into effect . It could open new opportunities for Ukraine’s economic development .
 The U.S. has committed over $550 million in assistance to the government in Kyiv since 2014 . The United States has also committed $1 billion to help the new government carry out political and economic reforms .
 U.S. economic and technical experts advise almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities .
 Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv in 2014 by seizing Ukraine's Crimea region and annexing it .
 In April 2014, armed pro-Russian separatists supported by Moscow seized parts of the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . In April 2013, pro- Russian separatists backed by Moscow took control of parts of Ukraine .
 A 12-point agreement to end the conflict, known as Minsk-2, was signed in Minsk, Belarus, in late 2014 . The leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France, and Germany signed the agreement in 2014 .
 The United States strongly condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its incursion into eastern Ukraine . U.S. imposed sanctions against Russian individuals and key firms initially for seizing Crimea .
 sanctions have continued and were enhanced in response to Russia’s continued aggression and activity in eastern Ukraine . These sanctions have been enhanced in reaction to Russia's continued aggression.
 In December 2014, President Obama signed H.R. 5859, the Ukraine Freedom Support Act .
 The measure authorized the President to impose sanctions on Russian defense, energy, and other firms and foreign persons . The measure also authorized increased military and economic assistance for Ukraine .
 The legislation also urged the Administration to provide weapons to the Ukrainian military . The Obama Administration rejected the idea, viewing it as risking further escalation of the conflict .
 Additional legislation supporting Ukraine is likely to be considered by the House and Senate in 2016 . Additional legislation support Ukraine will be considered in 2016.
 Ukraine, comparable in size and population to France, is a large, important, European state . Ukraine is comparable to France.
 It occupies a sensitive position between Russia and North Atlantic Treaty Organization member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania . It occupies the sensitive position.
 Russian politicians have never been fully reconciled to Ukraine’s independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . There was strong Russian support for the annexation of Crimea .
 In 2008, Russian President Putin told U.S. President George W Bush that Ukraine was not a state . While the western part of the country may belong to Eastern Europe, eastern Ukraine was Russia’s.
 The United States and European view is that a strong, independent Ukraine is an important part of building a Europe that is whole, free, and at peace . The U.S. view of Ukraine is that it is important to build a European Europe.
 Ukraine's political scene has been dominated by ‘oligarchs’ (powerful, politically well-connected businessmen) Since Ukraine achieved independence in 1991, Ukraine’s political scene is dominated by 'oligarch' businessmen . They divided up the country’
 Yanukovych's government was criticized for high levels of corruption, in part committed by his own family and close associates . His government has been accused of corruption in part by his family and associates .
 United States and European Union officials expressed concern over the government's human rights record . U.S. officials expressed strong concern over targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution .
 Many observers had believed that despite growing dissatisfaction with the Yanukovych government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine . The 2004/2005 pro-democracy “Orange’ revolution as well as widespread disillusionment with the political class.
 Yanukovych government made a last-minute decision to not sign an association agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . It would have aligned Ukraine more toward Europe, at least in the areas of economics and trade .
 The decision sparked antigovernment demonstrations in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square .
 Smaller protests occurred in other Ukrainian cities, mainly in opposition strongholds in western and central Ukraine .
Public reaction shifted from just protesting against Ukraine's failure to sign the association agreement to the government’s lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine's citizens .
 The death toll likely caused support for the government-controlled Ukrainian Rada to evaporate . The regime's regime is expected to collapse .
 The Rada approved a resolution calling for the withdrawal of the Interior Ministry and military forces from the streets of Kyiv to their bases in February 2014 .
 Yanukoyvch and many of his supporters in the government and parliament fled, including to Russia .
After Yanukovych and his supporters abandoned Ukraine, the Rada rapidly passed sweeping measures to address the unrest and reform the government . The Rada is now composed mainly of former opposition deputies .
 The parliament formally deposed Yanukovych as president on February 22 for abandoning his duties . Yanukovych was deposed by the parliament in February .
 Yanukovych ordered new presidential elections to be held on May 25, 2014 . The parliament restored many democratic provisions of the 2004 constitution .
 On February 27, 2013, the Ukrainian parliament approved a new, interim government . Arseniy Yatsenyuk, a former prime minister, was the prime minister .
 Many Maidan protestors viewed the new government skeptically, suspecting that it was nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime . Despite the rapid changes and formation of a new government, many Maidan protesters were skeptical .
 The winner, Petro Poroshenko, a pro-Western billionaire, took 54.7% of the vote . The winner is a former Ukrainian president .
 The lowest turnout was in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in eastern Ukraine . Pro-Russia separatists seized polling places and used threats, kidnappings, and other forms of intimidation to stop the vote .
 The Opposition Bloc, composed of supporters of the Yanukovych regime, won 29 seats . The opposition Bloc was formed by a group of pro-government supporters .
 Far-right groups, often held up by Russian propaganda as neo-Nazi gangs dominant in Ukraine, did very poorly .
 One group, Svoboda, won only six seats, while another, Right Sector, won one . One group won only one seat .
 The overall result was a victory for forces in favor of closer ties with the EU and the U.S. The overall results were a win for forces.
 On December 2, 2014, the incoming parliament approved a new government again led by Yatsenyuk, who returned as prime minister . The incoming parliament also approved the new government.
 Representatives of the leading political groups were all included in the government .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk maintained that Ukraine’s main goal was to adopt European standards . The ultimate objective of EU membership for Ukraine is to adopt EU standards .
 Ele consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption . He said the government would reduce government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy .
 Fie stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collects and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities . Fie said the government will cut the amount of taxes they collect and devolved more budgetary powers to local officials .
 Yatsenyuk appointed Natalie Jaresko as Ukraine’s finance minister; Aivaras Abromavicius, a Lithuanian citizen, as economy minister; and a health minister from Georgia . The move is a symbolic move.
 Mikhel Saakashvili was appointed mayor of Odessa, Georgia . The former president of Georgia was elected mayor of the city .
Some of the information in this report appeared in previous versions written by Steven Woehrel . These moves were likely intended 2. Some of the info in the report was likely intended.
Land area approximately 315,028 sq. mi.; slightly smaller than Texas .
 President Poroshenko launched several political, economic, and judicial reform initiatives . The initiatives were designed to reassure the population and the West that changes they demanded would be implemented .
 To date, the record of passage of these reform measures has been mixed . The record is mixed .
 The government is setting up an AntiCorruption Bureau that would investigate corruption among government officials . New anti-corruption laws passed in 2014 would require annual disclosures of income by public officials .
 At the time, only 5% of the Ukrainian population completely trusted the judiciary . She also noted that, at the time.
 President Poroshenko complained that Shokin was taking too long to clean up corruption even within the PGO itself . This led to the February 16 resignation of Shokin . Shokin resigned after Poroshenko said Shokin had taken too long.
 Others have observed that it has been very difficult to keep reform progress moving forward . Others have also noted that it is very difficult for reform progress to move forward .
 The oligarchs and kleptocrats who controlled Ukraine for decades know their business model will be broken if Maidan reformers succeed .
The economy minister, Abromavicius, resigned in February 2016 . He complained of political interference from advisers to the president and members of the Rada .
 The International Monetary Fund had postponed the late 2015 delivery of the third and fourth installments of funds for Ukraine . The slow pace of reform, including the lack of tax reform, further delayed the payment .
 There were other signs of potential trouble ahead for the governing coalition .
 According to some, the debate opened up serious splits within the governing coalition .
 Tensions inside the Rada likely made it difficult for the decentralization law to be included in the constitution .
 President Poroshe nk o found himself in the middle of a struggle between EU and U.S. that wanted to move forward toward a settlement of the conflict in the east at all costs .
 The same day, parliament chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that beginning on February 16, 2016, the legislature would conduct a review of the cabinet’s work . The review will precede a vote of no confidence on the Yatsenyuk government .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has been accused of treating some of the wealthy oligarchs with deference . He has vowed to reform the oligarchs .
 Some believed changes would have to be made in the government to retain any semblance of stability . Some believed that changes would be needed to keep stability in government .
 President Poroshenko asked for Yatsenyuk’s resignation over the slow pace of reform . He felt the prime minister no longer enjoyed the support of the government coalition or the Rada .
 Yatsenyuk noted that while he would not step down, he would consider replacing some of his cabinet . After the vote, he said he would be considering replacing some cabinet members .
 The number of votes against Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and the fact that Poroshenko called for his resignation created doubts within the government and among the population .
 Ukrainian law prohibits Rada from considering additional no-confidence votes for six months . Yatsenyuk was given time to make changes and move the reform process forward, if possible .
 Observers believed that although the government had been weakened, all three former coalition partners had continued to support the government’s reform agenda .
 Neither a new coalition government led by Yatsenyuk nor a new prime minister had materialized by late March 2016 . Despite this assessment, neither a new Coalition government had materialize by late 2016 .
 Speculation became centered on Volodymyr Groysman as a replacement for Yatsenyuk . But he refused to resign until a new governing coalition was agreed to .
 This stalemate led to typical Ukrainian political maneuverings among the parties, says the U.S. State Department .
 The United States and the EU did not want the government to collapse, despite their concerns over the pace of reform . They supported the formation of a new coalition, even without Yatsenyuk .
 The idea of new elections could have generated nationwide political and economic instability . The parties of both Poroshe nk o and Yatsenyuk appeared not to be a viable option .
 New elections would call into question the ability of a new government to be any more dedicated to reform or successful in achieving such reforms .
 Ukraine's leaders quarreled bitterly after attaining power . Some observers fear that Ukraine might repeat the failure of the earlier Orange Revolution .
Victor Yanukovich delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovich in 2010 . Their mutual hostility paralyzed the government, alienated voters and alienated voters .
 The political turmoil surrounding the Yatsenyuk government was not all bad news, however, according to the government .
 Institute for International Strategic Studies, February 4, 2016, will be held at the Ukraine Corral .
 Opinion polls indicate that public skepticism remains high regarding the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government’s commitment to make a serious impact in fighting the country's deeply ingrained, crippling problem with corruption .
 Yatsenyuk's People's Front party did not even participate in October 2015 local elections . Polls indicated that the party had experienced a significant decline in support in some regions of the country .
 Only 27% of those polled expressed a favorable view toward President Poroshenko . Only 12% looked favorably on Prime Minister Yatsenyuk .
 Yatsenyuk initially survived the political uprising . He indicated that he would resign, but only if a new prime minister was agreed to .
On April 14, 2016, the Rada, by a very slim margin, approved Volodymyr Groysman, the Speaker of the RADA and a close associate of President Poroshenko .
 Groysman had to rely largely on the Petro Poroshe nk o Bloc and Yatsenyuk’s People's Front to confirm his new position .
 Groysman's coalition starts out in a weakened state, with serious doubts about his ability to move the agenda forward in the very Rada he recently led .
 Groysman's close association with Poroshenko has raised some doubts about his ability to effectively carry out major reforms .
 Mr Groysman presented his cabinet to parliament last week . The Washington Post wrote, Mr Poroshenko and his new prime minister talked a good game .
 Ukraine says they are committed to continuing an International Monetary Fund program that is keeping Ukraine financially afloat . They say they are also committed to rejecting economic populism proposed by many in parliament .
 Neither man has a record of supporting the radical steps Ukraine needs, but neither has a history of supporting radical steps . But neither man has supported a sweeping reform of the judiciary, or big increases in energy prices for consumers .
Groysman's first moves to fill his Cabinet raised some additional concerns . Groysman has made a series of first moves by his Cabinet .
 Groysman replaced the popular finance minister, Natalie Jaresko, and appointed Oleksandr Danyliuk, former senior consultant at McKinsey & Company .
 Vice President Joseph Biden congratulated Prime Minister Groysman on his election and on the new Cabinet .
 The Vice President stressed that to maintain international support for Ukraine, the new team should move forward quickly on Ukraine’s reform program . The new team will fulfill IMF commitments, including fulfilling its IMF commitments .
 The Ukrainian republic was the most important economic component of the former Soviet Union . It produced about four times the output of the next-ranking republic .
 Its fertile soil generated more than one-fourth of Soviet agricultural output . The fertile soil produced more than a fourth of Soviet agriculture output .
 Ukraine’s economy was in decline in 2013, some believe . But some believe Ukraine's primary economic challenges are not all self-inflicted .
 Since 2013, Russian trade sanctions have slashed Ukraine’s exports to Russia by 70% . The drop is accounting for a drop of 18% in Ukraine's total exports .
 Ukrainian goods could not be redirected in the short term away from the Russian market to other markets, particularly in Europe . Logistical issues, the lack of commercial links, and the specialization of some products meant that Ukrainian goods couldn't be redirected away from Russia .
 Russia's aggression in Ukraine still unsettled, few want to invest in what could become an extended war zone . In addition to Russia’s aggression, there are fears that it could become a war zone in Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s net foreign direct investment, which was slightly over 3% of GDP, has evaporated .
 In August 2015, the government announced that a deal on the restructuring of up to $18 billion of Ukraine’s public debt had been reached with private creditors .
 In December 2015, the Rada adopted a 2016 budget that included some changes to the tax code . But it did not go as far as the finance minister had wanted .
 E1U says this target is in line with the government’s commitments made as part of its April 2014 IMF loan of $17 billion .
 Passage of the budget would have allowed the IMF to continue to lend money to Ukraine as long as other reforms continued . The IMF would have been able to continue lending money to the Ukraine .
 IMF commitments included maintaining a flexible currency exchange rate and increasing household gas prices to 56% of the import price and heating prices to about 40% of import price in 2014 .
 The IMF also wanted to make rapid progress on reforms, including further energy price increases, ha nk restructuring, governance reforms of state-owned enterprises, and legal changes .
 IMF Director Lagarde warned Yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long . IMF support for Ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased .
 The budget debate in the Rada was difficult, as many parliamentarians noted that the fiscal austerity focus of the budget, the ongoing conflict in the east, and recession all contributed to a downturn in living standards .
 The central ha nk of Poland announced in December 2015 that it would establish a zloty/hryvnya currency swap line with the National Bank of Ukraine .
 The initiative was to strengthen Ukraine’s financial system, stabilizing the hryvnya and promoting an increase in bilateral trade between the two countries . The main purpose of the initiative is to strengthen the financial system .
 Russia suspended its own free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned imports of Ukrainian food in January 2016 . Ukraine has responded in kind to the move .
 In the short term, any positive impact of the EU free-trade deal could be offset by Russia’s countermeasures .
 In 2016, the EIU expects a weak economic recovery, owing to the effect of Russia’s trade bans and still high political risk, which could dampen recovery .
 Ukraine has historically been heavily dependent on Russia for its energy supplies . Ukraine has traditionally been heavily reliant on Russia.
 In 2012, 63% of Ukraine’s natural gas consumption came from Russia, as well as nearly three-quarters of its oil and other liquid fuels . In 2012 the country's gas consumption was 63% .
 Ukraine’s vulnerability to Russian pressure has been mitigated by the fact that the main oil and natural gas pipelines to Central and Western Europe transit its territory . However, Ukraine's vulnerability to Russia is mitigated.
 Past Russian efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in a cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006 .
 A second gas crisis occurred in January 2009, resulting in a gas cutoff of nearly three weeks . A second Gas Crisis occurred in 2009, following a gas crisis in January 2010 .
Until recently, Russia had long sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities .
 Moscow's efforts were unsuccessful, even with friendly governments in Kyiv . Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets was the reason for the failure .
 Russia has negotiated with European countries to build pipelines that would bypass Ukraine . In recent years, Russia has been trying to pressure Ukraine over the pipelines .
 Moscow had also proposed a pipeline through the Balkans (called South Stream) to Western Europe .
 Russia cancelled the South Stream project in December 2014 . EU objections that the project, as planned, violated EU rules . However, Russia was annoyed by EU objections .
Russia has also used gas prices as a tool in its policies toward Ukraine . Russia has also been using gas prices in its policy toward Ukraine. Russia also has used gas price as a weapon in its efforts to help Ukraine .
 Ukraine refused to pay the increased amount and demanded a new gas contract with a lower price . Ukraine refuses to pay increased amount .
 Russia cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine for non-payment of debts . Russia responded in June 2014 by cutting off natural energy supplies to the Ukraine .
 In October 2014, the EU brokered a deal between Gazprom and Ukraine on gas supplies at a lower price through March 2015 . The deal was in exchange for Ukraine’s repayment of some of its debts to Gazprom .
 Ukraine would have to sharply reduce its overall energy consumption, which was driven by low energy prices, and its dependence on Russian gas . Ukrainian leaders acknowledge that in order to avoid future Russian efforts to use energy supplies as a political weapon, Ukraine would need to cut its energy consumption .
 Ukraine began to import more significant amounts of gas from Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia in 2015 . In 2015, the pipelines were reconfiguring the pipelines to “reverse flow’s” supplies .
 Ukrainian government ordered Naftogaz, the state-run gas monopoly, to cease buying gas from Russia . By November 2015, Ukraine was buoyed by lower energy consumption due to the economic slowdown in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government's decision to stop buying gas from Gazprom is part of a broader trend toward dismantling of bilateral Russia-Ukraine economic ties .
 Ukraine is currently only able to do without Russian gas because a deep economic contraction has reduced demand . However, according to the EIU, Ukraine is still able to use Russian gas without it .
 Ukraine could develop its own hydrocarbon reserves, including shale gas deposits . Some believe Ukraine could improve exploitation of its conventional gas reserves .
 Ukraine will have to make much greater strides in energy conservation . Ukraine has required a steep and politically unpopular hike in natural gas prices, including for households .
 The 4 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report on Ukraine, December 2015 . According to some, some of the 4 Economist intelligence Unit's findings are not accurate .
 Ukraine is seeking continued international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . These include nonrecognition of Russia's annexation of Crimea and reorienting its economy as quickly as possible .
 President Poroshenko requested assistance from NATO for its military . Poroshenko asked NATO for assistance from its military.
 NATO agreed to set up four trust funds to help Ukraine’s military in such areas as logistics, command and control, military personnel issues (including wounded soldiers), and cyberdefense .
 The EU policy is intended to forge a close relationship that encompasses political association and economic integration that could prepare Ukraine for eventual membership .
 The desire by some segments of the Ukrainian public for stronger relations with the EU and the West fueled the initial protests in late 2013 that culminated in the collapse of the former Yanukovych regime .
 The European Commission unveiled an initial support package of €11 billion in March 2014 . In response to the crisis in Ukraine, the European Commission announced a €11billion package .
 The package included €1. billion (about $2. billion) in macro-financial assistance loans to support Ukraine’s government finances . The package also included $2 billion in loans for Ukraine's government .
 The EU also agreed to provide some €1. billion in grant aid between 2014 and 2020 to assist Ukraine .
 The package includes up to €9 billion (about $11.16 billion) in loans from the European Investment Bank and the European Ba nk for Reconstruction and Development .
 The package also included close to €110 million (approximately $112 million) aimed at developing the private sector, including small and medium enterprises .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe, coordinated by Paul Belkin . Response to crisis in Ukraine, security concerns in Europe .
 Approximation to EU norms could also lead to increased foreign investment in Ukraine . Approximating to European norms could lead to more foreign investment.
 The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s association agreement dealing with political issues in March 2014 . The parts dealing with economic issues were signed on June 27 .
Ratification of the pact was delayed due to Russian threats to block Ukrainian imports from its markets . The pact is to protect Russia’s interests.
 The EU and Ukraine refused to do so, and the European Parliament and the Ukrainian parliament ratified the accord on September 16, 2014 . The accord was ratified by the EU and Ukrainian parliament .
 Moscow responded by closing off the import of selected Ukrainian products . Moscow also closed off the imports of selected products .
 EU and Ukraine appear to bow to Russian threats by agreeing to postpone implementation of the DCFTA until 2016 . However, the European Union and Ukraine did appear to agree to delay implementation .
 The association agreement with the EU came into effect on January 1, 2016, with the promise of a gradual improvement in the Ukrainian economy .
 Russia suspended its own long-standing free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned imports of Ukrainian food . As expected, as soon as the agreement went into force, it was suspended .
 The EU established a High Level Investment Forum/Task Force and created a dedicated Ukraine Support Group to provide advice and support to the Ukrainian authorities in the mentioned reform sectors .
 The EU also committed to help modernize Ukraine’s natural gas transit system and to work on reversing the flow of pipelines through Slovakia . Ukraine can receive gas from the west .
 Relations with Russia Ukraine was the center of the first eastern Slavic state, Kyivan Rus . During the 10 th and 11 th centuries, Ukraine was one of the most powerful states in Europe .
 Kyivan Rus was eventually incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and subsequently into the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth .
 Most Ukrainian territory was absorbed by the Russian Empire during the 18 th century . During the latter part of the 18th century, most Ukrainian territories were absorbed by Russia .
 Following the collapse of czarist Russia in 1917, Ukraine achieved a short-lived period of independence . But was reconquered and endured Soviet rule until Ukraine achieved independence in 1991 .
 Russia is determined to ensure that despite any changes in the government in Kyiv, Ukraine would remain on good terms with Russia . Russia's political and economic influence over Ukraine remained strong, with Moscow determined to keep it in good terms .
 Recent Russian perspectives on Ukraine are seen as a culmination of longstanding Russian resentment of the outcome of the Cold War . In some ways, recent Russian perspectives are the culmination of Russian resentment.
 Russian leaders have also asserted that nations in the post-Soviet region should remain of privileged interest to Russia . Russian leaders say nations in post- Soviet region should stay of privileged interests .
 Ukraine has a particularly important place in Russian psychology, according to many experts . The country has a particular place in Russia's psychology .
 Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incoiporate Crimea and most of the rest of Ukraine into the Russian Empire .
 Ethnic Russians make up around 17% of Ukraine’s population, according to the 2001 census . Ethnic Russians are estimated to be around 17 per cent of the population .
 They are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country . They are in the south and east of country .
 Many ethnic Ukrainians in the east and south tend to be Russian-speaking, and are suspicious of Ukrainian nationalism . They also support close ties with Russia and have supported close ties.
 Soviet leaders concentrated important heavy industries in eastern Ukraine, which tied the region to Russia economically and fostered what many have viewed as a lingering Soviet-style mindset .
 This is particularly true of the Donbas region, on the border with Russia . The region is on the Russian border .
 Putin preferred using indirect methods of influence in Ukraine. Until the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Putin preferred indirect methods.
 Ukrainian politicians and oligarchs use Russian media to attack uncooperative leaders . These included “carrots,” such as lucrative business deals with Ukrainian politicians .
 Russia reacted with great hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership in Ukraine . Russia seized Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula in February 2014 .
 Starting on February 27, heavily armed Russian-speaking troops poured into Crimea, seizing airports and other key installations throughout the peninsula . The Crimea peninsula is the peninsula of Crimea .
 At the time, Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that the troops were not Russian Federation military forces, but only local Crimean self-defense forces .
 Crimean authorities held a referendum on Crimea's annexation to Russia on March 16 . On March 16, Crimea's Crimea was annexed to Russia .
 Ukraine, the United States, the European Union, and other countries denounced the referendum as illegal and not held in a free or fair manner . The referendum was held in Ukraine, Ukraine, and the U.S. and the EU .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a “treaty with Crimean leaders on March 18, 2014, formally incorporating Crimea into Russia . Putin signed the deal with Crimea in March .
In April 2014, Putin suggested that Russian Federation military forces did in fact invade Crimea . In April 2014.
 Crimea's return to Ukraine has been relatively stable since then, but the reality of its return to the Ukraine continues to fade .
An incident involving a disruption in the supply of electricity from Ukraine to Crimea resulted in recriminations and accusations of sabotage . Ukraine and the peninsula have been trading between Ukraine and Crimea .
 In addition, two reported cyberattacks on Ukraine’s electricity grid and its airport computer system have been attributed to hackers inside Russia .
 Thousands of pro-Russian protestors began organized demonstrations in eastern Ukraine in March 2014 . In addition to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, thousands of protestors began in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Some demonstrators favored union with Russia . Others sought only greater autonomy from the government in Kyiv .
 The government in Kyiv responded with military force and employed local militias to help push back the separatists . The government responded to the separatists by employing local militias .
Senior U.S. officials and NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Philip Breedlove said Russia had played a leading role in the activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine .
 No international observers monitored the vote, and witnesses reported rampant irregularities . No international monitoring of the vote .
 In July and August 2014, Ukraine successfully dislodged the gunmen from strongholds in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and other towns, and began to move on separatist forces in key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 It was during this time that the tragedy of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 occurred . The tragedy occurred during the time of the tragedy .
 The plane, which was flying over Ukraine, was downed by a surface-launched missile .
 Accusations flew on both sides as to who fired the missile, but for some it was clear . Dutch government later determined that the missile was fired by separatist forces using a Russian-supplied Buk missile .
 Ukrainian forces lost ground and suffered heavy casualties. As a result, Ukrainian forces lose ground and casualties .
 Ukraine agreed to a cease-fire plan during talks with separatist representatives and Russian officials in Minsk, Belarus, on September 5, 2014 . The agreement was reached after talks between Ukraine and Russia .
 The Minsk-1 agreement also called for Ukraine to adopt a law on amnesty for those involved in the war in the Donbas and other provisions .
 The signing of the agreement led to the end of the Russian-supported offensive on Ukrainian forces . But it did not fully end the fighting .
 In January 2015, President Poroshenko said Russia had 9,000 troops inside Ukraine, along with hundreds of tanks, armored fighting vehicles, and artillery pieces .
 Both the U.S. and the EU made the full implementation of the Minsk protocol a precondition for easing sanctions on Russia .
 A particularly violent flare-up of attacks by pro-Russian separatists against Ukrainian-held territory in late January 2014 and early February 2015 led the U.S. and the EU to warn Russia that it faced possible additional sanctions for its military intervention in Ukraine .
 U.S. Ambassador to NATO Douglas Lute says Russian troops in Ukraine are mainly intelligence officers serving a command and control function . Russian servicemen operating highly sophisticated, specialized equipment, such as that used for electronic warfare and air defense .
 President Obama and Administration officials have been in regular contact with the main figures in the talks . President Putin, President Poroshenko, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and President Francois Hollande of France have also been in contact .
 The presidents of France, Russia, Ukraine and Germany met again in Minsk in early February 2015 to try to secure a new agreement to stop the fighting . A second attempt at a Cease-Fire attempt to end the conflict was successful .
 On February 12, a cease-fire agreement was signed to take effect on February 15 . On February 15, the agreement will take effect .
 The agreement called for local elections in rebel-held regions . It also called for legal and constitutional reforms to be negotiated with the rebels to give a special "decentralized" status to the region .
 The return of control to Ukraine of its side of the Russia-Ukraine border is conditioned on the implementation of these decentralization reforms . The return to Ukraine is expected to be conditioned on these reforms .
 Some expressed concern that the Minsk-2 agreement amounted to a step toward transforming the occupied parts of Donbas into a new Transnistria 33 . Some expressed concerns that more conditions had been placed on Ukraine .
 Putin, the architect of the crisis, managed to avoid binding himself through the agreement . Another point made by skeptics was the fact that Putin avoided binding himself .
 All heavy weapons by both sides to be completed within 14 days . Withdrawal of all heavy weapons will be completed in 14 days.
Launch of dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation . Launch of dialogue. Launch of talks on modality of local election in Ukraine .
 Release of all hostages and other illegally detained people is based on the “all for all’s principle, based on ‘all forall’ principle . Release of hostages and others illegally detained is a key part of the principle .
 Safe delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need, based on international mechanism . Safe delivery is based on an international mechanism.
 Full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia throughout the conflict zone . Full Ukraine control over the border with the Russian border .
 Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory . Withdrawing of allForeign armed groups and weapons, weapons and mercenaries .
 I I I Constitutional reform in Ukraine with decentralization as a key element . A new constitution by the end of 2015 will be in place in Ukraine .
 Local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk regions to be held according to OSCE standards . Local elections will be held in both Donetsk and Donetsk .
 Minsk-2 was not even signed by Putin but by Mikhail Zurabov, Russia's ambassador to Ukraine .
 By the beginning of 2016, little had been accomplished in fully implementing the Minsk-2 provisions despite commitments by both sides to do so .
 A tenuous cease-fire continues to hold, although sporadic fighting does flare up . Ukrainian soldiers and rebels continue to be killed in rebel areas .
 Some of the rebels’ heavy weapons and military personnel supplied by Russia have been withdrawn from the front lines . But they have not been removed from Ukraine altogether .
 President Poroshenko won a hard-fought victory in initially moving legislation to grant increased autonomy for the Donbas . He does not have the necessary votes to pass this legislation as an amendment to the constitution .
 He is unlikely to secure the votes unless major progress is made by the other side . He is likely to secure those votes unless the others make major progress .
 Russia seems little inclined to push for a resolution of the conflict . On the other hand, the separatists appear to have no intention to ensure free and fair elections in the disputed regions .
 The elections in the Donbas have become a major sticking point in the peace process . The elections have been a key point in peace process for years .
 Ukraine claims Russia and separatists have not honored the steps necessary to move the election process forward . Ukraine claims that Russia and the separatists have failed to honor the steps needed to move forward .
 OSCE observers cannot safely enter the disputed areas to begin preparations . There is no real cease-fire, OSCE observer says .
 It is unclear whether Ukrainian government officials will be allowed into the region to help set up polling stations, print ballots, or even determine how ballots would be counted and reported .
 Ukrainian political party candidates are not yet permitted to campaign in the Donbas . Ukrainian political parties are not allowed to run in Donbas.
 Moscow so far has declined to recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk ‘People’s Republics’ as independent countries or annex them to Russia .
 Russian official statements and the Minsk-2 cease-fire agreement view the separatist regimes as legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv in determining the future of Ukraine . However, Russia's official statements say the separatist regime is legitimate .
 Russia has made demands on the subject of Ukraine’s political future . Russia has also made demands. Russia has asked Ukraine's political future.
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has called for making Russian the second official language in Ukraine and for constitutional reforms that would confirm Ukraine’s neutral status .
 Moscow has insisted on decentralization of Ukraine, under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finance, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties .
 Many experts on Russia have stated that Putin’s key objective in Ukraine has been to weaken and discredit the pro-Western government in Kyiv and Western policy generally .
 Moscow's policy in Ukraine's east is starting to look more likely to strengthen the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics .
 Moscow has begun in the past four or five months to fund social policies . The measures are increasingly clear signs Moscow has decided to transform the crisis into a frozen conflict .
 At best, the outcome would likely amount to a ceasefire in place, given the unlikelihood of an agreement between Kyiv and separatists on elections .
 Such an outcome could still provide Moscow with leverage over Kyiv but might not afford the same opportunity to destabilize Ukraine as continuing the war . Such a result could still give Moscow leverage but may not afford same opportunity as continuing war .
 This has raised some concern in Kyiv and has led some to suggest this could only become a politically divisive problem . Some have suggested this could become a political issue .
 The concept of ‘Novorossiya’ has largely disappeared from official Russian rhetoric for now . It may be expanding the Russian-controlled area to include most of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Putin first used the term in mid-2014 when he first used it. This goal may have seemed easily achievable to Putin in mid 2014 .
 Ukrainian forces have become somewhat more capable, and it may appear to Putin than such an objective would likely require a massive infusion of Russian military forces to realize . Since then, however, Ukrainian forces are more capable.
 Russia does not want to incur major new expenses in the current economic environment created by falling oil prices and Western sanctions as well as Russian commitments in Syria . There also may be financial considerations in that Russia doesn't want to invest in new expenses .
 Given Putin's past unpredictability, such a scenario cannot be ruled out, given Putin’s past unpredictablity, it cannot be rule out. Nevertheless, given the past unpredictable, such an scenario cannot been ruled out .
 Russia has taken other steps against Ukraine, including imposing trade sanctions against Ukrainian imports . Russia has also cut all gas and coal deliveries to Ukraine .
Ukrainian government servers have been hit by sophisticated cyberattacks . Some experts suggest the attacks may have come from Russia .
 Some in Europe are pushing the Ukrainian government to move forward with the implementation of Minsk-2 . Some are pushing to put pressure on Moscow to forge a settlement with Ukraine .
 Russia does not want to continue to incur in the current economic environment by prolonging the crisis . They believe that there are additional financial consequences, created by continued low oil prices and Western sanctions .
 Many observers believe this argument misses the entire point of why Putin seized Crimea and supported the separatists in the first place .
 EU and U.S. pressure on Ukraine to comply with Minsk-2 is misplaced, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Few believe either pro-Russia separatists or Kremlin have any intention of complying with their parts of the agreement .
 These observers contend that Putin is not interested in a solution that would otherwise allow Kyiv to turn its full attention to its Western ambitions . These observers argue that Putin isn't interested in the solution .
 The big farce of Western policy on Russia, EURActive.com, February 12, 2016 .
 They reiterated their desire to see enacted constitutional reforms aimed at the Donbas region . They praised some reforms already implemented to address corruption and the economy .
 Denmark’s foreign minister, Kristin Jensen, suggested on February 5 that Ukraine had to uphold its part of the Minsk agreement .
 "suggestions" from some Europeans have led others to question the motivations of the Europeans . Some Europeans have suggested that some Europeans may have been influenced by other Europeans .
 Kyiv must meet Minsk-2 requirements, including amending the Ukrainian constitution, to meet the Minsk 2 requirements . The separatists could be rewarded for taking sovereign territory from their own country at a gun point .
 Europe's real priority is quality and lasting political reform or implementation of the Minsk agreement . This approach reinforces resentment of the West and suspicions of Europe’s goals .
 The United States and the European Union strongly condemned the Russian military invasion and annexation of Crimea and Russia’s ongoing efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine as violations of international law .
 The United States has imposed sanctions against Russia in order to increase the costs to Russia of its aggression . The U.S. is pressing Russia to implement a genuine political settlement with Ukraine .
 The European Union imposed a visa ban and an asset freeze on 21 figures from Ukraine and Russia who played roles in Russia’s seizure of Crimea .
 In March 2014, after President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incorporating the region into Russia, the EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian figures .
 By May 2014, the EU had added at least 28 additional names of Russian officials and two companies based in Crimea .
 The EU list included some senior government officials and members of the Russian parliament . But some low-level figures directly involved in the Crimea operation and efforts to destabilize Ukraine .
 The EU has stopped short of sanctioning Putin's "inner circle" or key firms associated with them . The U.S. has not sanctioned Putin’s ‘inner circle’ or key companies associated with him .
 For its part, the United States suspended most bilateral cooperation with Russia . The United States suspends most bilateral Cooperation with Russia for its part .
 On April 2, 2014, the Administration announced that it was suspending several projects planned under the aegis of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission . The Administration planned to use that funding for aid instead to Ukraine .
 The United States has also placed additional restrictions on defense-related exports to Russia . The U.S. has also put restrictions on Defense-related export restrictions to Russia.
European Council on Foreign Relations: Kyiv's political crisis. How to react to the crisis?
 Observers have noted that sanctions have been crafted to reduce the economic harm to EU countries . For example, not targeting the sensitive natural gas sector or sale of dual-use technologies to civilian firms .
 Since January 2015, the United States and EU have extended the sanctions on individuals and entities three times . The sanctions have been extended three times.
 The United States established diplomatic relations with Ukraine in 1991 . Relations with the United States began in 1991 after Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union .
 U.S. policy is centered on strengthening a democratic, prosperous, and secure Ukraine . Ukraine is closely integrated into Europe and Euro-Atlantic structures .
 The United States has granted Ukraine market economy status, giving Ukraine permanent normal trade relations status . The U.S. has granted the country a normal trade status .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Council on Trade and Investment was established under the trade and investment cooperation initiative . The initiative works to increase commercial and investment opportunities .
 Ukraine is the 80 th -largest trading partner of the United States, with $2.2 billion in total trade in 2014 . The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative says Ukraine was the 80th largest trading partner in the country .
 U.S. exports to Ukraine include coal, machinery, vehicles, agricultural products, fish and seafood, and aircraft .
 U.S. imports from Ukraine include iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, oil, aircraft, and agricultural products .
 The focus of U.S. efforts has been to support Ukraine’s efforts to reform and increase its cooperation and integration with the European Union .
 The United States is providing financial and technical assistance to Ukraine . The U.S. is in cooperation with the EU and international financial institutions .
 The United States has also provided non-lethal aid to Ukraine’s security sector, including its army . The U.S. has declined so far to provide weapons to Ukraine .
 Vice President Biden warned that Ukraine had to seize the moment and press forward and deliver on the promise of the Maidan . Biden said the government had a window of opportunity to implement systemic changes to deepen reforms .
 U.S. Assistant Secretary for Europe Victoria Nuland has praised Ukraine for its progress so far . But she has warned Kyiv that progress must continue .
In April 2016, Vice President Joseph Biden stressed that the new team should move forward quickly on Ukraine’s reform program as well as on Minsk implementation .
 The U.S. economic and technical advisers advise almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities .
 In its FY2017 budget request, the Administration asked for $192. million in Economic Support Funds for Ukraine to continue to address corruption, government reform and other initiatives .
 The Administration also requested $15 million in International Narcotics Control and Faw Enforcement funding to support justice and law enforcement reform .
 The request also included $2. million in International Military Education and Training funds . $42 million in Foreign Military Financing aid for Ukraine from the Overseas Contingency Operations account .
 United States technical assistance has been aimed at helping Ukraine stabilize its financial sector . U.S. technical assistance aims to carry out reforms in the agricultural sector .
 Assistance is also devoted to helping Ukraine develop laws and regulations to fight corruption . Ukraine is one of Ukraine’s biggest challenges .
 Technical assistance is also being used to improve its energy security, including by enhancing energy efficiency . Technical assistance has also been used to boost energy security .
 U.S. aid has been used by Radio Free Europe/Radio Fiberty and Voice of America to produce Russian news broadcasts .
 In FY16, Ukraine's border guards, military, and coast guard will train and equip more of Ukraine’s border guards and military . Ukraine will defend against and deter future attacks, and respond to illicit smuggling .
 A U.S. Army battalion has been training Ukrainian forces in Poland . The battalion is trained on how to operate against Russian electronic warfare and how to protect themselves from Russian and rebel artillery .
 Some critics have claimed that U.S. military aid had been slow to arrive in Ukraine due to bureaucratic impediments .
 Members of Congress have expressed support for going beyond the non-lethal support given by the United States so far . The United States has provided “defensive weapons’ such as man-portable anti-tank weapons .
 Other suggested assistance includes secure communications equipment, reconnaissance drones, and radars capable of tracking longer-range heavy artillery, not just mortars . Other suggested items include secure communication equipment, and reconnaissance drones .
 The United States Congress has been an active participant in the effort to address the Ukraine crisis . The U.S. Congress has also been a part of the effort.
 Congress has focused on providing assistance to the Ukrainian government and supporting sanctions against Russia for its occupation of Crimea and its efforts to destabilize Ukraine .
 The resolution urges the U.S. and the EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis . The President and Congress should consider whether to apply targeted sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence .
 The resolution contained provisions broadly similar to those of S.Res.9 . It included raising the possibility of sanctions against Ukrainian leaders if they use violence against protestors .
 In April 2014, President Obama signed into law H.R. 4152, which authorized aid to help Ukraine carry out reforms . The law also required the President to impose visa bans and asset seizures against persons in Ukraine and Russia .
 The President also signed S 2183, a related bill requiring Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty and Voice of America to increase broadcasting in eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova .
 Several other pieces of legislation were adopted by the House and Senate over the period of the crisis . The legislation urges NATO allies and European Union member states to immediately suspend 49 Op. cit.
 Congress calls on the President to increase pressure on Russia by targeting Rosoboronexport and Gazprom . Congress also calls on President to ban ExportImport Ra nk programs, government procurement contracts, exports of arms and services .
 The act also authorized the President to target Russian financial institutions and foreign financial institutions that engaged in Russia’s defense and energy sectors .
 President said he would continue to work with international allies to respond to developments in Ukraine . He did not intend to make use of the additional authorities .
 The U.S. should supply defensive weapons to Ukraine, according to a congressional report . The report sparked significant congressional debate on the issue .
 A bipartisan group of 15 Senators sent a letter to President Obama urging him to act on the Ukrainian Freedom Support Act . In February 2015, 15 Senators wrote to the President asking him to take action .
 Those opposed to arming Ukraine argued that Putin could use the move as an excuse to escalate the conflict beyond the desire to respond . Those opposed said it would increase the level of violence .
 Some experts concluded that escalation could have resulted in a new Cold War . The possibility for U.S.-Russian cooperation on key issues elsewhere was eliminated .
 France and Germany were strongly opposed to arming Ukrainians . Others felt it would also split Western unity on Russia policy .
Fighting between Russian-supported pro-separatists and the Ukrainian military has receded, but intense, fighting has occurred . fatalities/casualties continue to result .
 weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern Ukraine from Russia . Not all of the rebel-held medium and heavy military weapons have been completely withdrawn .
 Many analysts believe that the resumption of large-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine is not likely in the short term .
 The collapse of the governing coalition, followed by the prolonged discord over how to create a new government and avoid national elections, stymied the political process and fueled doubts among public .
 Instability increased in part due to the reemergence of powerful oligarchs and others with entrenched interests in not seeing too much change and attempting in subtle ways to derail the reformist agenda .
 The newly formed government under Prime Minister Groysman comes into office with weak support and serious concerns about the commitment to reform . The newly- formed government is the first government under the Prime Minister .
 The second internal challenge appears to be a dispute between those who do not want to implement parts of Minsk-2 or accommodate the separatists . Those who want to keep the process moving forward as long as the other side appears willing to do so .
 The Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government has been in power for more than a decade . It has been under pressure to address other pressing reforms . This has led to the collapse of the government, according to the government .
 The new government under Groysman has little public confidence in its willingness to seriously tackle some of the oligarchs . The stage had been set for a potentially significant period of instability and a new national election in the fall .
 The pro-separatist rebels in the Donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing their parts of the Minsk-2 agreement . On the other hand, the pro- Separatist rebels are not moving forward .
 elections are supposed to take place in disputed territory . It appears unlikely at this time that the pro-separatists will allow a totally free or fair election .
 It appears unlikely that pro-Kyiv political candidates will actually be permitted to campaign in the region or that the separatists will allow government officials from Kyiv into the region to help organize the elections .
 President Putin apparently told the Normandy Group that the OSCE would have total access to the area to monitor the elections . Many seem doubtful that the rebels would allow such access to all voting places or guarantee the election observers’ safety .
 Putin observes the political chaos in Kyiv and assesses the mood of European countries and United States to support Kyiv . This, of course, could change as Putin observes Kyiv, and assesss the mood.
 Putin could offer to hold elections anyway, though they likely would be flawed . Putin could also offer to take part in elections anyway .
 Putin could conclude that for the West, progress would still be progress, but that woidd be good enough for Putin’s overall plans for Ukraine . He could conclude for theWest, progress, however, would nevertheless be progress .
 Kyiv's internal political dynamics make it more difficult for the government to address political reform, corruption, and economic growth . All of this, whether it is the internalpolitical dynamics in Kyiv or the evolution of a “frozen conflict in the east, makes it harder for the
 A new political crisis could arise among the frustrated general public, which is increasingly skeptical of any political figures in Kyiv . The current government, or its successor, shows weakness or loses its power .
 Any political crisis could also result in a slowing of the implementation of Minsk-2 and further movement toward a ‘frozen conflict’ in the east . Russia would be able to manipulate the intensity of political unrest and future fighting in order to further hinder Ukraine’s economic
 There is renewed fear in Kyiv that with Putin’s objectives in Syria well on their way to being realized, Putin has turned his attention back to Ukraine .
 The current political uncertainty in Kyiv could tempt Moscow to take further efforts to undermine Kyiv’s efforts to reform the country .
 Some point to August 2016 as a critical period for any additional Russian actions in Ukraine . Some say August 2016 is a critical time for any further Russian action in Ukraine.
 In July, the EU may extend its sanctions on Russia over Ukraine for an additional six months without any changes .
 Moscow has not reacted well to Europe’s continued sanctions or to recent NATO summits . The events may be no different, placing Ukraine in the Kremlin's crosshairs and posing substantial risks for the U.S. and the EU to promote stability, security, and economic development
 The United States and the EU continued to add additional travel freezes, visa restrictions, and economic sanctions on Russia for its failure to cease its support for the pro-separatists actions in the Donbas regions of eastern Ukraine .
 The Administration announced asset freezes on 16 high-ranking Russian officials and members of parliament on March 20, 2014 .
 One bank, Bank Rossiya, was also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior Russian officials . One bank was also sanctioned due to the role of senior officials .
 On April 28, the Administration imposed asset freezes on an additional seven senior Russian officials .
 Igor Sechin is the president of Rosneft, Russia’s leading oil company, and former chief of staff to Putin . He is also the former head of staff of the Russian oil company .
 The Administration sanctioned 17 entities, including banks and other businesses . The Administration also sanctioned 17 businesses, including bank and other banks .
Energy trader Genneddy Timche nk o and ha nk ers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, or to Bank Rossiya . The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin's inner circle .
 The names of those receiving visa bans have not been made public . It is likely that they include those under asset freezes .
 On July 16, 2014, the United States imposed sanctions unilaterally on key firms in Russia’s financial, energy, and military technology sectors . Gazprombank, Vnesheconombank, Novatek, and Rosneft.
 United States firms and persons are barred from dealing in new equity or loans of greater than 90 days maturity for these companies . U.S. firms and people are also banned from dealing with new equity and loans of more than 90days maturity .
 Bank of Moscow, VTB Bank, and Russian Agricultural Bank added to list of companies with restricted access to U.S. capital markets . Administration responded by adding Bank of Russia, V TB Bank, VTS Bank and VTB to list .
 The United States assets of United Shipbuilding Company were frozen . In addition, the company's U.S. assets were also frozen .
 In September 2014, the United States imposed sanctions against additional Russian companies . Transneft, Lukoil, Gazprom Neft, Rostec, Surgutneftegaz, and Sberbank were among the companies targeted .
 On December 19, 2014, the President issued an executive order to bar any U.S. person from participating in new investment in Crimea . The order includes imports from and exports to the Crimea region .
 After the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on July 17, 2014, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond U.S. sanctions .
 EU foreign ministers agreed to expand Ukrainerelated sanctions against Russia on July 22 . They added individuals and companies to the existing travel ban and asset freeze list .
 sanctions were strengthened in September, in response to a massive Russian-supported offensive in Ukraine . These sanctions were stronger in September .
 The sanctions barred EU nationals and companies from providing loans to five major Russian state-owned banks . They also barred trade in new bonds, equity, or similar financial instruments with a maturity exceeding 30 days .
 The same restrictions were also extended to three major Russian defense companies and three major energy companies . The restrictions also extend to three main defense companies.
 The EU banned certain services necessary for deep water oil exploration and production, Arctic oil exploration, and shale oil projects in Russia .
 The EU has also banned exporting dual-use goods and technology for military use in Russia . The EU also banned export of military technology and technology .
 In December 2014, the EU banned or restricted most European investment, trade, and tourism with Russian-occupied Crimea . The EU banned most European investments, trade and tourism in December 2014 .
 The EU is currently considering additional sanctions in response to Russian support for a separatist offensive in eastern Ukraine in January and February 2015 . The EU has also been considering further sanctions against Russia for support for the offensive .
 The U.S. Administration said it was adding 29 people to its sanctions list on September 2, 2015 .
 Some of those added have ties to Kremlin-linked insiders and companies who were previously sanctioned . Gennady Timchenko, a wealthy oil trader believed to be close to President Vladimir Putin, is one of those who was sanctioned .