Twenty-seven years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, it seems so strange, to be living through a new Cold War with Russia .
 The United States media following its State Department script depicts Russia as an expansionist power . The U.S. State Department says Russia is a "expansionist power" The State Department has been criticized for its portrayal of Russia .
 Trump's victory is testimony to the lingering power and utility of the Cold War mindset. That it can do so, such that even rather progressive people, such as those appalled by Trump’s victory, believe it, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Russia is twice the size of the U.S. with half its population . The country is twice its size with half the population .
 It does not claim to be the exceptional nation appointed by God to preserve ‘security’ on its terms anywhere on the globe . It does.
 Since the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, the U.S. has waged war in Bosnia, Serbia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria . The United States has also been waging drone strikes from Pakistan to Yemen .
 The United States heads an expanding military alliance formed in 1949 to confront the Soviet Union and global communism in general . The U.S. heads an expanded military alliance to confront Soviet Union, global communism .
 Estonia and Latvia share borders with Russia . It has expanded from 16 to 28 members since 1999, and has now expanded from 28 to 28 .
 Russia placed a new S-400 surface-to-air missiles and nuclear-capable Iskander systems on its territory of Kaliningrad between Poland and Lithuania on the Baltic coast . Alliance officials expressed outrage when Russia responded to the warmongering .
 Russia has been comparatively passive in a military sense during this period . But Russia has in fact been relatively passive in the military sense in the past .
 In 1999, as NATO was about to occupy the Serbian province of Kosovo, Russian peacekeepers raced to the airport in Pristina, Kosovo, to secure it .
 The British officer on the ground wisely refused an order from Gen. Gen. David Cameron . But the British officer at the scene refused to take the order .
 Wesley Clark to block the Russian move, declaring he would not start World War III for Gen. Gen. Wesley Clark . Clark says he will not start the war in Russia .
 Madeleine Albright presented to Russian and Serbian negotiators at Rambouillet a plan for NATO occupation of Kosovo and Serbia .
 This Pristina airport operation was largely a symbolic challenge to U.S. hegemony over the former Yugoslavia . It was a statement of protest that should have been taken seriously at the time .
 He was thanked by George W Bush with the expansion of NATO by seven more members in 2004 .
 NATO announced in April 2008 that Georgia would be among the next members accepted into the alliance . Georgia was one of the first to be accepted into NATO in 2008 .
 Georgian president Mikhail Saakashvili provoked a war with the breakaway republic of South Ossetia . The breakaway state had never accepted inclusion of the new Georgian state .
 The Ossetians, fearing resurgent Georgian nationalism, had sought union with the Russian Federation . The Ossenians feared resurgent Georgia nationalism .
 The two ‘frozen conflicts’ between the Georgian state and these peoples had been frozen due to the deployment of Russian and Georgian peacekeepers . The two states had been involved in the conflict .
 Russia had not recognized these regions as independent states nor agreed to their inclusion in the Russian Federation . Russia did not recognize them as independent countries or agreed to them being included in Russia .
 Russian soldiers died in the Georgian attack ion August . Russia responded with a brief punishing invasion of Georgia .
 The Ukrainian president opted out in favor of a generous Russian aid package . The Ukraine president opted to give the aid package to Russia .
 The decision to deny these “European aspirations’ was used to justify the coup. That decision — to deny them — was used as a justification for the coup, he says .
 The expanding NATO alliance is expanding to include Russia, Poland and Poland . It includes Russia to the east and Poland, bordering the Black Sea to the south .
 The NATO countries at present are shown in dark blue, Ukraine and Georgia in green .
 NATO demands Russia vacate its Sevastopol naval facilities, which have been Russian since 1783, turning them over to the alliance .
 The Russians denounced the coup against President Viktor Yanukovych . The coup was abetted by neo-fascists and marked by an ugly Russophobic character .
 Russia has no doubt assisted the secessionists while refusing to annex Ukrainian territory . Russia has urged a federal system for the country to be negotiated by the parties .
 The Soviet munitions industry integrated Russian and Ukrainian elements . The Russian and Ukraine elements of the munitions industry were integrated .
 42 ethnic Russian government opponents were killed in Odessa in May 2014 . One must assume there are more than enough Russians angry about such atrocities as the killing .
 The brief 2008 war in Georgia, and Moscow’s response to the Ukrainian coup since 2014 have been presented as evidence of a general project to disrupt the world order by military expansion . Still, these two incidents have been present as evidence.
 The teleprompter will refer routinely to Putin’s aggression and Russian expansion and the need for any mature presidential candidate to respect the tradition of supporting NATO .
 All 17 U.S. intelligence services have concluded that Vladimir Putin interfered in the United States presidential election . The anchor is expected to repeat that all 17 United States intelligence services concluded that Putin interfered with the election .
There is zero evidence that Russia and Putin in particular must have hacked the DNC in order to undermine Clinton’s legitimacy .
 All kinds of liberals, including Sanders’ best surrogates like Nina Turner, are totally on board the Putin vilification campaign .
 It is sad and disturbing that so many progressive people are so willing to jump on the new Cold War bandwagon . It's sad that so much progressive people have jumped on the bandwagon .
It is as though they have learned nothing from history but are positively eager, in their fear and rage, to relive the McCarthy era . It is as if they havelearned nothing from the history.
 U.S. Russophobia does not rest on reason, judgment, knowledge of recent history and ability to make rational comparisons .
 The hawks in Congress are determined to dissuade the president-elect from any significant rapprochement with Russia . Congress is bipartisan, amoral, ignorant, knee-jerk Israel apologists, opportunist scum .
 Putin backs of from his vague promise to “get along’ with Russia. They want to so embarrass him with the charge of being Putin’s ‘puppet’ that he backs of the promise .
 The first Cold War was based on the western capitalists’ fear of socialist expansion . The Cold War began on the fears of western capitalists' fear of socialism .
 It was based on the understanding that the USSR had defeated the Nazis, had extraordinary prestige in the world . It was the center for the expanding global communist movement .
 It was based on the fear that more and more countries would achieve independence from western imperialism . The fear that investors would be denied their rights to dominate world markets is based on a fear of western imperialism.
 Russia and the United States are equally committed to capitalism and neoliberal ideology . Russia and U.S. are both committed to the same ideology .
 The conflict is of the same nature as the U.S. conflict with Germany in the early 20th century . The United States and Germany were involved in the same conflict in the 20th Century .
 The Kaiser's Germany was at least as “democratic’ as the U.S. The system was not the issue. The Kaiser’s Germany was not as democratic as the United States .
 The U.S. intervened in World War I belatedly, after everybody else was exhausted, cleaned up . It was just jockeying for power, and as it happened, the United States intervened in WWI .
 The U.S. responded to the fall of Berlin to Soviet forces by rushing token forces to the city to claim joint credit . The United States had hesitated to invade the continent despite repeated Soviet appeals to do so .
 Up is down, black is white, Russia is the aggressor, the U.S. is the victim, the United States is a victim . Up is the down, Black is white and black is black, Russia's up is down .
 Trump camp wants to buy the Russian blame game, or get smeared as a fellow-traveler with whistle-blowers keen on exposing the multiple crimes of United States imperialism .
 Stupid people are shaping opinion every day, and have been since the first Cold War, based on innumerable lies . But stupid people — or wise people, cynically exploiting others’ stupidity are shaping opinions every day .