 The move comes amid tensions between Russia and Ukraine over the free movement of merchant ships to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov .
 Ukraine's navy will take possession of the two U.S. patrol boats, defense officials say . Ukraine's military chain of command has taken over from the border guard in defending the country’s southern coastline .
 Russia’s aggression in the Sea of Azov has spurred Ukraine to shore up its defenses against the threat of a Russian amphibious invasion from either the Sea or the Black Sea . Ukraine is now trying to protect its own territory from the threat from Russia's invasion .
 In April, Russian naval forces in the Sea of Azov stepped up harassment of merchant vessels traveling to and from Ukrainian ports .
 The twin American Island-class cutters are due for delivery to Kiev . They are typically armed with a 25 mm machine gun, two .50-caliber machine guns, and other small arms .
 The U.S. cutter deal is also part of a broader NATO effort to shore up Ukraine’s maritime defenses .
 The United Kingdom will deploy more Royal Marine commandos and a naval attaché to Ukraine . British Defense Secretary Gavin Williamson announced the move on Sept.
 U.K. military units have been in Ukraine training the country’s armed forces since 2015 .
 Last week alone, international cease-fire monitors recorded more than 5,500 violations along the Donbass front line . Last week, more than five,500 ceasefire violations were recorded along the front line.
 Poroshenko kick-started a plan to build up Ukraine’s naval strength and harden its coastal borders .
 Kiev plans to stand up a new naval base on the Sea of Azov to “repel the aggressive actions in the region by the Russian Federation,” Kiev says .
 Poroshenko also ordered the navy to rapidly build a new fleet of shallow water gunboats . The navy is known in military circles as a “mosquito fleet’s” with advanced anti-ship weapons .
 Ukraine has launched two of its new Gyurza-M class gunboats to the Sea of Azov region . So far this summer, Ukraine has launch two new gyurza M class gunsboats .
 Only Russia and Ukraine have coastlines on the Sea of Azov . 80 percent of Ukraine’s exports pass and with vast untapped gas deposits that have yet to be claimed .
 Russia’s Kerch Strait bridge was immediately seen as a threat to the free flow of maritime traffic into the Sea of Azov . Ukraine and its allies in the West saw the bridge as a risk to maritime traffic .
 Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan: "This is a tool for economic and political pressure on Ukraine" The Kerch Strait bridge opened on May 16 .
 Ukrainian ships passing under the bridge. More of a concern for Kiev was the uptick in Russian harassment against Ukrainian ships .
 Two Ukrainian navy vessels effectively ran Russia’s de facto blockade of the Sea of Azov on Sept. 2 .
 Russian vessels escorted the Ukrainian ships “under complicated circumstances” as they passed through the strait .
 A U.S. Air Force RC-135V surveillance aircraft was flying near the Kerch Strait on Sept. 29 . The Ukrainian ships made the crossing .
 Russian warplanes reportedly buzzed the two Ukrainian navy ships . Meanwhile, Russian war planes reportedly buzz the two ships .
 Poroshenko: "They require a strong response, including an enhanced sanctions policy and other targeted measures" Poroshenko said .
Tensions in the Sea of Azov could widen or escalate the ongoing land war in the Donbass . Ukrainian and Western military experts alike worry that tensions in the sea could widen .
 British defense secretary says Ukraine's behavior only increases the risk of miscalculation . Williamson: "The prospect of crisis turning to chaos is the prospect of chaos"
 The Mouse That Roared is the 1955 Cold War satirical novel by Irish American writer Leonard Wibberley . Ukraine is like "The Mouse that Roared" The book was written by the same author as the Cold War satire .