 Ukraine and its conflict with Russia will pose a significant foreign policy challenge for the Trump administration . Russia's conflict with Ukraine and the Ukraine conflict will pose an important foreign policy challenges for the administration .
 Washington should insist that Kyiv accelerate reform efforts, continue current military aid to Ukraine, maintain pressure on Moscow, keep U.S. policy aligned with Europe . If a prospect emerges, avoid displacing Germany and France in negotiations, and continue not to recognize Russia’s illegal annexation
 Ukraine and its conflict with Russia has killed nearly 10,000 Ukrainian and Russian combatants and civilians . The Trump administration is facing a major foreign policy challenge from its start .
 A settlement of the conflict in Ukraine will likely be a prerequisite for any restoration of normalcy in U.S.-Russian relations .
 The February 2015 Minsk II settlement that was to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region has yet to be implemented .
Kyiv has no leverage to change Crimea’s status and has put the issue on the back burner . Kyiv has been unable to change the Crimea's status .
In 2017, sustaining the diplomatic momentum around Minsk II will become especially difficult . In 2017, it will be especially difficult to maintain diplomatic momentum .
 The country remains dependent on Western loans and assistance, and thus on the goodwill of Western governments . The country is dependent on the help of Western nations .
 The ongoing conflict distracts the Ukrainian government from much-needed domestic reforms . The culture of corruption permeates Ukraine’s politics and economics .
 In Europe, key constituencies have pushed to end EU sanctions that impede trade and business relations with Russia . Germany has thus far managed to maintain a unified EU stance .
 Europeans on both the EU and member-state levels are critical actors in the Ukraine-Russia crisis . Europeans are on both sides of the line in the crisis .
 Washington has closely coordinated with Brussels and individual member states on policy toward Ukraine over the past several years . Washington has close coordination with Brussels, individual members states on Ukraine policy .
 The EU supported International Monetary Fund credits for Ukraine and has provided additional financial assistance to Kyiv alongside the United States . The United States also provided financial assistance for Ukraine .
 EU sanctions on Russia have been tougher than Moscow anticipated . The EU sanctions are not identical to those imposed by the United States .
 The EU adopted more severe sanctions after separatist forces used a Russian-provided missile to shoot down Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 . In response to Moscow’s duplicitous denials of separatist involvement.
Denials have continued despite publication of a detailed report by a Dutch-led investigative team . The report was based on a two-year review of all available evidence .
 The French and German leaders face general elections, as do their counterparts in Italy, the Netherlands, and the Czech Republic . France, Germany and the Netherlands are also facing elections .
 Anti-EU parties have secured seats in European national assemblies and the EU Parliament . A popular backlash against the wave of refugees and migrants seeking entry to Europe .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin has stalled on Russia’s compliance with the Minsk II agreement . Putin has been waiting to see if these developments will weaken Western resolve .
 Continue the policy of nonrecognition of Crimea’s illegal annexation by Russia .
Security and political provisions of Minsk II will remain the heaviest lift in the negotiations in 2017 . The security and political elements of the deal will remain in place for 2017 .
 Russia provides leadership, weapons, funding, and leadership to separatists . In some cases, regular units of the Russian army support separatists .
 It has shown no sign that it wants the separatists to fulfill their Minsk II obligations . The separatists have not yet shown any sign that they want to fulfill the obligations .
 The Ukrainian government argues that it should not be expected to implement political elements of Minsk II until Russia and the separatists implement the security provisions for a cease-fire and withdrawal of heavy weapons .
 The process has little prospect of success unless there is a major change in Kremlin policy and an improvement in Kyiv’s political capacity . In sum, the process has no prospect of successful unless there are major change.
 In light of the impasse, some in Ukraine and the U.S. recommend abandoning the Minsk process .
 A precipitous withdrawal from Minsk could leave Ukraine in a one-on-one face-off with Russia .
 German chancellor Angela Merkel and French president François Hollande could choose not to reengage in a new set of negotiations in a critical domestic election year for them . The United States would not be able to fill the diplomatic vacuum given the separate demands on Washington to find a deal with Russia on Syria
 There is no “grand bargain’ to be had with Russia in which the future of Ukraine is traded for other strategic goals in the Middle East .
 The conflict has to be dealt with on its own terms, in the context of its own complexities . The conflict is a complex issue that must be addressed in its own context .
 French President Francois Hollande, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Russian President Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko will meet in Paris, France, October 2, 2015 .
 France hosts a meeting with leaders of Russia, Germany and Ukraine in Paris for talks about Ukraine . France hosts the leaders of the three countries in Paris .
 When Minsk II was concluded in February 2015, Minsk I had irrevocably frayed . The first iteration of a negotiated settlement was concluded last year .
 A major debate about the provision of lethal weapons to Ukraine was under way in Washington . The aim is to help Kyiv to establish a better balance of forces on the Donbas battlefield .
 The Kremlin wanted to head off the prospect of the U.S. unilaterally arming the Ukrainian military . The Kremlin said it wanted to stop the move .
 Putin, however, preemptively moved to rupture this debate by switching to the diplomatic track . Putin, therefore, moved to move to a diplomatic track.
 He negotiated a new Minsk agreement with Germany and France that put considerable emphasis on political concessions from Ukraine in addition to concluding another cease-fire . He negotiated the new deal.
 Germany opposed arming Ukraine for fear of further escalating the conflict with Russia . Moscow’s initiative was greatly facilitated by the fact that Germany opposed arms .
 Minsk II must be fully implemented before there can be sanctions relief for Moscow, says the U.S. German insistence that the agreement is fully implemented is a major impediment to Russian interests .
 Western sanctions have contributed to the contraction of the Russian economy over the past two years at a time of low oil prices . Western sanctions are blamed for the decline of Russian economy .
 Russian government impinged on private sector's ability to borrow money on international financial markets . They have blocked new foreign investment in manufacturing, banking, and services .
 Moscow remains concerned that continued sanctions will lead to a long-term economic stagnation . The Russian government has taken measures to adjust .
 Keeping Ukraine in a state of perpetual conflict with its international borders under constant question is one way of ensuring that the West keeps Kyiv at arm's length .
 Sanctions have not deterred Russia from pursuing its goals in Ukraine . Sanctions haven't deterred Russian from pursuing their goals in the Ukraine .
 Moscow has made it clear that it considers Ukraine, as well as other former Soviet republics, as part of its sphere of influence .
 Ukraine and other countries in Eastern Europe and Eurasia are off limits for membership in Western economic, political, and security institutions . It demands explicit U.S., EU, and NATO acknowledgment that Ukraine is off limits to membership .
 Russia wants to prevent Ukraine from implementing the terms of the association agreement and free trade agreement it signed and ratified with the EU in 2014 . The agreement precipitated the initial confrontation when Russian forces seized Crimea after the Maidan Revolution .
 Moscow also seeks to roll back the commitment that NATO made at the 2008 Bucharest Summit to grant Ukraine eventual membership .
 Moscow has focused on different ways to weaken support for the sanctions regime . Instead of pursuing the implementation of Minsk II, Moscow has been focusing on other ways to strengthen support for sanctions .
 Moscow is working hard to shape a narrative among European politicians and populations that lays the blame for the conflict in the Donbas . Minsk II is not being implemented entirely on Kyiv, and to break EU and transatlantic unity on sanctions .
 The German chancellor is the most influential European decisionmaker shaping policy toward Ukraine and Russia . He is also the most powerful European leader in Europe .
 Merkel sees Russian aggression against Ukraine as violating the principles of international law that underpin the European security order . She says states should not use military force to seize territory from their neighbors .
 Senior German officials routinely describe Russia as their number-one foreign policy challenge . They decry Moscow's media and public relations campaigns to influence Germany’s domestic policy .
 The United Kingdom’s decision to leave the EU greatly complicates European and U.S. policy coordination .
 The British government announced in early October that it intended to initiate the Article 50 process to leave the EU by the end of March 2017 .
 The United Kingdom will remove itself from the center of EU policy debates . British diplomacy played a critical role in hardening resolve on dealing with Russia and other EU foreign and security issues .
 Russia was the major recipient of foreign direct investment into the EU . It was the biggest recipient of investment in the EU, primarily into the goods and services sector in London .
 Without the UK, the EU will have less economic clout with Moscow . Without the United Kingdom, the European Union will have fewer economic clout .
 The impact of theBrexit negotiations, along with other internal EU matters, will dominate EU summit meetings . The migration crisis and the ongoing vulnerability of the eurozone will dominate the meetings .
 European leaders will have less time for serious discussion of EU foreign policy issues like Russia and Ukraine, as well as less time to engage and coordinate with the United States .
 European trade with Russia was roughly 10 times the size of trade between Russia and the U.S. Trade with Russia is about 10 times larger than the United States .
 Sanctions have had a greater impact on individual European economies than on the U.S. Sanctions, including countersanctions that Moscow imposed on European countries in retribution, have had an impact on France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, and Italy .
 French politicians have called for ending EU sanctions, which Brussels currently reviews and renews on a semiannual basis . Hollande has worked closely with Merkel in steering the Minsk negotiation process .
 Hollande and Merkel face opponents who would seek to adopt softer policies toward Russia and reduce support for Ukraine .
 If Russian efforts succeed, sanctions will be lifted without any significant progress in implementing Minsk II security provisions . Western credibility will be undermined if Russian efforts fail, and sanctions are lifted .
 The Kremlin will feel emboldened to act in a similar fashion elsewhere in the post-Soviet space . The Kremlin is expected to be emboldened by the move .
 U.S. administration must maintain parallel support for sanctions and Minsk II process, says John Sutter . Sutter: Russian actions do have a cost .
 The administration should push back against the Moscow narrative that Kyiv is solely at fault for Minsk’s failed implementation . Minsk's failed implementation should be blamed for Kyiv's failure.
 Washington should recognize that Kyiv needs to do more on reform to sustain Western support . Washington should do more to support Kyiv, says Washington .
 Ukraine cannot afford the perception that the post-Maidan government, like its predecessors since the 2004 Orange Revolution, lacks the will and ability to genuinely transform .
 The Trump administration should press the Ukrainian government to accelerate anticorruption efforts, says the White House .
 Kyiv's slowness to tackle this problem is sapping public confidence at home and abroad . Kyiv’s slownness to tackle the problem is sacking public confidence.
 Washington and Brussels must push Kyiv leadership to move forward on measures it has so far resisted . This will entail making U.S. and EU assistance conditional on Ukrainian actions .
 If Kyiv moves more quickly, the U.S. and the EU should consider additional financial and technical assistance . The United States and the European Union should consider more financial andtechnical assistance .
 In parallel, the United States should continue to provide Ukraine with military assistance . The U.S. should also provide military assistance to Ukraine, according to the White House .
 Current policy limits U.S. support for Ukraine to nonlethal assistance, including training for the Ukrainian armed forces . Current policy limit United States support to Ukraine for nonlethal aid .
 Any changes in this policy should be closely coordinated with Germany and other EU partners, given their previous strong opposition to providing lethal weaponry . Any changes to this policy would be closelycoordinated with Germany, other European partners .
 Berlin may consider the provision of some defensive arms, such as man-portable antiarmor weapons . Washington might wish to consider some defensive weapons .
 The U.S. should also work within NATO to ensure full implementation of the decisions taken at the 2016 Warsaw Summit to enhance the alliance’s military capabilities .
 Assuring NATO’s eastern allies will be an important element in boosting the confidence of European states to push back against Russian efforts to intimidate governments and populations .
 U.S. and EU sanctions, NATO deployments to Poland and Baltic states, and NATO's continued engagement with Ukraine have made it clear to the Kremlin that the costs of such a course could be prohibitive .
 The U.S. and EU will have to invest in Europe’s political, economic, and societal resilience . The United States and the EU will also have to investment in Europe.
 Russia’s interference in Western political and societal dynamics is far less attributable, much cheaper and easier for Moscow to carry out than all the military maneuvers . Russia's interference in the West is more damaging to the U.S. and EU interests than all its military maneuvers, according to
 It will be critical to keep Europe closely aligned with the U.S. policy in 2017 .
 Regular high-level consultations with Berlin and other EU member states will be necessary to sustain trans-Atlantic coordination .
 The U.S. has not directly participated in Normandy format negotiations that support the Minsk II process . The United States has not participated in the Normandy format talks .
 Washington should seek to enter the negotiations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: If a prospect emerges for finding a settlement to the Donbas conflict that builds on this process, it would be helpful .
 The U.S. should not be seen to displace Germany or France in any way, or fall into a bilateral or multilateral negotiation format with Russia that is conducted over the heads of the Ukrainians or the Europeans .
Russian policy regarding Ukraine and Donbas could evolve, says CNN's John Sutter . It is entirely possible that Russian policy regarding Ukrainian and Don Bas could evolve .
 Donbas is a sprawling territory with an impoverished population, destroyed infrastructure, and a deeply damaged economic base that will take years to restore . By now, by now, Donbas has a sprawling, impoverished population and infrastructure .
 The Kremlin has shown zero interest in annexing the occupied region, which would entail costs far in excess of annexing Crimea . The Russian government has shown no interest in the move .
 At some juncture, Moscow will be open to an accommodation with Kyiv. This suggests that at some junctures, Moscow could open to a Kyiv accommodation .
 Russia has absorbed Crimea into its existing federal structures, annulled its autonomous status, and included the peninsula in its September parliamentary elections . Russia has also included Crimea in its parliamentary elections in September .
 The West cannot and should not accept Moscow’s use of force to redraw borders. The West must not accept the use of Force to redrawn borders .
 The United States and the EU should maintain a coordinated policy of not recognizing Crimea’s illegal incorporation into Russia until such time as Crimea is returned to Ukraine .
 Moscow forcibly incorporated the Baltic states in the Soviet Union at the end of World War II . This is a similar proposition to the United States and European nonrecognition of the status of the three Baltic states .
 Ukraine's policy of nonrecognition will require patience and persistence, until circumstances change, in order to succeed . Like the policy of BalticNonrecognition, this approach to Ukraine will need patience, persistence and persistence .