 Sea of Azov may now become the next flashpoint between Kyiv and Moscow . The conflict continues in Ukraine .
 Following the completion of the Crimean Bridge, Russia relocated much of its navy from the Caspian Sea to the Sea of Azov .
Experts are worried that the area could go up very quickly . No shots have been fired, but experts are worried about the area .
 Russia's current move into the Sea of Azov is not illegal because of a 2003 agreement between Russia and Ukraine on the cooperative control of the Sea and its territory . Russia’s current move was not illegal due to the 2003 agreement.
 Scholars at think tanks believe pressure from Russia may be to get Ukrainian officials to ease up on the ban on supplying water to the Crimean Peninsula .
 Others believe that Russia is focusing on controlling all of the Sea of Azov near the Crimean Peninsula and the Ukrainian coast .
 Kyiv has not stated publicly about what to do with Russia . It has also started negotiations with Europe and the United States in response to its actions . It is also looking towards the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for assistance .
 The Ukrainian military has started conducting military exercises around the coast of Ukraine . There has been no increase in naval power in the area .
 Ukraine has few options, bar military power, to fight off Russia . International law and international courts have little control over Russia, especially as of late .
 One recent summer morning, four Ukrainian Sea Guards peered out from speeding patrol boat nicknamed Little Boy .
 Bubbly pop hits from the 1990s blared over the hum of the engine propelling them through the choppy swells of the Sea of Azov .
 One guard trained his eyes on the horizon as another stood rigid behind a heavy machine gun on the lower deck . One guard was on the top deck of the ship .
 Both have been increased in recent months, so they were out there somewhere . But both have been in the same place, so both have increased .
 Russia-backed separatists briefly controlled it then before the Ukrainian military and its volunteer battalions dislodged them . Russia- backed separatists briefly control it then then before Ukraine's military dislodges them .
Fighting continues to rage just 24 kilometers to the east, in the once-quiet seaside town of Shyrokyne .
 The Sea of Azov is a rich fishing ground in Soviet times that has been of great strategic importance to independent Ukraine . It is the latest flash point in the four-year conflict between Moscow and Kyiv .
 Russia launched the opening salvo here in 2016, with its $3. billion Crimean Bridge project . The bridge will link Ukraine with Russia across the Kerch Strait .
 The move led to stern condemnation and sanctions from Kyiv and Western governments .
 The European Union in late July added six more Russian companies involved in the bridge project to its sanctions list . The EU added six other Russian companies to the sanctions list.
 Russia has stepped up confrontation in and around the Azov in a big way . Since then, Russia has step up confrontation with Russia in the past .
 Russian border guards reportedly arrested a Ukrainian fishing vessel and its crew in the Black Sea . The vessel was reportedly for illegally fishing in Russia's exclusive economic zone .
 Russia reportedly moved naval vessels from its Caspian Flotilla to the Sea of Azov in mid-May .
 The appearance of armed Russian ships and increased activity of its FSB alone mark a dangerous escalation and highlight an imbalance of power at sea . Mariupol on edge again.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Ukraine’s then-President Leonid Kuchma signed the agreement in 2003 . It makes the Sea of Azov jointly controlled territory, allowing both countries to use it freely .
Despite the current conflict between Kyiv and Moscow, the agreement is still in place . Despite the conflict between the two cities, the deal is in place, despite the conflict .
 Border Guard Service of Ukraine ruled out making any change to the agreement . But Oleh Slobodyan, chief spokesman for the Border Guard, ruled out any change .
 Russia has imposed an effective "sea blockade" in the Azov, observers and officials say . The deal has allowed Russia to impose an effective “sea blockade’s” in the region .
 Mariupol and Berdyansk are home to Ukraine’s two major steeland grain-exporting ports on the Sea of Azov . Hundreds of private fishing companies that employ more than 20,000 people.
 The port has shortened the work week to four days for most of its 3,000 employees . To avoid layoffs, the port has cut the week to 4 days for many of its employees .
 RFE/RL visited the port in late July, only one merchant ship was present . Workers were making repairs to a large crane and a pipe running from the dock .
 Odnorog said that is not the case, arguing that Kyiv has not paid enough attention to the escalating “crisis in the sea’s sea .
 Others in Mariupol also shake their heads at official remarks from Kyiv . Others in Kyiv also shake heads atofficial remarks .
 Maritime Logistics is a management company and service provider for 70 ships in the Sea of Azov . Anton Shapran, director at the Mariupol-based Maritime Logistic, insists the "crisis" was real .
 He said owners of “several vessels had complained to him about having been detained for longer than 24 hours . The delay can cost between $3,000 and $13,000, he said .
 Black Sea News is an online information site devoted to covering developments in the Black and Azov seas . Some ships have been stopped for more than three days, according to Andriy Klymenko .
 Several shipping companies are thinking twice about trips to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov .
 Moscow might be trying to force Ukraine to “ease’s ban on supplying water to occupied Crimea, a scholar says . Crimea appears to be drying up at an alarming rate .
 Ukrainian state water agencies stopped flows through a major canal in 2014, citing millions in outstanding debts from the peninsula’s Russian-imposed government .
 Moscow's ultimate goal is to take complete control of Crimea and all along the Ukrainian coastline . Still others say Moscow’s ultimate goal may be nothing short of taking control of the annexed Crimea .
 Ukraine is trying a raft of tactics to respond to Russia’s maneuvering. Ukraine is also trying to counter Russia's maneuvering in Ukraine .
 Russia is negotiating with European and U.S. partners to punish Russia’s Black Sea portsover Moscow . Russia's infrastructure minister Omelyan says it is negotiating to punish Moscow's moves .
 It is unclear how persuasive Kyiv has been when so much of the West is grappling with its own problems . But it is unclear whether Kyiv is being persuasive in the West .
 Ukraine is taking measured military actions along the Sea of Azov shore . President Petro Poroshenko warned on July 16 that Russia was building up forces and weapons in the Black and Azov seas .
 He did not exclude the possibility that the Kremlin might prepare for an all-out attack on Mariupol .
 The next day, Poroshenko ordered top military officers to take measures in connection with the ship detentions and inspections . Poroshenko also ordered the top military officials to take steps in connection to the detention .
 The Ukrainian military conducted two-day helicopter shooting drills over the Sea of Azov in late July .
 There seems to have been little done to boost defenses on the sea itself . But there seems to be little to do to boost defense on sea itself.
 Ukraine has no naval presence in the Azov, a spokesman says . The Ukrainian Sea Guard is tight-lipped about the number of boats available .
 The country lost as much as 80 percent of its naval fleet when Russia annexed Crimea . Russia took Ukraine's ships with it .
 RFE/RL counted 14, including the Lyubomir, two patrol ships — the Donbas and the Onyx — and 12 small patrol boats . Four of which were getting fresh camouflage paint jobs to cover rusting hulls when R FE/RL visited .
 Ukraine had as many as 70 boats patrolling in both the Black and Azov seas .
 Melnyk, the political and security analyst, said Ukraine is in an impossible position . He said Ukraine was in a difficult position .
 Kyiv has filed cases against Moscow with various international bodies in the past, with little success . Kyiv is a member of the Russian state-run-run Kyiv .
 In January 2017, Ukraine brought a case against Russia with the Court of Justice, the highest U.N. court . The case was heard in January 2017 .
 Poroshenko said he had ordered the creation of a body to prepare a lawsuit against Russia . The body will prepare a suit against Russia for damages caused by separatists in the Donbas region .
 Ukraine does not “have the capacities’ to defeat Russia, Melnyk says . And militarily, he says, Ukraine doesn’t have the capacities to defeat the Russian nation .
 The Sea of Azov, Ukraine's powerful neighbor, feels closer than ever, with its mighty flotilla and FSB boats lurking nearby .
 The Ukrainians and Russians cross paths at sea on an almost daily basis, and sometimes even communicate over the radio .
Poliakov: It’s a warning that more often than not goes unanswered . Poliakov says it's a warning.
 Ukrainian presidential election nears in March 2019 and Russia looks to turn up the heat . Unless something is done, he predicted, the situation will grow more tense as the election approaches .