Petro Poroshenko and Volodymyr Zelensky held a long-awaited head-to-head debate in a football stadium .
Ukraine's rival presidential candidates hold a long-awaited head-to-head televised debate . Candidates clash ahead of presidential poll BBC News .
 Exit Poll points to Landslide Zelenskiy Win RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . Follow all the latest developments as they happen .
Petro Poroshenko's electoral failure shows the limits of using ethnonationalism as a political strategy in Ukraine, says Aljazeera.com .
 Comedian plays a fictional president on TV has won the first round in Ukraine's presidential elections .
 Political newcomers rise to top of election polls in Ukraine and Slovakia . Two unlikely candidates have made their way to the top of the polls .
 Ukraine's presidential election on Sunday is held in Ukraine's capital Kiev . Ukraine's president is expected to be sworn in on Sunday .
Ukrainians are casting their ballots in a high-profile presidential runoff . Ukrainians vote in a presidential runoff in the presidential election .
 Readers share their views on the musician's call for other artists to stay away from Israel over its human rights record .
Donald Trump's decision to recognise Israeli sovereignty over territory it seized from Syria sets a troubling precedent . Experts fear the move sets a disturbing precedent for Israel .
 Russian S-400 Triumfs detected and acquired the target, simulated by the tactical Sukhoi Su-24 bombers . The S- 400 Triumf detected the target and acquired it, and the target .
 US warns Turkey over Russian S-400 missile system deal with Turkey . Washington sees as threat to U.S. jets .
 Two rare white lion cubs born in Crimea safari park WLS-TV . The cubs were born in a Crimean safari Park .
Moscow and Turkey realize they have to work with and around each other . The emerging diplomatic Crimea-Cyprus highway is the first of its kind .
 Ukraine still hopes to reclaim Crimea and Donbass from Russia . The battle to reclaim Ukraine's occupied territories is far from over, foreign minister says .
 Ukraine's independent Orthodox Church is facing eviction in Simferopol, the capital of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula . The Crimean Peninsula was seized by Russia in 2014 .
 Ukraine's independent Orthodox Church is facing eviction in Simferopol, the capital of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula . The Crimean Peninsula was seized by Russia in 2014 .
 Russia flexes its military muscles in Crimea drills ahead of Ukraine election . The exercise involved three days of explosions, tanks and helicopters along the coastline with 1500 paratroopers taking part .
Ukrainian political prisoner Volodymyr Balukh tried in Crimea delivered to Russia's Tver UNIANIllegally convicted Ukrainian activist . The prisoner has been delivered to a detention facility in Tver .
Photographer Stanislava Novgorodtseva has been observing Crimea transform since her childhood .
 Fighting ramps up in Ukraine's Donbass ahead of presidential elections on Sunday . Two Russian-backed republics broke away in 2015 .
 Ukraine's presidential race was packed with unexpected moments . Ukraine's president was a 'bachelor' candidate .
 Many voters don't know who Putin is for the simple reason that they don't think he is . Zelenskiy is not who many voters think he's for thesimple reason .
 The group's capture caused an international outcry. The trial remains a long way off, but a trial is still a way off .
 Ukraine’s Election is an All-Out Disinformation Battle The Atlantic . The campaigns have become combatants in the information war .
 The militarized border between government-controlled territory and Russia-backed separatists has created its own grim reality for those forced to cross .
 Stalin's efforts under Stalin to impose collectivism and tamp down Ukrainian nationalism left an estimated 3. million dead . An estimated 3 million people were killed by Stalin's regime .
 Inside Ukraine's Last Nuclear Missile Base RadioFreeEurope/RadioLibertyA perfectly preserved nuclear launch site in the Ukrainian countryside .
 The first round took place on March 31, and the run-off is coming up on April 21 . The run-offs are scheduled to take place in April .
Green energy subsidy scheme has boosted the cost of power but generates little renewable electricity . Ukraine’s green oligarchs say the scheme is a waste of money .
 A Ukrainian comedian pretends to be President in a Ukrainian TV show . He squares off against the actual incumbent President .
 Ukrainian Ambassador to the United Kindom's vehicle attacked in London outside embassy NBC News .
 Man arrested after ramming Ukrainian ambassador's car outside Ukrainian Embassy . Police in London say officers opened fire on a car outside the Ukrainian Embassy.
 The Wagner Group has ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin's inner circle but blurs the line between what is and isn't happening on Moscow's orders .
 Western Sanctions are driving Russia’s Focus on the Middle East Fair Observer . The MENA region quickly becoming Russia's most profitable destination in terms of exporting arms .
 Russia wins landmark WTO 'national security' case against Ukraine Aljazeera.com . Ruling opens the door for more countries to cite national security to seek exemption from global trade rules .
 Moscow Snuffs Out Religious Liberty in Eastern Ukraine is persecuting religious minorities in the name of the Christian church .
 Ukraine bans unscheduled flights to Russia after visit to Moscow by two opposition politicians . Ukraine Bans All Flights to Russia.
The Treaty of Friendship between Ukraine and Russia expired on April 1, 2019 . The Ukraine-Russia Friendship Treaty expires news politics .
 The agreement provided for "respect for the territorial integrity" of the two parties . The agreement provides for respect for the Territorial integrity of the parties .
Milove village is a good visualisation of Ukraine's current situation torn into two pieces by the weight of its past . A unique village laments its historical divide.
 Russia ordered to pay for petrol stations seized in Crimea GARA group of Ukrainian oil and gas companies . Russia has won around US$80 million plus interest and costs in a pair of investment treaty claims against Russia over.
 The second round of Ukraine's election for president takes place on 21 April . Comedian and political novice Volodymyr Zelensky is in the lead .
 The Moscow TimesUkraine has assessed the damage from Russia's annexation of Crimea at $100 billion . Russia says Crimea lost $23Bln from Ukraine's 'Annexation'
 Raids, another criminal case, four appeals 2 April 2019 Forum 18 .
 Armed Russian FSB security officers raided eight Jehovah's Witness homes around Yalta . They seized religious literature .