 The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any particular individual .
 You should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for it . You should be able to use it as a legal and professional advice .
 We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or misstatements contained herein . We are not liable for any error or omissions .
You should consult a suitably qualified professional if you require specific advice or information . You should consult an expert if you need specific advice.
 This information is provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence . This is provided by the Open parliament Licence.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly available briefings is correct at the time of publication .
 Readers should be aware that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect subsequent changes . Readers should also be aware of the changes in their briefings .
Parliament.uk. If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.UK.uk .
 Authors are not always able to engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions about the content of their research . We will carefully consider and correct any factual errors, although we will consider andcorrect any factual mistakes .
 You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at commonslibrary.uk. You can also read our news stories .
 The House of Commons has been criticised for the work of the Commons . If you have general questions about the Commons work, email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.
 Tensions escalated following U.S. intelligence assessment in December 2021 . Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022, it was suggested .
 This reading list provides links to Commons Library briefing papers, UK Government press releases and parliamentary material since 2014 . The reading list includes links to the UK government press releases, parliamentary material and press releases .
 A Parliamentary reading list is a list of briefing papers relevant to the crisis in Ukraine . The list includes briefing papers from the Commons Library . It is also a look at UK relations with Russia since 2014 .
 Ukraine Crisis This page features Commons Library publications relevant to the current crisis in Ukraine . The page is regularly updated with the latest briefings and information .
 A timeline CBP-9476 provides a timeline of the major events in the Ukraine-Russia crisis since Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014 .
 Recognition, military action and international law CBP-9470. As Russia begins widespread military action against Ukraine .
 Fears Russia could use chemical weapons in Ukraine, says Insight This Insight . Fears that Russia could deploy them in Ukraine .
 The UK and NATO have ruled out establishing a no-fly zone in Ukraine . No-fly zones and Ukraine CBP-9488 are ruled out .
Russian military forces building on the borders of Ukraine once again . CBP-9401 Russian military forces are building on Ukraine's borders again .
 Aid and refugees CBP-9467 Describes the potential effect of the conflict in Ukraine and the possibility of a refugee crisis . UK and others have pledged to help Ukraine in 2022 .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine threaten a humanitarian crisis. Organising humanitarian aid and help for Ukraine CBP-9490.
 The Government advises those in the UK seeking to help make cash donations to registered charities .
 The West’s response Sanctions against Russia CBP-9481. In response to Russian military action in Ukraine, Western allies and other partners across the globe have imposed an unprecedented package of coordinated sanctions .
 The UK has imposed sanctions against Russia CBP-9485 . A Parliamentary reading list of UK’s Overseas Territories is published .
 This paper describes how these sanctions apply in the UK’s Overseas Territories .
 UK has banned the export of all dual-use items to Russia in response to conflict in Ukraine . Arms exports CBP-9483 are banned.
 The already controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project has taken on greater significance amidst the current crisis in Ukraine . Geopolitical implications of the project have taken greater significance .
 This paper focuses on the military assistance provided to Ukraine since the Russian invasion started on 24 February 2022 . The paper also focuses on military assistance given to Ukraine.
 NATO has been increasing its military presence along its eastern borders in response to Russian action . Reinforcing its eastern flank CBP-9450 NATO is increasing its presence .
 NATO's response to Russian military action in Ukraine CBP-9469 NATO has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine . NATO has also condemned Russia's attack in Ukraine .
 In mid-January 2022 the US, NATO, OSCE and Russia held a series of talks .
 The focus of the talks became European security more broadly and Russia's desire to see legally binding security guarantees with respect to its near abroad .
 This paper explains what NATO is, its structure and purpose, and how it has evolved since its formation in 1949 .
 Widespread sanctions have been imposed on Russia for its actions in Ukraine . The UK CBP-9472 has been placed on Russia's influence in the UK .
 Economic Crime Bill 2021-22 CBP-9486 A Bill to introduce beneficial ownership register of Overseas Entities owning UK property . Bill to reform the UK Unexplained Wealth Order and Sanctions regimes .
 UK Immigration concessions CBP-9473. The Government has announced some immigration concessions for some people affected by the crisis in Ukraine .
 Campaigners are calling for further measures to help a wider range of people in Ukraine .
 President Joe Biden's foreign policy has lived up to his campaign promises, his other major foreign policy achievements and the challenges ahead . One year in CBP-9447.
 The House of Commons debate on Russia's grand strategy took place on Thursday 6 January 2022 . Russia’s grand strategy CDP-0002.
 British support for Ukrainian membership of NATO CDP-0208 . The House of Commons debate took place on Wednesday 8 December 2021 .
 One year on from the disputed Presidential election CBP-9334 - 5 October 2021 . President Lukashenko has consolidated his grip on power .
 Russia recently announced that its military forces that have been building up in Crimea and on the borders of Ukraine in the last few weeks would be withdrawn by 1 May 2021 .
 Russia said its forces had been deployed on exercise, a justification which has been questioned by many analysts .
 Whether Russia will fully implement its commitment to withdrawal also remains to be seen . Russia's commitment to withdraw from Russia is still not fully implemented .
 The imprisonment of Alexei Navalny CBP-9137 has died down for now, but commentators argue that Vladimir Putin's legitimacy is thin .
 This paper briefly examines Russia's nuclear weapons policies, capabilities and programmes .
 The August presidential election in Belarus led to the biggest demonstrations since the country's independence . The August election was the biggest demonstration since Belarus's independence.
 In the weeks leading up to the election there were large rallies against the incumbent president .
 President Lukashenko secured a sixth term in office . In the weeks since the election, protests have continued amid allegations of widespread vote-rigging .
 Magnitsky legislation CBP-8374, 8374, and 20 July 2020 Stronger legislation providing for sanctions against corrupt officials who commit gross human rights abuse has been passed . UK's first Magnitky sanctions have been announced .
 The election of a new president in 2019 raised the prospect of a resolution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Sanctions policy and implementation took place on 3 October 2019 . The House of Commons debate on the UK Government’s sanctions policy and Implementation took place .
 Russian annexation of Crimea took place on 24 April 2019 . Russian annexation took place in Crimea in Crimea on April 24 .
 Russia has given rise to territorial conflicts and thousands of deaths . Many former Soviet States are close to a resurgent Russia .
 This paper looks at the areas of conflict, the causes of the conflicts, and Russia's role and international attempts to broker peace .
 Russian intelligence services and special forces hit the front pages to an unprecedented degree in October 2018 . Russia's intelligence services hit the back pages to a unprecedented degree .
 The UK has a new legislative framework for imposing sanctions post-Brexit . The future of sanctions CBP-8402.
 The Salisbury incident CDP-0204 is the House of Commons debate on the Salisbury incident .
 The House of Commons debate on Russia and the Council of Europe took place on 18 July 2018 .
 The House of Commons debate on Russian Federation activity in the UK and globally took place on 28 June 2018 .
 pressure has increased for further sanctions against Russia . The alleged chemical weapons deployment in Syria and the poisoning incident in Salisbury have increased pressure .
 The House of Commons debated national security and Russia in March 2018 . National security and Russian CBP-8271 .
 Theresa May had sharp words for Russia in her speech to the Lord Mayor's Banquet in November 2017 .
 The House of Commons debate on Russian interference in UK politics and society took place on 21 December 2017 . The debate took place in the Commons on December 21.
 Situation in Ukraine CDP-0260 is the House of Commons debate on the situation in Ukraine that took place on 20 December 2017 .
 Over the last decade Russia has been implementing an extensive rearmament programme . A Parliamentary reading list includes Russia’s Rearmament Programme .
 Its aims are considered to be ambitious within the context of Russia's economic situation and the status of its military-industrial base .
 Donald Trump on foreign and defence policy CBP-7780 . The paper predicts the effect of his victory on United States foreign policy .
 The alliance adopted its Readiness Action Plan in 2014 . To counter increased assertiveness by Russia along NATO's eastern flank, the alliance adopted it in 2014.
 This briefing paper explains the main elements with a specific focus on the UK military contribution . It also explains the UK's military contribution to the UK .
 Litvinenko Inquiry put spotlight on UK-Russian relations . UK relations with Russia 2016 CBP-7541 - 7541 .
 The EU announced broad economic sanctions against Russia on 29 July 2014 . The sanctions include restrictions on some Russian banks’ ability to borrow money in EU financial markets .
 Violence has been increasing in eastern Ukraine, leading to calls for West to arm the Ukrainian government .
 The conflict in Ukraine has caused more than 3,000 deaths since it broke out in March 2014 . The EU and U.S. have imposed sanctions and more are pending . NATO has stepped up its presence in Eastern Europe .
 Ukraine is due to sign its agreement with the EU on 27 June . Russia's reaction is awaited . A stable solution may be elusive, however .
 In November 2013 the Ukrainian government decided not to sign a planned Association Agreement with the EU . Demonstrations ensued in the capital Kiev .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ demonstrations turned violent in early 2014 . In February, some European foreign ministers mediated a compromise, involving a unity government and early elections .
 The opposition has appointed a new president, while Western nations are hurrying to prepare financial support . Ukraine's economy is in difficulties .
 The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office are undertaking to support the economic stability of Ukraine after the Russian invasion in March 2022 . Ukraine Guarantee 31 Mar 2022.
 Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules 29 Mar 2022 . House of Commons: HCWS736 Statement of changes in immigration Rules .
 A Parliamentary reading list UK suspension of exchange of tax information with Russia and Belarus 17 Mar 2022 . UKEF Update 15 Mar 2022: UKEF update on UKEF support to Ukraine .
 Economic Crime (Transparency and Enforcement) Bill will be introduced in the House of Lords .
 A Parliamentary reading list of the Economic Crime (Transparency and Enforcement) Bill . The bill will be introduced in the House of Commons .
 Ukraine Update: Ukraine Update 10 Feb 2022 . Ukraine update: Ukraine update 10 Feb. 2022 . UK sends package of defensive weapons to Ukraine .
 Exercises in the Black Sea 24 Jun 2021 . Royal Navy warships through Ukrainian territorial waters .
 NATO’s Enhanced Forward Presence in the Baltic States and Poland .
 The UK intends to make a further gifting package to the Government of Ukraine .
 Ministry of Defence Support to Ukraine. UK intends to make a further gifting package to the Government of Ukraine .
 House of Commons updates the House on the UK's support for the Ukrainian armed forces .
 Ministry of Defence Support to Ukraine is gifting package to the Government of Ukraine . UK intends to make the package to Ukraine .
 Motion condemns Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine. Motion calls on the Government to ensure that the United Kingdom's NATO defence and security obligations are fulfilled to counter threats from Russia .
 UK response to OSCE 8 July 2021 Ambassador Neil Bush responds to Ambassadors Çevik and Grau . He discusses OSCE's efforts in response to Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine .
 UK, Ukraine and industry will collaborate to boost Ukraine's naval capabilities . Trilateral agreement signed onboard HMS Defender, which was in Odesa .
 Russia’s Informal Arria-formula Meeting on Ukraine. Calling on Russia to immediately cease its aggression against Ukraine and end its occupation.
 UK Delegation to the OSCE condemns ongoing human rights violations . Nicola Murray condemns persecution of Crimean Tatars, in illegally annexed Crimea . The OSCE also condemns the persecution of Crimea's Tatars .
 A statement from the Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States of America and the High Representative of the European Union .
 Prime Minister Boris Johnson spoke to the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy this evening .
 G7 foreign ministers condemn Russia's continued actions to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence . The foreign ministers’ statement 18 March 2021 .
 Russia's Arria-formula Meeting on the Situation in Crimea. Defending sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine 17 March 2021 Joint Statement .
 UK Ambassador Neil Bush speaks about Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014 at the OSCE Permanent Council .
Ambassador Jonathan Allen spoke at the General Assembly debate on the situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine . Urging unwavering support for Ukraine's sovereignty 23 February 2021 Statement .
 Foreign Secretary reaffirms UK's solidarity with Ukraine on seventh anniversary of illegal annexation of Crimea 20 February 2021 . UK will remain at forefront of international efforts to end Russia’s illegitimate control of the Crimean peninsula .
 Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. 11 February 2021 Statement by Ambassador Barbara Woodward at Security Council briefing on the Minsk Agreement .
 UK statement 10 December 2020 Delivered by Ambassador Neil Bush at the OSCE Permanent Council . UK statement will be released on December 10 .
Standing behind Ukraine and supporting Ukrainian sovereignty 20 February 2020 Statement by Mungo Woodifield at UN General Assembly .
 UK Ambassador Karen Pierce, UK Permanent Representative to the UN, spoke at Security Council briefing on Ukraine .
 UK statement on Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine 5 February 2020 . Delivered by Graham Townsend, Senior Military Adviser of the UK Delegation to the OSCE .
 PM call with President Zelenskyy 22 August 2019 Prime Minister Boris Johnson had a call with the Ukrainian President .
 Russia's aggressive tactics in the face of Ukraine's work towards peace and democracy, says Ambassador Jonathan Allen .
 Five years ago, Russia illegally annexed the peninsula of Crimea in a blatant land grab from Ukraine . Foreign Secretary statement on fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea 18 March 2019 .
 A Parliamentary reading list Standing united behind Ukraine's sovereignty 20 February 2019 Statement by Ambassador Karen Pierce at the General Assembly debate on the situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine .
 Repeated violations of Ukraine's territorial integrity by Russia by Russia in February 2019 .
 Defence Secretary reaffirms support to Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression . HMS Echo docked at the Ukrainian port of Odesa .
 G7 Foreign Ministers’ statement on recent events near Kerch Strait 30 November 2018 The Foreign Ministers of the G7 countries issued a statement on Russia's actions against Ukraine in the Kerch strait .
 UK Ambassador Jonathan Allen. Condemned Russia's use of force on Ukrainian vessels in November .
 Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson meets Minister of Defence of Ukraine Stepan Poltorak in London . Maritime training deployments to deepen UK-Ukraine defence partnership .
 Joint Statement of the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom and Ukraine . Joint Statement was released on 21 November 2018 .
 UK calls on Russia to allow ships access to Ukraine's ports 20 November 2018 . UK joined calls for Russia to stop delaying or preventing access for ships to the Sea of Azov .
 UK committed to Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, says Ambassador Karen Pierce .
 The UK highlighted Russia's failures to protect human rights in illegally annexed Crimea . The UK raised its concerns regarding the welfare of 72 Ukrainian political prisoners .
 UK supports U.S. declaration condemning the illegal annexation of Crimea . US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo reiterated the United States stance against Russia’s illegal annexation .
 Ambassador Karen Pierce, UK Permanent Representative to the UN, made the statement at the Security Council briefing on Ukraine .
 UK has directly trained over 5,000 members of Ukraine’s Armed Forces . 1,000 more than initially targeted, Defence Secretary confirmed .
 Foreign Secretary welcomes progress towards peace in Ukraine . Boris Johnson hails the signing of a framework agreement for the disengagement of forces in eastern Ukraine .
 PM met with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko at NATO Summit in Warsaw . Cameron reaffirmed the UK's commitment to Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Foreign Secretary denounces Russia’s continued illegal annexation of Crimea . Foreign Secretary calls for Russia to return Crimea to Ukraine two years after illegal annexation .
 Development Minister Desmond Swayne responds to news that UN and international aid agencies have been ordered to leave separatist-controlled areas of Ukraine .
 Minister for Europe calls for lasting ceasefire in Ukraine 5 September 2015 . David Lidington has called for a full and lasting ceasefire.
 The Minsk agreements are the only way that stability can be restored in eastern Ukraine, says Ambassador Matthew Rycroft of the UK Mission to the UN .
 Foreign Secretary condemns Crimea ‘referendum’ one year on 22 March 2015 Foreign Secretary denounces Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea .
 Cameron held a video conference call yesterday to discuss how Europe and the USA should work together to enforce the Minsk agreements . PM video conference on Minsk agreement on 4 March 2015.
 NATO strongly condemned the escalation of violence by Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine . Support to separatists "undermines Russia's denials about their military presence in Ukraine"
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant of the UK Mission to the UN, to the Security Council Meeting on Ukraine .
 Foreign Secretary restated UK support for Ukraine in a call to Ukrainian Foreign Minister Klimkin . Foreign Secretary has restated support for the country in the call .
 UK remains deeply concerned by the situation in Ukraine . Statement by Ambassador Lyall Grant of the UK Mission to the UN to the Security Council Briefing on Ukraine .
 Russian Ambassador summoned to FCO over reported military incursion into Ukraine . Ambassador asked to account for reports of Russian military vehicles crossing the border into Ukraine.
 Foreign Secretary William Hague welcomes east Ukraine ceasefire and calls on Russia to support President Poroshenko’s peace plan .
 Foreign Secretary William Hague calls for de-escalation of tension in eastern Ukraine ahead of his visit next week .
 G7 leaders discuss ongoing situation in Ukraine and additional sanctions on Russia . G7 leader: Ukraine situation is ongoing and Russia is under increased sanctions .
 Foreign Secretary William Hague gives 'cautious welcome' to Ukraine agreement . But quick progress is needed, Hague says .
 UK Statement to OSCE Permanent Council on the situation in Ukraine 14 April 2014 . Ambassador Dominic Schroeder's statement to the OSCE PC on the Situation in Ukraine .
 Foreign Secretary William Hague backs UN resolution to respect Ukrainian territorial integrity . Foreign Secretary welcomes UN vote to support Crimea 27 March 2014 .
 William Hague called Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk to outline UK support for Ukraine . Foreign Secretary William Hague spoke with Ukrainian PM on 25 March 2014 .
 The leaders of the G7 made a joint statement on Ukraine following their meeting in The Hague . The G7 leaders made the joint statement.
 The Kremlin has this evening announced that President Putin has signed a decree recognising Crimea as a sovereign state . Foreign Secretary condemns Russia's recognition of Crimea as 'sovereign state'
 Russia stands isolated in UN and international community and a referendum tomorrow can have no credibility . Russia is isolated in the world and has no credibility in the UN .
 UK Statement to the OSCE Permanent Council on growing tensions in the Crimean Peninsula 14 March 2014 . Ambassador Dominic Schroeder's statement on the continuing situation in Ukraine .
 Statement of G7 leaders on Ukraine 12 March 2014 Statement calling on the Russian Federation to cease all efforts to change the status of Crimea . Statement calls on Russia to stop all efforts.
 Prime Minister called President Putin to discuss the situation in Ukraine . PM call with President Putin on March 9 March 2014 . PM called President to discuss Ukraine situation .
 Foreign Secretary William Hague underlines difficulties but says there is sufficient willingness to continue trying to bring Russia and Ukraine into talks .
 Foreign Secretary sets out importance of diplomatic progress on Ukraine 5 March 2014 . William Hague says UK is taking every diplomatic opportunity to try to bring Russia and Ukraine into direct contact .
Ambassador Lyall Grant of the UK Mission to the UN has made a statement to the Security Council meeting on Ukraine . A Parliamentary reading list has been published by the UK.
 A joint statement from the leaders of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States . The statement was made in a joint statement on 3 March 2014 .
 Foreign Secretary calls for de-escalation of tensions in Ukraine . William Hague deeply concerned at escalation of tensions. Russian parliament authorises military action .
 Our impartial analysis, statistical research and resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise legislation, develop policy, and support constituents .
Our published material is available to everyone on commonslibrary.uk. Our published material has been published in the past .