 Ukraine up to the present is, according to its constitution, a unitary state . Ukraine's constitution is based on the constitution of the country .
 Those who are holding power centrally should also be controlling the provinces, as there is relatively little authority assigned to regional governors or municipalities .
 In reality, there has been for a considerable period now a significant split . The pair have been separated for several years .
 In many respect, anti-government protests in many respect mimicked the strategies of the ‘Maydan’ initially, only to be backed up by paramilitary forces .
 The Ukrainian police and other security forces have been both discredited and shattered .
 Many reports tell us that they are mere bystanders now when clashes on the streets occur . Many reports say they are just bystanders now .
 The new government has little in the way off executive power . It is a stark contrast to the 'Orange Revolution' scenario of 2004-05, when large parts of the security apparatus changed sides .
Political preferences were quite polarized in Ukraine. As I mentioned above, political preferences in Ukraine were quite polarization .
 Those parliamentary majorities were ‘made’ by independent or opportunistic deputies in the parliament .
Third of the electorate behind Yanukovych in 2010 or 2012 were not too happy to see him ousted by the other camp taking the streets .
 Russian media has not ceased to depict the 'new' government as an agent of ‘fascist’ and ‘Banderovtsy’ The South and the East are hardly represented in the new government .
 The unnecessary motion against minority rights put forward by the parliament made it a self-fulfilling prophecy . Many deputies opportunistically changed sides again in 2014.
 We do not know pretty much about what people in the eastern regions of Ukraine ‘really’ think, we say .
 There is a conscious intimidation of journalists. That is due to the fact that there is aconscious intimidation of reporters .
 There seems to be little doubt that many people voted pro ‘independence’ in the East .
 Looking back at the last round of referendums during the late perestroika period, may be instructive .
 Many former administrative-territorial units of the Soviet Union declared their sovereignty without much practical consequence . Then many ex-Soviet units declared sovereignty without immediate practical consequence.
 Crimea and Eastern Ukraine could vote for Russia at the moment . The option of voting for Russia might be fuelled by very much of the same sentiment .
 The separatists in the South and East of Ukraine are actually Russian Special Forces, according to the Ukrainian provisional government .
 Putin denies that there are any Russian troops on Ukrainian soil, which he also denied in Crimea . But he admitted later that there were no Russian troops in Ukraine .
 There would have been little to exploit for Russia that way. Without a certain support of those locally concerned – I am not saying that it is a majority – there would be little to exploited for Russia .
 Crimea was a part of Ukraine due to a voluntary decision by a Soviet leader, Khrushchev, in 1954 . That is sure for the Crimea, which indeed happened to be part of the Crimea .
 There has been little in the way of ‘Ukrainianness’ on the peninsula then and not much has developed since .
 Crimea has had a certain place in the imperial self-imagination of the Russian Empire, from Pushkin to the Crimean War of the mid-1850s to the decision to rebuild Imperial Sevastopol .
Post-Soviet Russian Federation and West guaranteed post-Soviet Ukraine’s identity in treaties like the Budapest accord of 1994 . That said, the post- Soviet Russia and the West guaranteed Ukraine's identity .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin revived the term ‘Novorossiya’ during his annual call-in show in April 2014 .
 Ukraine's UN representative Yurii Klymenko has said that Russia is on its way to unleash a military intervention in Ukraine's East and South . Ukraine expects Russia to unleash military intervention.
 Historically, much of the territory of contemporary southern and eastern Ukraine were Steppe territories roamed by nomadic tribes . None of the neighboring European states like Muskovy or the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth were able to control .
 The Tatar Khanate of the Crimea was a vassal of the Ottoman sultans . On the contrary, they employed Cossacks, armed peasants fleeing serfdom .
 The Russian Empire could expand into the steppes. Only with the military revolutions of the late 17th century and the disposal of firearms, the Russian Empire, then stronger that its former Polish competitor could expand .
 During the late 18thand early 19th century, these territories were populated with colonists by the Russian Empire . The territories were inhabited by colonists.
 These colonist were of different ethnic origin, and only a minority was Ukrainian . Only a minority of these colonists were Ukrainian .
 The newly populated and very fertile area was baptized ‘Novaya Rossiya’ at the time . The area emphasized its character of being a part of the Empire as opposed to being ethnic Russian .
 Putin is playing on imperial note by employing the term, which his Soviet predecessors avoided to do . Putin is certainly playing on that imperial note.
 Russia wants to truncate Ukraine further by an annexation of all these territories up to former ‘Bessarabia’ That is current Moldova and its breakaway district of Transdnistria, I have my doubts .
 Moldova has already warned Moldova of signing an Association Agreement with the EU . Some minor figures in the Russian government have already told Moldova to sign the agreement .
 Russia says new EU and U.S. sanctions will hinder efforts to solve the crisis in Ukraine . Russia urges the West to persuade the provisional government in Kiev to discuss the country's future structure . The presidential election is scheduled on May 25 .
 Any government in Kiev will have to consider a degree of federalization – or regionalization . In his opinion, due to the factual loss of influence in Eastern Ukraine, any government in Ukraine will have the option to consider federalization .
 There are not so many ethnic groups in Ukraine that it would require some degree of national autonomy . There are no so many Ethnic groups in the Ukraine.
 I think it is rather than about balancing interests of differently structured regions . I think the issue is rather about balance interests of different structured regions.
 I do not think regionalization would be a big stepping stone in Ukraine . It would allow the established camps to entrench themselves further in the regions .
 That is exactly the reason why I doubt that it would be the solution either. That's exactly the reasons why it's not the solution .
 Look, as long as there would be a consensus that a change of political power is possible, it would be no problem, says John Sutter . Sutter: As long as a consensus, there would have been no problem .
 The Orange Revolution of 2004-05 was the biggest difference between Russia and Ukraine after the Orange Revolution . It looked as if that was the largest difference between the two countries after the revolution .
 Yanukovych did everything to revoke constitutional arrangements enabling a regular change of governments in the wake of elections . Yanukovych, defeated during the Orange Revolution, was in power again since 2010 . He was defeated in 2010 and again in power since 2010.
 Each side is depicting the possible political victory of another camp as a political catastrophe . Each side, at the moment, is depicting a potential political victory.
 Any EU policies that pursue normative aims in influencing Ukrainian developments are problematic . The EU policies in Ukraine are problematic, according to a report .
 At the same time we need to acknowledge, that the EU’s choices are not simple either . The EU's choice is not simple.
 The EU has been severely criticized for not offering Ukraine any accession perspectives after the Orange Revolution . The EU was severely criticized by the EU for not giving Ukraine access to the EU .
 The European Neighborhood Policy offered too little incentive for Ukraine . Ukraine was seemingly treated on par with North African states like Tunisia .
 The Association Agreement, for its part, offered little in terms of short term gains for Ukraine and its ruling elites . It was linked to the conditionality established with the Copenhagen Criteria in 1993 .
 Russia seems to offer short-term gains linked to political and economic dependence . EU offers long-term advantages, at the cost of short and medium term hardships . Russia has a long history of dependency on gas.
 Many Ukrainians tired of the notorious corruption and inefficiency endemic to their political establishment . The current economic situation in Ukraine does not sound too promising for many people, even if the economic situation is not too promising .
 Tymoshenko and Poroshenko are two oligarchs entrenched in Ukrainian politics for more than a decade . The choice between them does not forebode too well, says the writer .
 Donetsk People's Republic and neighboring Luhansk agreed to unite a day after declaring independence . The self-declared Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhans agreed to united .
 Referenda pointed out that nearly 90% of voters in Donetsk voted for self-rule . In Luhansk 96% voted for independence, Referendnda said .
 Many pro-Ukraine activists have left the region after threats, some have been kidnapped . Most of those who disagree chose to boycott the referendum rather than vote no .
 At least that is partly a result of conscious intimidation of investigative journalism, says John Sutter .
 It is still a question of whether they would wholeheartedly support a union with Russia . But even if their agenda is less of an enigma to the local population than to Western observers .
 Sometimes they say it is merely a vote for more autonomy within Ukraine . At other times they say the yes vote is for a new state incorporating Russian-speaking East Ukraine .
 Others suggested Eastern Ukraine could join Russia, as was the case with Crimea that joined Russia after a controversial referendum .
 Ukraine's economic performance between Ukraine and Russia in the border regions may be enough of a motive to vote against Kiev .
 A Kiev that is supposedly ‘lost’ to fascist and ultranationalists, as Russian media would have it .
 Russian media is quite important in regions, as is the suppression of alternative channels of information, illustrated by attacks on TV stations and journalists .
 There has been a lot of speculation, indeed, on the role of the local economic elites, in supporting centrifugal forces in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 Allegedly, some of the oligarchs, above all Rinat Akhmetov, are suspected to have a hand in the emergence of 'self-defense' forces in Eastern Ukraine .
 The militias are basically operating to create obstacles for the ostensibly ‘anti-corruption’ government emerging from the Maydan protests in Kiev .
 It is difficult to foresee, at the moment, whether the ‘self-defense forces’ are indeed in their majority favoring an annexation of the Donbas by Russia . The self-declared leaders of the insurgents point in this direction .
 The Europeans stumbled into a situation that they have not really foreseen, he says . "I think that the Europeans stumble into a situations that they've not really Foreseen," he says.
 In Europe, the confidence in the persuasiveness of European norms and values is unbroken, according to the EURO-Maydan .
 The Association Agreement with its strings attached in terms of the conditionality would have brought Ukraine into a difficult situation . It implied a political choice between East and West, according to the agreement .
 A successful Ukrainian development along those lines would have laid bare all the defects of Putin’s Russia . Putin reacted with so much determination, and that is probably why he reacted so much .
 Russia has been building up Ukraine as a sort of ‘better’ Russia after the Orange Revolution . But I doubt that this was the declared intention of EU negotiators when preparing the Association Agreement .
European reaction to Ukraine's actions suggests that we do not have a concept of what Ukraine is to us .
 The Ukraine crisis has been described as a crisis in the world's most important region . Ukraine has been a major source of instability in recent years . Ukraine's government has been accused of failing to provide a credible policy towards Ukraine .
Ukrainians threw their lot with Europe. I am afraid, however, that the answer will not be very satisfactory for those in Ukraine who threw their lots with Europe . I'm afraid, but I'm not very satisfactory with those who threw a lot with the Europe.
 His research is focused on the past and present of Muslims and other Minorities in Russia and Central Asia . His research focuses on the cultural and social history of the late Soviet period .
 Histories, Memories and Representations of Famine in Ukraine and Ireland are published in Ukraine, Ireland and Ukraine .