 Russia’s aggression against Ukraine in the Kerch straits are a result of simmering tensions around the Crimea between the two states since 2014 . Russia's aggression against the Ukraine is the result of a simmering tension between the Crimea and Ukraine .
 Russia has slowly but steadily begun a process of militarization by accumulating sea and land equipment, along with developing infrastructure . After successfully annexing the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, Russia has steadily begun the process of militaryization .
 Russia began building a highway in late 2014 and completed in mid-2018 . It joined Russia with the Crimea, called the Kerch bridge . Most notably, Russia beganBuilding a highway.
 The Azov Sea and Kerch strait represent mutual territorial waters for Ukraine and Russia .
 The war in Donbas and annexation of the Crimea has complicated the realities on the ground . Russia is increasing its grip on the region, with Russia increasing its hold on it .
 Reports earlier this year indicated that Russia had been increasing pressure on the Azov Sea region, with regular detention of Ukrainian shipping vessels .
 Ukraine began warning about further escalation in the Azov Sea region due to a de facto blockade on Ukrainian shipping through the Kerch Straits . Ukraine then began warning of further escalation due to the blockade .
 Ukraine decided to start constructing a naval base near Berdyansk . Russia in the sea, along with economic blockade, harassment and even fears of a possible invasion, is building a base .
 Russia's aggression in the Azov Sea region has been in the making for nearly twelve months . Russia’s aggression has been on the rise for nearly 12 months .
 Crimea and its surrounds have mostly been ignored by western analysts since 2014 . There are regular daily skirmishes between Donetsk and Luhansk peoples’ armies and Ukraine’s armed forces .
 Russia’s aggression in the Kerch strait has caught many off-guard, according to the Russian media . Russia's aggressive behavior has caught some off- guard, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The morning of November 25th saw three Ukrainian vessels begin a journey across the Black Sea from Ukraine’s port city of Odesa to Mariupol .
 Russian vessel rammed a Ukrainian tugboat en route in the strait . Two Russian vessels fired upon two Ukrainian gunboats making passage through to the Azov Sea .
 Russian special forces boarded the vessels, capturing them along with their crew . The vessels were captured by Russian special Forces .
 Russia would have no claim to defend its territorial waters, as its use is mediated by a 2003 agreement . If the incident transpired in or near the Kerch Strait, Russia would not have any claim to defending its waters .
 The actual location of the incident has been revealed as taking place in the international waters of the Black Sea . Russia has no right to defend.
 Russia is signaling to Ukraine and the international community that it will be setting the rules in and around the Crimea . It will define what its territorial waters are .
 The incident confirms that has already been a slow erosion of Ukraine’s ability to access and administer its rights in and around Kerch and the Azov sea .
 The Kerch incident is the first open attack on Ukrainian military by Russia . No civil defense forces or separatist fronts are required, no civildefense forces or separatists are required .
 The openness of the attack is perhaps the most significant challenge Russia has posed to Ukraine and the West . Russia has openly attacked Ukrainian military assets .
 Ukrainian servicemen abroad the vessels have been arrested and tried for breaching Russia’s border .
 They have been transferred from Crimea to Moscow and are serving 2-month pre-trial sentences . They have since been transferred to Moscow. They are serving two-month sentences .
 The undeclared war between Ukraine and Russia has been ongoing since 2014 . There have been no drastic changes since 2015 .
 Russia has openly attacked Ukraine, violated international law and bilateral treaties . Russia has not masked the fact that it has attacked Ukraine and violated international laws .
 There are four competing theories on the origins of the Kerch aggression .
 The first theory believes that Kerch was engineered by Putin to allay his diminishing popularity at home . The second theory is that Putin was trying to keep Kerch's popularity in Russia .
 The second state that Putin engineered the aggression to help create a more vocal pro-Moscow bloc in Ukraine’s domestic politics . The second states that Putin engineer the aggression.
 Third, cynical theory which proposes that Poroshenko planned on Russian aggression in order to create martial law at home due to his low popularity and poor election chances in March 2019 .
 Moscow deliberately sought to bait Ukraine into a disproportional response from its attack on Ukraine . Moscow deliberately tried to escalate to a full invasion or divide western support for Ukraine against Russia .
 Putin's popularity has dropped quite significantly since being re-elected in 2018 . Putin’s popularity has fallen quite significantly in recent years .
 His popularity is sitting roughly at the same level before the annexation of the Crimea . His popularity sits roughly at same level as the Crimea annexation .
 This is due to Putin’s government introducing new pension reforms that were widely unpopular and stirred protests across Russia . This led to the erosion of trust in Putin's regime, which led to a decline in trust .
 Proponents of the domestic explanation believe that Putin engineered the Kerch aggression to allay domestic troubles and harness Russians’ growing mistrust of Ukrainians and patriotism .
 Potential wars and aggression are a costly and risky strategy just to boost popularity in an authoritarian state .
 Putin has vast resources at his disposal to create a war or perceived aggression in the imagination of the Russian people rather than initiating a new round of hostilities between himself and the West .
 He would not risk a temporary boost in popularity for a new round of sanctions. Thus he wouldn't risk a Temporary boost in popularity for new sanctions .
 Ukraine's presidential election is in March 2019, and a pivotal moment for Ukraine's foreign policy, and Russia's perceived interests in the state . Ukraine’s presidential election will be held in March 2018 .
 The Kerch incident provides more leverage to Putin’s preferred candidate in Medvedchuk, godfather to Putin's daughter . Putin's preferred candidate is Medvedch, god father to Putin.
 Medvedchuk has already begun campaigning on a platform of creating peace through his personal contact with Russia’s president .
 Putin creates more opportunities for Medvedchuk to create a bloc of those opposed to Ukraine's continued resistance to Russia’s aggression and settling the conflict on terms favorable to Russia . Putin creates a demonstration of blatant strength.
 Medvedchuk is very much in favor of reaching a deal favorable to Russia – ignoring the Crimea and allowing the Donbas separatist republics to be reintegrated to Ukraine on Russia’s terms .
 Kerch has not made any significant statements regarding Kerch a week after the incident . He has not said anything about Kerch .
 Kremlin alleges Ukraine deliberately sent its boats across Kerch to provoke a crisis in order to increase sanctions against Russia by Ukraine and the West .
 Ukraine engineered the Kerch incident in order to bring in martial law . The Kerch Incident was the first time Ukraine had a martial law in place .
 martial law provides the means to suppress domestic criticism of his government, and indefinitely delay elections . Poroshenko is very unpopular in current polling, and martial law gives him the chance to suppress his government .
 The Verkhovna Rada made Poroshenko compromise on the terms of the martial law, reducing its length to 30 days and coverage to only those oblasts directly threatened by Russia’s military presence .
 Most of the cynics believe Poroshenko is just as bad as Putin – or trying to be at least at least .
 Russia has accumulated military hardware on the border. International relations at its base are governed by power dynamics, and western concerns .
 The law may make Poroshenko more unpopular in those oblasts who had to suffer increased police and military presence . Cynics cannot explain why martial law was so transparently enacted .
 Any actual interference with Ukraine’s election cycle would be met with international criticism . Poroshenko would harm further if he was to extend martial law, which would harm him further .
 The second theory postulates that Russia engineered the Kerch aggression to bait Ukraine into escalating aggression in order to justify an invasion into south-east Ukraine .
 The “Novorossiya’s’ project was abandoned in 2015 after Russia realized that Ukraine had an army capable of resisting its hybrid war tactics . The ‘NovorOSSiya” project was completed in 2015 .
 In reality, the separatists would be not exist had Russia not supported them in shelling Ukraine’s positions on the border . Russia would not have supported the separatists in the Ilovaisk and Debaltseve battles .
 The bait theory proposes that the taproot of Russia’s aggression in Kerch was an attempt to create a casus belli for an invasion to create Novorossiya and a land-bridge to Crimea .
 Russia has been accumulating military hardware on the border with Ukraine, primarily tanks and aircraft . Second, Russia has accumulated military hardware in the region .
 This would suggest that it was not a local military issue handled by the military in the Crimea, but a part of the Kremlin’s strategy toward Ukraine . It would suggest the issue was not local military issues handled by military .
Russia controls how and when aggression can escalate in both theatres of conflict with Ukraine . Russia controls how, when and when it can escalate .
 Ukraine has no nuclear deterrent and a conventional army that could not resist a direct and open conflict with Russian forces if a full-scale invasion was to take place . It is well aware of the realities; Ukraine hasno nuclear deterrent .
 In the Donbas, there are separatists whom Russia only diplomatically supports . Russia only supports the separatists .
 If Russia were to successfully initiate a conflict under the guise of protecting itself and trigger conflict with Ukraine, it would undoubtedly win with enough diplomatic cover to parry western calls for restraint .
 The more realistic scenario would have been expecting Ukraine to escalate the situation by returning fire or increasing pressure in the Donbas .
 The result would see Ukraine being admonished by its western partners such as the EU and USA, and Russia driving a diplomatic wedge .
 Ukraine's military hardware on Ukraine's borders would make Ukrainian leaders sensitive to any new hostilities . The Kerch aggression most definitely was the most likely was the amassment .
 Ultimately the West will never respond to Russia in a symmetrical manner . Russia will not respond to the West in the same way .
 The West values the international rules-based order, but it is not willing to deploy any measures further than “deep concerns’s” and sanctions . The West has called for dialogue and sanctions.
 The Kerch incident saw a delayed response from the West after the incident . The incident saw the West's response to the incident delayed .
 Ukraine's leaders were most likely expecting a far louder and non-equivocal response to new Russian aggression . This could have been a trigger for the martial law in Ukraine, whose leaders were expected to be more aggressive .
 Russia hampers Russia from further exercising its military superiority in Ukraine . The lack of diplomatic cover to escalate aggression is the lack of a diplomatic cover .
 Ukraine itself has no means of resolving the conflict unless it regains control of the Donbas and Crimea, the latter of which is a non-negotiable to Putin’s regime .
 Overall, given the dynamics governing all three sides in the conflict, not much will change . Overall, the dynamics of the conflict will not change .
 Ukraine now will be even more sensitive to Russian aggression – real or perceived . However, Ukraine now is more sensitive than ever .
 Expect it to act more so on the way to upcoming elections in March 2019 . Expect the election to be held in March.
 From Russia, expect more challenges probing Ukraine’s levelheadedness and western support .