 Artemenko claimed to have evidence showing corruption by President Poroshenko that could help oust him . He said he had received encouragement for his plans from top aides to Putin .
 Felix Sater pleaded guilty to a role in a stock manipulation scheme decades ago that involved the Mafia . Michael Cohen is being investigated by the FBI for links with Russia .
 Most commentators agree that this ‘peace plan’ originated, not from Artemenko, but from the Kremlin, in tactics designed to test whether the U.S. and Ukrainian society might be ready for some kind of deal .
 Ex-President Yanukovych announced he would send letters to the US, French, German and Russian presidents . He asked them to act to stop the war in eastern Ukraine and to ask for an honest and open investigation into the murders of police and protesters in Kyiv in February 2014 .
 Yanukovych also repeated his claims that “unidentified snipers’ attacked both police and protesters on Maidan in 2014 . He said he had evidence which would help identify the real masterminds behind the killings .
 Yanukovych has made such claims, while at the same time refusing to provide evidence to investigators . This is not the first time that Yanukovych has claimed that he has made the claims .
 Ukraine was firmly on the agenda at the Munich Security Conference . It was the first meeting between President Poroshenko and United States Vice-President Mike Pence .
 Poroshenko said he received a “very strong message supporting Ukraine” in a meeting with Pence and recent talks with the U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson .
 Poroshenko dismissed that notion that U.S. President Donald Trump and members of his administration were sending mixed signals on Ukraine .
 Poroshenko spoke about the need to maintain sanctions against Russia . Nevertheless, Poroshenko said that Russia needs to remain in sanctions .
 To move in that direction would be naive, wrong and dangerous, he says . He says it's not only for Ukraine, but for Europe and for the world .
 He also warned against “any agreement behind our back’ with Russia on Ukraine . He also warns against ‘any agreementbehind our back with Russia’
 Mike Pence said the Trump administration would demand that Russia honours the 2015 Minsk agreement . The agreement was reached in 2012, but the agreement was not reached until 2014 .
 The United States will continue to hold Russia accountable, President Trump said . President Trump believes Russia can be found .
Sergiy Lavrov announced a fresh ceasefire brokered by Russian, Ukrainian, German and French negotiators . There was little confidence that this would be any more successful than previous ceasefire agreements .
 President Putin signed an executive order granting visa-free travel to anyone living in self-declared separatist territories in eastern Ukraine and recognising all documents issued by separatist militias .
 The statement said it related to ‘certain districts of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk’ It was not specifically referring to the self-proclaimed People's Republics . The statement was made in a statement released by the government .
 It gives birth, marriage and death certificates, identification, qualification, vehicle registration certificates . Pro-Russian separatist “authorities’ official recognition in Russia .
 Russian foreign minister claims 'Donbass residents' can enter Russia legally . Thousands are already fleeing over the border as asylum seekers .
 The timing was no coincidence, coming as it did on the heels of Mike Pence’s statement about United States support for Ukraine .
 Russia has repeatedly denied interference in eastern Ukraine . It is challenging the U.S. and the West to test their appetite for further action .
 An Austrian court approved the extradition of Ukrainian oligarch Dmytro Firtash to the United States this week . An earlier ruling had said the U.S. request was politically motivated .
 Austrian judge announced his extradition verdict to a packed courtroom . Firtash had been detained on a European arrest warrant based on a separate Spanish request .
 Austrian police took him into custody on an outstanding warrant from Spain . The warrant accuses him of money laundering and engaging in organized crime .
 Mr Firtash gained much of his wealth through arrangements with Russian energy giant Gazprom . He gained a fortune through arrangements.
 A key paid adviser in Yanukovych's campaign was Paulafort, who later became Mr Trump’s election campaign adviser .
Manafort and Firtash were linked in a real estate project to redevelop the Drake Hotel site in Manhattan .
 Yulia Tymoshenko argued this was a money-laundering project to siphon huge amounts of cash out of Ukraine .
 Firtash denies this, telling Bloomberg that although he was initially interested in the project, he changed his mind . He told Bloomberg that he was originally interested in it, but changed hismind .
 The Firtash story will be interesting to watch how it plays out, how it will affect the Trump administration .
 Whether this might work in the interests of the Ukrainian people is an open question . Whether any of this may work in this way is anopen question .