 The U.S. President Barack Obama is the president of the United States. Obama will be the first president to take the oath of office in Washington, D.C.
 The House 7 Intelligence Committee is being conducted by the 8 Oversight and Foreign Affairs Committees . It is being held by the House 7 intelligence committee .
 We expect the questions 11 to be professional, that you'll be treated civilly . We expect you to be treated as well as a professional .
 The time limit will be set by a 16-year-old colleague . Then we'll begin the questioning, and our colleague will set out the time limits .
 I'm the director of 14 investigations for the HPSCI majority staff, and I want to 15 thank you for coming in today . I'm also the head of the Hpsci majority staff. I'm a former member of the National Security Council .
 He's a senior counsel 17 for the majority staff, and he will be conducting the 18 majority of the questions today . He'll be conducting 18 majority questions today.
 The interview is 3 being conducted in the Intelligence Committee's secure 4 spaces and in the presence of staff who all have appropriate 5 security clearances .
We will reserve time at the end for a classified portion of the interview . Now, if any of our questions can only be answered with classified information, please inform us of that .
 The majority will be given 1 hour to ask questions, then the minority will ask questions . The minority will also be given one hour to answer questions .
 Thereafter, we will alternate back and forth between majority and minority in 45-minute rounds until the questioning is complete . The questioning will continue until the question is completed .
 We will take periodic breaks as needed, and if you need a break at any time, please let us know . We'll take periodic break as needed .
 Under committee rules you are allowed to have an attorney present during this interview . Under the committee rules, an attorney is allowed to be present during the interview .
 There is a stenographer to your left 2 taking down everything that I say and everything that you say 3 to make a written record of the interview . The stenographer takes down everything he says and everything you say.
 For the record to 4 be clear, please wait until each question is asked before you 5 answer, and we will wait until you finish your response 6 before asking you the next question . The record to four is clear .
 If a question is unclear or you 12 are uncertain in your response, please let us know . If you have a question that is unclear, please answer it .
 If 13 you do not know the answer to a question or can't remember, 14 simply say so .
 Mr Volker, with that, we turn it over to you for any opening statement that you would like to make . Now, Mr Volkers, with the opening statement, he turns it over for you to make.
 Members. I'm not going to prohibit Members, but we'd like to keep this professional at the staff level . We'd like it to be at the Staff level, says the author . We're going to keep it professional, he says .
 Mr Chairman, I've probably sat in on more transcribed interviews than maybe any other Member, at least on our side . I have never seen an effort to prohibit Members from asking the witness questions .
 Mr Jordan says he's not going to prohibit you, Mr Jordan, but we will expect you to treat the witness with respect .
 The HPSCI has conducted innumerable interviews in the last several years without any difficulty . I hope that the decorum that we expect here will be represented on both sides, he says .
 I have never seen a 8 time where agency counsel was not allowed to be present . I've never seen an 8 time when agency counsel wasn't allowed to present .
 10 Members not even participate in the interview, says 9-year-old . "I've certainly never seen an indication that you would prefer 10 Members," he says .
 We heard from our witness 13 today. But I at least wanted to 12 get that on the record before we heard from their witness 13 .
 Mr Volker, if you have an opening 17 statement, now is the time for you to deliver it . If you have a 17 statement to deliver, you will have to do it .
 "That is a testament to the strength of our people, 3 our institutions, and our country," says CNN's John Sutter .
 My efforts as U.S. Special Representative for 20 Ukraine negotiations were no different. My efforts were no Different .
 I would not have been true to myself, my duties, 25 or my commitment to the people of the U.S. or 14 . I would have beentrue to myself if I did not dive in and try to fix problems as best I could .
 There are five key points I would like to stress in this testimony, and I would want to submit a longer version and timeline of events for the record . There are four key points to stress, including the timeline and timeline .
Let me be clear that I wish to be complete and open in my testimony in order to help get the facts out and the record straight . Let me beclear that I want to be open in his testimony. I want the facts to be out and straight .
U.S. foreign policy goals with respect to Ukraine are focused on advancing U.S., Ukraine policy goals .
 U.S. policy toward Ukraine for the past 2 years has been strong, consistent, and has enjoyed support across the administration, bipartisan support in Congress .
 I sincerely hope that we are able to keep this policy strong going forward. While I will not be there to lead these efforts any longer, I sincerely hopes that we will continue this policy going forward . I will no longer lead the efforts to lead this efforts.
 I believed I could steer 18 U.S. policy in the right direction, he says . He says he could steer the U.N. policy into a right direction .
 I was 20 the administration's most outspoken figure highlighting 21 Russia's ongoing aggression against Ukraine and Russia's 22 responsibility to end the war . I was also 20-year-old president of the United States .
 Ukraine policy is perhaps the one area where the U.S. and its European allies are in lockstep . The United States and their European allies have been locked in a lockstep.
 The coordination helped to strengthen U.S. sanctions against Russia and to maintain EU sanctions as well . This coordination helped the United States strengthen its sanctions on Russia and the EU .
President Obama has urged other countries to follow the U.S. lead in Ukraine . He has advocated for lifting the ban on the sale of lethal defensive arms to Ukraine .
 I engaged with our allies, with Ukraine, and with Russia in negotiations to implement the Minsk agreements . I held a firm line on insisting on the withdrawal of Russian forces, dismantling of the so-called People's Republics .
 In order to shine a spotlight on Russian aggression and to highlight the humanitarian plight suffered by the people in the Donbas as a result.
 The U.S.-Ukraine bilateral relationship is helping shepherd a peaceful transition of power in Ukraine . The administration worked hard to strengthen the relationship under the new President and government .
 2 years ago most observers would have said that time is on Russia's side . In short, we've turned the tables, 18 1 and nowTime is on Ukraine's side. In short.
 President 16 Zelensky says Ukraine is worthy of U.S. support . Mayor 14 Giuliani believed such a negative narrative about 15 Ukraine had changed .
 Vice President Biden was never a 19 1 topic of discussion. As you will see from the extensive text messages I am 24 providing, which convey a sense of real-time dialogue with 25 different actors .
 This 24 included in-person meetings with senior U.S. officials at 25 State, Defense, and the NSC . The Senate will hold public testimony in the Senate on June 18th, 2 2019 .
 State Department correspondence 6 concerning meetings with Ukrainians, allies, and so forth . I have no doubt that there is a 5 substantial paper trail of State Department communications .
 congressional notifications about proceeding with 14 that required assistance on July 18th, 2019 . Congress has been notified of 13 a hold on congressional notifications . Congress is scheduled to hold a vote on the issue on July 19, 2019.
 The position was reversed and assistance allowed to continue within a few weeks after that . The position had been reversed.
 I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony, and I will answer your questions . I lookforward to answering questions .
HPSCI's senior counsel on HPSCI will be asking you most of the questions today . I'm a senior counsel. I'm going to be asking most of your questions .
Before I begin, I just want to remind you that you're under oath, and that it's very important, obviously, for you to tell the truth today. Before I start, I'm under oath and that you are under oath .
On September 27th, 2019, you resigned your position as the Special Envoy for Ukraine .
 I felt that I would no longer be effective as a special representative with this impeachment inquiry beginning and my name associated with that and all the media attention around that. A felt that he would not be effective in the impeachment inquiry starting . He said he felt that it was
I didn't think I would be able to go to Ukraine or meet with Russians and carry out those duties in that way anymore . I didn't believe I would have been able to carry out that duties in the Ukraine .
 I could see this coming, with as much candor and integrity as I possibly could. I also wanted to make sure that I would be able to provide testimony, because I would see this come, as much as I could . I could also see it coming, because
 I called him and told him that I was very sorry, I felt that I would not be able to be effective as a special representative going forward . I thought it was important that I be able. to provide testimony as I have just done. I told him I was
 The Ukraine mission has been held for more than two years . Ukraine's president was disappointed because he was focused on the mission with Ukraine . He was disappointed that he was disappointed .
 I don't recall discussing the whistleblower's complaint with him in that call . A I don's recall discussing that call with him. A I'm not sure what happened to him .
 Q Are you aware of any of the testimony that I just read? I did not discuss the contents of the evidence that Ijust read. Q Are You aware of anything?
 A It did not provide any instruction not to cooperate, and neither did I receive any separate instruction . A It didn't provide any instructions not to cooperate, nor did any separate instructions .
 Q. We'd ask that you provide a copy of that letter to the committee for the record . Q. Q.
 It is from Marik String, the acting legal adviser at the State Department . It is the acting Legal Adviser at the state Department .
 Q For the record, we're going to mark the letter that's dated October 2nd, 2019 as Exhibit 1 .
 The 7 administration was still deliberating internally what they 8 would say. And he 6 told me that he did not have any clear guidance - that he didn't know what they would say .
 The 23 transcript of the phone call came out on September 25th . I became aware of the 21 President being interested in investigations concerning Vice 22 President Biden and his son .
 We're going to go through some of your text messages that you turned over . We'll ask you more questions about that .
 Q Now, I believe in your opening statement you said that President Trump -you were not aware of President Trump exerting pressure on Ukraine to open investigations. Q Now. I believe that in his opening statement, President Trump said that he was not aware that President Donald Trump was exerting
 A that's correct, to open investigations into Vice President Biden or his son. A That's correct. A. That's right, to start investigations into vice president's son .
 A man was concerned about the possibility of there having been election interference . He was concerned that there had been elections interference, he said .
 A meeting with the President in May following his participation in a Presidential delegation for the inauguration of the new Ukrainian President .
 Rick Perry was Ambassador to the European Union 11 Gordon Sondland, it was Senator Ron Johnson, and it was 12 myself . That was Rick Perry's Secretary of 10 Energy Rick Perry .
 I believe the deputy 15 national security adviser, Mr Kupperman, was one person 16 who was there. I believe he was there .
 The four of us had been part of the 22 Presidential delegation . They had requested the meeting in order 23 to brief the President after their participation at the inauguration of the new Ukrainian President .
 We believed he was sincerely committed to 3 reform in Ukraine, to fighting corruption . We believed that he was sincere to 3 reforms in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has had 5 20-some years to break the grip of corruption that has 6 set the country back for so long . And we believed 4 that this was the best opportunity that Ukraine had for 5 20 years to really break the Grip of corruption .
 Most 19 people who would know anything about Ukraine would think 20 that would be 20 . Most people who know anything would think that 20 would think about Ukraine .
 It was important that we wanted to brief 21 him, because we were saying, it's different, this guy is 22 different. That’s why it's important that it was important to brief him, he says. That's why it was crucial that it
 President Zelensky invited to meet 25 with him at the White House . We urged that he invite him to meet with him .
 We are 31 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 25 25 persisted . We are 30 years old, we are 31 years old.
During the course of this conversation he did reference Mayor Giuliani, because he said that what we were saying as a positive narrative about Ukraine is not what he hears .
 Rudy Giuliani gave the example of hearing from Rudy Giuliani that they're all corrupt, he said . He said they tried to take me down -meaning the President in the 2016 election .
 He was clearly demonstrating that he had a negative view of and that information that he was getting from other sources was reinforcing that negative view . He said he had been getting information from others that was reinforcing his negative view.
There were accusations that had been made by the prosecutor general of Ukraine . There were accusations made by Ukraine's prosecutor general .
 Court reporter would be able to spell some of the Ukrainian names . I think that would be helpful for the court reporter to spell the names .
 A No, ""he"" being the prosecutor general of Ukraine, made a couple of accusations or allegations in early 2019 .
 A journalist's writing was then interviewed on television, so it was major news . And they made their way into U.S. media .
 Ukrainians sought to influence the 2016 election by providing derogatory information about President Trump and about Mrafort to the Hillary Clinton campaign . Ukraine ambassador Masha Yovanovitch says this was done by passing that information to our ambassador at the time .
 Marie L Yovanovitch, Y-o-v-a -1 second -Y-O-V-i-t-c-h, and she goes by Masha . She's known her for 30 years -is that correct? -'88 to now,
 The accusation was that derogatory material to influence the election was given to her and to Ukrainian ambassador in Washington .
 This information was intended to reach the Hillary campaign to influence the election . And this information was therefore intended to help Hillary campaign .
 This was before Zelensky was elected, 17, but you could see the wave of popularity . This was the time he was elected .
 He would stay in office 21 probably to prevent investigations into himself for things 22 that he may have done as prosecutor general . I think there were a couple motivations to this, 20 but I think most important was that he would stay.
 Rudy Giuliani was a target of how to get information into the United States system . Giuliani met with Rudy Giuliani, he obviously met with him, he said .
I know that Giuliani did, and I know that Mr Giuliani reported to President Trump, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he knows that Giuliani told President Trump .
 President Zelensky and President Trump had a difficult time scheduling a bilateral meeting between them .
 The answer is no, we did 8 have difficulty scheduling a meeting, but there was no 9 linkage like that . The reason is no is the reason the answer is that we did not schedule a meeting .
 The President's interest in that 12 investigation will be investigated later on . The investigation will focus on the President's interests in a 12-month investigation .
 The second allegation is the one about 15 Burisma and Hunter Biden and Vice President Biden . The third allegation is that 15 of the 15 are Burisma.
 Hunter Biden was put on the board of 17 a corrupt company that a prior prosecutor general, Shokin -18, was seeking to investigate that 19 company . Vice President Biden weighed in with the 20 President of Ukraine to have Shokin, 21 fired .
 Vice President Biden made representations to President Poroshenko he was representing U.S. policy at the time .
 Shokin was not doing his job as a prosecutor general. It was a general assumption among European Union, France, Germany, American diplomats, U.K. U.S.
President Zelensky said during his Oval Office meeting with the President, he urged the President to have a meeting with President Zelenky .
 He was taking on an effort to reform 8 Ukraine, fight corruption, and fight corruption . The U.S. support for him would have been very important .
 The imagery of the 17 Ukrainian President, you know, at the White House, in the Rose Garden, may be, 19 that conveys a message of United States support .
 I have two more questions on the second 21 allegation, as you call it, and then I'm going to move on to 22 text messages . I have three more questions to answer . I've also asked you about your text messages, which you call the second allegation .
 I believed him to be a private citizen who is President Trump's personal attorney . I believed he was the president's personal lawyer .
 A September 2nd to 5th timeframe, somewhere in that range, I believe . A roughly September 2-5th timeframe is somewhere in the range .
Q Do you know whether he has opened an investigation or reopened an investigation into Burisma Holdings? I don't . Q Do You know if he has open an investigation? Q Do you knows whether he is open to an investigation.
Before we move to the text messages, I want to ask you a clarifying question .
Q. I do not know whether he advocated for any linkage between those things or not . If I can explain, I will be able to explain what he did .
 We ended up 18 talking about, well, then, make a statement about 19 investigating corruption . And we ended up talking about. And then, we made a statement on 19 investigating Corruption .
 The thought behind that was just trying to be convincing that they are serious and different from the Ukraine of the past. And the thought behind the thought was just to be convinced that they're serious andDifferent from the past .
 One of the text messages to Andrey Yermak is one of the texts he sent to him . Q Now, I recall that in that text, I might have you spell that for the record .
 Andrey is an assistant to the President of Ukraine, probably his closest adviser . Yermak is Y-e-r-m-a-k, and he is an Assistant to -or a - or a - - I don't know what the exact title is .
President Zelensky has sent a proposed statement to President Yermak . The text messages were sent by President Zelenski .
 President Zelensky was going to release a statement that he would release . Q -for the statement that President Zelenky was to release -A Yes .
 A To Giuliani: Information flow reaching the President would be more positive than it had been . A to Giuliani, and therefore that information flow reached the President.
Ukrainian company Burisma may have violated Ukrainian law, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Burisma's company may have tried to influence United States elections, he says .
 I advised him that making those specific references was not a good idea, that a generic statement about fighting corruption was not good idea . If anyone had tried 16 to interfere in United States domestic politics, it's unacceptable, we 17 have to make sure that never happens again, that's fine
 Prosecutor 24 General Lutsenko was at this time still in office . There is no -no evidence was brought forward to support .
 Lutsenko says he doesn't want to say there is any evidence that there is no evidence . He says he wants to destroy the evidence and then have it destroyed .
 The new prosecutor general is the new team that took office . We don't want to commit to anything that we might do as an investigation without having our own prosecutor general .
 I just think it's important that you avoid anything that would look like it would play into our domestic politics, and this could . This could. And in addition, I just thought it'simportant that you avoided anything that wouldn't look like this would play.
 Hunter Biden was a board member of Burisma, so it could be interpreted that way . It was known that he was a member of the Burisma board .
 A Well, we're talking about what we see today especially in light of the phone call on July 25th .
 At the time I was not aware of that phone - the contents of that call . The contents of the call were not known .
 Giuliani said he was cautioning Ukrainians not to get sucked in by Ukrainians .
 I believe that he was doing his own communication about what he believed and was interested in. I believe he was trying to make a statement about his beliefs . He was also interested in what he thought, I believe .
 Ukrainians asked to be connected to him in order to try to get across their message of being different from the past . The Ukrainians asked for a connection to him to try and get across the message that they were different .
 I do want to go through the text messages because I believe that they're a good anchor for some of the other topics that we've been discussing that I do wants to discuss . The text messages are good anchors for other topics, says the author .
 The witness produced KV1 through KV65. So for the record, I'm handing out the witness 5 what the witness produced yesterday .
 A Gordon is United States Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland . Bill Taylor is Ambassador Bill Taylor, who is the Charge d'affaires in Kyiv .
 If you jump down to -and I think it will be easiest to refer to the messages by the date and timestamps on the left-hand side .
 When a person sends a text message in WhatsApp and then they go in themselves and delete it, she says . "I did this, didn't -you know, I wanted to say something different"
 WhatsApp records show that there was a prior message that was deleted before the next message is there .
 Bill Taylor is the Charge d'affaires at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv . Taylor is a former ambassador to the United States .
 He was a career civil servant, and served as Ambassador to Ukraine, in the late 2000s . He also served as ambassador to Ukraine in the 1990s .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch was at the end of her tour when she left the embassy .
 The United States needs a more seasoned diplomat in place to be the U.S. Charge of the United States Charge . Secretary Pompeo recommended this to Pompeo, saying it was his judgment .
 Bill had been the vice president of USIP, and he took a leave of absence from that to take on the role of Charge .
 Gordon asks you to see if you can break through on two key issues . The Zelensky visit is a date from the 14 White House for the visit . The visit means 15 Zelenski .
Senior levels at the White House said 8 that the visit is not happening any time soon . George Kent on the high 7 side says that senior levels at White House say the visit will not happen soon . Gordon, you 6 might not have seen the message from George Kent .
 10 Ukrainians on Friday, as 11 staff is suggesting, makes sense . If not, 10, 10 would have a senior call with the Ukrainians, says David Cameron .
 Two of the 22 people mentioned in the messages are mentioned in these messages . I want to ask you about two of the people 22 who are mentioned .
 Alex Vindman is a National Security Council staffer who has worked on Ukraine . He has also worked on the Ukraine government .
 President Trump wrote a letter to President Zelensky, inviting him to meet with him at the White House .
 The Ukrainian government is trying to get a date to propose to the Ukrainians . But they were not getting anywhere .
 Alex Vindman was slow-rolling this invitation to President Zelensky . He believed that Alex VIndman wasSlow-rolling the invitation to Zelenski .
 White House visit to Ukraine will be first with Ukraine to build up to visit . We need to do more with Ukraine first, says David Cameron .
 We need a personal relationship between President Trump and President Zelensky, says President Trump .
 President Trump is a new President in Ukraine . He says he is committed to reform .
 I just wanted to get the two of them together as quickly as possible. So I just want to get them together. I want them to be together as fast as possible . I want to see the two together as soon as possible, he says .
 President Trump congratulates President Zelensky on his inauguration . President Trump sent a letter to President Zelenky congratulating him .
As of the time of these text messages in late June, no meeting had yet been scheduled . Q And yet, as of the date, no meetings had been scheduled.
 I think we just keep it among ourselves and try to build a working relationship and get the damn date for the meeting . I think it just keeps it among themselves and try and build a relationship and build it up .
I don't usually -and a smiley face because I don't normally use profanity. I'm not normally using profanity, but I'm usually smiling and smiling . I'm always smiling, I'm happy, I've never used profanity .
 The U.S. 16 Destroyer visited the Port of Odessa on February 28th . The Destroyer was the first to visit the port .
 I went there as the 17 senior representative, to be there for that visit . I went to the Destroyer as a senior representative .
 He had close ties with the political side of the 23 White House that I did not have . He had -he’s a political 22 appointee and had close relations with the White House . He was a political22 appointee .
I just know that he had a relationship with President Trump that I did not have. I just know he had an relationship with him that I didn't have, she says .
 A would say that he felt that he could call the President and that they could have conversations . The President said he felt he could talk to the President .
 It took me a while to reconstruct this in my own mind. So what I understand this to be is -it took me to reconstruct it in his own mind . I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this .
 Gordon and Bill had a phone call with President Zelensky, he says . I don't know what the purpose was, but they were trying to somehow steer President Zelenky on the where we are with the request for a meeting .
 The White House is a tremendous symbol of support to have their president visiting with our President in the White House . That's a tremendous sign of support.
 Ulrich Brechbuhl is the counselor of the State Department . A Ulrich is a former State Department counselor .
 A I believe they have a very close relationship and work well together . The pair have been together for over a year and are very close .
 The Secretary of State was a way of communicating so that information could get to the Secretary if he needed it to . He was the way of talking so that he could get the information to the secretary .
 I think Gordon and Bill did call him a few more times than I did. And one that I did not use very much, but I think he did not call him very much .
I'd have to think about calendar and where I might have been or what I was doing, but I'm not sure . I'd have had to look at - I'd be in trouble if I'd been doing anything .
 He was at that time the chair of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine . He was appointed by President Zelensky .
 John Bolton was seeking a meeting with John Bolton as a first meeting with his counterpart . Bolton is the National Security Advisor.
 The meeting that later took place on July 10th -A That is correct. A And I believe the meeting in question with Bolton -waiting for the Bolton meeting I understand to be 62 . Q Is that the meeting that -I apologize for interrupting, but is that is that
 Bill Taylor said at 7.56m. "I'll just have you read those, starting with what Bill Taylor says."
 He is now the Foreign Minister of Ukraine . He was a diplomatic adviser to President Zelensky . He is a former diplomatic adviser.
 It could be Andriy Bohdan, A-n-d-r-i-y, Bohdan but spelled in the Ukrainian way, B-o-h-D-a-n . It could have been Andrii Bohdan.
 Lutsenko has his own self-interest here. Good grief, please tell 19 Vadym .
 President Trump and President Zelensky had a phone call on a call . Danylyuk and Bolton had a meeting with Trump .
 -Q Let's finish the text, then we'll go back and have you explain some things . If I can explain that, then I'll have to explain some of the things I've done .
 The Zelensky-POTUS meeting will not happen, according to Giuliani .
 It's possible that they had further communications, but I don't know. So it's possible they had more communications, says CNN correspondent .
 Rudy Giuliani wanted to make sure that Secretary Ulrich would get to the Secretary that this is what was said . Lutsenko said that according to Giuliani this meeting will not happen .
 Andriy and Vadym told them about what Lutsenko told them. A Well, when he says ""briefed Ulrich this afternoon on this," I assume what it is, is that message from Andriiy andVadym .
 Rudy Giuliani told Lutsenko that the meeting with the President of the United States was not happening . Bill Taylor learns from Andriy and Vadym that Giuliani said the meeting was not going to happen .
 Bill Taylor briefs that to 66 1 Counselor Ulrich so that Ulrich can inform Secretary Pompeo . And then Taylor briefs the Secretary of Pompeo.
 National Security Advisor of the 18 United States. He was getting into 12 the weeds about restructuring the intelligence services, the 13 security services in Ukraine, and the Defense Ministry .
 We want to work 22 with -that's what the message should have been, and he just 23 di dn 1 1 do i 24 Q Okay. We want a message that's what's what we want to do .
We kind of tried to 4 shepherd this relationship together as best we could . We kind of try and try and get a good relationship together .
 I don't remember who it was now, whether it was Alex or -Vindman or 8 . It's unclear if it was senior director at the time . I'm not sure if it's Alex or Vindman.
 When she left, Tim Morrison was replaced by Tim Morrison, 18 . I don't remember when that transition took place . She was 18 when she left .
 Eager 24 to hear if your meeting with Danylyuk and Bolton resulted in 25 a decision on a call .
 The President of Ukraine has been invited to the White House without scheduling the visit . We thought it would be a good idea for President Trump to call him again .
 The Parliamentary election was going to be concluded on July 21st . And, in addition, we were looking forward to the Parliamentary election .
 Let's see if we can get agreement that we'll do a phone call either just before or just after that Parliamentary election . Let't see if you can get a call either before or after that election .
My time is up, so I'm going to turn it over to my colleagues on the minority side . My time isup, and I'll turn it to my colleague on the minorities side . I'm not going to give it to them, but I'm turning it over
 We were just amazed by your deep knowledge of the region, your ability to recall specific names, pronounce them .
 During the break, all of the staff at large talked about it, just an incredible 69 1 appreciation for your knowledge of the region .
 The career 5 Foreign Service officers. We appreciate that that is just an unfortunate circumstance . We have great respect for the career 5 foreign Service officers .
 If I mispronounce it, if I get any of the names, please 13 forgive me . If I'm not as savvy as you, please13 forgive me.
 It in no way is a lack of respect for the job 14 that you and your colleagues do. It's not the same thing that you do, it's the same way you do .
 At all 16 times, you conducted yourself with the highest level of 17 personal and professional integrity . I 15 mean, I mean, you mentioned in your opening statement .
 In 6 the U.S. interest for the information that was reaching the 7 President to be accurate and fresh and coming from the right 8 people. It was in 6 the United States interest for that information to be correct and fresh .
 Giuliani had a draft statement with Mr Yermak in Madrid on August 2nd . I believe it must have come up in the conversation that Mr Giuliani had with him in Madrid . The conversation must have been made up by Mr Giuliani.
 The Ukrainian Government is on the record about their commitment to reform and change and fighting corruption . The President has been skeptical about Ukraine's corruption.
 I wouldn't say I 18 thought it was necessary to have it in there because I 19 thought the target here is not the specific investigations . I would not say I18 thought it would be necessary to be in there .
 There's a lot of conversation that never comes up in the pages and pages 2 of the book . There's more to talk about than you know .
 Don't do anything to interfere, that would be seen as interfering in U.S. 16 elections . Don't interfere, don't try to interfere with 16 elections, says Obama .
 Q It's my understanding he's a former Interior Minister and that he has great control over energy companies in the energy sector . Q it's his understanding that he's an ex-Interior Minister .
 Ukraine 14 has a long history of pervasive corruption throughout the 15 economy throughout the country . It has been incredibly 16 difficult for Ukraine as a country to deal with this, to 17 investigate it, to prosecute it .
 A slogan that I 19 have used a lot or in explaining this to people is that in a 20 situation where everybody is guilty of something, the choice 21 of whom to prosecute is a political decision .
 Lutsenko may not have been a reliable, other than you had said earlier that he may not be a reliable . He was accused of protecting President Poroshenko in this case .
 He was a politician himself who became the prosecutor general . He was not a judge or lawyer who got into that position directly, and played a very political role .
 President Poroshenko was concerned about possible investigations into himself once he was out of office . He saw the writing on the wall when Zelensky's popularity was rising and he was likely to lose the election .
 It struck me as normal at the 15 beginning, and then the longer it went on, it became clear 16 there's an issue here . It struck him asnormal at the beginning, but then it was clear there was an issue there .
 I was at the 20 National Security Council staff, trying to get meetings with 21 President Bush for various leaders there . I was banging your head 22 against the wall trying to getting it scheduled .
 In your experience, foreign assistance sometimes gets locked up . You know, in your experience. You know that in your experiences, foreign aid sometimes gets lock up .
 I agree with you in saying that assistance gets held up for a variety of reasons at various times . I agree. I agree, says that assistance is held up.
 Pentagon, military, civilian, State Department, National Security Council all thought this is really important to provide this assistance . In this case, here you had a instance where everyone that I spoke with in the policy side of the administration spoke with .
 A hold placed placed by a man in his home is unusual, says the author . He says it was "unusual" for him to be held .
 It came from 0MB, so I immediately thought about budgetary issues . For whatever reason, there's a hold placed .
 There was one report about a hold placed on all assistance because of a concern about end-of-year spending not being done efficiently .
 The policy community in the administration was determined to see it go forward, he says . "I just didn't believe that this hold would ever be sustained"
 U.S. Secretary Pompeo never communicated to Ukrainians 10 that it is being held for a reason . I don't believe 8 of the 9 representatives never communicated that it was being held .
 By the time it hit Politico publicly, I 19 believe it was the end of August . I 19 believes it was August .
 The future Foreign Minister was either the Foreign Minister or -I think it was 21 . And I got a text message 20 from.
 It looks like 8 people have been singled out and penalized for some 9 reasons . They expressed concern that since this has now come out publicly in this Politico article, it looks like that 8 are being singled out .
 I was working and still am as the executive 23 director of the McCain Institute . I was also working as a senior executive director at the institute .
 2 means that we've been successfully building this institute . Some of you may have heard of it by now, which means that it's been successfully built .
Secretary of State Tillerson asked if he would be okay if he did this on a part-time, voluntary, unpaid basis rather than 11 as a full-time employee . I didn't feel I could give up the responsibilities I had taken on in 13 developing the McCain Institute .
 Ukraine had developed a very 2 strong Ukraine policy. There was a very strong policy in Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government .
 The Ukrainians are 7 being very smart about the negotiations right now, and it's 8 developing some new pressure on Russia . The Ukrainians, 7, are 7.
 10 unfortunate things to be unable to be in a position to keep pressing that I think is very unfortunate .
 We 4 want to be able to have candid conversations with them, and 5 we don't want to feel that they will not have that degree of 6 openness in speaking with us . If they believe what they tell 7 us is going to be released publicly, they will be released .
 U.S. assistance provided to 24 Ukraine for some time, under Bush administration, under Obama administration . Now under Trump administration, assistance has been provided for 24 Ukraine .
 I 85 1 was particularly interested in the security assistance and 2 lethal defensive weapons . I was also interested in security assistance. I 851 was particularly keen on security assistance .
 The reason for this is this was 3 something that the Obama administration did not approve. The Obama administration didn't approve .
 It is not 6 my -you know, I was just a private citizen, but that's my 7 opinion . It's not 6 - you know, you know. It's 6-year-old, but it's 7.
 Russia is defending 8 countries against Russian aggression, says CNN's John Sutter . "I thought that this is a country that is defending itself against Russia," he says .
 Russia had their military 9 largely destroyed by Russia in 2014 and '15 and needed the 10 help . They needed the help of 10 other countries in the world's most recent years .
 If you're being attacked with mortars and artilleries and 13 tanks, you need to fight back . Humanitarian assistance is great, and nonlethal 11 assistance, you know .
 Russia is trying to go further 20 into Ukraine, and there's no deterrence of Russia from going further . I had a 17 fundamentally different view that if we did not provide it, 18 it's an inducement to Russia to keep up the aggression .
 Russia's 21th birthday will be held in Moscow, Russia's capital city, on Sunday . It will be the first time Russia has been given a chance to rebuild their defensive capabilities . Russia's defence has been improved in recent years .
 Secretary Tillerson wanted to think 5 it through, see how that would play out . It took a 4 while, but Secretary Tillerson, you know, he wanted to see how it would play. It took 4 while.
 The President and the President met 10 with the President and approved it . And they met -I 9 did not meet with President about this - but they met 10 .
 I mean, I'm 24 sure there were other things, like night vision goggles, 25 scopes for rifles, counter-battery radars . I mean. I'm24 sure there are other things like nightvision goggles, like 24 scopes.
 If you're being fired on with mortar or artillery, you can calibrate where that's coming from better with a counter-battery radar . That enables you to then fire back more accurately. So, if you're fired on, it can be easier to calibrate.
 We weren't giving them the weapon to fire back, but we were giving them a radar . We were giving the radar. So we didn't give them a weapon to fight back, we weren't .
 The Pentagon was finessed by the Pentagon before we changed the policy. So these are the sorts of things that were being finessed.
 The U.S. will provide lethal defensive arms, anti-tank missiles, and anti-sniper systems . And then said, no, we're going to provide genuine lethal weapons, and so forth .
 We have not done as much in the naval and coastal defense area as we have on ground as we've on ground. We have been on the ground for more than two years .
 I felt that this is what we needed all along. And I could see the body language and the chemistry between them was positive, and I felt this was what we need .
 The Foreign Service transfer season is expected to start in January . It was about 3 weeks prior to what the normal transfer season would be .
 A Well, without commenting on the merits of it, it is 89 1 absolutely the right of the President to determine who his 2 Ambassadors are in the world .
 The President has the right to recall anyone at any time that he wants . That is a Presidential 3 nomination, a Senate confirmation, and the President can also recall anyone he wants.
 I think that's unfortunate for her because she is a 20-year-old professional . And I think she's unfortunate because she's a 20 professional .
 It is unfair to her to have that 22 reputational damage or that image created as a result, she says . She says it is unfair. And she says it's unfair to have her image damaged by that image .
 I have always known her to be upstanding, high integrity, and capable, honest, 13 and professional . She is known for being upstanding and high integrity. She is also known to be capable and honest .
 Some Republican colleagues are having with the emotion connected to her recall, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 President's prerogatives as President are unquestionable, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think you can look at it as a matter of the President's Prerogatives"
 A capable career diplomat who then suffers some damage to her reputation or career or perceptions about her is unfortunate .
 There have been allegations that officials from the Embassy in Ukraine communicated to prosecutors general in Ukraine . There were certain entities or individuals that should not be prosecuted .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch gave a list of the most important things he has ever been given . There's a question of whether or not a list was given by Ambassador.
 State Department put out a statement addressing the allegation . "A I've seen that allegation as well, and I believe the State Department puts out that statement," he says .
Q: "There certainly are facts on both sides, and there are -like I said, this is one of those allegations that provokes great emotion. I don't recall exactly how it was addressed, but -Q -Q: There certainly are Facts on both side.
 Lutsenko has said that there was a list of entities not to prosecute . But he has said there was no list of people not to be prosecuted .
 The prosecutor general said things that he believed were intended to be self-serving, he says . This is the same prosecutor general who described earlier as saying things that I believed were meant to beself-serving .
 Q And Shokin has alleged that he was encouraged not to investigate Burisma . Q and Shokin is known to have been involved in a number of incidents .
 U.S. policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine was a push to remove him for those reasons . It was a matter of United States policy to investigation corruption in the Ukraine .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko brought Prosecutor General to the meeting so he could meet with him . On one occasion when he met with him, 23 he brought prosecutor General Lutenko to a meeting so she could meet him .
 I was -that was just me with President 95 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 Poroshenko .
I don't remember how many meetings I had with him, but possibly, you know, 10, 12, something like that . I don't know how many times I had to meet him, he says . He says he doesn't remember any meetings with him .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch has been with Bill Taylor for more than a decade . Taylor is a former ambassador to Russia .
When I visited Ukraine, for the most part, we were in all our meetings together . And when I visited the country, I was in all my meetings together.
 The State Department put out a statement saying it was "researched and put together" I think that was actually put together, I think . I'd have to refer back to the State Department's statement .
 Lutsenko's visa was denied, he wanted to come to the U.S. and he had his visa denied . Q There's another allegation that Lutsko's visa is denied .
 If a name is flagged for any reason, then it triggers a review by people . Then they make a decision as to whether to approve a visa or not .
 If someone applies for a visa and the visa is denied, then you can apply for a waiver of the denial . Depending on what the denial is, the waiver can be granted .
 I was -I was the -I don't know what you would call it -the waiver officer . I was the –I was -The -I wasn't the -The waiver officer. I was. The -I didn't know how to call it the -
 A petition to have a waiver of the denial is needed to have the denial waiver .
 In advance of your coming in for the interview, nobody at the State Department told you, you couldn't come, he says . You mentioned this morning that in advance of the interview no one at the state department told you.
 Pompeo and -the State Department have concerns about their diplomatic relations. Q And while there was a letter from Pompeo, the State Department has concerns about its diplomatic relations .
 One of them is the importance of protecting members of our Foreign Service . The Foreign Service is a key part of the U.S.
 It is difficult to put together information of the right quality for a committee like this in such a short period of time. Another is that it is hard to put on the right information for a Committee like this .
 I already noticed this morning I got three dates wrong. And I noticed even in the long form written testimony that I prepared for you, I also noticed that I was wrong .
 Marik String had a conversation with the acting 18 legal adviser on Tuesday . He had to have been the 1st of October, 19 which had been the first day of October .
 I saw -I had 20 prior conversations with him, but those prior conversations 21 were not at a point where it would be . I had resigned and 22 was -clearly was going to testify .
 In none of these conversations did he say he was instructed not to testify, he said . In none, he told me to not testify .
 The letter does not say, don't do it, and there was no formal instruction . The letter doesn't say, but there was not a formal instruction to do it .
 There was a concern expressed in this letter that was sent to my attorney last night about protection of classified material . The letter was sent by his attorney about protecting classified material.
 All of the information that is contained in these things that I'm discussing is unclassified, he says . As was asked earlier, he believes all of the info is un classified .
 I was communicating on unclassified devices, I was doing it with people. There's no intelligence, there's no deep national security information. I was talking with people, there was no deep security information, I said .
There are a couple of conversations I would categorize as sensitive, but I would not characterize any of those as classified . There are a few conversations, but he would not categorize them as sensitive .
 Marik String sent a letter to Marik. The letter was written by Marik's son, who is married to a former member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 The request for transcribed testimony came in, and I had a conversation with White House Counsel lawyers soon after .
 The State Department acting legal adviser did call my attorney yesterday. As a matter of completeness, he called his attorney .
 The name of your name has been revealed to us . We could just get you to talk about your reaction to your name .
 He got some facts wrong, but I thought that trying to do damage limitation was wrong . I wouldn't have used the word "damage limitation," but I kind of get what he's talking about .
 There's not a negative narrative about Ukraine that's reaching the President from other means, that we get one story straight. This is what I am referring to when I say make sure that there's a -there's not an negative narrative that's reached the President .
 The Ukrainians "navigate," was the word that he used, ""requests," he said from the President, if I'm not mistaken . And then secondly, helping the Ukrainians ""navigate" was the words he used .
 I -the whistleblower report says that I was dispatched to Ukraine after the President's phone call to meet with President Zelensky to talk about it . I - the whistleblower report said that I had been dispatched to the country after the call .
 I was planning a visit to Ukraine to fall after the 21st of July, which is when the parliamentary election was .
 I did not want to show up in Ukraine during an election campaign, because all they do is ask you, do you like this candidate, does you like that candidate, did you talk to these - so I just avoid going during election seasons. I did NOT want to
 I wanted to go after that, and I wanted particularly to go to the conflict zone, which I tried to do every year, as a way of highlighting that Russia is still here killing people. So I wanted especially to go into that area, and wanted to do that
 The trip is scheduled to be around the 25th, 26th of July .
 The proposed phone call, congratulatory phone call from President Trump to President Zelensky, was then starting to be scheduled .
 It turns out that it took place on the 25th of July, which was the day I was in Kyiv already having meetings . It was the same day that I was having meetings.
 The next day is when my meeting with President Zelensky was scheduled, and then after that meeting, we went out to eastern Ukraine to the conflict zone . The next week, the next day, we were in eastern Ukraine.
 President Zelensky reiterates that he is committed to fighting corruption and reform in the Ukraine . President Trump reiterates an invitation for President Zelenky to visit him at the White House .
 The 5-man team will try to stop in the middle of a sentence at the end of an hour . They don't want to abuse the process, so they don't like to be strict .
In Ukraine, Ukraine is a country that has a history of violence and violence . The country is known for its violent violence, but the violence has been blamed for some of the violence .
 I was vaguely aware, meaning I had heard in 15 early 2019 that he was on the board of Burisma . He had been on Burisma's board for 15 years .
 I didn't 16 know much more about the company or the details than that -17 other than that . The company had a bad reputation, which is probably 18 why they wanted him on the board .
 Burisma was looking to spruce up its image by having prominent-named people on its board . Burisma had a bad reputation as a company for corruption and money laundering .
 In the interests of time, I'll stop there before opening up a new line of questions . In the interest of time. I will stop there.
 The President and President Zelensky have been discussing the events, in many respects, as if the call between the President and the President never happened .
 I realize you weren't on the call, but we now know what was said on that call . I think we need to evaluate what you witnessed in the context of a call that we now knows the details of that call.
There's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped the prosecution . The other thing, there's a a lot to talk about, says Biden . "A lot of people want to find out about that," he says .
 Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution, so if you can look into it, you can see it .
 President Zelensky wants to look into allegations concerning Joe Biden and his son . The President's request is that he look into the allegations .
Vice President Biden would have had a conversation with Shokin, he says . "It's specifically about stopping this prosecution," he adds .
 There's a lot of talk about Biden's son - and then it says - that Biden stopped the prosecution .
Joe Biden's son is the second son of Joe Biden, the son of Vice President Joe Biden . Joe Biden is the third son of the vice president, according to reports .
 This isn't some generic interest in energy companies or one particular company . This is not a generic interest. This is a different type of interest in the energy industry .
 The President's interest as expressed here is in Joe Biden and his son, Joe Biden . President Joe Biden's interest is in his son and son .
 Andriy Yermak knows that the President of the United States wants Joe Biden and his son investigated . The President thus far has not been willing to commit to a date for a meeting with Biden .
 Rudy Giuliani goes to Madrid to meet with Andriy Yermak . Rudy Giuliani meets with Yermack for the first time .
 I then discussed that with Mr Yermak after that conversation, and he did not want to include Burisma and 2016, and I agreed with him . I then talked with him. He then discussed the possibility of Burisma being named in 2016 .
 Ukraine's leadership in Ukraine is any different than the past, he says . "It doesn't convey a sense this Ukraine, this leader, this leadership," he adds .
 Giuliani was saying: Without a mention of Burisma, this statement won't be credible . It won’t help get the meeting. So now you do know that and now you can put in context.
 Ukrainian Government is serious about finding out what happened in the past, cleaning it up . He said that it needs to mention Burisma and 2016, and if it doesn't do that, it's not credible in terms of being a convincing statement .
 He was interested in Burisma because he thought it reflected ill on the Bidens and would be helpful to his client . He was also interested in the Burisma.
 I don't know if he was representing the President or whether he was doing his own things to try to be helpful to the President . I don’t know whether he’s representing the president .
 Rudy Giuliani was a direct channel to the President, according to the Ukrainian President . He was the agent of the President.
 Giuliani would be someone who would be talking to the President anyway, so it would flow information that way . I would not say that they thought of him as an agent.
 I'm not so sure about that, because I don't know whether -I was not part of the discussion that they had in Madrid . I'm also not sure about whether - I was part of a discussion that was in Madrid. I was not a part of that
 I don't know whether Mr Giuliani represented himself as speaking for the President . I'm not sure whether he represented himself.
 Ukrainians viewed him as someone who communicated with the President . They wanted to tell their story to him, he says .
 Burisma says Burisma needs to mention Burisma and 2016 . He's saying that the statement, in order to be credible, needs to be cited .
 It's less clearly linked to that that would break free the scheduling of a meeting . It's not clear that that's the case .
 I don't think Mr Giuliani ever -ever -ever suggested that he's in a position to do that . I'm not sure he's ever suggested that. I'm sure he would do that, but he's not.
 There's no indication from the call record of any interest by the President in Burisma, but there is an interest in the Bidens .
 Rudy Giuliani sees these as synonymous, says Congressman .
 Burisma has been asked to investigate Burisma . Burisma is the name of the Burisma. Burisma was founded in the 1960s .
 Is it reasonable for Ukrainians to say that they would do that or not, or not? Is itreasonable for the Ukrainians to do that? Or not, it's not .
 Rudy Giuliani said Burisma should mention Burisma and 2016, and I agreed with that, and said I don't think you should do it .
 The prosecutor general in place at the time was not, quote, unquote, their prosecutor general . It was the carryover from the previous government, Lutsenko .
 They didn't trust him and they didn't want to put anything out suggesting investigations that would either get him engaged or try to obstruct or thwart somehow . They wanted to know if he would then try to block or thwart some investigations .
 The U.S. Soccer Federation has been in charge of 11 domestic politics for 11 years . It is the first time the country has been involved in American politics in the past 11 years. The country has not been seen as a factor or a football in American domestic politics .
 The CHAIRman says we're 1 toying around the 20 edges of the world's top 20 .
23 investigating a Democratic candidate for President, which 24 would mean only peril for Ukraine .
CNN's John Sutter says he didn't know the context at the time of the incident . Sutter: "They didn't express that to me, and of course, I didn't understand that"
 Vadym Prystaiko, the diplomatic adviser to President Zelensky, texted me a copy of a Politico article about the hold on assistance . The first conversation was when the diplomat texted him a copy.
 This was not on his radar until that time when he saw the article . So I had had many conversations with him in the months prior to that, and this did not come up from him to me .
 President's request of a foreign power that is dependent on the United States for military support is going to carry enormous weight with that foreign leader, ambassador says .
 We're getting now into, you know, a 12 conflation of these things that I didn't think were actually 13 there . We're now into a 12-conflation of things that we didn't know about .
 You weren't knowledgeable about the 15 request at all at the time, but you are now . You are now.
 Congressman: "It's a pretty straightforward question. So, again, I don't believe"
 The timeline doesn't -as I understand it, 8 and 8 - will have been impartial, 9 because I was not privy to a lot of information . The 10 timeline about talking with Andriy Yermak about whether there would be a statement or not to convey their commitment
 By the time 18 that we had that, we had dropped the idea of even looking at 19 a statement . And by the time we had the idea, we'd had that .
 Ambassador, you're making this much more complicated than it has to be, says Ambassador . Ambassador.
Hundreds of millions in military support is being withheld from Ukraine . The suspension may have occurred earlier, but the request is made to investigate .
 Congressman: "If we assume it's August 29th, they had just had a visit from the National Security Advisor, John Bolton"
 He was recommending and working on scheduling the visit of President Zelensky to Washington .
 Ukrainians felt like things are going the right direction, and they had not done anything on an investigation, he says . "Things were ramping up in terms of their engagement with the administration"
 Ukraine's aid to the U.S. has been suspended for unknown reasons . Ambassador: "I find it remarkable as a career diplomat that you have difficulty acknowledging that"
 There's no chance, given the broad support for this in Washington, this will not go through, says Congressman .
 The Ukrainians were communicating to the Ukrainians, we will get this taken care of. So I and others were communicating, we'll get this take care of them, I said .
 President's trip to Warsaw as part of that World War II commemoration . The President's visit was part of the President's tour of Warsaw .
 The nightmare is they give the interview and don't get the security assistance . The nightmares are they don't have the security help they need .
 Zelensky is talking about his commitment to fighting corruption and mentioning Burisma and the 2016 election interference . A statement or interview by Zelenski is still the idea of a statement. A I believe this is still an idea of an interview by him .
 He just said he had just had a conversation with Ambassador Sondland . Q So this is -and he just said it was a conversation .
I don't have any clear 10 indicator here, but it would be normal for me to talk to him . I don't know if he would be able to talk with him, but he's not a clear indicator .
 16 members of the Senate to 0MB pushing to get that lifted, and 17 were confident that it would . We had a letter from several members of Senate to0MB .
 It's important that we have competent professional 22 people staying on the job here. It's crucial that they stay on the jobs, says the company .
 Russia will see that and that will benefit Russia, he says . "They come out and they make a statement like this," he says of Russia .
 Bill Taylor was threatening that he would resign. Q And, again, he was threatening to resign .
 A Well, he was saying if that nightmare scenario plays out, that he would quit . A Well was saying that if that happened, he'd quit .
 The message to the Ukrainians -parenthesis -(and Russians), we send with the decision on security assistance is key . The message will be sent by the Ukrainians .
 Ukrainians send message to Ukrainians with decision on security assistance is key . The message to the Ukrainians we send with the decision is key.
 With the hold, we have already shaken their faith in us, says the author . "With the hold," he says, "We have already shook their faith"
 I said we are where we are, and believe we have identified the best pathway forward . I said, "I said we were where we were, and believes we have identify the best path forward"
I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign. As I said on the phone, I think it is crazy to withholding security assistance.
 President Zelensky is trying to evaluate whether Ukraine is truly going to adopt transparency and reforms that he promised during his campaign . The President is also trying to assess whether Ukraine will adopt the reforms he promised .
 If you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or S -meaning Secretary Pompeo - a call to discuss them directly .
 I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign. I'm not sure why this is happening, but I'm sure it's a good thing to do so .
 A I could only interpret this as meaning President Trump's political campaign and that he thought it would be crazy to withhold security assistance to help with that . A could onlyinterpret this as mean President Trump is running a political campaign .
 Lisa Kenna is the executive secretary of the State Department and S refers to Secretary Pompeo . S. refers to Pompeo as Pompeo.
 His message was just broader in general about fighting corruption in Ukraine . He said he wanted to focus on Ukraine's corruption problem .
 President Trump and President Zelensky had a July 25th call between Trump and Zelenski . Q I'd like to go back to some more questions about the call .
President Zelensky's assistant set up a meeting between Rudy Giuliani and Andriy Yermak . Before that call, is it true?
 Rudy Giuliani had been in touch with Prosecutor General Lutsenko, says CNN's John Sutter . Giuliani's text message shows he was in contact with the Prosecutor General, he says .
 I believe he was getting bad information, and I believe that his negative messaging about Ukraine would be reinforcing the President's already negative position about Ukraine . The President's negative messaging would reinforce his already negative stance about Ukraine.
 President Zelensky met with Mayor Giuliani in Toronto on July 3rd . Giuliani said he didn't discuss his meeting with Lutsenko then .
 President Zelensky says Ukraine is still corrupt, there's still terrible people around you . But he says he has a problem with the message of being clean, reform is not getting .
 Andriy Bohdan had been a lawyer for a very famous oligarch in Ukraine . Bohdan was the chief of presidential administration at the time .
 Mr Giuliani seemed to be furthering with the President, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he discussed this negative narrative about Ukraine .
 It was impeding our ability to build the relationship 9 the way we should be doing, in my -as I understood it. It was, in his 8 view, it was impeded our ability. In my 8 view it was in his -as he understood it, he said
 15 Andriy asked me to connect him to Rudy . I reached out to Rudy to see whether he would be able to get back with him .
 I reached out to 16 Rudy to see whether he could get together so that I could ask 17-year-old whether he wanted to be connected to Yermak . I asked him if he would like to get together with him.
 I wanted 18 parties to want to be connected to each other before 19 doing anything . I wanted both parties to do anything before 19 did anything. I want 18 both parties.
 I 21 then set up a phone call between the two of them on the 22nd 22 of July . The two of the two were in the same place .
 Q I'd like to mark as exhibit 6 pages 18, 19, and 20 of your text messages . Q would like to see as exhibit of 6 pages and 19 of your texts .
 This was in advance of the phone call between President Trump and President Zelensky . The phone call was between the two men .
 Gordon spoke to someone at the White House, he says . The best of his recollection is that he spoke to a White House official .
 The things that President Trump wanted to investigate I did not know, and this was before the call and well before I found out what was in the call .
 Prosecutor general accused Ukrainians of passing documents to try to influence 2016 election .
 Q You did not believe there was any validity to the two allegations as we -A No, I do not. Q You do not .
 President Trump wanted Zelensky to commit to investigating before he could get -A Right. Q -called them earlier, and yet, that's what he wanted .
 President Zelensky is convinced that he is going to get to the bottom of what happened . It's a matter of President Zelenky being convincing that he's going to be able to find the bottom .
 President Trump asked President Zelensky to propose dates for a White House visit . So on that call it went well .
 Please remind Mr Mayor -that's Rudy Giuliani -to share the Madrid dates .
 Dan Goldman: "I'm going to let my colleague, Dan Goldman, ask some questions on this" Goldman: I'll let his colleague ask some Questions on this. I'm going for some questions, he says .
 Q Real briefly, because we only have a couple minutes, Ambassador Volker says . Q Real brief: "Q Real"
 President Zelensky said he needed to convince President Trump that he will get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 in order to be a White House meeting .
 A visit to Washington will take place in 2016, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I understand it to be get to the bottom of what happened"
 I believe we were still going to push for a White House visit anyway, whether or not Zelensky did, you know . I'm committed to finding out if there was any effort in election interference, finding out what Lutsenko was talking about .
 If he is strong in this phone call, that will help, he says . But here is that if he is, you know, strong in the phone call.
 The White House has been accused of corruption in Ukraine . President Trump has said he will visit Ukraine to root out corruption .
 A Get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 is a reference to the prosecutor general's claims that there was interference . The prosecutor general said that there were interference.
 "We don't want anybody interfering in our elections and did it happen," he says . "That to be investigated I always thought was fine, because that is just a matter of, you know," he adds .
 President Zelensky is trying to build a relationship with the President that he needs to build just to have confidence in each other . The President's phone call is helping him convey the right message in a phone call .
 A to make sure he conveyed a message that would be convincing to the President. A To make sure that he conveyed the message would be convinced to him .
 The President's skeptical, 8 deep concerns about Ukraine prior to President Zelensky . We were asked 7 questions, about the President's skepticism, about Russia .
 Ukraine had for decades a reputation of 18 being just a corrupt place . But Ukraine had a reputation for being just an corrupt place.
There are a handful of people 19 who own a disproportionate amount of the economy . There are a number of people in the country who own more than half the country's economy .
 Oligarchs, 20, use corruption as kind of the coin of the realm to get 21 what they want . They influence Parliament, the 22 judiciary, the government, state-owned industries .
 I would have to believe that President Trump would be aware of that general climate . I would be surprised if he was aware of the climate in the future .
 There's already a baseline of negative assessment and then this just reinforces. My view is that there's already an assessment of negative assessions .
 The investigation of Paulafort during -either -that -that too surely - was a Ukraine connection in that somehow .
 There's a belief, fair or not, that perhaps Poroshenko or his allies were feeding information to somebody to, you know, get Paulafort in trouble .
 In the investigations of Ukraine, there was a supposed ledger, and there's been in the media discussions, is this a valid ledger, is a forgery ledger .
 He's 10 played a variety of roles from journalist to member of 11 Parliament . He's supported Poroshenko, opposing Poroshenko and supporting Zelensky's team .
 I personally did not see him as, you know, 12 motivated by anything other than that . And I personally didn't see him. And I myself did not think he was a 12-year-old .
 I 17 believe that they were investigated and declared to be valid, 18 but, nonetheless, this was in the public domain . I believe that I was investigated but I was not found guilty .
 Going back to the same page we were on, 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 25 A Q page four .
 Yovanovitch's attitude towards me was far from the best as she admired the previous President, and she was on his side . Her attitude towards him was farfrom the best, and this is her attitude to me, says the former President .
 It's the penultimate sentence of that paragraph and then the last sentence . It's also the final sentence of the paragraph and the last of the sentence .
 Her attitude towards me was far from the best as she admired the previous President, and she was on his side . She was on her side, and her attitude towards her husband was not the best .
 He's expressing his view, and I -in my dealings with Masha, I found her trying to be impartial. Well, he's expressed his views, and he's expresses his view . I found Masha trying to being impartial, he said .
 I found her trying to navigate the election without taking sides on anyone . She was not taking sides with anyone, she said .
 Zelensky came up out of nowhere. Some of the context to this is that Zelenski kind of came up from nowhere .
 Most of the 2 focal point was Poroshenko or Yulia Tymoshenko, will he run, and 3 will he not run about a rock star named Sovavakochuk . 4 and Zelensky was not in the picture .
 He felt that she was not like on board, 8 you know, communicating with him early enough, that that's 9 possible, as he perceived it .
 A foreign leader thinks of our ambassador shouldn't drive how 17 we treat our ambassadors .
 I think it's the President's own 18 judgment about our ambassadors that should matter . I think that's the president's own judgment on our ambassadors .
There's a lot of ambiguities in this document, and so it's very difficult to know for certain what's in the mind of the people that are recorded on the transcript .
 You have to really know the issues and the context to understand what they're talking about, because it was in a particular moment, says the author .
 If you read it just cold and you don't know the context, I'm sure it's hard to figure out. They knew what they were discussing, but, you know, if you reading it justcold and you're not aware of the context. They know,
 There's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped this prosecution, says CNN's John Sutter . "A lot of people want to find out about that," Sutter says .
 There's a lot of people talking about Biden's son, a son of Vice President Biden .
 Get it into an official communication, an official contact between Ukraine and the Attorney General . The Attorney General will be in charge of the Ukrainian government .
 "There's been a lot of commentary about that. And it's not specifically saying investigate, but I think, you know, this came out in September, September 25th, and there's been an investigation .
 It was at least saying, you know, work in an official, legal channel. And I don't think you can make any other assumption than that it meant investigate, he says .
Joe Biden shows up in the top of page four, but the call doesn't -I mean, this call -it wasn't a call about Biden .
I was not on the call and didn't get a detailed readout at the time, so I'm only reading the same text as you are . I was not in the call. I'm not on a call and did not get a full readout .
 I was back in Kyiv after visiting the 23 conflict zone and gave an interview and was asked about the 24 phone call . At that time, I reiterated the readouts that I 25 was given at the time, so this did not come up .
 Burisma or Burisma is synonymous for Biden, or Biden .
 The name Burisma may not have been on the tip of the President's tongue during the call. I mean, the name may not be on the president's tongue .
 No doubt that he would not know or even know how to pronounce or be familiar with the name of a company like that .
 Burisma was notorious for having had a history of corruption and had been investigated for money laundering . There is 2016 election interference that had been alleged by the prosecutor general of Ukraine .
 There are three separate things that we're talking about, and sometimes they're getting conflated in the discussion here, but they are three distinct things .
 Ukrainian citizens who violated Ukrainian law, Burisma, is about, he says . He says it would only be proper for Ukrainians to investigate Ukrainians who violated Ukraine law .
In his duties as a special representative, I would meet with him, talk with him . And in his duties, I will meet with the special representative .
 The Foreign Minister and the diplomatic adviser to the President were visiting Ukraine . The President was also staying in touch with the Foreign Minister .
 Q She is a consultant that -hired by the DNC during the 2016 election cycle, was paid $71,000 . She was a consultant for the DNC.
 I read about -Q Do you know anything about -A No, I have no personal knowledge of any of it . I read on -Q do you know any of the things you know about? Do you have any knowledge of anything?
 Chalupa is just what you've read in the press -A Exactly. Q So anything you know about Chalupo is just how you've been reading it .
 Chalupa is accused of looking for things for the benefit of the DNC and the election campaign . But you're aware of the general allegations that ChalupA is trying to -A That she was looking for something to benefit the DNC.
 We happened to be booked on a radio interview at the same time about Ukraine, so we were chatting there . We were booked on the same radio interview about Ukraine .
 He then attended a conference in Tbilisi, Georgia, and met him and his new wife at that time .
 The U.S. Destroyer visited Ukraine for the United States Destroyer visit to Odessa . Then he went up to Kyiv, had a meeting with candidate Zelensky . He was at that meeting along with a number of other people .
 He never had any firsthand experience of his involvement in theafort-related issues . He didn't know that he was involved in that until he later read about it in the media .
 I think he was serious that, if we don't give 10 Ukraine the security assistance, then he would step down . If we can't get our policy right, then I don't think he wants to be 14 there representing it. I think it would be beneficial to the Russians as
 He should know that 22 nobody in any of the policy agencies would sit still for 23 suspending this suspension .
 There is a hold on assistance or a condition placed on assistance because they want a particular policy outcome . I don't need to go into examples, but I've come across many in my experience for any number of reasons .
 Sometimes it's human rights related, so that we're trying to get a government to do, says CNN's John Sutter . "You know, release a political prisoner or, you know, respect human rights better"
 There's a lot of reasons why assistance gets held from time to time .
 We had one meeting, one breakfast, and the rest was just by text or by phone .
 The reason I 3 assisted the Ukrainians in contacting him was precisely to 4 advance the interests of the United States . I wanted the 5 information that the President would be getting to reflect a 6 better understanding of who his new 7 team are .
 The U.S. wants Ukraine to be 15 a democracy . The Ukraine-U.S., Ukraine is a democracy, says the Obama administration . Ukraine is the country that the United States wants to strengthen .
 I didn't think it improper to contact Mr Giuliani, 22 you know, not think it inappropriate to contact anybody . I didn’t 21 think it proper to contact him much as I would, 22. You know that I wouldn't have contacted him if I'd been 21 .
You 23 know, I've had meetings with businessmen who have invested in 24 Ukraine . You 23 know. You 23 have met with businessmen. You have been with businessmen for over a year .
 There were probably, you know, some individuals you decided not to do that with. Q and there were probably some individuals. Q And there wereprobably, you knew, some people you decided to not do that .
 The Ukraine-U.S. relationship was the focal point of the U.S.-Ukrainian relations . Ukraine's relationship with the United States and Ukraine is the focus of the conversation . The United States wants to advance its interests in Ukraine, Ukraine .
 The Russians were not going to move out of eastern Ukraine, he says . He says they were content to keep the war going .
 We had some exploratory discussions late 2017, early 2018, that I thought might have some promise . We had been in talks late 2017.
 By the time we hit the middle of 2018, it was clear they had made a conclusion to just keep the war going . But by the time they hit the mid-2018, it had been clear they'd made a decision .
 The only thing we can really do is strengthen Ukraine, he says . He says .
 If Russia wants to negotiate a way out, the only way they're going to do that is if they're convinced that it's pointless to stay. If we want Russia to negotiate, we should ask them to leave, we say .
 The U.S. is helping Ukraine militarily, economically and economically, security, reform, fighting corruption, and fighting corruption . It is all part of demonstrating to Russians that this is an expensive, wasted effort to keep this war going in eastern Ukraine .
 I want to make sure that I give time to our members if they have questions . I also want to give time for members to answer their questions .
 The President has been criticized for his actions in Ukraine . The President's actions have been criticized by some in the past .
President Poroshenko had a very skeptical view of Ukraine, says President Obama . President Poroshenko met with President Obama in September 2017 .
 Biden's son Biden 19 stopped the prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out 20 about that . The Attorney General 21 would be great, he says .
 The Attorney General, prosecutor general, leaves that to the law enforcement community, he says .
 The need for cooperation as a general matter has been raised in other phone calls in previous administrations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he's heard that raised in previous phone calls.
 The 2 President is referring to Attorney General Barr . He's referring to the Attorney General .
 I'm making 6 an entree to kind of set the table, set the stage, open the 7 window . I'm going to make 6 an Entree to set the tables, set a stage, and open the window .
 In terms of process to say work with 9 the Attorney General, that's the right process, says the attorney general . The Attorney General's office is currently working with 9 of the 9 .
 Chairman Schiff says he just wants to clarify some of his comments . Schiff: "I just want to kind of sort of clarify"
 The White House visit is the first time the president has been to the White House . The president is expected to attend a White House trip .
 Representative Schiff implied that there was an agreement based on that conversation . If you do the investigation, then you can have a meeting and maybe we'll consider this military aid .
 Some of them are in text streams, and some are in these text streams . They wanted to make a statement to show that they are serious about investigating the past and fighting corruption .
 Bill, I believe you are incorrect about President 3 Trump's intentions, says Bill . Bill, he says, "I believe you're incorrect"
 Gordon and I and other, you know, Bill 7 and other - were in frequent contact .
 President seeking assistance of a 12 foreign government regarding our electoral process . In the last 10 round you were questioned a few times regarding the 11 acceptability of a President .
 U.S. citizen in Ukraine is a special 24 representative to Ukraine . His view is that we do not want foreign countries interfering in American elections .
 The majority of North Carolina members don't want members to do that, says Meadows . Meadows: "I'm not going to ask questions"
 I'm going on the record to indicate to the majority that we need to make sure we clarify the rules, and members should be allowed to ask questions . I'm on therecord to indicate that we must make sure that we have to clarify our rules .
 "From my standpoint, it is critically important that we establish this going forward. And I can tell you that, from my standpoint," he said .
 This is for the record, and I object to the way that this deposition -transcribed interview has been conducted in terms of the overall rules . I can tell you that I objects to the manner that this interview was conducted in term of the Overall rules .
 On behalf of the American people, it is a great loss that you are going back to your passion, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I can tell that you have done an incredible job of representing our country. I can say that you've done a incredible job, says President Barack Obama .
 State Department and Foreign Service personnel in such a gracious way that I just want to say thank you .
 "I just want to thank you for that. And your testimony here today has given me such great encouragement," he says . "You've come across in an unbelievably transparent and authentic way"
 I'm acting as the chairman for the rest of the day, so you can ask questions . I'm also the chairman of the company, which has been in charge for more than 20 years .
 Mr Swalwell has been on the record for the longest time in the history of the world's most successful boxer .
 Chairman Schiff gets back, we'll ask someone who is really in Charge .
 "You've done a great job of answering as a fact witness," he says . "I think that that's critically important, that in the context of all of this for the record"
 I would say my friends opposite have tried to lead you down a road where you're supposed to get in the mind of everybody else that was on a text message and have you opine on what they thought . Now, he would say. Now, I would says.
 "I think all the counselors around here realize that it would be leading the witness," says John Sutter . Sutter says he thinks counselors around the world realize that they would lead the witness .
 Lutsenko was sent a letter by three Democratic Senators demanding 19 his assistance with regards to the Mueller probe . The letter was submitted by three Democrats and one Republican .
 You testified earlier that a problem in 15 the past for Ukraine was its leaders investigating political 16 rivals . You testified that in 15 years, Ukraine's leaders investigated 16 rivals.
 You mentioned that President Trump had expressed skepticism about Ukraine as long as you had known President Trump's views on Ukraine . You also mentioned that he had expressed doubts about Ukraine .
 You had said that, as long as you had known Mr Trump had a view on Ukraine, you believed he had skepticism about Ukraine . But you had said he had doubts about Ukraine.
 There was the meeting with President Poroshenko in September 2017, and then there was the Oval Office meeting on May 23rd of this year .
 President Trump has visited Ukraine, according to his bio . If you look at his bio, he may have visited Miss America or Miss Universe .
 "He just recoiled at the corrupt environment. And like a lot of businesspeople, I think he just Recoiled," she says .
 It is not unusual for countries to have an investigation cooperation agreement, says Perry . He said it would be unusual to discuss specific investigations .
 I'd just like to level set in light of many of the questions you received today . I would like to answer many of your questions about your answers today .
I've consulted with them before and after those phone calls and meetings . I've consulted them before, after and after the phone calls .
 The most laudable goals of 10 trying to advance national interests can get ensnared and 11 enmeshed with efforts to advance personal political 12 interests . The list includes a list of 10 people who want to advance political interests .
I think it's going to be an important thing to clarify for the rest of this interview. And I think it'll be an 18-hour long interview . I think that's an 24-hour time to clarify.
Q: I'd like to go back to what my colleague on the minority asked you about . Q: What my colleague said about my colleague? Q: I would like to return to what I was asked about .
 There's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped the prosecution, and Biden stopped it . "Whatever you can do with the acting -with the Attorney General would be great," he says .
 The President said no less than three times in the portion of the transcript he said, he actually meant to say Burisma .
 He or she will look into the situation, specifically to the company that you mentioned in this issue . The company that he or she would look into it will be looking into it .
Exhibit 6 is a new exhibit, Exhibit 6 . The exhibit will be on display for the first time .
 Yermak confirmed 12 that President Zelensky was going to make a statement along 13 lines that we had discussed in that other exchange . And I believe this referred to Yermk confirming 12 that president Zelenski was going for a statement .
 It appeared that the flow of information to the President up and down from the National Security Council staff was not working very well. The reason I asked this question is because there is a -to me, anyway, anyway .
 Ambassador Sondland: August 9th, 2019, at 5:51m., at 5.51m. Q And if you can skip down to August 9m., and just read what ambassador says .
 Andriy has been asked to see exactly what they propose to cover . It might be helpful to ask him for a draft statement .
 Zelensky does a live presser, but he can still summarize in a brief statement . The presser is live .
 Ambassador Sondland says he briefed Ulrich. Q And then on the next, he says, "I guess the next day, August 10th, 2019"
 I think it's possible to make this declaration and 5 mention all these things which we discussed yesterday, but it will be logic to do after we receive a confirmation of date . It's possible, but 6 will be logical to do, after we get a confirmation.
 We talked about making sure that 14 there is no effort to interfere in U.S. elections and that if 15 there was anything in the past it should never happen again .
 If you could turn to page 18 19, and I believe this is already marked as part of exhibit 19 6.6 .
 Once we have a date, we'll 12 call for a press briefing announcing upcoming visit and 13 outlining vision for the reboot of U.S.-Ukraine relationship . Burisma, Burisma and election meddling 15 in investigations.
 We're going to go through the various 8 versions of the statement in a moment . The statement will be released on Thursday .
 You appear to be arguing or having 14 some disagreement about which came first . It's a chicken and 15 the egg problem .
 Special attention should be paid to the problem of interference in the political processes of the United States, especially with the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian politicians, according to a report .
 We intend to complete and complete a transparent and unbiased investigation of all available facts and episodes which, in turn, will prevent recurrence of this problem in the future .
 Q Let's go to page 23, which we’re going to mark as a new exhibit, exhibit 8 . Q Let’s go topage 23 .
 Rudy Giuliani wanted to be in the statement from -A. That's right. Q And that's what Rudy Giuliani wants to be. Q and that's the what he wanted to say .
 Andriy asked whether any request had ever been made by the U.5. to investigate election interference in 2016 . He said we will work on official request .
 I will work on that, because 4 I didn't know what the answer was. That's why I said I will be working on it, because I don't know the answer . I'll work on it because 4. I will not know what it is, I
 This is a version that inserted Burisma and 10 2016 U.5.5 elections into the text that Andriy had provided, 11 and it was meant to reflect the conversation with Rudy that 12 we had just talked about .
 There is Bidens, Bidens and Burisma, which has a long history . There is 2016 elections, and there is 2016 election .
 Ukrainians are not talking about anything other than their own citizens, their own company, or their own own citizens . The Ukrainian government did not do anything in 2016 .
 President Zelensky wanted President Trump to start an investigation of the Bidens . President Trump understood that to also be referring to Burisma .
 President 2 Trump asked about investigating Biden, said work with 3 Attorney General concerning Biden . President Zelensky 4 responded by saying we will look into the company .
 I think he would have thought this was a former Vice 15 President of the United States, it would be highly political . It would just be seen that way, I think .
 I assume the timing backs that up, but I have to check it - but before discussing it with Andriy . I wanted to go over it with Gordon, make sure we understood the same thing before I discussed it with him . I want to make sure they
 Department of Justice has asked for official request from the Justice Department . No official request has ever been made from the department .
 Bruce Schwartz is a senior official in the Department of Justice responsible for international affairs . Schwartz has known Schwartz for many years .
 Mr Schwartz says he's sorry for mentioning these investigations . He's sorry, strike that .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has urged Ukrainians not to put it in now . Putin has been accused of being a terrorist in Ukraine . Putin's government has been criticized for its anti-Putin policies .
 A statement came up in this conversation with Andriy about the statement . He asked whether we ever had a statement about it .
 As I found out the answer that we had not, I said, "Let's just not go there" I said: "Let't just go there. As I find out that we have not, let't just not going there"
 Q So Mr Yermak wanted to know whether the U.S. DOJ had been involved in the case .
 He said, "I think quite appropriately, that if they are responding to an official request, that's one thing. He said he thinks quite appropriately" if they were responding to a request, he said .
 Q Skipping down to August 19th -A. And when I say that's the clear message so far, I just literally mean that.
 I'm hoping we can get -can put something out there that causes him to respond with that . I'm trying to get him to say something, but I'm not sure what it is . I hope we can do that.
 I have not made up in my mind that this is where we want to go, he says . When I said that's the clear message so far, that means that I has not made it up in his mind, okay. That means that he has made up
 I'm hoping we can put something out there that causes him to respond with that, meaning that we actually have an official request . And then when I say I'm hope we can do that, he responds with that .
 If we have an official request through appropriate channels, then it's a reasonable thing for them to respond to. And if we have a official request, then we can respond to it .
 The author is now convinced that this is going down the wrong road . He stopped pursuing it as well, because he was becoming convinced it was wrong .
 It is the level of trust that the President has with President Zelensky. It is a level of Trust that the president has with the President .
 He has a general negative assumption about everything Ukraine, and that's the larger issue . He has this general negative assumptions about everything, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 You said you were concerned that it would go down the wrong road - a Yes . You said it would be a good decision to take the road .
 There was not an official Department of Justice request from President Trump to President Zelensky . If you didn't know there had been an official request, there was no official request from the president .
 A First off, I didn't know anything about the Presidential conversation . It was referencing Vice President Biden .
 Ukrainians are pushing the Ukrainians or asking the Ukrainians to include Burisma and 2016 in a statement that they would make . The Ukrainians have said they will make a statement in 2016 .
There were a number of inquiries about 2016 elections and foreign interference, Russia, China, potentially others . "There was an effort to interfere, it was rattling in my mind," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Ukrainian government has asked for an official request from the Ukrainian government . The request has not yet been made, but there has been a request for the request .
When I discovered that there had not been, then I thought, oh, then we should not be going further than what we have done in official channels. And when I discovered there hadn't been, I thought. Then, then, when I found out there had
 The Department of Justice has asked for help in Ukraine to investigate any effort to interfere in the U.S. elections . The request was made in response to a request from the Justice Department .
 Yermak had raised concerns that there had not been an official request. So in this context, you also mentioned that Yermack had raised concern .
 A Definitely the latter, that their caution and my advising and agreeing with that caution I think led them to never make a statement. A definitely the latter. I think they should have made a statement, but I'm not sure what happened .
 The military aid has become a public matter, but we'll get to that later . There's another effort to get a statement out in September after the military aid becomes a public issue .
 There's something in the first part of your question, though, that I wanted to comment on . The question is "What do you think about?"
 I remember what it was now, so no need to read back now, but thank you. I remember the time when I was in the middle of the world .
 I've 10 known him a long time, he’s a person of integrity, and that's 11 not credible . I’ve known him for years, but that's not credible, he's a person with integrity, he says . I've known him
There's another thing about Ukrainians trying to do bad things, and it's appropriate to investigate the second. In my understanding, as I said, I'm separating the two, that there's one thing about the Bidens, there's another things about Ukrainians.
 I knew they had a track record of a company that had a lot of problems. I knew that the company had a lots of problems, I knew .
 A Well, this is investigating what happened then, not what's happening now . A Well is investigating. A Well will not reveal what happened now .
 The Ukrainian president has been trying to bring peace to eastern Ukraine . He says he's redoubling his efforts to bring the country back to peace . The Ukrainian government says it's trying to make peace in Ukraine .
 I think some have just been around Ukraine so long, they are just skeptical of everybody . Some are skeptical of everyone, I say .
 The official message coming from the State Department about Zelensky was that he was a legitimate anti corruption. Q So the official message from the state Department was that Zelenski was a genuine anti corruption .
 The Presidential delegation at the inauguration was empowered to go there, meet, make an assessment, and report. A May I also add, importantly, from the Presidential delegation .
 President Zelensky is investigating corrupt or illegal acts in the past . If things happened that were corrupt orillegal, President Zelenky is quite appropriately investigating them .
 If nothing happened in the past, then you don't turn up anything and there's no problem . If nothing happens in the future, then there is no problem, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukrainians want to clean up Ukraine, find out if anything happened, make sure it doesn't happen again . It was the Ukrainians' own message that they want toClean up Ukraine .
 I think the Ukrainians were doing the same thing I was doing, is drawing a distinction . I think they were doing a similar thing, says the author . He says the Ukrainians are drawing a difference .
 Looking into what Hunter Biden and Joe Biden's relationships were, different issues were different issue .
Vice President Biden would have been seen very politically and that would have had a ripple effect, he says . He says that is an example of if they had done something like that, that would be seen very political .
 Giuliani was sending a message to change the statement to include an announcement of an investigation into Hunter Biden and Joe Biden . The message was so that they would include an investigation of Biden and Biden .
 Ukrainians should check out Burisma and 2016, he says . I know that may be what's in his mind, I understand that, but I understand it, that might be what is in hismind .
 The company had a history of improper things - that's legitimate for them to investigate. Whether any Ukrainians had done anything improper is legitimate for the company to investigate .
 The 2016 one was the 2016 one that concerned me even more, because we had not made an official request. A Because it was a 2016 one, it concerned him even more. A because it was the2016 one, he said .
We're going down the road in talking about a statement of asking them to investigate something or they say they will investigate something . We have not made such an official request. And so now we're going to talk about it, we're talking about it .
 Rudy - not Rudy -Gordon Sondland, myself, Rick Perry, Bill Taylor, BillTaylor, were convinced that this is someone we very much need to support in Ukraine. A As I understood it at the time, we were all convinced, we're all convinced
 In retrospect, when you see the transcript 14 of the phone call and you hear what Rudy Giuliani has now 15 said on television, that's clear . In retrospect. When you hear the transcript, you can hear what Giuliani said on TV .
 It was not clear to me that he was seeking investigations of 21 that specifically by Ukraine . He was seeking investigation of 21 of the 21 investigations by Ukraine.
 Rudy says investigating your own people for what may have happened in the past is reasonable . But the further we talked about it the more I became convinced that even this is not a good idea .
 A That it would be seen politically here, and that wouldn't be in Ukraine's interests. A that would be politically here would be in the Ukraine's interest . A that it would not be politically seen politically in Ukraine, and it wouldn't.
 Rudy Giuliani publicly tweeted on June 21st, 2019, well before the events . New Pres of Ukraine still silent on investigation of Ukrainian interference in 2016 election and alleged Biden bribery.
 Ukraine was abused by Hillary and Obama people. Time for leadership and investigate both if you want to purge the country .
 If that tweet was -I'm not familiar with the tweet, but yes, then that would have been in public . It's not clear if it was in public.
 Ambassador: "I understand 2 your belief that it's okay to look in the past at corruption 3 if that's what the Ukrainians were going to do"
 That's the time, so I think a 8 5-minute bathroom break, if that works for you . I think that's a good time for you.
 Several hours in today answering a lot of 16 questions, much appreciated .
 22 manufacture or dig up dirt in the 2016 campaign or did anything happen with 24 Burisma .
 I just wanted to reiterate, when I had 10 that breakfast with Rudy Giuliani in May, I pushed back on 11 his discussing the Bidens just as they had been in the media, 12 I push back on that .
 Ukrainians may have 15 wanted to buy influence in some way, that's another 17 matter . Whether Ukrainians wanted to purchase influence is another matter .
Burisma is the name of 20 Burisma . Burisma means Burisma, not the 21 Burisma and the Bidens. Burisma.
 I think 25 is important to understand when we're talking about Burisma later on in August what I'm talking about and what I understood us to be talking about together . And that is something that I think I think 20 is important. And that's something that is
 Andriy Yermak on the Ukrainian side and an overall readout, overall briefing from Charge Bill Taylor, and from my assistant in the State Department who was traveling with me at the time .
 She had been in touch with NSC staff to get a cursory readout of the call . And she, she believes, had been on the phone to get the readout .
 Burisma had a reputation for corruption and money laundering . I believe that they were trying to spruce up their image . Burisma is a company that has a reputation of corruption .
 Q It's been reported -A I'd say that I don't know much about him at all. Q It has been reported that he has not been in contact with him .
 Q. It's been reported that he was drawing a monthly salary of 50,000 or more .
Vice President Biden would not be corrupted in the way that he would carry out his duties as Vice President at all, he says .
 Ukrainians may have sought to buy influence or to believe that they were buying influence . But whether Ukrainians are buying influence, that's quite possible .
 Former Senator Mitchell has been appointed to someone's board . Mitchell is a former senator from New York City .
 A that came up earlier, and I was reminded that he was also associated with Hunter Biden and Burisma in some way . A That came up before, and he was reminded of that.
 A If it was in the same media reports, I probably just skimmed right over it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "A If it's in thesame media report, Iprobably just skimbed right over"
 Ukraine has such a bad reputation of its own. It is -it's a way of trying to demonstrate cleanliness and credibility, it is said .
Q: I want to go back to your text messages, and I'd like to turn to the text messages with Rudy Giuliani . Q: I would like to return to your texts with Giuliani .
 exhibit 9, pages 2, 9, 2, 2 through 9. And I’m going to mark as the next exhibit, exhibit 9. The exhibit will be on display for the first time .
 Giuliani was introduced to Mr Yermak by the president of the United States . Giuliani has been in charge of the White House since 2007 .
 Q I kind of want to just turn to the end of these, this message chain, to page 7. Q I want to turn to a page 7 . The message chain is a message chain.
 Yermak is the author of a new book, "Yermak" The book is published in the summer of 2013 . The book will be published on August 11, 2013 .
 He was very, very public, you know, and you know. And he was very public. And you know that cell phones held up on camera and, you knew, text messages tweeted out and feeding these out there .
 I think he was getting frustrated that I was not responding to any of that because I'm not backing up that story. And I think that he wasgetting frustrated that he wasn't responding to that . I think it was getting frustration that I wasn't backing up any of
 A Well, he was saying that we were directing him and that he was acting on the behest of the State Department to do things. A well, he said that we was directing him .
 Q Rudy Giuliani was not telling the truth when he was saying that he was acting at the direction of -A Correct . Giuliani was saying he was not acting in the right direction .
 Andriy asked me to introduce him to Rudy, but he didn't want to talk to him . He said he wanted to talk about his relationship with Rudy. He said, "I don't think he's a good guy"
 Lutsenko is getting much better information than he's getting from Lutenko . He's going to get much better info than he'd been given from the Russian government .
 A Well, I'm not sure what it means, because I had spoken with the Secretary and I knew the Secretary knew that I had connected them. A well, I was not sure how it means .
 The Secretary of State seems not to know what he's referring to, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Secretary of State made a media appearance where he did not affirm that he had connected them . It may be that there was a press appearance that the Secretary made .
 A In -I don't want to say same day, but we're talking in the same time period. A In-I-In-I.
 The Secretary was aware of what Rudy Giuliani was communicating directly with Andriy Yermak. Q So it's fair to say that Giuliani was aware. Q
I'm -please go ahead and keep asking, but I can skip ahead to something here if you would like . I'm - please go ahead. I'm –please go Ahead and keep ask, but keep asking .
 A So, skipping ahead, so the date of these text messages is Sunday, the 22nd of September .
 I think that's 6 partly why I think he was frustrated. So I did not answer those calls, and I think it's 6 part of why I didn't answer them, and that's part of his frustration .
 I had done it earlier in August, and he just wanted to be refreshed . I had been doing it earlier this year, and I had already done it in August .
 The Secretary of State says he's 16 going to let the Secretary know that he connected, which 17 fine . He also says that he'll let the secretary know he connected.
 Andriy has been together for 22 years . The pair have been married for more than a decade .
 The State 24 Department connected me to Yermak, and I reported back to 25 State on my conversations . "I reported back on 25 State," he says .
 The Secretary of the Secretary of State has been in the news for more than a decade . He has been accused of lying to the media about his actions .
 Rudy was concerned that we were not affirming that we had connected Yermak 15 and him rather than him just doing it on his own . And he said, what he was concerned about 14 was that we weren't affirm that we'd connected him and him .
 The State Department said that 18 Yermak had asked me, and I had put him in touch with Rudy, 19 . It had made media back then. Well, that's easy, because on August 22nd, 17 we put out a statement .
 The 22-year-old was handed a copy of 22 what was handed out at the time . So why don't call Rudy back, tell him that, and give him a copy.
Ken Vogel tweeted it to Ken Vogel, who then tweeted it . But it was prepared, it was cleared, and it was handed to Vogel . It was then tweeted to him .
 I described my concern that he is projecting a damaging or a negative image about Ukraine, and that's reaching the President . I am trying to work with Ukrainians to correct that messaging, correct that impression, he said .
 May 10th then I must have spoken with him. Good speaking with you yesterday, which meant May 10st then I need to speak with him .
 We would like to brief you more about the Zelensky discussion and also Russia-Ukraine dynamic . We would also like to talk about Russia- Ukraine dynamic .
 Lutsenko was going to go to Ukraine, he was intending to pursue these allegations that he had made, he said . He was planning to go investigate these things, and he had learned through the media .
 A to say that I had met with Zelensky as a Presidential candidate, and I believe he's the real deal, and we should be trying to support him. A To say that he had met him, he says he's a real deal .
 "I wanted to talk to him about what's going on with Russia and Ukraine so he's aware of that," she said . "He's not aware of what's happening to him," she added .
 It must have been -I don't have an exact time in mind, but I'm guessing it was 10 minutes, something like that . It must be 10 minutes .
 I'm happy to follow up, because we didn't have a full conversation, and he was going to go to Ukraine . I'm not sure if he would follow up with a follow-up, but I'm glad to follow him up .
 There was no point in pursuing it any further, he says . Because he didn't go to Ukraine, there was "no point" in pursuing the case .
 Even at this time, I wasn't aware that he had as many Ukraine connections as it later became apparent .
 Rudy Giuliani attended the breakfast that I had with Rudy Giuliani on May 20-whatever, 25th, he said .
 A I'm confusing the White House readout after the inauguration as the date. Q This is the breakfast at the White house meeting .
 July 19th is when I had breakfast with Rudy, and Lev Parnas attended that breakfast .
 I assumed Giuliani brought him along to the meeting because he's Ukrainian-American and therefore, therefore, knows a lot about Ukraine .
 Rudy was going to be staying, so that would be the easiest thing to do, he says . "I was guessing that's where Rudy would be staying," he adds .
It's possible he was at the same breakfast, but I honestly don't remember . It's possible that he was in the same room, but it's not clear if he was .
 A Lev Parnas says he was expecting to have a very negative view of Zelensky . He says he had a very pro-supportive view of Lutsenko .
 The next 5 years of the Ukraine are going to be 3 determined. I think there's a 3-to 6-month window in 2 which the next five years of Ukraine will be 3 years determined .
 I think 11 is a self-serving narrative to preserve himself in power 12 and protect himself, possibly protect Poroshenko as well . I think this is self- serving narrative to protect himself and Poroshenko .
 I think I want to switch gears a little bit and ask you about some other messages . I think we should ask you if you have any other messages to share with us .
On page 26, I'd like to direct your attention to the first entry for May 26, 2019 . The first entry will be on page 26 .
 I was there for the presidential inauguration with the others that we discussed . I was at the inauguration for the president with the other guests .
 3 Ambassador Yovanovitch had left the Ukraine once 3 ambassador had left . I was concerned that we were not going to 2 have a serious senior diplomat on the ground in Ukraine .
 A new 4 DCM had not served in Ukraine before, so it was important to get a seasoned diplomat in there . It was important 6 that we get an experienced diplomat in Ukraine .
 Bill Taylor could go on a temporary basis as a Charge 10 while we appointed a new ambassador . Taylor had been ambassador there before, he knew the players, he had a lot of 9 experience .
 Ukraine has been a strong support for Ukraine for the past 16 2 years . But the president is not sure if he would maintain as robust a support for the country as he has been .
 Russia is the country where 25 we throw Ukraine under the bus . It was more a generic 23 fear, but I think hanging over everyone's head on the expert 24 community is, is there some grand bargain with Russia .
 We have increased 4 sanctions, we have lifted the arms embargo . We have lifted 4 sanctions. We have lift -we have increased four sanctions, and we have increased 3 sanctions .
 We are on track here, 7, 7 and it's important that we have people in there fighting to 8 do that. We're on track to 8, 7. It's important to be on track, 7 .
 0MB that announced in the interagency meeting that there was a hold -Q Okay. It was 0 MB that announced the hold .
 The first time you learned about that was -well, actually, it's in the text messages. Q And I believe you said the first time I learned about it was in the texts .
 It was a sub PCC meeting, which is typically deputy assistant secretary level . It was also a sub-PCC meeting. It's typically deputy deputy assistant secretaries level .
 Bill Taylor says he's talking about his decision whether or not to -A Correct. So let's pick up where he says -and I believe he is talking about it .
 May 26, 2019 is approximately 2 months before President Trump's phone call with President Zelensky . President Trump urged President Zelenky to investigate the Bidensky.
 He was referring to what he had seen in the media about Giuliani talking about Hunter Biden and whether Vice President Biden acted inappropriately in attacking the former Prosecutor General Shokin .
 He was working at USIP, so he's just referring to the -what's out there in the media swirl . He was just working for USIP .
In 6 conversations about whether Giuliani would take the job, I would 7 reiterate, "Look, Giuliani does not represent the United States 8 government"
 Bill wanted to be 16 reassured that the Secretary of State is saying the same 17 thing that I'm saying about where our policy is, that we are 18 robustly in support of Ukraine, he said .
 He's going to be out there speaking publicly and saying what he says no matter what. He's not sure what he will say .
 The future of Ukraine is in play right now. But we can right now - you know, the key thing is what we can do, he says .
 We have a new president, there's going to be a new parliament, a new government, and it will be a dicey time . We're going to have a Dicey time, says David Frum .
President Obama's attorney for the President has a different relationship with the President . President Obama's lawyer for the president has a relationship with President Obama .
 President Zelensky and the Chief of Presidential Administration, Andriy Bohdan, were standing next to him . Bohdan: "I explained it to President Zelenky and President Zelenedky"
 Ukraine's image 4 in the U.S. is a negative factor for Ukraine, says Ukraine . Ukraine's relationship with the United States is a "negative factor" for Ukraine. Ukraine's ability to advance the bilateral 5 relationship.
 The phone call readout from the White House of the call between President Trump and 9 President Zelensky was read out 17 days after you 7 .
 I don't know, yeah, because I was not aware of the content of that phone call . I was. not aware, yeah. I wasn't aware of 16 of the phone call. I didn't know that 16 of those 16 were there .
 President Zelensky and 17 Andrey Yermak never mentioned that to me, so I don't know . The president and 17-year-old never mentioned it to me .
 President Zelensky was forewarned by President Obama when he heard this from the 25 President . He had been told by the President that there's a Giuliani problem .
 Q Going back to page 28, if you can flip to the bottom portion on August 26, 2019, at 11:05m. Q Going Back to the page 28. If you can switch to page 26, you can do it on August 25, 2019 .
 The President was going to see Danylyuk, who was technically his counterpart . He was actually visiting the President .
 Danylyuk's star within the Zelensky orbit was fading at this point, and he's since resigned . Yermak's star was up, and his star is now up .
 He did send me a text message before this testimony today to wish me well, but I haven't spoken with him . He did -he did - he did send a text messages before this testified today . But he did not speak to me, he did .
 Igor Kolomoisky became very uncomfortable with the visibility of this oligarch in recent months in Ukraine . But his understanding is that he became very discomforted with this.
 A Danylyuk became uncomfortable with it, and did not want to continue in his duties if he thought that this individual is having too much freedom of maneuver in Ukraine .
 Igor Kolomoisky is one of the handful of 3 very, very wealthy Ukrainians . He is also one of a handful of three very,very, very rich Ukrainians .
 Together, if you 4 include influence over state-owned industry as well as 5 privately owned things, they probably control at least 6 20 percent of the GDP, and it is all the GDP that matters . So 7 energy, energy distribution, infrastructure, defense 8 industries, coal and steel
 Ukrainian 14 taxpayer officially is bailing out the bank for the money Kolomoisky stole . The bank is in liquidation for the 15 stolen money .
 He was living in exile in Switzerland, and then moved to exile 20 in Israel . He was 19 when he moved to Israel, and later moved to Switzerland and Israel .
 I mean, we 5 don't have - I don't want to keep you here all night . I mean we don't. I mean. We don't need to be there all night, I mean they don't know what to do .
After Zelensky was elected, he returned to 12 Ukraine, he visited some of his businesses . He played a very visible public role in the country .
 Tim Morrison is the Senior Director for Europe at the National Security Council . Morrison is a former member of the European Security Council. He is also a former Director of Europe for the European Union .
Kurt -or Bill Taylor wrote to you, "Kurt, can you WhatsApp Defense Minister"
 I had done some staff meetings with 8 the Armed Services Committee, Senate Armed Services 9 Committee . I had been working with the Senate Armed services 9 Committee.
 Esper should establish a counterpart relationship, 13 and give a call and express his concern about this . He should also express his concerns about this, and empower Esper to raise this issue .
Several Senators signed a letter to Chief of Staff Mulvaney urging that there not be a hold . Several Senators said they had heard that there was a hold.
 Senator Shaheen, Senator Durbin, Senator Blumenthal, Senator Portman, and Senator Johnson. It was addressed to the Director of 0MB, Mick Mulvaney, and copied to Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Esper .
To page 56, I want to direct your attention to August 29th, 2019. Q And, again, to page 56. Q and Q: What's next?
 Vadym Prystaiko, who was the diplomatic advisor to President Zelensky, was the ambassador to the president .
 He had been ambassador to -Ukraine's ambassador to NATO . He was tapped to be diplomatic advisor .
 There was a possibility of a hurricane hitting Florida, and he cancelled his trip for that stated reason .
 Q And President Trump was supposed to meet with President Zelensky in Warsaw .
 President Trump and President Zelensky have been working together since May . President Trump has said he wants to work with President Zelenky .
 As long as we have at the end where we can come back and do a round, we can still come back. We have 11 players who can do the round. We can still win the game at the top of the table .
 I had just been traveling for 7 about a week prior to that, including to Ukraine, and had 8 scheduling conflicts . I was traveling for seven days, including a week in Ukraine .
 The Vice President will not be part of the delegation to 10 the Warsaw anniversary of World War II . It just wouldn't have been possible to attempt.
 I would think that there would have been some contact with the State Department, but 23 I 1 m not aware of who would have done that . I would say 22 would have had contact with State Department .
 Vice President Pence led the administration delegation to the Munich Security Conference .
 I had asked to be included in his meeting with President Poroshenko, but I was not included in that meeting . I had been asked to include him in the President's meeting with Poroshenko .
 The Vice President's staff, the Vice President or Vice President, are the vice president or vice president's staff . The VP's staff are the VP's office's staff and vice president.
 The Vice President likes to keep his meetings very, very small, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I my understanding is that the Vice President like to keep the meetings very small"
 The Vice President was flying from the U.S. to the United States . He had just headed back to the US, but didn't really push for it .
 The Vice President did not have an answer to lifting the hold . It went well, the Vice President said .
 The Ukrainian President said he would advocate for a meeting with the President when he got back . He said the decision ultimately is, rest assured that we stand side by side with Ukraine .
 The logical person would have been Catherine Croft's assistant at the State Department . Croft is a former State Department assistant .
 He repeated the same line of -I don't -maybe you know where it is in the timeline here . He repeated that same line. He repeated his line of –I don’t -maybe -you know where the timeline is in.
 Vadym is convinced that a meeting with President Trump-President Zelensky would go well . "It could easily be a very successful meeting," he says .
Security assistance funds to Ukraine were frozen on September 1st, 2019 . Security assistance funds were frozen at the start of September .
 Ukrainians are still pushing for a White House meeting . Q You were still, and the Ukrainians were still pushing to the White House .
Vice President Pence meets with Vice President Pence for the first time in a year . The meeting is expected to take place in New York City .
 He couldn't give a date for the meeting with President Zelensky, but he undertook to support such a meeting .
 Q So we had talked about that before, the statement that we were going back and forth on, he says . We were going to go back and back on .
 Let's work on substantive 6 issues like this, security assistance and all. Let's also work on security assistance .
 Once the parliament was seated, then 15 could vote in the ministers . And then once the parliament had been seated, the ministers could vote . Then once the ministers were seated, they could vote.
 We agreed it just wasn't a 21 good idea, it's not productive, we said . They did it because we agreed it was just not a 21good idea, we agreed .
 I must admit, I felt that you 24 sugarcoated a message on a visit, or the message I got 25 earlier was not correct . I must confess, I must say, I feel that you had a message that was wrong. I felt it was wrong .
 There was a conference 8 hosted by the Canadians on supporting Ukrainian economic reforms . I led the U.S. delegation .
 I had probably 20 communicated with him, I can go back and look, but explaining 21 that, you know, we're getting nowhere here . And I hadprobably 20 communicated to him, he said, but I can't go back. And I could go back
 We're trying, 22, but we're not getting any date out of the White House . We're still trying to get a date .
President Zelensky says he didn't say this is a 9 problem in terms of getting a meeting . "Just exactly what I just said, that in the 8 meeting with President Zelenski, I didn't said," he says .
 I said we are working 10 it, I'm confident we're going to get there, more like that, he said . I said that we're working 10, I said. I said it's working 10. I am confident we will get there. We are working
 I'm not 23 making any promises, but we can set those aside for right 24 now . I'm 23 making no promises. But we can't wait for 24 now, and we can make some promises .
 Q Ambassador Volker: I want to turn back for a moment to the security assistance issue .
 Let me direct your attention to Bates number 37 of your text messages, if you have them there . If you have the number 37, please send it to me .
 The President of the United States had issued the order to freeze the Ukrainian aid .
 President Trump cancelled his trip to Warsaw. The next day, August 30th, was when President Trump canceled his trip .
Vice President Pence met with Vice President Pence in Warsaw on September 1st .
 A man had been in France at the G-7, and then returned to the United States . He was in the U.S. at the time of the incident, but he returned to France .
 Vice President Pence relayed to Ukrainians -he did not relay an official explanation for why the aid was being held .
 The aid was being held in Ukraine, and no one had a reason why, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Three, that we all thought this is a mistake, and we're going to fix it . We all thought it was a mistake . We're not going to make a mistake.
 The call record, I think, kind of speaks for itself as to what the President said, says President Barack Obama .
 It's a little different than saying Burisma and 2016 and 2016, but the call record is there . The call record for Burisma is there, but there is there.
 It was a real struggle 17 to push Ukraine to fight corruption, and that had been an 18 impediment . It was an 18-year-old struggle to push the country to change its corruption policies .
 The U.S.-Ukraine relationship will help 23 to improve, he says . He believes that he convinced President Trump that 22 he is serious .
 I don't know if all calls are read 9 out, and if they are, they are just so perfunctory, you don't learn anything from it anyway . I'm not sure if all callers are read out, but if they're not, they'll
 The pair met in Madrid on August 2nd and did not have a detailed conversation until August 2th . They did not talk for 23 hours before they met .
 The President had planned a meeting in Madrid prior to the President's call -A Correct . But they had no follow-up from either of 25 them about that other than -274 .
 The security assistance had been held from mid July until late August, says CNN's John Sutter . "A Uh-huh" was held during that time .
 He's affirmatively trying to make a phone call happen, that's -correct me if I'm wrong . He's trying to get a call, but he's not sure if he's wrong, he says .
 Is now advocating for a phone call, is now supporting a phone . I -I -I take them to be the same, but, okay, okay; advocating for, urging that there be a call .
 I don't know whether I said it that explicitly to the Ukrainians, but I think it's reasonable to see this as something happening on its own . And I'm not sure whether I did it explicitly, but it'sreasonable to see it as a thing happening on own.
 Trump said in one text that you were out of the loop, you were not privy to Rudy Giuliani's conversations with the Ukrainians . Now, you said that you had only two phone conversations with Donald Trump, you had just two .
Ukrainian authorities say they don't have firsthand knowledge of what messages were relayed to the Ukrainians .
 The -did you -you reviewed the call record of the July 25th call -A Yes. The - did you - you reviewed the calls? The call record was a yes .
 I made the argument that President Zelensky is the real deal, he is going to try to fix things, and he just did not believe it, I said . I made it that he just didn't believe it.
 He didn't mention investigations to me in that meeting, or call for investigations . He did not mention investigations in that Meeting, or called for investigations.
 Rudy Giuliani, as we know from a lot of his public commentary, talks about this all the time . Rudy Giuliani is a former New York City mayor .
 The President is as focused on that as Rudy is, so I would -I would differentiate there. He's interested in that, but that doesn't mean that he's as focused as Rudy, he would say .
 President 20 Zelensky has not met with President Putin in the Oval Office . He would meet with 21 President Putin .
 I can't answer other than that I 24 think it's important that both take place . I'm not sure if both takes place, but I'm sure they do .
 It's also 2 important that the President meet with President Putin 3 because we can't have a risk of conflict with Russia either . The President should also meet with Putin 3.
 Rudy Giuliani is acting alone as a rogue actor without any connection to Donald Trump, who is his client . Rudy 18 Giuliani is a Ukrainian actor who has no connection to Trump .
 At the 3 time, neither President Trump nor Rudy Giuliani ever brought up 5 Joe Biden .
 You've been 12 testifying today primarily to what you knew at the time, 13 . Let's just take a step back and look back with hindsight that 14 is 20/20, because you know this area very well .
 I had conversations with them about this 24 after August 29, and for about a week, they never raised 25 that with me . They never raised that with him, he says .
 When we were talking about the statement that was being drafted in August of 2018, I believe you testified it was never issued . The statement was not issued, according to the statement .
 Gordon Sondland had been in touch with Ukraine, he said . Zelensky would talk about his commitment to investigating things that happened in the past .
I don't know the details of those conversations, and I don't believe any such interview happened . "I'm not sure what happened," he says . "It's not clear what happened"
 My understanding is that it was just a congratulatory phone call on his election victory. My understanding was that it wasn't just a congratulations phone call .
 The White House had put the inauguration for President Zelensky on Vice President Pence's calendar . At some point President Trump instructed Vice President VP Pence not to attend .
 Vice President Pence wasn't able to lead the delegation, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I was aware that we were trying to get him to lead"
 The Vice President's office was put together over the course of a couple days . He was not surprised at the time that he couldn't do it .
President Trump was not aware that it was at the direction of President Trump . He assumed it was just a matter of scheduling .
 A Cabinet level was still important to have someone at a cabinet level, he says . Ukraine has a lot of issues with Ukraine on energy .
 I had known him years past, but nothing 7 concerning Ukraine in a contemporary time space until we went 8 together . We went 8 there together .
 The speaker of the parliament met with the then-speaker of the Parliament because it was before the parliamentary election . The speaker was the former speaker of parliament .
 I was a little surprised that this was still 23 going, so I'm sure you're exhausted . I was just a little surprise that this is still 23 years old .
 There are four questions left, if any, but we may have just a couple . And I don't think we have very many questions left .
 We wish you could get home by, you know, 6:00 9 or at some reasonable hour, so we'll try not to stand in the 10 way of that . We would like to go home by.
 In the last round there was some 14 questions that present some ambiguous facts . In the final round there were 14 questions.
 Vice President Pence was asked whether he didn't travel because of the aid issue or there wasn't an investigation into Joe Biden and so forth .
 You testified 22 that you didn't have any firsthand knowledge on that . In 23 fact, you said it was probably his schedule. And you testified 22.
 It is difficult to get 25 things on the President or Vice President's calendar .
 The inauguration was a short notice announcement of when the inauguration would be . It was a very short notice, so I think, as a -you know, anybody in the world only had like 4 days' notice .
 It was a very -it was the largest delegation from any country there, and it was a high-level one . The delegation was the biggest in the world .
 It would have been nice to have the Vice President, but, you know, you can't always always -yeah. It would be nice to be Vice President.
 I'm not certain the word ""corruption"" appears, but you know, if you turn to page three at the bottom . A Yes .
Q. Q You know, I don't know if that’s an ambiguous statement or not, but, you know, reasonable people could equate very bad people . A Right could equate a Right to a Right .
 The President says the word "corruption" appears and does the President say it. So the question that I answered was whether the word ""corruption"" appears .
 A prosecutor who was very good getting shut down, says that’s really unfair . I said, there are some things that you can infer, and that was what I was looking at is, he said .
 At various points today we've talked about the President's deep-seated concern about Ukraine, the business culture there .
 The President may have had that view, whether it was related to his prior business experience . It's unclear whether the President's previous business experience is related to the President .
 The President had a very genuine -9 A Yes. But among all of those things, you would 8 testify that indeed, he had a real-life President .
 Q Exhibit 12 was the -A Oh, yes, the statement from the President's Office of Ukraine, yes .
 Q This morning we spoke in some detail about the delay in the assistance funds . Q this morning. Q: The delay in assistance funds is the reason for the delay .
 There's different power centers on any type of assistance to a foreign nation . There's no single power center for foreign nations .
 In the end, the assistance funds were -A That is exactly right, says Q . Q. Q .
 There was some discussion about whether President Trump has met with Rudy Giuliani in the Oval Office .
 There had been no -it had been difficult scheduling a meeting with President Zelensky . A and there was no - it had been hard scheduling.
 President Zelensky was elected in May of 2019, and we had a meeting in September of 2019 . President Zelenky waselected in May 2019 .
 19 investigations are or not involved. So the only reason that can be is because they are not involved . The only reason is because these 19 investigations have not been investigated .
 It never came up in conversation with them, and I believe they had trust in me that they would have asked if that was really what they were worried about . I believe that they had trusts in me, and they would've asked if they were really worried about.
 Ukrainians have an expectation that it's coming. And so the second that's appropriated and the President signs into law, the Ukrainians have a expectation it's come .
Every day that goes by after it's appropriated and they don't receive it, it's binary . So whether they learned about the hold in August or before, every day that went by, it is binary .
 I believe, and I'd have to go back and read it again, but I believe it was the Politico article that suggested that . I believe. I believe I would have to read it once again, though .
 Gordon Sondland: "I don't think that's it, and don't panic over this. And we, Gordon SONDland and I, both spoke with Bill and said, I don't believe that's the case."
 A No, I think, if we actually did not deliver the security assistance, that would be a major change in U.S. policy and that would cause him to resign . I think the way I read his note, he said, would be the way he
 Ukraine has been on the front burner in Ukraine since the start of this year's presidential election . Ukraine is a key part of the U.S. presidential delegation . The Ukraine government has been trying to keep Ukraine on the back burner .
 He had some particular issues in the energy sector that he was very keen on working with the Ukrainians . He was very active on that, and was veryactive on that .
 Rick Perry, Gordon Sondland and Senator Johnson were the delegation that had been the presidential delegation .
 I believe Mr Kupperman, the deputy national security adviser was there, but I'm not sure about that . Mr Mulvaney was there. I believe he was there but I don't know what happened .
 The President started the meeting and started with kind of a negative assessment of the Ukraine . The President said the Ukraine is a country with a history of violence .
 A -it's a terrible place, all corrupt, terrible people, just dumping on Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . "A - it's a horrible place," he says .
 Each of us took turns from this delegation giving our point of view . The delegation was that this is a new crowd, it's a new President, it was that he is committed to doing the right things .
 Ukraine is a terrible place, and he campaigned on cleaning it up, and that's why the Ukrainian people supported him . The Ukrainian people support him, he says .
 We strongly encouraged him to engage with this new President because he's committed to fighting all of those things that President Trump was complaining about. So, you know, we strongly encourage him to engaged with this President .
 Rudy said, "I think he said, not as an 11 instruction but just as a comment, talk to Rudy, you know. And I don't know how he phrased it 10 with Rudy, but it was - I think he was -I think it was
 I don't know who those might be, but 16 he said, "I hear from people. I don’t know who they might be," he said . He said he's not sure who he might be .
 It's possible, but -I was 20 sitting facing the desk, and he was sitting facing us, and I 21 couldn't see what was happening behind me . It's Possible, but it's possible. It'sossible, but he was standing facing us.
 The President agreed to sign a congratulatory letter to President Zelensky and invite him to the White House . The outcome was that the President agreed.
 Jared Kushner and President Zelensky will meet at the United States mission to the EU's Independence Day celebration on June 4, 2019 . The meeting will be held at the U.S. Embassy in Washington, DC .
 President Zelensky is going to the United States, or to the European Union, says CNN's John Sondland . He says he believes there was a dinner that Gordon Sondlands was at with him or maybe Gordon even hosted .
 Danylyuk feels that he's the one closer to President Zelensky, 9 . It just created a little bit of a dynamic between them that you could see .
 I met with 11 Danylyuk for drinks in the evening before. I said I met the group for drinks at the end of the night before . I meet with 11 of the 11 people I met at the time .
 It was talking about legislation to reform the security services, reform the defense establishment, and not conveying a top-level message, a strategic message . It was really getting down into the bureaucratic weeds, and really getting into the bureaucracy .
 Danylyuk was doing his presentation and talking because he was -Yermak was respecting his role of making this presentation . It was only Danyylyuk doing his presentation and talking. He was respecting Danyluk's role.
 The meeting was just kind of flat, and I thought it was a missed opportunity. And the meeting was kind offlat, and it was just sort of flat .
 Danylyuk is coming as a new counterpart to Bolton in Ukraine . He didn't talk about what's going on in Ukraine, and he didn't discuss that .
 John Bolton says no, we don't have a date for a visit yet . It was just do we have a visit for a date yet, he says .
 The President's got a lot of things stacked up on his calendar looking forward, not giving a substantive reason .
 He told me later that he was there for the Bolton meeting but he had other meetings with Members of Congress as well, bipartisan . He said it was probably -we're probably looking at least a month later, he said .
 I wanted to meet with the heads of each 8 of the different parties that had been elected to the 9 parliament . I want to meet each 8 parties that were elected to 9 parliament.
 I think I had a 16 breakfast with humanitarian organizations working in the 17 Donbas, maybe a civil society group as well that are dealing 18 with anticorruption issues . I think it was a good breakfast for me .
 The next day - I had lunch 19 with Yermak that day as well, on the 25th . The day before, I'd had lunch with Yerak on the same day .
 Bill Taylor was at that 25 meeting as well, along with other staff from the embassy .
President Trump and President Zelensky called Ukrainians after President Trump's call about the call .
 The President asked them to pick dates for coming to the White House . They were encouraged again because the President had asked them for dates .
 A meeting with Zelensky was held in Stanitsa Luhanska . The Ukrainians now saw the next steps of how to improve the ceasefire, work towards Minsk implementation .
 This was the first time Zelensky really seemed to have a command of those issues and was doing things . This was a first time he seemed to be doing things like this. This was his first time that Zelenski really seemed.
 At least two-thirds of the conversation, if not more, was just about that. And so we had a -I'd say, at least two thirds of the talk, ifnot more.
 There were two letters sent from the three committees to Secretary Pompeo, 7 one seeking this transcribed testimony and another 8 seeking documents . There are two letters - there were two of the six letters sent to Pompeo .
 The President made an inappropriate promise 24 in a phone call with a foreign leader, according to the news media . The news media broke the story about 22 there being a whistleblower .
 The cycle just escalated from there, and I followed those media reports, and then I saw the transcript released . And then, you know, the cycle just escalate from there. Then, then, the whistleblower report was released .
 There was a call between Secretary Pompeo and the Ukrainian foreign minister . We understand there was a phone call between the two .
 I would meet with the Secretary periodically to update him on what I was doing and things with Ukraine. A in the sense that I would met with him periodically.
 I think I had met with him on -I had just made a note as I was going through some of these messages that are in here . I think he had met him on.
CNN's John Sutter was traveling when he visited Bolton, Bolton, Labor Day and Labor Day .
 The Secretary was up to speed on things happening with Ukraine, she says .
 I believe it was a first phone call, you know, that it's, I'm the new foreign minister . I believe that it was an early call, I believe. I'm a new foreign Minister .
 He had no information to give about security assistance, and he was going to advocate for a White House meeting .
 I'm just trying to remember conversations I had with Bill Taylor who told me about it . I'm trying to recall conversations with him, he told me .
 The U.N. General Assembly is held on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly . Q So then I want to jump to the meetings on the sideline .
 I did have these conversations with Secretary Pompeo in advance of the UNGA meetings. I did not have these talks with Pompeo before the meetings .
 By this time it was all well in the public domain about Rudy Giuliani, about 3 text messages, about, you know, about.
 7 would like to have the meeting first and talk before releasing 8 a transcript . They would also like to release a transcript of the meeting before releasing the transcript .
 If it's going to be released, at 19 least do the courtesy of sharing it and talking about it 20 first . It can be seen to be something that they agreed 21 on rather than just letting it go .
 The President's comments came from the President, so I'm not really engaging in trying to discuss it. And the public 20 commentary about this was coming from the president .
 I said I would see what 16 I could do, and I conveyed that message to Secretary Pompeo 17 and through an intermediary, through the executive secretary . I said, "I would seeWhat 16 I would do, but I would have to go to the top level"
 There was a threat 18 to withhold funding for other things from Congress if this 19 funding did not go forward .
 The Pentagon was very clear in communicating with me, and I assume that they were also communicating with the White House . There was also timelines involved.
 President Zelensky and President Trump did about the first 30 minutes of their bilateral meeting on camera in order to show that they're sitting there and working together .
 Dan Hoffman is a former CIA 11 station chief in a couple of different places . Hoffman was a CIA 11 chief in the U.S. and has worked for the CIA for years .
 The 12 Ukrainians were in the midst of reforming their security 13 structures . They were concerned about personnel, and they were also concerned about getting the structure right .
 Mr Hoffman is a private citizen who 24 sits on the President's Intelligence Advisory Board today .
 I have no reason to think that he would have been involvec 1 in that at all . I'm not sure what he would do if he had been involved in that .
 The password on the government phone always seemed to i drop, and I couldn't get into it . The password is always 20, but I can't get in .
 The McCain Institute president says he had "very good intentions" as far as executing U.S. policy .
 The President is not sharing with 8 you and the President . He's not shared with you this other 9 track .
 It makes me feel 11 that it's very, very unfortunate, because we had done such 12 good work on policy with Ukraine, pushing back Russia, supporting them, democratic transition . What I would say is it makes me feels 11 that we have done such good work.
 The need to continue the work going forward is still to be done, says David Cameron . But this separate track, as you refer to it, ends up 15 overshadowing the work that we've done .
 Mr Kolomoisky is 4 visible in Ukraine . He also has 3 this dynamic of Mr Kolomisky showing up and being quite 4 visible .
 If he doesn't get that 9 through in the first 3 to 6 months, he will probably lose his 10 parliamentary majority . He probably will probably be unable to accomplish 11 much after that .
 The White House is the best in the world, in terms of how it enhances someone's image . The imagery you get from 24 being at the White House are the best.
 The U.S. has been in talks with Russia to settle the war for years . It's essential that we continue to provide it for a variety of reasons, says President Obama .
 It is critically important that we do everything we can as quickly as we can. It's critically important to be able to get things done quickly. It is critical to ensure that we can do all we can quickly .
 Q A couple rounds ago, you answered some questions about this Burisma investigation . You answered questions about the investigation .
 Burisma. "I just wanted to circle back to it for one second," says Burisma . "I think you testified that it was important to find out what the facts might be about Burisma"
 He was executing U.S. policy at the time 13 and what was widely understood internationally to be the 14 right policy, right . He was executed United States policy at 13 .
 I'm sorry, I don't mean to be -21 Q No, I just mean you're familiar. I think with what 22 you said in your meeting that you had with Mr Giuliani about 23, you said that he was explaining to you what Biden, Vice President 24 Biden's
Rudy Giuliani talks about Burisma, rather than Burisma . Giuliani says he has the benefit of the call record where President Trump talks aboutBurisma .
 Ukraine should apply its own laws, no political interference in investigation, Rudy said . Rudy said to me once was, all I want is for Ukraine to apply its Own laws, and investigate and apply itsown laws .
 I believe Giuliani was interested in Biden, Vice President Biden's son Biden . I had pushed back on that, and I was maintaining that distinction . I believe that Giuliani was interest in Biden.
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko retracted allegations made by the Prosecutor General in Ukraine . He later retracted the allegations, which he later retracted .
 Ukraine should have been able to clarify what's all this about, he says . But he says it would have been very useful .
 A Well, in order to say that, you would presumably want to investigate. A Well is a well-known, but a Well is not a well . A Well would presumably be a good place to investigate .
 A. A. was always doing best in geography when it came to Trivial Pursuit . A. I was always did best in the geography when I was a student .
 I don't know if he did that or not, but I think I heard that he had said that . I think he had told me that, but it's not clear whether he did or not .
 Q and then he later closed those investigations in, I believe, May of 2019 . He later closed the investigations in .
 I believe he was distancing himself from Poroshenko and wanted to have a separate set of relationships in Washington different from him . He was probably wishing that he would be kept in office as well .
 The focus that I had in communicating with him was free and fair elections . And the focus that he had in talking with him is free and free elections .
 No, I -it was a 10-minute call and it was about my decision to step down. No, it was a ten-minute phone call. It was about his decision to stepping down .
 Mr Meadows looks a little bit sad down there. I'm looking down at poor Mr Meadows and he's 6 .
 Mr Ambassador, I want to come back to one 8 thing, only because I've been on Foreign Affairs for a long 9 time . He says he's been on foreign affairs for 9 years and wants to return to one thing .
 The 10 point was made that once it's appropriated, it's a done deal, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "When we talk about foreign aid, and I think the 10 points were made that when it was appropriated"
 One foreign aid 20 allotment gets held up every single year through every appropriation process . So, to suggest that there 19 is some nefarious purpose just because one foreign aid20 allotment is held up, you would have nefarious purposes 21 every year .
 The 25th anniversary of the first anniversary of this year's first anniversary will be held in New York City . It's important to put this in the context of what it really is, says Tom Charity .
 It was a delay that you believed was ultimately going to get finished and corrected . You believed it was going to be completed and corrected. It was the delay you believed would get finished .
 Ukraine officials "believed and communicated that to the Ukraine officials, not to worry, that we are going to get this done," Ukraine official says . "You believed and communicated" that to Ukraine officials. You believed and believed that to. Not to worry," he says
 Everyone in your circle believed it would be done, including Mr Taylor, once you had that conversation . And, in fact, everyone in the circle thought it would happen .
 That conversation relates to his decision to accept being appointed as Charge, I believe . That conversation I believe relates to him accepting his appointment as Charge .
 Burisma-Biden. I want to clarify one other thing, because as we've looked at this, one of the things that we continue to look at is this whole Burisma Biden . "I want to clear up the situation," he says .
 That's exactly my understanding, is that it has 8 never been investigated . That's what I think is that 8 never have ever been investigated, he says .
 It has never actually been investigated. And you have these allegations and 9 then retraction of allegations, and it has never really been investigated .
 I just think it's important that we look 12 at the clarification of these issues . I just want to see how much we need to know about these issues.
Joe Biden 14 didn't do anything inappropriate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I do appreciate the fact 13 that you've been very strong in believing that Joe Biden 14 did nothing inappropriate" Sutter says Biden's 14-year-old son was
 "You're a career professional, and honestly, over eight hours now, I've been impressed," says the author . "Over eight hours, I'm impressed. You're a Career professional," he says .
 The Middle East is one of the most difficult places to actually navigate foreign policy . I'm disappointed, because I believe that America is being deprived of an unbelievable public servant .
 I've been impressed not only with your spelling, but with your knowledge of your knowledge today . I've also been impressed with your vocabulary .
Ukrainian expert: "I hope that you look at staying involved as a Ukrainian expert, because that's what you are"
 I've gotten to meet a whole lot of experts in their field, and yet, I'm very rarely impressed . Today, I was impressed. I've met a whole lots of experts, but today I was impressed .
 There's going to be spin that comes out of this particular transcribed interview. I want to close by saying this: There's Going to bespin that comes from this particular interview .
 There's going to be things that are in the media that you supposedly said, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You supposedly said. There's a lot of stuff that is in the press that is not true"
 It's going to take, you know, a little sentence and suggest that it means something other than the context of the 8 hours that we've had. They're going to be taken to a different place .
 I think it's critically important that the message to the American people is very clear, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's critical that it's very clear that the messages to American people are very clear"
 There was no quid pro quo at any time ever communicated to you. And that message that I heard you very loud and clear today is that there was noQuid Pro quo atany time .
 We went over earlier this thing about a statement and how that would be helpful in getting a White House date . But I think that we eventually dropped that, kept working on the date and saying we are still going forward .
 Two groups that didn't talk to each other were very similar in that they felt like the call was a positive call and a positive move going forward . The readout, according to your testimony, from Ukraine and the understanding from the State Department, was very similar .
 "I think it's also important to the U.S. people that they understand one critical component of your involvement in all of this," he says .
President Obama says he was working to put together the right policies for the administration . He says the administration was successful at doing that .
 We have a renewed commitment to 4 there being such a visit to the White House . We have renewed commitment.
 Russia is putting a little bit more pressure on Russia in the Minsk 6 process . Russia is currently in the middle of a six-month process to reach the summit .
 This is about as good as you would want to be if we didn't have all this 10 other things going on in the background . This is as good. This is where you would like to be, if we had all this other thing going on .
 I'm going to encourage that very meeting. Well, you have my word that I’m going to 12 encourage -based on your expertise and your expertise 13 alone, I'mGoing to 12 . I�’s going to12 encourage - based on your knowledge and your
 16 Q&A about whether you would -after the whistleblower 17 complaint came to light . You were talking 18 to Secretary Pompeo and some of the other folks about the 19 contents of the complaint .
 President Trump's phone call with President Zelensky was mentioned in which Vice President Biden was mentioned . The question to be is what I understood to be. What I understood the question was President Trump.
 I do want to put it in the context, though, that I believe that your expertise should have been prioritized over Mr Giuliani's . I think that is part of the problem here and I wish that would have occurred, I wish it would have happened .
 I don't want to be naive about the security assistance that has gone through finally and the meeting that may happen at the White House . I also don't wants to be naïve about the Security assistance that's gone through .
 Only once those two incidents happened did security assistance be released . I mean, that has to be a part of the context, that only once those 2 happened did the security assistance.
 Whether they're related or not we may never know, but, I mean, that's an important contextual aspect of this . Now, whether they'rerelated or not, we might never know. But, it's important to know whether they are related, but that
 Giuliani went very public with the 18 statements about our instructing him and that he was 19 representing the State Department and so forth. This was 16 the phone call on 22nd of September .
 The Secretary of the Secretary had a 25-minute conversation with the Secretary of State .
 The State Department said to tell Yermak that we had already said on August 22nd, through a spokesperson of the State Department . He said that he had already told him that.
 A statement from August 22nd confirms that I was the one who put Yermak in touch with him . He was going to then tell that to John Solomon . He said that that is helpful to have that statement .
 John Solomon was writing something, and so he wanted to get this point into the article that Rudy was not acting alone, but that is not the right way to say it .
 Rudy was -he did not initiate the contact with the Ukrainians on his own, that I facilitated that for him . That Rudy was not -he didn't initiate the Contact with the Ukrainian on his himself, that he facilitated that .
 A Because I didn't want to be engaging in this media cycle with Rudy Giuliani. A Because of the media cycle, I did not want to engage in this Media cycle with Giuliani .
 I think he was talking about the Burisma/Biden investigation, and I just want to be sure . I think it was about Burisma-Biden probe, and he was talking about the investigation, I just wants to beSure. I think I
 Former Prosecutor General Shokin was not doing enough on Burisma, says former Prosecutor General . Burisma had an investigation into Burisma for a number of things .
 I believe that the next prosecutor general, Lutsenko, started and stopped. I believe the next Prosecutor General, Lutenko, began and stopped . I believe he will continue to be a prosecutor.
 There was some contact or communication with the White House Counsel's Office, he says .
 It was after the telephone transcript came out and the whistleblower report came out . The whistleblower report was released after the phone transcript was released .
 There's a reference to me in the whistleblower report. Who am I, what did I say? What did I do, what -you know, what is -what is -there's areference to me. Who is I? What is I, who is I
 Q So the whistleblower complaint came out the morning of last Thursday, the 26th of September, and you resigned the evening of the following day . The complaint was filed on September 26th .
 Just getting the basic facts so that they were aware of what's out there, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The State Department's acting legal adviser has had no additional conversations since resigning, he says . Q And other than the one call that your attorney had with your attorney, have you had any additional conversations?
 I believe I spoke with him on the weekend, and I spoke to him on October 2nd. I believe he spoke with me on the Saturday, and he spoke on October 3rd .
 The Secretary wanted to make sure that I had seen the Secretary's letter, which I told him I had, giving reasons why this was an unreasonable request, as the Secretary saw it . He wanted to ensure that he had seen it, which he told him he had .
 He wanted to make sure the State Department had access to all the things that are here in this - the text messages and things that you have access to, which they do .
 State Department email address must be copied. That was the rule that I tried to follow and that was approved .
 There may have been examples where I failed to, and to make sure that I went ahead and did that. And I tried to follow that religiously, but there may be examples where he failed to .
 A Bill Taylor that we've talked about and the Acting Assistant Secretary, Phil Reeker . The Acting Assistant secretary is a Bill Taylor . Reeker is a former Secretary of State .
 As I said in my opening testimony, my view is if it's a fact, we've got to deal with it, he said . As he said in his first testimony, his view is that it's not a fact that we're getting to deal.
 I had not heard anything about Biden, Hunter Biden or Joe Biden in this entire time . I had never heard any of them in the entire time.
 I've been very active in communicating with people, in trying to solve some of these problems . I've also been trying to get the White House visits together, phone calls, and phone calls .
 The incident took place in the early hours of this morning . It was a surprise to see that it had taken place and it was quite a surprise .
 "It creates a problem again where all of the things that we're trying to do to advance the bilateral relationship, strengthen our support for Ukraine, strengthen the positioning against Russia is now getting sucked into a domestic political debate in the U.S., domestic political narrative," says
 Ambassador. I apologize for not being here 14 to hear all of your testimony, Ambassador. Ambassador.
 Yuriy Lutsenko is the 18 prosecutor general of Ukraine, who is no 19 in office . He is no longer in office. He is a former prosecutor general .
 President Barack Obama was not credible and 22 that he was making things up, she says . He was trying to create a 23 self-serving narrative to make himself look valuable to the 24 U.S.
 President Trump was encouraging Mr Lutsenko to be retained, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he believes in the conversation between the President and President Trump .
 The phone call is between two men . They're talking past each other, but they're talking a little bit more .
 I heard you had a prosecutor who was very good and he was shut down, he said . That's really unfair, he added . He said, "I heard he was a very good, he was closed down"
 I think President Trump is referring to the former Prosecutor General Shokin . Shokin is a former prosecutor general .
 A lot of people are talking about the way they shut your very good prosecutor down and had some very bad people involved . The prosecutor's office has a very good reputation .
 Vice President Biden was widely perceived as not fighting corruption . This is the one that Biden was involved in helping to remove from office, because he was widely seen as notfighting corruption .
 I understand and I am 6 knowledgeable about the situation, he says. First of all, I understand, and I'm 6 years old, he adds .
 President Zelensky did not trust Prosecutor 18 General Lutsenko at all . President Zelenky did NOT trust Prosecutor18 General Lutenko . Zelenski did not.
 He thought that he was there for 19 his own interests and to protect Poroshenko's interests . 20 was determined to remove him from office . He thought he was in office for 19 own interests . He was determined that he would be removed .
President Trump's 22 comments are interpreted differently than I did. But you're interpreting President Trump's comments differently than you did, I say .
 President's comments are not talking about Lutsenko, but talking about Shokin, says President .
 Zelensky is not understanding that and talking about he's going to get his own prosecutor general in place and then we will have a reliable prosecutor general. And Zelenski is not understood that .
 Mr Lutsenko was interviewed by one of the cable TV channels . He said he had investigated Mr Biden and Hunter Biden and did not find anything . And then recently, he said that he did not.
 In an interview with Face the Nation on Sunday, he said that he did not investigate the Bidens . He said he would only investigate Ukrainian citizens .
 The 4 Ambassador has been very open. As I think you can all appreciate, the 4 Ambassador is very open .
 He's been cooperative with 5 answering all of your questions today and in providing 6 information, documents to the committees today . He's also been cooperative in providing information to committees .
 This information has been provided to you 11 with the understanding that it's not classified . This 12 interview transcript and the documents associated with it 13 will not be made public except in accordance with the rules 14 of the committee . This information is not classified and that this 12
 This is not in executive session, but you are, of course, welcome to come and review the transcript .
 "I'd like to ask a question, because my attorney mentioned that there are some sensitive things in here," he says . "There are somesensitive things in this place," he adds .