 NATO has strongly condemned Russian actions in Ukraine . NATO has taken steps aimed at reassuring allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe .
 NATO has shown support for Ukraine and its territorial integrity . Measures aimed at rebuking Russia include demonstrations of support for the Ukraine .
 NATO members say they will continue to conduct previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and elsewhere in the region . NATO members have said they will still conduct previous planned exercises .
 The United States has been a key driver of the NATO response. The U.S. has taken additional military measures intended to reassure its allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe .
 ERI would enable augmented U.S. troop rotations and military infrastructure in Central and Eastern Europe . Among other things, it would also enable augmented United States troop rotation .
 Critics have called for more robust forward or permanent deployment of U.S. and NATO forces in Central and Eastern Europe . Other things, including military training and anti-aircraft weapons, have been called for .
 Some members of Congress have called on the Obama Administration and NATO to take additional military action to reassure allies and deter Russia .
 Some members have called for a more resolute demonstration of NATO’s commitment to enlargement . Georgia, a former republic Soviet republic, had a military conflict in 2008 .
 The proposed Forging Peace through Strength in Ukraine and the Transatlantic Alliance Act calls for additional NATO and U.S. military assistance to Ukraine . Montenegro and Georgia should be granted NATO membership for Montenegro .
 The U.S. Congress has expressed deep concern over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its role in the ongoing crisis in Ukraine .
 Some policy makers and analysts have called for a reassessment of the transatlantic community’s progress in realizing its goal of a Europe “whole, free, and at peace,” citing security concerns .
 NATO's transformation could come at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense, enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty . Some NATO members, including former members of the communist bloc, have expressed concern .
 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and others have argued that budgetary constraints facing allied governments could spur much-needed defense cooperation among European allies .
 NATO announced the suspension of all “practical’s civilian and military cooperation with Russia in early April . The NATORussia Council was formed in April .
 Cooperative activities in NATO-Russia Council that could be affected include a helicopter maintenance fund and a counternarcotics initiative in Afghanistan . Some joint counter-terrorism initiatives in the council could also be affected .
 The allies have agreed to strengthen political and military cooperation with the government in Kyiv . NATO Support for Ukraine has been in Ukraine since 2004 .
 This includes providing military trainers to assist in Ukraine’s military modernization efforts . This includes improving the interoperability of Ukrainian and allied armed forces through exercises and joint operations .
 NATO officials have announced 24 new multinational defense projects in which assets are pooled or shared . In June, Secretary General Rasmussen announced the creation of several new NATO trust funds to help develop Ukrainian defense capacity .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine logistics, command and control, cyber defense, and assisting retired military personnel to adapt to civilian life .
 Total contributions to these trust funds have not as yet been publicly disclosed . Total contributions have not been disclosed .
 NATO has not provided Ukraine with military hardware and is not expected to do so . Ukraine has not been given military hardware by NATO .
Bilateral military assistance does not preclude bilateral military assistance from individual allies . This does not, however, preclude bilateral assistance from individuals .
 All NATO allies have thus far ruled out providing Ukraine with lethal military aid, arguing that such assistance could lead to a further escalation of the conflict . The conflict has been escalating in recent months .
 Since Russia's annexation of Crimea, NATO has sought to reinforce its commitment to defending central and eastern European allies . NATO Reassurance Measures in Central and Eastern Europe are in place .
 Measures taken so far have centered on air defense and surveillance, maritime deployments, and military exercises . Measures taken thus far have included air defense, surveillance and maritime deployments .
 NATO has thus far ruled out permanent troop deployments in the region . Despite calls from some Member states, NATO has yet to rule out permanent deployments .
 NATO is carrying out aerial surveillance flights over Poland and Romania . NATO member states have deployed additional fighter jets to the alliance's Baltic Air Policing mission .
 NATO increased the Air Policing Mission from four to 16 fighter jets in April . In April, the mission was increased to four-16 fighter jets .
 Denmark, France, Poland, and the UK are each currently contributing four fighter aircraft to the mission . Denmark, French, Poland and UK each currently contribute four fighter planes .
 Canada has also deployed jets to Romania to conduct training exercises with the Romanian air force . Canada also has also deploys jets to the country for training exercises .
 NATO has used surveillance images to monitor Russian troop movements along the Ukrainian border .
 NATO has deployed two maritime groups on patrols to the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas . The two groups are based in the Baltic, the Mediterranean and the Baltic .
 One group of 5-7 mine clearance vessels have been patrolling the Baltic Sea since late April . One group has been patrolling since April .
 It includes ships from Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Norway . The ship is from the Netherlands and Belgium .
 A second maritime contingent of frigates has been patrolling the Mediterranean since May . A second contingent of the frigates have been patrolling since May.
 It includes ships from Canada, Germany, Norway, Turkey, and the U.S. It includes ship from Canada and Germany .
 In mid-July, a third NATO maritime group participated in naval exercises in the Black Sea . In July, the group took part in a third naval exercise .
 The group of four ships conducted interoperability exercises with naval units from Greece, Italy, Romania, Turkey, and the United States .
 NATO member states have conducted several military exercises in Central and Eastern Europe . They have planned at least one major exercise in Ukraine in September .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine conducted a military exercise in Estonia . It was aimed at repelling a potential attack on Estonian territory .
 The United States Army-led Rapid Trident 2014, originally scheduled to take place in western Ukraine in July, has been tentatively postponed until mid-September . The U.S. Army- led Rapid Trident was originally scheduled for July .
 The Army anticipates that up to 14 nations, including many NATO member states, will participate in the exercise . The exercise will reportedly feature a combined U.S.-Ukrainian battalion headquarters practicing a peacekeeping operation .
 Some allies in Central and Eastern Europe have called for a more robust demonstration of NATO’s willingness and capacity to defend them .
 NATO's 1997 pledge to refrain from permanently stationing substantial combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Other allies have cautioned against a further “militarization’s” of NATO relations with Russia .
 Officials in Germany have said permanent troop deployments in member states formerly aligned with the Soviet Union could represent a counter-productive provocation of Russia .
 The Obama Administration has taken additional military measures intended to reassure Central and Eastern European allies .
 The U.S. European Command’s Operation Atlantic Resolve is under the umbrella of Operation AtlanticResolve . The effort includes enhanced troop rotations in the region and joint military exercises with allies and partners .
 U.S. troops have participated in at least ten land-based military exercises with NATO Central and Eastern European and other allies this spring and summer .
 The United States has suspended all military-to-military activities with Russia . Two previously scheduled trilateral exercises with Canada and Norway have been suspended .
 The Defense Department has also enhanced U.S. naval presence in the Black and Baltic Seas . The Defense Dept. also enhanced its naval presence.
 The USS Taylor and the USS Vella Gulf were at varying times deployed to the Black Sea for naval exercises .
The USS Oscar Austin has conducted naval exercises and port visits in the Baltic Sea . The USS OscarAustin has conducted a number of exercises in the region .
 President Obama announced that he would seek congressional approval for up to $1 billion to fund a European Reassurance Initiative . The initiative is intended to reassure allies and bolster security and defense capabilities of partner countries in the region .
 The Administration has since requested $925 million in the Department of Defense’s FY2015 Overseas Contingency Operations budget request to fund the initiative .
 Could include augmented U.S. Army rotations to the NATO Response Force . Could include enhanced F-15 fighter jets deployments and increased participation in NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission .
 Could include improvements to air fields and training ranges and operations centers in Central and Eastern Europe . Could include improved air fields, training ranges, operations centers .
 Activities could include adding U.S. air equipment in Eastern Europe and improved prepositioning facilities for Marine equipment in Norway .
 Could include increased U.S. force levels in military exercises in Europe, as well as funding to enable enhanced allied and partner participation in such exercises . Could also include increased United States force level in Europe .
 The exercises aim to improve allied and partner readiness and interoperability . The exercises are aimed at improving allied and partners' readiness .
 Activities could focus on building military capacity in Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine . Activities could also focus on developing military capacity.
 Areas of emphasis include filling critical operational gaps in border security and air and maritime awareness and strengthening civilian oversight of the defense establishment .
 Central and Eastern European leaders have called for increased U.S. military engagement in the region . The proposed ERI has been welcomed by Central andEastern European leaders .
 The ERI would allow the U.S. to prolong measures that were already planned or were taken in the wake of Russia’s annexation of Crimea . It falls short of the permanent basing of NATO forces called for by some in the region .
 Critics emphasize that contributions to the ERI from NATO members other than the United States could be important .
 Some Western European leaders, including in Italy and Germany, have repeatedly cautioned against further militarization .
 The Economist, June 7, 2014, is the latest edition of The Economist . The Economist is the second edition of the magazine's annual series .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine sharpened concerns . Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe about Vladimir Putin's possible future intentions .
 Geographical proximity and long-standing historical relationships, including the experience of Soviet invasion and domination during the Communist era, color regional attitudes toward Russia .
 Many officials and analysts in Central and Eastern Europe say they have not been especially surprised by Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary joined NATO in 1999, and Slovakia joined in 2004 . Poland, Czech Republic and Hungary also joined NATO .
 All four countries regard NATO as the central pillar and guarantor of their national security . All four have demonstrated their commitment to the alliance by participating in the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan .
 The governments of Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia founded the Visegrád Group as a platform for regional cooperation in 1991 . Hungary also agreed to a deal with Russia's state nuclear 14 .
 Response to Crisis in Ukraine company in early 2014 for the upgrade of a Hungarian nuclear power plant, financed by a €10 billion loan from Moscow .
 The V4 countries joined their fellow EU member states in adopting wider financial and trade sanctions against Russia on July 29 . Russia's failure to halt support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine quickly shifted the sanctions debate in Europe .
 debates during the spring and early summer of 2014 about EU sanctions and responding to Ukraine crisis exposed differences within the V4 . Some observers questioned the future relevance of the grouping as a mechanism for coordinating foreign policy .
 Poland's consistent and forceful advocacy of a robust response to Russia's actions made it something of an outlier in the V4 . Poland’s consistent, forceful advocacy. of a strong response to the Russia’'s actions was something of a outlier .
 The governments of the other three countries have tended to be more reserved . Whether owing to a desire to preserve energy and economic ties with Russia, concerns about provoking Russia further.
 Critics of these governments’ response noted an apparent preference for inaction by the Czech Republic and Slovakia . Some outright pro-Russian stances by the prime minister of Hungary .
 Poland is in the midst of a long-term transformation to a smaller, more capable, and more deployable military . Poland is by far the most populous country, the largest economy, and the most significant military actor of the V4.20 .
 Central European Policy Institute, June 30, 2014. Grappling with irrelevance, Central European policy Institute, July 1, 2014 .
Analysts say the Fidesz party has used its parliamentary supermajority to weaken systemic checks and balances . Since 2010, analysts say the party has concentrated power around the prime minister .
 Orbán and Putin appear to have similar visions of structuring their respective states . Ideological affinity between them appears to derive largely from their similar visions.
 Poland has reportedly significantly increased equipment expenditures . Response to the Crisis in Ukraine has reportedly increased equipment expenditure .
 Poland has been a leading allied participant in NATO’s mission in Afghanistan . Poland is a leading NATO participant in the Afghanistan mission .
 Poland has been a leading voice in calling for NATO to focus on its traditional vocation as an alliance of territorial defense . At the same time, Poland has seen Russia as a threat to Poland .
 Polish officials revived a long-standing wish to base U.S. forces on their territory . Polish officials call for two NATO brigades to be stationed in Poland as a security guarantee .
 Poland's security is the 5,800 square mile Russian exclave Kaliningrad, wedged between Poland and Lithuania . Poland is also wedged in the exclave.
 Hungary intends to increase defense spending from the current 0.8% of GDP to 1.4% by 2022 . It will replace Soviet-era transport aircraft and helicopters .
 As much as 75% of Slovakia’s defense equipment is past its life cycle and the military remains heavily dependent on Russian armaments . Analysts say a low defense budget presents the Slovak military with an especially difficult challenge .
 The V4 countries have sought to expand their cooperation from largely political matters to security and defense . In recent years, the V4 nations have tried to expand cooperation from politics to security .
 Current or prospective areas of cooperation include joint procurement of ammunition, armored vehicles, individual soldier equipment, and battlefield imaging systems . CBRN; joint training of helicopter pilots and air traffic controllers; and cyber defense . The United States and the U.S. are among the
 All three initially called for the EU to impose harsh political and economic sanctions . But moderated their stance after economists suggested severe EU sanctions against Russia could push the countries into an economic recession . Latvia and Lithuania likely most affected by the sanctions .
 Leaders of Baltic countries have backed the expanded measures as a political imperative that outweighs economic disruption and discomfort . Despite the potential economic consequences of the wider EU sanctions adopted July 29, however, the leaders of the Baltic countries say they are not worried about the impact .
 The Baltic countries rely heavily on NATO membership . They have emphasized active participation in the alliance, including by having contributed troops to Afghanistan .
 All three Baltic countries also contribute forces to the EU’s Nordic Battlegroup . 2,400 troops expected to be ready and available for deployment in 2015 .
 Transnistria, Moldova’s breakaway region with a strongly pro-Russian government, has redoubled its long-standing efforts to secure Russia's recognition for its independence .
 Russia has not yet done so, but may have little more to lose in doing so now, given international condemnation of its actions in Ukraine . Russia has been criticized for its actions, but has not done so so.
 NATO’s top military commander, General Philip Breedlove, expressed concern that Russian forces could sweep across eastern and southern Ukraine to link up with Transnistria .
 Moscow has shown hostility toward the Moldovan government, especially due to its signature of an Association Agreement with the European Union in June 2014 . It has so far given no indications that it is planning military action against Moldova .
 Most observers believe Russia will continue to try to turn Moldova away from a pro-Western orientation by using indirect tactics such as imposing de facto trade sanctions .
 NATO cooperation with Moldova includes such areas as defense strategy, planning and budgeting, as well as improving military education and training . Moldova also has a strong military presence in the country .
 The Administration's FY 2015 aid request, drafted before the current conflict in Ukraine, includes the same amounts for FY 2015 for Moldova .
 Moldova may receive additional security assistance from the United States, perhaps as part of the Administration's proposed European Reassurance Initiative .
 Ukraine's armed forces and police were unable to effectively oppose Russia's invasion of Crimea in February and March 2014 . Ukraine’s armed forces, police were able to oppose Russia’'s invasion in February.
 Pro-Russian gunmen took over Donetsk, Luhansk, and other towns and cities in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine .
 Many observers say the weakness of Ukrainian forces was due to poor training, poor morale, shortages of equipment, and treason in the military and police .
 Ukrainian forces have inflicted serious defeats on pro-Russian separatists since June 2014 . However, they have managed to overcome some of these problems .
 Ukrainian forces are seeking to surround the key “rebel’s bastions in Donetsk and Luhansk . They are trying to cut off the separatists off from their source of supplies in Russia .
 Ukrainian leaders say they are seeking to avoid house-to-house fighting in big cities . The move could cause a dramatic increase in military and civilian casualties .
 Even a prolonged siege of the cities would likely dramatically worsen the humanitarian situation . Even a longer siege would likely worsen the situation .
 Ukrainian military spokesmen and some outside observers claim that Ukraine may be able to defeat the separatists in a matter of weeks . Russia does not massively intervene to support the separatists .
 Ukrainian leaders say they want to negotiate the peaceful withdrawal of Russia-backed separatists from Ukraine as part of a peace plan for the region . Ukraine's leaders say that they want a peaceful withdrawal from Russia- backed separatists .
 Russia has increased its supply of tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers, and other heavy weapons to them . U.S. policymakers say the "rebels’’s” deteriorating situation has caused the increase .
 Administration officials say Russia supplied the "rebels" with the SA-11 anti-aircraft missile that was used to shoot down Malaysian Airline Flight MH17 .
 U.S. officials have also provided satellite imaging that reportedly shows Russian forces have launched artillery attacks on Ukrainian forces from Russian territory .
 Russia could be preparing to send additional heavy weaponry to separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 Analysts have expressed concern about Russia’s reaction if the forces it has supplied are close to defeat .
 Russia could decide to abandon them (perhaps hoping to loosen U.S. and international sanctions on Russia) or it could openly invade eastern Ukraine with the forces it has deployed on the border .
 NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Breedlove said that Russian troops on the border with Ukraine had increased to well over 12,000 . On July 30, he said that Russia's forces on the Ukraine border had increased.
 The Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine . It has provided non-lethal assistance .
 The Administration announced an additional $5 million in security assistance to Ukraine . The additional $8 million in non-lethal support includes explosive ordinance disposal equipment and handheld radios .
 The U.S. announced a further $10 million to assist Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service . The total security assistance to Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis to $33 million .
 The United States delivered to Ukraine 1,929 first aid kits, 80 multiband handheld radios, 1,000 sleeping mats, over 5,000 uniform items . In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on July 9, Assistant Secretary of Defense Derek Chollet said that during June
 Members of Congress have argued for supplying lethal military aid to Ukraine . Some argue for providing real-time intelligence support to Ukraine's armed forces .
 Supporters of such aid say the United States needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 aid could serve to deter Putin from further incursions into eastern Ukraine. They argue such aid could help deter Putin's incursion into Ukraine .
 Some objections to lethal aid for Ukraine are that it could foreclose a diplomatic solution to the crisis . Others say it could actually provoke Putin to invade eastern Ukraine with his army . It could also end U.S.-Russian cooperation in such issues as the withdrawal of U.
 NATO suspended all practical and military cooperation with Russia on April 2 . As noted above, this was the first time the suspension was suspended by NATO .
 The crisis in Ukraine is a response to NATO's commitment to partnership, its unpredictability, and perceived attempts to sow disunity within the alliance . The Ukraine crisis is the latest in a series of events that have rocked the NATO alliance .
 Russia's actions have drawn uniform condemnation from NATO and the European Union . Many in Europe and the United States emphasize that Europe’s long-term security will depend on cooperative relations with Russia .
 European allies continue to stress that they aspire to cooperation and partnership with Russia . Many European allies still stress they want cooperation and cooperation .
 Analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust, at least for the time being . However, analysts expect ties will continue to remain.
 Moscow has objected to NATO and the United States’ military responses to the crisis . The alliance’s 1997 commitment is not to permanently station substantial combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The first of these Mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered later this year .
 French President François Hollande has repeatedly stated that France would honor the existing contract . Hollande has said that France will honor the current contract .
 French commentators have noted the economic and 32 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen as quoted by Kathrin Hille and Peter Spiegel, “NATO Chief Defends Eastern Advance,’
 Hugh Carney: “Spotlight on French Military Deal with Russia’s’
 France's sale of France has been linked to the crisis in Ukraine . France has sold France to Ukraine in the wake of the Ukraine crisis .
 Some members of Congress have called on NATO to offer to purchase the Mistrals built for Russia from France .
 Germany has cancelled the planned sale of a military training facility to Russia . UK and U.S. also say they have halted military cooperation .
 Montenegrin security agencies and defense sector require reforms to meet NATO standards, NATO officials say . Montenegrin officials say further efforts need to be made to fight corruption and organized crime in country .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine to a protracted dispute with NATO ally Greece over the country's official name .
There has been some indication that public support for NATO membership has increased to some degree, though not significantly . As the conflict in Ukraine has persisted, there has been an increase in support for membership .
 Georgia has not been granted a Membership Action Plan . Administration officials have indicated that they would support granting a MAP to Georgia at NATO’s September summit in Wales .
 Russian forces have performed air and land exercises near Swedish and Finnish territory . In 2013, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said that Moscow would be forced to “respond’ if Finland or Sweden joined NATO .
 Public opinion in both countries remains firmly opposed to NATO membership .
 The adjusted United States force posture has coincided with calls for European allies and the EU to enhance their own military capabilities in order to boost NATO’s effectiveness .
 The United States system is designed to defend alliance territory against possible missile attacks from Iran and other potential adversaries . The U.S. system serves as the foundation for a new NATO missile defense capability .
 Critics of the Administration's and NATO's response to Russian actions in Ukraine have argued that more should be done to support Ukraine and reassure allies in Europe .
 The United States has provided the Ukrainian government with some nonlethal military aid . The U.S. has thus far declined to provide lethal military aid to Ukraine .
 Congress could continue to play an important role in shaping U.S. and NATO responses to Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 NATO involvement in areas such as cybersecurity and energy security . Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Georgia, NATO relations with Russia, and NATO involvement .