 Last week’s ceasefire has held up better than I expected, but it is still very precarious .
 The level of violence is down considerably for where it was two weeks ago . The good news, especially for civilians in the conflict zone, is that it's down considerably .
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko claimed that some 70% of the Russian regular forces in eastern Ukraine had returned to Russia . NATO reported on Thursday that the number of Russian regulars on Ukrainian soil was down to some 1000 .
 Many Ukrainian servicemen caught behind Russian/pro-Russian lines when ceasefire went into effect have made it back to Ukrainian-controlled territory .
 The military situation is still very unstable, above all because the disposition of forces remains confused . There is no clear or agreed-upon line of separation .
 There continue to be reports of fighting, particularly regular and sometimes heavy shelling and rocket attacks in and around Donetsk . I remain convinced that the separatists are not going to accept continued Ukrainian control of the Donetsk airport .
 The Ukrainian National Defense and Security Council also seemed to contradict Poroshenko . It could not confirm that Russian regulars were returning to Russia .
 It is clear that the parties to the conflict remain far apart on a possible political solution . The conflict is still very far apart.
 Poroshenko has made clear that Kyiv will never surrender its claim to Crimea or the Donbas . He does not intend to push for constitutional amendments needed to transform the state into a formal federation .
 He is also insisting that the special status for “certain districts’ in the Donbas called for will not threaten Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 Kyiv has lost de facto sovereignty over the territory controlled by the separatists and is not going to get it back . All this is to say that I remain convinced that Kyiv is losing de facto control of the territory .
 ‘People’s Republic of Novorossiya’ will effectively be a protectorate of Russia . Instead, we are likely to see the consolidation of another so-called “frozen conflict’ in post-Soviet space .
 The borders of "Novorossiya" have probably become clearer, unless full-scale war resumes .
 This is not an outcome that Poroshenko can acknowledge or accept publicly, and it is one that most Ukrainians are going to find extremely hard to swallow . This is one of many things Poroshenko is going to face .
 Ukraine has lost de facto sovereignty over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Nagorno-Karabakh . Russia will have to accept it, just as the governments and peoples of Georgia, Moldova, and Azerbaijan have had
 There are some important differences between Novorossiya and the other post-Soviet frozen conflicts that warrant mention, however .
 The population of Novorossiya is much larger than the others, depending on the borders it ends up with and how many civilians remain or return .
 This compares to a population of some 500,000 in Transnistria, less than 250,000, in Abkhazia, around 50,000. In South Ossetia, about 50,00 people are in the region, and around 150,
 Novorossiya will have a very long border with Ukraine, one without any clear geographical features along the so-called line-of-control . It will be more difficult to stabilize and for international monitors to keep the border stable .
 The good news is that sustained and large-scale military operations in eastern Ukraine may have ended . Still, the good news was that sustained military operations may have end .
 It is still possible that an effort to drive the Ukrainians back from Donetsk or invest Mariupol will lead to a resumption of fighting all along the front lines .
 Moscow could decide whether it needs a land corridor to Crimea . It is also possible that Moscow has decided, or will decide, that it needs to make that happen .
Kyiv's volunteer battalions could resume offensive operations in Ukraine . Decision would almost certainly lead to another surge in Russian support and more defeats for the Ukrainians .
 Novorossiya People’s Republic is going to prove to be a very bad outcome for all parties. My view is that an unrecognized NovorOSSiya People's Republic will be a bad outcome .
Large numbers of people have switched loyalties or turned on each other over the course of the fighting, as demonstrated in Slovyansk after the Ukrainians retook it .
 The economy of the region has also been devastated, and it is unclear that it will continue to receive massive subsidization of its heavy industries from underpriced Russian energy .
 separatists are going to have to form a government despite their lack of unity and try to bring order to a lawless territory with a very heavily armed and now militarized population .
 The ceasefire is going to prove very divisive and may well increase support for the far right . As for the rest of Ukraine, it is in an acute economic crisis .
 Russia’s other neighbors, including the Baltic states, can expect even more heavy-handed military, economic, and political pressure from Moscow .
 Russia, in turn, is going to be burdened with the economic costs of keeping the Donbas afloat . Russia's economy continues to deteriorate in the face of Western sanctions and what may be a significant decline oil prices .
 The already economically distressed EU countries are going to suffer from the sanctions on Russia and from Russian retaliatory measures . The sanctions will be a boon to the region’s far right and will likely deepen the already serious intergovernmental tensions over Russian policy .
 EU governments are not going to want to foot the bill for restoring Ukraine's finances .
 NATO will have to take additional measures to defend its eastern borders, including the United States . The Baltic states are effectively impossible to defend.
 We are almost certainly going to witness a full-blown gas war over the coming winter. And we are almost definitely going to see a full gas war .
 I do not mean to suggest that the ceasefire is not a blessing for the civilians remaining in the conflict zone – it is. That said, I don't mean to say that, but I did not suggest that it is . It is.
 Ukrainian forces are not going to have to try to take Donetsk and Luhansk by force . The turn in the tide of battle over the past several weeks has at least meant that Ukrainian forces will not have to take the two cities by force.
 There is a widespread assumption in much of the analysis that the Ukrainians were on the verge of a decisive victory in the east before the surge in Russia’s indirect and direct military assistance .
 The assaults on Donetsk and Luhansk would have been very violent, bloody, and time consuming . Even if the Ukrainians had been able to fully surround Donetsk, which they never did, I suspect the assaults would have be very violent .
Ukrainians capture city of Horlivka, a city of less than 300,000 residents just to the northeast of Donetsk . Many civilian deaths and a great deal of destruction were caused by the capture .
 Most of the civilian population still in the conflict zone, including those not particularly sympathetic to the separatists, blamed the Ukrainians for most of the shelling and rocket attacks .
 A bloody battle for Donetsk and Luhansk would very likely have reinforced those sentiments . The battle would have reinforced the sentiments of many .
 Kyiv is not going to have to further alienate the civilian population of the Donbas and then try to govern them . The silver lining for Ukraine, then, is that Kyiv will not have to alienate civilian population .
 Neither is Kyiv going to have the burden of restoring its devastated economy . Kyiv will not be able to restore its economy.
 A frozen conflict is preferable to the political and economic costs of trying to reintegrate the population of Novorossiya into Ukraine, writes David Frum . In the long run, a majority of Ukrainians may even conclude, he says, that Transnistria is preferable .
Political stability in the rest of the country will probably require many years of political stabilization and economic progress . But that is a very long way off, and it will probably need many years to make progress .
 Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, and even Belarus are in for a long period of costly and dangerous confrontation with Russia . At the geopolitical level, he remains convinced that we are in a long time of costly confrontation .
 Russia is going to respond by probing NATO’s eastern borders and by engaging in deliberate provocations along the Finnish border and elsewhere as well . The attendant risk of some military incident.
 It is now starting to militarize the Arctic by establishing a new Northern Command and increasing its military assets in the region . It is also starting to establish a new northern command and increasing military assets .
 We may also see Russia withdraw from the INF treaty, deploy nuclear missiles and engage in cyberwar by proxy . We may likewise see Russia pull from the treaty, deploying nuclear missiles .
 The Kremlin will continue to do everything possible, hopefully short of all-out war, to keep the EU and NATO out of a region that not just Putin but the great bulk of the Russian political elite and public considers rightfully within Russia's sphere of influence .
Realists in the West and in Russia come to realize that this is an irrationally costly and dangerous game . There is compelling need for new rules that reduce the costs of geopolitical confrontation and keep a Hot Peace from becoming a Hot War .
 NATO has to abandon its long-held position that all “European’s states that meet its vague criteria for membership and wish to become NATO members . But it will very likely require some very unpleasant concessions on the part of the West .
 NATO is a club, and it is not obligated to take in countries that it does not want, particularly countries it cannot or will not defend if push comes to shove, or whose membership will undermine, not enhance, the security of its member-states or Europe as a whole .
 Russia has agreed to a renewed commitment to the INF treaty and a new Conventional Forces in Europe treaty . The treaty provides for force dispositions and confidence building measures that make Russia less intent on destabilizing its neighbors .