 We believe a savings account should actually help you save .
 Ally Online Savings Account offers among the most competitive rates in the country . Ally Online savings account offers one of the best rates in country .
 Cuba American business is eagerto cross the Florida Strait, but obstacles remain, page 31 . Cuba American businesses are still on the list .
 Labour's plan to end a tax break for the rich and mobile is welcome . Bello, page 33 British tax rules, is the latest in a series of tax rules .
 Eurostat Europe's economy. Investors are getting excited about Europe again .
 Companies in the euro zone are finally enjoying the benefits of a tentative recovery, page 61 . But its continuance is by no means assured, says page 61.
 Italy's prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is methodically pushing through his reforms . But the biggest ones will take years to complete, page 47 Malaysia A thuggish government is playing racial politics .
 An anti-terror law dents freedom in Malaysia, page 36 TheTambora volcano . Two hundred years ago the most powerful eruption in modern history.
 The Economist Newspaper Limited. Neither this publication nor any part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system .
 Louis, MO, 63146-6978 USA Canada Post publications mail sales agreement no.012331 .
 “Our frictionless enterprise has nearly tripled our capacity to deliver projects of value to the business.’s frictionless business has nearly doubled our capacity. ‘Our frictionlessness enterprise has almost tripled ourcapacity to deliver project of value’
 CIO T Tribune Media Tribune Media's goal was to increase IT’s capacity to bring value to their business teams .
 Riverbed helped them consolidate from 54 to just one software-defined data center and achieve superior application and business performance . Riverbed is now a software-focused data center .
 More than 26,000 customers rely on Riverbed for end-to-end application visibility, optimization, and control .
 It was the country’s worst act of terrorism since the bombing of the American embassy in Nairobi in 1998 . The bombing was the worst attack on the U.S. embassy since the attack in 1998.
 In their spree, the gunmen targeted Christians, separating them from their Muslim classmates, before they themselves were killed fighting Kenyan security forces .
 Iran and six world powers agreed on the “parameters’ of a deal to limit the Iranian nuclear programme in return for the lifting of sanctions . Iran, Russia, China, Britain, France, France and Germany agreed to the deal .
 Iran's “breakout capability’s time needed to make the fissile material for an atomic bomb would be extended to about a year . The condition would hold for a decade, Iran's "break out capability" would hold.
 A final deal is to be reached by the June 30th deadline. But several crucial issues still need to be settled and much hard bargaining lies ahead . The deal is expected to be agreed by the end of the month .
 exit poll showed those who fretted most about the perilous state of the city's finances voted for Mr Emanuel by a margin of more than two-to-one .
 California brought in the state’s first-ever mandatory restrictions on water use following four years of drought .
 The restrictions will fall mostly on urbanites, who use 10% of the water . The restrictions are aimed at urbanites who use more than 10% .
 Mr Tsarnaev carried out the attack with his brother, who was killed when police tried to apprehend him .
 A police officer was charged with the murder of an unarmed black man in Charleston, South Carolina . A video emerged of the officer apparently shooting the man as he was running away .
 The swift decision to prosecute for murder comes amid a national debate on the policing of black communities . Michael Brown was shot dead in Ferguson, Missouri, last August .
 Rand Paul is the second Republican to officially announce that he is running for the presidential race .
 Hillary Clinton rented offices in Brooklyn for her national campaign headquarters . Clinton to declare formally after renting offices for her office in Brooklyn .
 The former general has been held responsible for torture and killings during the country's civil war in the 1980s . The holiday's over The United States deported to El Salvador .
 Eugenio Vides Casanova was head of El Salvador’s national guard . Casanova had lived in Florida since 1989 .
 Inflation in the year to March was 8.1%, mainly because of higher prices for food and energy . Inflation is due to a rise in food prices and energy prices .
 Atacama Desert, normally one of the driest areas on Earth, is normally driest area in the world .
 Emergency workers recorded anotheri25 people missing and 2,700 homeless . The homeless are at least 3,000 people in need of shelter .
Michelle Bachelet reckons the government will have to spend at least $1. billion to repair the damage . The president, Michelle Bachelets, reckons that the government must spend $1 billion .
 Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister of Greece, visited Moscow to discuss economic co-operation with Vladimir Putin . The Greek prime minister was visiting Moscow to meet with Putin .
 Mr Tsipras said no such deal was on the table. European countries worried that he might offer to obstruct sanctions against Russia in exchange for aid .
 Greece could run out of money to repay its debts as early as next month . Greece’s cash crunch is becoming ever tighter, and the country could be running out soon .
 Transcripts provide evidence that officials on board the plane pressured pilots to attempt to land despite dangerous conditions . The transcripts provide evidence.
 Marine Le Pen, the leader of the National Front in France, withdrew the party’s support from her 86-year-old father Jean-Marie Le Pen .
 Ashton Carter began a tour of Asia in an attempt to breathe new life into America’s ‘pivot’ towards the continent . Carter is the secretary of defence of the U.S.
 He started his tour in Japan, where he warned countries about the risks of conflict over disputed islands in the East and South China Seas .
 In India 20 people were shot dead by police for allegedly cutting down red sandalwood trees . The wood is highly sought after in East Asia by furniture-makers and other trades .
 Smuggling red sandalwood is a lucrative business, but confrontations between loggers and the authorities are not usually deadly .
 An explosion tore through a factory that produces paraxylene, a chemical used in plastics among other things, in the city of Zhangzhou .
Violent protests erupted in Guangdong province last year against the construction of a new px plant . Last year violent protests erupted against the building of the new plant .
 30 taxi drivers took their protest against new restrictive laws on renewing licences to the extreme . They poisoned themselves with chemicals in an apparent mass-suicide attempt on a busy shopping street .
 The men had travelled to the capital from the north, near the border with Russia .
 Shell's acquisition will increase its energy reserves by 25% and make it the world's third-biggest producer of liquefied natural gas . Shell’s acquisition will make it world's second biggest producer of gas .
 French government blocked any attempt by Orange to sell Dailymotion to a foreign bidder . French government did little to assuage critics who think it meddles too much in business matters .
 Vivendi says it will return €6. billion ($7. billion) to shareholders . It resolves a dispute with P Schoenfeld Asset Management . The activist hedge fund had put pressure on the company to pay more to investors .
 French government temporarily increased its stake in Renault by 47% to 197% in order to get the carmaker to adopt a rule that gives double voting rights to long-term investors who have held shares for at least two years .
 The rule became law last year but Renault has resisted implementing it . The rule was introduced by Renault last year .
 Hong Kong's Hang Seng stockmarket index soared, jumping above 27,000 for the first time since January 2008 . Rising trading volumes on Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect scheme, which links the mainland and Hong Kong markets .
 Volumes had been disappointing since the link’s launch last year . But it has been boosted by a government decision to allow domestic mutual funds to use it .
 Mylan tendered an unsolicited $29 billion offer to buy Perrigo . In another blockbuster deal in the drug industry, Mylan also tendered a $29billion bid for the drug company .
 Both companies used to be based in America but moved their registered offices to European countries to take advantage of lower corporate tax . Both companies were based in the U.S.
 FedEx tried to buy tnt Express in 2012, but Europe’s antitrust regulator withheld its approval . FedEx was confident that it could surmount any competition concerns in Europe over its bid .
 FedEx wants to combine its air-delivery service in Europe with tnt’s extensive road-based logistics network . FedEx believes its deal is different; it wants to merge its air delivery service with its road- based logistics network in Europe .
 The imf’s latest ‘World Economic Outlook’ report warned that many countries face lower economic “speed limits’ The report said many countries should ‘adjust to a new reality’ of stagnant living standards .
In rich economies the fund reckons ageing populations will be the biggest hindrance to the type of expansion seen in the 1990s and 2000s . slower productivity in emerging markets will be main factor holding those countries back .
 World Bank president Jim Yong Kim gives his strongest backing to new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank . The new bank will be led by China, which has been proposed by China .
 America has raised concerns about transparency at the aiib, even though many of its allies have signed up . Many of America's allies have also signed up.
 Mr Kim plans to place the issue high on the agenda of the forthcoming spring meeting of the World Bank and imf. The issue will be discussed at the upcoming spring meeting .
 Switzerland became the first country to date to issue a ten-year sovereign bond with a negative yield . Switzerland is the first nation to issue the bond with negative yield.
 This is part of a general move in Europe towards negative yields . This is prompted by fears of deflation and the European Central Bank’s quantitativeeasing programme .
 Ramalinga Raju, founder of Satyam Computer Services, was found guilty along with nine others of accounting fraud in India's biggest corporate scandal .
 His misconduct came to light in 2009 when he admitted that Satyam’s books had been cooked for years, and that a $1 billion cash pile did not exist .
 Samsung’s stock was hammered as it lost market share to low-cost Chinese rivals . This will be around 30% less than in the first three months of 2014 .
 This week sees the release of Samsung’s Galaxy S6, for which advance orders are heavy . This week's release of the Galaxy S 6 is expected to be the first of its kind .
 Dean Wherever the toughest challenges in public health may be, he says . We will be on the front lines, creating new and exploratory paths through ep science .
 There is no end to what we —and the leaders we are creating —can accomplish. There isno end to the what we can accomplish, he says .
 Hillary Clinton ■*Vis expected to declare that she is running for president . The most familiar candidate is surprisingly unknown .
 Cinco de May o will once again be on May 5th . For most Americans this will be as surprising as the news that Cin co-op will be on the same day .
 She nearly won it in 2008 and is in many ways a stronger candidate now . She is a strong candidate now.
 The moment Mrs Clinton turns the key will begin openly to suck up contributions, spit out sound bites and roll over her rivals .
 Paddy Power, an Irish bookmaker, has a 91% chance of capturing the White House in 2016 .
 The month before the Iowa caucuses in 2008, she was 20 points ahead of other Democrats in national polls . But she still lost to a young senator from Illinois .
 This time, no plausible candidate has yet emerged to compete with her for the Democratic nomination . But there is still time for her to run for the nomination, and she's not yet a plausible candidate .
 It is hard to say how she would fare against the eventual Republican nominee, not least since nobody has any idea who that will be .
 The field promises to be varied, ranging from the hyperventilating Ted Cruz to Jeb Bush .
 Air miles and briefing books Competence and experience, say her supporters .
 If a foreign crisis occurs on her watch, there is a good chance she will have been there, read the briefing book and had tea with the local power brokers .
 For eight years she was a close adviser to a president who balanced the budget and secured bipartisan agreements to reform welfare and open up trade in North America .
 Mrs Clinton made a habit of listening to, and working with, senators on both sides of the aisle . Some Republicans publicly regret having disliked her in the past .
 President Hillary Clinton could be better at hammering out deals with lawmakers than President Obama has been . A President Clinton could have been better at negotiating with lawmakers.
 For someone who has been on the national stage for a quarter-century, her beliefs are strangely hard to pin down . She has been a national figure for a century .
 Some candidates’ views can be inferred from advisers they retain, but Mrs Clinton has hundreds .
 Mrs Clinton's critics on the right fret that she is a powerhungry statist .
 Elizabeth Warren and Martin O'Malley are possible Democratic rivals who bash trade and banking . She fits this bill better than, say, Elizabeth Warren or Martin O’Malley .
 Some dubious ideas, such as ramping up implied subsidies for mortgages and creating make-work schemes for the young . This includes boosting investment in infrastructure and expanding wage subsidies .
 Mrs Clinton’s pitch is that she would be tougher than Mr Obama .
 She backed his surge of troops in Afghanistan but regretted the expiry date he put on it .
 Many foreigners would welcome an American commander-in-chief who is genuinely engaged with the world outside America .
 Sceptics raise two further worries about Mrs Clinton . Secrecy and privilege raise two more worries about her .
 Some say she is untrustworthy-a notion only reinforced by the revelation that she used a private server for her e-mails as secretary of state . She released only the ones she deemed relevant and then deleted the rest .
 The other worry is that dynasties are unhealthy, and that this outweighs any benefit America might gain from electing its first female president .
 The campaign has barely begun, but if Mrs Clinton is to deserve the job she desires, she has questions to answer .
 Najib Razak paints his country as a model of moderate Islam-a multicultural democracy and a beacon of tolerance . Razak should be dressed down M ALAYSIA’s prime minister .
 He has spoken of scrapping oppressive British-era laws and nurturing a creative economy . He has also spoken of the importance of nurturing the creative economy in Britain .
 The liberal master is the man to vanquish the reactionary forces in his political party, umno . The party has never been out of power and is prone to cronyism and political thuggery .
 He is the first American president since 1966 to have visited Malaysia . He is first president to visit Malaysia since 1966. He is also the first U.S. president to go to Malaysia .
Mr Najib enjoyed a round on the golf links with Mr Najib last year in Hawaii .
 The White House gushes about a “growing and warming relationship’s” between America and Malaysia .
Race to the bottom is time to call Mr Najib out on the widening gulf between spin and substance .
 Mr Najib launched a national investment fund that is now burdened with $12 billion of debts . On the economic front is a growing scandal over dubious connections.
 Mr Najib scrapped a notorious colonial law, the Internal Security Act, three years ago . It allowed indefinite detention without trial .
 The new Prevention of Terrorism Act allows suspects to be detained indefinitely . The new legislation also allows people to be held indefinitely .
 The coalition that Mr Najib leads uses foul as well as fair means to keep the opposition down . The coalition is a coalition that he leads uses to keep opposition down.
 In the most recent election, in 2013, it lost the popular vote for the first time . In 2013, President Barack Obama lost the majority of the vote .
 Anwar Ibrahim was sentenced to five years in February on trumped-up charges of sodomy . He was convicted in February of five years on sodomy charges . The opposition leader was sentenced in February to 5 years .
 In the past year growing numbers of activists and opposition figures have been arrested under the Sedition Act . The law was originally aimed at advocates of independence .
 Mr Najib once promised to remove it from the statute book . He now plans to strengthen it with harsher punishments and a clause forbidding speech that denigrates Islam .
 Among those already arrested under the Sedition Act are opponents of hudud, corporal and capital punishments, including stoning to death for adultery .
 Hudud does not apply in Malaysia, but Islamists from an opposition party want it introduced in Kelantan state in the northeast . Hudud is not allowed in Malaysia .
 The government does not like the idea but is quietly supporting it in a cynical ploy to widen splits in Pakatan Rakyat .
 Government is fanning racial and religious divisions in majority-Malay country with large ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian minorities .
 Playing racial politics could be disastrous in this multiracial country, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A better and more enlightened way for Najib to boost umno’s prospects would be for him to repair its image with ethnic Chinese and Indians .
 Malaysia's friends should be blunter about this where they have been mealy-mouthed . Malaysia’s friends should have been blunters about this .
 They should condemn Malaysia’s corruption, its decaying freedoms and its racial politics . They should also condemn Malaysia's corruption and racial politics, they say .
 The Sedition Act and unlimited detention should go. They should call for both the Act and the unlimited detention to go .
 The prime minister's hoped-for trip to Washington this year. Until matters improve, not only should golf be off the agenda, but so too should the prime minister.
 Economists are savouring the unaccustomed pleasure of revising their growth forecasts up, rather than down .
 Surveys of business activity have reached a four-year high . Euro-area consumers are feeling a lot more confident .
 The euro zone is still a long way from meeting the dic13 14-year-old definition of a recovery .
 Investors’ swing from gloom to europhoria appears already to have gone too far .
 The euro area has actually been growing for two years since an extended double-dip recession ended in early 2013 . The Euro area has been growing in the past two years .
 The expansion has been so desultory that it barely deserved the name . Yet the expansion has not even been called 'the expansion'
 The excitement generated by growth of just 0.3%, an annualised rate of little more Than 1%, tells its own story of shrunken expectations .
 euro-zone gdp in late 2014 was still 2% below its previous pre-crisis peak in early 2008 . So feeble has the recovery been that Euro-zone recovery has been.
 Two engines that are likely to run out of steam are expected to be running out of power . The two engines could run out.
 The first is the oil-price collapse in the second half of 2014, which has acted like a tax cut for consumers and businesses . The second half is the third half of the year, with the first being the first .
 That stimulus will fade towards the end of this year, and will go into reverse if oil prices move up again . That stimulus is expected to fade towards end of the year .
 The second engine is the fall in the euro, by 12% on a tradeweighted basis over the past year . The fall is the second engine of the euro's fall by 12%.
 Many European firms have done a good job of expanding their foreign sales in recent years . They will do well from a weaker currency, say analysts .
 The euro has stopped falling and, in the long run, is growing in trading markets . But the euro has also stopped falling in the past few years .
With China slowing and the American economy causing concern, the outlook is less favourable . The outlook for the U.S. economy is also less favourable with China slowing .
 Germany is running a current-account surplus of over 7% of gdp . Recovery would also be based on strong demand within the euro area, especially in Germany .
 European Central Bank’s generous programme of quantitative easing began in early March . Oe has boosted equity and bond markets-Germany's dax index is up by more than 20% since start of year .
 Banks play a bigger role than capital markets in providing funds to euro-zone companies and households . But banks play a big role in providing money to companies, households .
 Lending to the private sector is beginning to edge up, but loans to firms are still falling .
 One of the main achievements in improving euro-zone governance, the creation of a single banking supervisor under the auspices of the ecb is a double-edged sword .
Credit will not take wing while banks are still repairing their balance-sheets . Welcome though that is, credit will not be taken wing .
 Markets have been insouciant about tensions between the radical-left government of Alexis Tsipras and the rest of the euro zone .
 The fraught negotiations between Greece and its European creditors highlight how hard it is to reconcile the interests of the currency union’s disparate members .
After years of bad news, it may seem churlish to belittle signs of brighter prospects .
 The oe programme is useful in bolstering inflation expectations. Countries like Italy have made welcome efforts at reform, says the economist .
 Neither France, the second-biggest economy in the currency bloc, nor Italy, is expected to muster growth above 1% this year . But neither France or Italy are expected to be the third-bigest economy .
 The euro area’s potential growth rate of growth has deteriorated since before the financial crisis of 2007-08, according to the imf .
 The talks with Iran to limit its nuclear programme are the most important test of the Obama doctrine . Diplomatic engagement with calculated risks is better than ostracising enemies .
 If the outline becomes a final agreement, it would offer much greater assurance that Iran will not get the bomb for at least a decade .
 Obama's political foes could seek to destroy even a good deal. On the one hand, Mr Obama’s political foes may seek to destruction even a bad deal .
Team could yet fail to secure the safeguards that make the difference between a good agreement and a bad one in the weeks of bargaining to finalise an agreement by the end of June .
 A credible deal might provide balm to a region now ravaged by civil war . A credible agreement might provide a balm for the region.
 With time, dialogue might help America and Iran overcome the rivalry that has poisoned the Middle East since 1979 .
 It might change Iran’s disruptive behaviour, or perhaps the regime itself . It might be the first time Iran has taken action against the regime .
 It clearly holds enough promise to justify further talks without Congress imposing new sanctions or impeding the president's right to conduct foreign policy .
 The inspection system has been tightened and will become much more intrusive . The inspections system will become more intrusive and will be more intrusive.
 It would be more likely to be detected if it tried and the world would have more time to respond to violations . It is more likely than it would be if it was detected.
 The two sides have differences of emphasis and sometimes substance that are unsurprising but nevertheless unsettling . The two side have differing of emphasis, sometimes substance, that are sometimes unsettling .
 With IBM Watson Analytics, you can uncover hidden patterns and relationships that reveal new insights for your business . IBM Watson analytics can help you find hidden patterns.
 Inspectors must be able to gain access to any sites they deem suspicious . Inspectors will have to find out if they have access to sites they deemed suspicious .
 “snapback provisions to reimpose sanctions should be credible, not vulnerable to endless negotiations. “Snapback’s” provisions should be “credible-not vulnerable to Endless negotiations,’ says author .
 Even if these criteria are met, undeniable dangers will remain. Spin and substance will remain, even if these are met .
 Iran would have the world’s blessing to develop a massive uranium-enrichment programme . After a decade, when this deal begins to lose force, Iran would be able to develop the program .
 It could then produce a bomb’s worth of fissile material in a few weeks . The material could then be used to make a bomb.
 As a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Iran would still be banned from a bomb . Iran would be subject to enhanced monitoring .
 The world would have to live with mullahs on the nuclear threshold. Even so, should the regime not change in fundamental ways, the world would be living with mullah on nuclear threshold .
 There is nothing, in theory, to stop America from taking action if they believe Iran is trying to cross that threshold .
 If Iran has kept to the deal in the interim, the world may take more persuading to endorse sanctions and air strikes .
Long-term danger may not be so much Iranian rule-breaking as apparently scrupulous compliance. Paradoxically, the long-term risk may not have been so much of the problem .
 A deal that ensured ‘zero enrichment’ would have been ideal, but it was unobtainable . A deal would have ensured “zero enrichment.’s’d been ideal-but it was unenjoyable .
In the real world, any accord has to be measured against the plausible alternatives, and they all look worse . In the real World, any agreement must be measured by the plausible alternative .
 Increasing sanctions to compel Iran to submit to tougher terms would require the backing of the un and the eu, which is unlikely to be forthcoming .
 A return to confrontation in the name of toughening the deal would probably convince the mullahs that no accommodation with America is possible, just as the West would give up on Iran if it suddenly changed its terms .
 If negotiations break down, the risk is that Iran will remove the existing constraints on its programme . Iran is expected to remove the current constraints.
 It might then get a bomb before sanctions threaten the survival of the regime . It might also get a bombs before sanctions are imposed .
 Bombing Iranian nuclear sites would at best set back the programme by a few years at the cost of driving it underground and of inflaming a violent region .
 If Iran remains the same, Mr Obama's accord will not eliminate the threat . But it will only bequeath it in a different form to a future president .
 T HE question of how a nation should treat foreign residents dates back at least to Plato . It is the right policy for the wrong reasons T HE says .
 At its heart is a generous tax exemption for nondomiciled residents, or “non-doms’s” Residents need only tenuous links to another country .
 Non-doms can choose whether to pay British taxes on their overseas earnings . Non-doments can choose if they pay British tax on their foreign earnings .
 If they have lived in Britain for at least seven of the previous nine years, they must pay an annual fee to avoid tax . The fee ranges from £30,000 rising to £90,000 for longer stays .
 At the last count 47,000 of 111,000 non-doms took advantage of the opt-out . 5,000 paying fees to the exchequer is not needed to avoid double taxation .
 The rich and mobile can live in Britain without coughing up much to the exchequer-at least, relative to their means . Instead, its main effect is to provide a “golden hello’s’ for the rich.
 Those who benefit most channel their overseas income through tax havens, so that it is taxed nowhere . Those who receive tax havens are taxed nowhere, according to the IRS .
 The most famous non-dom is probably Roman Abramovich, a Russian oligarch who owns Chelsea football club .
 Stuart Gulliver is the British chief executive of hsbc, a bank with its headquarters in London . He is a non-dom.
 Previous governments have pulled their punches, introducing fees rather than scrapping the exemption altogether .
 There is a risk that some non-doms will flee, potentially leaving the exchequer worse off on balance on balance .
Non-doms contribute about £8. billion in income taxes and at least £15001 in fees . Each year non-doments contribute about $8.7 billion in taxes and £15 million in fees.
 Britain’s pull is strong; the attractions of London life, for example, extend beyond the tax system . But Britain's pulling is strong.
 Non-dom status feeds a corrosive perception among Britons that the mobile rich do not pay their share .
 Labour’s policies too often seem less about restoring equitable tax treatment than sowing discord by demonising financial success . Bash and bodge is the problem .
 The "mansion tax" is based on the kernel of a good idea-property taxes . House prices have not kept up with the rampant growth in house prices .
Higher property taxes to houses above an arbitrary cut-off of £2m are bad economics . But restricting higher property taxes is bad economics, according to experts .
 A proposed tax on bankers’ bonuses is inferior to the existing bank levy . The bank levy is currently in place .
 Raising top rate of income tax to 50% would hurt incentives to work and yield little revenue . Raising the top rate to 50 per cent would hurt incentive to work.
 These proposals suggest Labour has lapsed into its old resentment of wealth . The proposals suggest that Labour is trying to regain control of the economy .
Only Volkswagen TDI® Clean Diesel technology gives you the option of both . The technology allows you to use your foot and your foot to power .
 Vour mileage will vary and depends on several factors, including your driving habits and vehicle condition .
 The sdgs are trying to ensure that the sdgs fully address the systemic injustices that women experience daily .
 The Millennium Development Goals fell far short of addressing gender inequalities . The earlier Millennium Development goals fell farShort of addressing the issue .
 The targets of the proposed sdg to “achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls’ are much broader and stronger . The targets are not perfect, but not perfect .
 They will cover discrimination against women, violence against women and girls, child, early and forced marriage . They will also cover women’s participation in decision-making and their sexual and reproductive rights .
Women’s and other organisations and many governments are standing firm to keep this agenda in the SDgs.
 This new development agenda is universal; it is to apply to all countries and all people . It is to be applied to all people and all countries, all people. This newdevelopment agenda isuniversal .
 Women and girls make up more than half the world’s population and have a right to this agenda for the achievement of gender equality in the next 15 years .
 Commonwealth MedicalTrust London set targets of reducing child mortality by two-thirds and maternal mortality by threequarters by 2015 .
 The world will come closer to achieving these goals than sceptics believed when they were adopted . In practice, the world will actually come far closer to achieve these goals.
 Many developing countries, including Ethiopia, Tanzania, Malawi, and Bangladesh, have met the childmortality goal ahead of schedule . Many more are accelerating progress, with many more accelerating progress .
 The new sdgs. This only underscores why it is so important that completing the unfinished agenda attached to clear, measurable targets for 2030 needs to be a paramount objective of the new SDgs.
 The debate over the use of televised debates in Britain (“Lights, camera, election’s election”, March 21st) neglects the fact that they do not suit our parliamentary system .
 You do not vote for David Cameron or Ed Miliband, unless you live in their constituency . You don't vote for Cameron or Miliband unless you happen to live in the constituency .
 The prime minister is meant to be the first among equals in his cabinet . The PM's office is expected to be in charge of his cabinet.
 The tv debates help put over the impression to the electorate that the prime minister has presidential powers .
 The increasing media focus on prime ministers will create that power gradually by convention . He does not, even if the increasing media attention will create the power .
 Britain's relationship with Europe has been the Great Rift Valley running through British politics for 40 years .
 Cameron has proposed a renegotiation of some aspects of Britain's relationship with Europe . British voters will decide the issue in a referendum in which they will decide .
 Eurosceptics have kept within the bounds of constitutional opposition. So far, despite many years of broken promises, they have kept in line with constitutional opposition .
 Europe's frustration could boil over with unpredictable results. But if there were to be a further postponement of a plebiscite on Europe, there could be more delays .
 At the very least the argument would become ever more bitter and corrosive . The argument would be even more corrosive and bitter .
People must be allowed to have their say on important matters in order to clear the air, says David Cameron . First, that occasionally in a democracy, the people must be able to have a say on matters .
 There is a strong likelihood that British voters will opt to stay as full members of the eu. And second, that there is astrong likelihood that they will stay .
 If Cameron delivers his referendum, it turns out he will have done the country, and Europe, a great service, and gone a long way towards healing the damaging divisions within the country and his own party .
 Singapore's success is but an unrepeatable geographic and historical anomaly, likely to implode, and not worth the limitations on civil liberties . By this narrative, Singapore’s success is. But this narrative is not the same as that of the past .
 A road less travelled is to apply Lee Kuan Yew’s legacy internationally, says Yew . A roadless road is needed to apply Yew's legacy internationally .
 Societies might yet benefit from near-absent unemployment, robust government finances, affordable quality health care and education opportunities for all .
 Cameron administration proposes to turn Heathrow into an aerotropolis, degrading London with noise pollution and traffic congestion that already is at dangerous levels .
 It could build an aerotropolis in the vicinity of Birmingham, England’s second most populous city, that would be a boon for the British economy .
 infrastructure improvement would bring an international hub airport within one hour’s travel for tens of millions . Other benefits, such an infrastructure improvement, would include an international airport in one hour .
 There used to be an app, called Bump, that allowed people to tap together phones to exchange virtual business cards . Bump's app was used to allow people to use their phones to swap business cards with each other .
Business cards were just being reintroduced in China in the late 1970s .
 The U.N. is looking for an experienced senior executive who will oversee strategic, programmatic and managerial aspects on safety and security . The Assistant Secretary-General will be a key member of the management team .
Candidates should have extensive senior management and leadership experience in handling complex safety and security issues . Candidates should also have experience in implementing workplace reform and change management . The candidates should also be able to implement workplace reform.
Strong strategic thinking, impeccable personal and professional integrity, and knowledge of U.N. Security Management System policies, procedures and operations are required . Strong strategic thinking is required, according to the United Nations .
 All applications should include a curriculum vitae and be sent to the Secretariat or emailed to UNDSSJobs.org by 25 May 2015 .
 CEO will work with the Board of Directors and a Leadership team to build a fully operational organization . Based in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, the CEO will provide a unique opportunity for a visionary leader .
 The CEO will lead the day-to-day operations to ensure AEMERA achieves its strategic goals at the highest operational standards . The CEO is expected to be in charge of the company's strategic goals .
 This individual will play a vital role in positioning AEMERA as a trusted source of credible, accessible, scientifically sound environmental data and information on the condition of the environment .
 The ideal candidate is a proven leader with at least ten years of executive experience . A proven leader can build the strategy and organizational capacity to effectively spur innovation and deliver results in a complex provincewide organization .
 The CEO will be a highly effective communicator and collaborator who understands governance and working with a board of directors . He will also understand the value of scientific rigour along with traditional ecological knowledge .
 A postsecondary degree is required, and a professional designation and/or a graduate degree would be an asset . A professional designation is required. A graduate degree is an asset.
 Canadians and permanent residents will be given priority. All qualified candidates are encouraged to apply . All qualified applicants are encouraged.
 Crisis Action is an award-winning organisation at the forefront of global advocacy .
 We work behind the scenes to create and support strategic coalitions to avert conflicts and ensure the protection of civilians where conflict exists .
 We are lucky to work with some of the world’s most effective civil society leaders, human rights, humanitarian and policy organisations .
 Executive Director will provide strategic leadership across the organisation . As Executive Director you will develop international campaigns and manage an exceptional, high performing international team .
 You must have a first-rate and global analysis of foreign policy, high-level experience of affecting change and world class management skills . You must be first- rate and globalAnalysis of foreignpolicy, high level experience.
 You will join Crisis Action in excellent shape and have the necessary vision, talent and experience to chart an inspiring and effective course into our second decade .
Crisisaction.org.org/opportunities for an application pack . Please go to www.crisis action.com/crisisaction .
 ROHTAK, INDIA IIM Rohtak was established in 2009 in the NCR region.
 The Institute is to be a globally recognised Institution for educating leaders who will contribute to the social, economic and cultural development of communities . The Institute will be a global recognised Institution.
 The Director provides academic leadership and administration to the Institute under the guidance of a highly distinguished Board of Governors .
 He is guided by an International Advisory Council comprising of world-class academic and business professionals . He is also guided by a World-class Advisory Council .
 Applications are invited from distinguished professionals and academic administrators having at least 15 years teaching/research experience in reputed institutions . Applicants are invited to have at least 20 years teaching and research experience . They are passionate about building a premier institution.
 The applicants should have outstanding academic credentials throughout including a Ph.D Degree from a reputed Institution with First Class degree at Bachelor’s and Master's level .
 The position is based at Rohtak within the National Capital Region . It is approximately a two-hour drive from New Delhi .
 SCSC will consider applications fulfilling the above criteria received in response to this advertisement . The SCSC has also received nominations from eminent persons in the field of management/management education .
 Selected candidates shall have a contractual tenure of appointment for five years or until the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier . Selected candidates must have a contract tenure of five years, or until they are 65 years old .
 Crown Agents Ltd is an international development company headquartered in the United Kingdom . Crown Agents Chief Executive Officer Crown agents Ltd is based in London .
 Its main focus is to help governments around the world to increase prosperity, reduce poverty and improve health by providing consultancy, supply chain services, financial services and training . The company is based in New York City, New York.
 The CEO, reporting to the Chairman, will be responsible for policy development, strategy and implementation as well as leading Crown Agents both in the UK and internationally .
 This is a high profile appointment requiring the ability to interface with a broad range of stakeholders including national governments and international development/aid bodies . The appointment will be a high-profile appointment.
 Applicants must have experience in the provision of development services to emerging economies . Applicant must have had experience in development services. Applicants need to have experience.
 They must be able to demonstrate a proven track record in building and leading a profitable and highly motivated organisation . They must also possess excellent skills covering negotiating and influencing, analysis and decision taking and representation on the public stage .
 A competitive package will be offered to reflect the importance and challenge of the position . The package will also reflect the need for a competitive package .
 The World Bank has commenced a global search for its next Vice President and Treasurer . The dosing date of the vacancy is Friday 17 April 2015 WORLDBANKGROUP Vice President, Treasurer .
 Treasury has deep experience in contributing to the World Bank’s capacity to fulfill its twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity .
 The Treasurer will lead an international staff covering business areas including asset management and advisory, bond and investment products, financing and risk management, debt management and financial advisory and pension and endowments .
 The successful candidate will be responsible for managing this substantial advisory, transaction and asset management operation . The World Bank’s high standing in the financial markets.
 The successful candidate will collaborate extensively with other finance businesses throughout the World Bank Group . He will also collaborate with the other institutions in the group .
 A full position description will be sent upon receipt of nominations or expressions of interest to WBTreasurer@RussellReynolds.com Deadline April 17, 2015 .
 The World Bank Group is committed to achieving diversity in terms of gender, nationality, culture, culture and educational background . The Bank Group has a history of achieving diversity.
 Two hundred years ago the most powerful eruption in modern history made itself felt around the world . The most powerful eruptions in modern History made itself feel around world .
 Tambora I F ALIENS had been watching the Earth during 1815 the chances are they would not have noticed the cannon fire of Waterloo . It could happen again at almost any time at almost anything time .
 Such things loom larger in history books than they do in astronomical observations . Such things are bigger in history than they are in astronomical observation .
 As the year went on, the planet in their telescopes began to reflect a little more sunlight .
 As the planet brightened, its surface cooled, the planet's surface cooled .
 Mount Tambora, a volcano on the Indonesian island of Sumbawa, was once similar in stature to Mont Blanc or Mount Rainier .
 The umbrella of ash spread out over a million square kilometres . In its shadow day was as night as night .
Billions of tonnes of dust, gas, rock and ash scoured the mountain's flanks in pyroclastic flows . The wave that hit eastern Java, 500km away, two hours later was still two metres high when it did so .
 Ships saw floating islands of pumice in the surrounding seas for years . The islands were seen for years.
 The eruption did not restrict its impact to the areas pummelled by waves and smothered by ash . But the eruption didn't restrict the impact of the eruption to parts of the island .
 The year after the eruption clothes froze to washing lines in the New England summer and glaciers surged down Alpine valleys at an alarming rate .
Countless thousands starved in China’s Yunnan province and typhus spread across Europe . Countless thousands starve in Yunnan.
 Grain was in short supply in Britain that the Corn Laws were suspended . A poetic coterie succumbing to cabin fever on Lake Geneva dreamed up nightmares that would haunt the imagination for centuries to come .
 No one knew that the common cause of all these things was a ruined mountain in a far-off sea .
 Eruptions have had measurable effects on the climate across the planet . None has been large enough to disrupt lives to anything like the same worldwide extent .
 If it turns out to be the case, it will be because the human world has changed, not because volcanoes have . But if that turns out, it won't be because of volcanoes .
 The future will undoubtedly see eruptions as large as Tambora, and a good bit larger still .
More than 50m tonnes of sulphur dioxide were spewed out from Tambora’s crater . A large fraction of which rose up with the ash cloud into the stratosphere .
 The sulphur dioxide stayed up and spread around the equator and towards the poles . Most of the ash fell back quite quickly, but most of it fell back .
 Over the following months it oxidised to form sulphate ions, which developed into tiny particles that reflected away some of the light coming from the sun .
 Earth began to cool down because less sunlight was reaching the surface . The Earth's temperature began to drop to a low level .
 The sulphate particles were small enough to stay aloft for many months, so the cooling continued into the following year .
 By the summer of 1816 the world was on average about i°C cooler than it had been the year before . An average which hides much larger regional effects is much larger .
Land temperatures dropped almost twice as much as the global average . Because the continents are quicker to cool than the heat-storing seas are.
 A cooler surface meant less evaporation, which meant less water vapour in the lower atmosphere and thus less rain . The lower atmosphere means less rain and less water.
 Rainfall over the planet as a whole was down by between 3.6% and 4% in 1816 .
 Most of the world of 1816 was devoid of thermometers and rain gauges . The numbers come from recent computer modelling of the climate . The Economist April lith 2015 seeks to mimic Tambora created .
 Similar results from other models can be accorded with the credence that comes from having been proved right in similar situations .
 The 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines was about a sixth as large as Tambora’s in terms of volume of lava, rock and ash .
 Satellites showed that in the summer of 1992 the sulphur it had spewed into the atmosphere was reducing the amount of sunlight getting to the Earth’s surface by well over three watts per square metre . For comparison, the warming effect of the 40% increase in the atmosphere
 Temperatures fell by around half a degree in the year after Pinatubo . rainfall dropped off significantly, too, too .
 This is one of the best reasons for thinking that such models capture the workings of the climate quite well . This is a good example of how climate models can be used to predict climate change .
 The historical record largely bears out what the models suggest Tambora did . The historical records largely bear out what Tambor a did .
 Across Europe the summer of 1816 was cold and wet, and the harvest terrible . The harvest was terrible .
 The price of grain more than quadrupled between 1815 and 1817 . The effects were most notable around the Alps . In Saint Gallen, in Switzerland, grain prices quadrupled .
 Hundreds of thousands of migrants took to the roads in their hundreds of thousands . mortality rates climbed due to starvation and disease .
 Death also stalked Yunnan, where Tambora’s cooling shut down the monsoon and cold days in summer killed the rice harvest for three years running .
 Monsoons are driven by the difference in temperature between hot land and cooler sea . They are vulnerable to the excessive cooling of the land that volcanoes bring .
 The global climate shifts in various ways on a number of timescales, and its particular disposition at the time a volcano strikes will influence the way the volcano's effects play out .
 El Nino event-a swing in the global climate driven by the slopping of warm water east across the Pacific towards South America . The Pinatubo eruption in 1991 undoubtedly modulated its climatic effects .
 There had been another large eruption six years before Pinatubo-just six years ago .
 No one knows where this 1809 eruption was, but its signature can clearly be seen in the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets . No one know where the eruption was .
 The sulphur put into the stratosphere by volcanoes shows up quite clearly in the year-by-year records of what was going on in the atmosphere .
Ice cores show that the 1809 eruption was easily large enough to have had effects on the climate . There is some evidence of cooling in subsequent years .
In Jane Austen’s ‘Emma’, a geologist at Royal Holloway, London, seems to follow the weather of 1814 . Apple trees blossoming in the middle of June .
 Precooling along these lines might have made some of the subsequent effects of Tambora more marked, while possibly lessening others .
 If the prior state of the climate system constrains an eruption’s effects, so does that of the human world . If the previous state of a climate system is constraining an eruption, so is that of a human world.
 The situation in Yunnan would hardly have been as dire had the population not been hugely expanded by the Qing dynasty’s encouragement of new settlers .
 The after-effects of the Tambora downturn are more fascinating to speculate about . The TamborA downturn has been blamed for the decline in the economy .
 The spike in grain prices caused by Europe's hunger drove a wave of farmers across the Appalachians to where the Ohio Valley was enjoying more clement weather .
 The collapse in the grain price when Europe’s harvest recovered contributed to the U.S. economy's first major depression .
 Tambora's effects held that the volcano reshaped European politics, historian John Post says .
 The Economist has held sway until the middle of the century . The Economist: The Economist.
 Farmers in Yunnan started to plant opium poppies in the aftermath of the Tambora famines . The value as a cash crop offered some insurance against future failures of the grain harvest .
In general, volcanoes are not something people around the planet worry about very much . In general, volcano is not a thing to worry about .
 The 40 most expensive and most lethal natural disasters since 1970 were recently produced by Swiss Re, a reinsurer . No eruptions feature at all in the list of the 40 most deadly natural disasters.
 Models of the economic losses that large eruptions could cause are nothing like as well developed as those that the insurance industry uses for storms, floods or earthquakes . Such losses have mattered little, because such losses have made little.
 A small eruption could cost a lot if it hit a built-up part of a developed country .
 Most of the property damage would be down to buildings collapsing under the weight of the ash that falls on them .
Geology shows geology shows that volcanoes need to be assessed on much longer timescales . The other reason for thinking more seriously about the damage done by volcanoes than recent history might seem to merit .
Today’s earthquakes, storms and floods which make up the bulk of the natural disasters that insurers worry about-are doing more damage than yesterday's did . But that is because they hit a world in which there is more valuable property that is likely to be insured .
 The world’s worst storm or earthquake over a millennium is not all that much worse than the worst of a century .
 In terms of direct effects, this is still not particularly worrying for most of the world’s population .
 Seven out of eight people on the planet live more than 100km from any potential eruptions . The planet is 100km away from any eruptions.
 95% of those at risk live in just seven countries, report says . The un summit on disaster-risk reduction was held in Sendai, Japan, in March .
 Five-Indonesia, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico and Guatemala-are on the circum-Pacific “ring of fire’s” The other two are Ethiopia and Italy .
 The good news for people who are at risk is that volcanoes-unlike earthquakes-provide a fair amount of warning before doing their thing .
 The MichoacanGuanajuato cinder-cone field in Mexico is a worrying one . Scientists are increasingly good at looking out for such warnings .
 Satellites and seismology are likely to pick up some signs of imminent eruptions from almost all the others . Satellite and seismologists are likely.
 During the 2010 eruptions of Mount Merapi in Indonesia, 350,000 people were evacuated . As a result the death toll was only a few hundred .
 Unfortunately, predicting really large eruptions may be harder than predicting smaller ones like Merapi's .
 Before a very large eruption you can expect a volcano to have been dormant for centuries . It takes time for the infernal forces to build up .
 The first eruption of any long-dormant volcano will be catastrophic, but that does not mean that the first eruption is likely to be catastrophic .
 It might have decades of throatclearing to go through before it really lets rip . It may have decades to go ahead before it lets rip.
Geologists embarked on a project to try to understand long-dormant Pinatubo’s history soon after it started to show signs of life in 1990 .
 They found that the volcano seemed not to be the throat-clearing type, specialising instead in dramatic eruptions .
 Wherever the next big eruption happens, it will, like Tambora, have global effects-and this time there will be a greater range of them .
Disrupted supply chains transmitted the losses from the Japanese earthquake and tsunami in 2011 far and wide . Tourism meant many more Swedes died in the Indian Ocean tsunami of 2003 than in any recent disaster on their home soil .
 Volcanoes have the added ability to interfere with one of the ways in which such connections between far-off places are supported . Volcanoe can also interfere with other places in the world .
 Eyjafjallajokull in Iceland showed five years ago a quite small eruption's ash cloud can have a big impact on air traffic if it is in an inconvenient place .
 A really big eruption would shut down large swathes of airspace for a couple of weeks . The eruption is expected to take place in the next few weeks .
Eyjafjallajokull cost it about $1. billion, and indirect impacts on its users-valued at about twice the direct effects in that case . If the airspace in question were hard to reroute around, that would have both direct impacts on the aviation industry-
 The Kenyan women who provide most of the labour for the country's cut-flower industry suffered disproportionately when Eyjafjallajokull kept their blooms from market .
 Tarnbora erupted in the early morning hours of Saturday morning . It is not known how much damage would be to the ozone layer .
 The reactions by which chlorine destroys ozone are encouraged by the sulphate particles produced by volcanoes .
 In the 19th century that didn't matter; there wasn’t any chlorine in the stratosphere . In the 18th century, there was no chlorine.
 Pinatubo saw global reductions in stratospheric ozone levels and a marked deepening of the ‘ozone hole’ over Antarctica . The “ozonehole’s” over Antarctica was seen to be deepening .
 If a Tambora-scale eruption were to happen in the near future it would have even stronger effects . The eruption would be even worse if it happened in near future .
 models predict an average cooling of perhaps 2°C in the summer of the next year overmuch of North America, Europe, Asia and Africa . The volcano in question is close to the equator, MrRobock says .
 Expect a peculiarly warm winter in America’s prairies, western Europe and Central Asia . A very cold one in eastern Canada, the Middle East and southern China .
 That gives more scope for bad harvests in some regions to be offset by better ones elsewhere . That means that some regions are being offset by good ones elsewhere, such as in some areas .
 Both models and studies of the years after Pinatubo suggest that, for various reasons, the world’s plant life as a whole gets more productive in cooler, drier years that follow eruptions .
 Some parts of the world stressed by global warming might experience sudden cooling as less of a problem than it was after Tambora .
 Another reason for tempered optimism is that the world would know what was coming. Another reason is that it would be better to know what's coming .
 Mr Robock and his colleagues would be spreading the word before the eruption was over .
 The Red Cross/Red Crescent Climate Centre is dedicated to providing warnings about the human impacts of climate shifts and extreme weather . It is also dedicated to acting as an advocate for the people who suffer from them most .
 It spends a lot of time looking at how to get timely warnings of the likely regional effects of El Nino events to the countries .
Climate impacts of Tambora might be comparable to those of the big El Nino of 1997-98, which have been estimated at $36 billion, with 130m lives affected and 21,000 lives lost . Its head, Maarten van Alst, says he thinks that the
 Mr van Alst and his colleague, Pablo Suarez, are trying to get a programme started that would study what actions should be given priority in that lull between eruption and cooling that would follow .
 There is a way for considerably smaller eruptions to have climatic effects . Such vigilance could come into its own well before there is another Tambora, since there is no one in the country .
 Eruptions that take place well away from the equator cool only their own hemisphere . These lopsided coolings have an impact on the intertropical convergence zone, a belt of rain around the equators .
 When the northern hemisphere cools the itcz shifts south, that causes droughts in Africa’s Sahel .
 A repeat of the Tambora-sized blast at Taupo in New Zealand that took place 1,800 years ago, would push the itcz to the north and bring plentiful rain to the Sahel .
 The Amazon, which depends on the itcz staying put, would have a dry few years . The Amazon would have to stay put .
 For a smallish volcano at high latitudes the effects on the itcz would probably be The Economist April llth 2015 swamp the local and regional effects .
 The direct damage a full-on Tambora would wreak in a populated region would be far greater . The hard-to-foresee effects further afield, like those Eyjafjallajokull had on Kenya, might conceivably reinforce each other in calamitous
 The climate effects would trump the rest of the world, but it seems likely that here, too, it would be .
Two centuries ago. But that does not mean their impacts would be as dire as those felt two centuries ago . But that doesn't mean their impact would be the same as those two centuries earlier .
 The world today is more developed and better governed. As well as having a wider agricultural base and more foresight, the world today has a wider Agricultural base .
 A lot of the damage done in famines such as those of the 1810s comes from agricultural workers losing income at a time of price rises and governments doing nothing about it . The damage is caused by price rises, and governments do nothing.
 Today the proportion of the population working the land is in most places much lower than it was then . Most governments both perceive a need to act during famines and have the capabilities to do so .
 There might well be a need for humanitarian interventions in the weird-climate years that followed . But such interventions do now happen, says John Sutter .
There is no reason to limit concern to Tambora-sized eruptions . That said, there's no reason for concern to limit concerns .
 Some 26,500 years ago the Taupo volcano in New Zealand erupted with well over ten times the power it mustered 1,800 years ago . It erupted with more than ten times as much power as it must have.
 Few of those alive today would perish in a rerun of Tambora . But chances of something much worse over their lifetimes cannot be ruled out .
 She has no serious rivals yet for the Democratic nomination. PORTSMOUTH has noserious rivals yet.
Hillary Clinton’s voice cracked and her eyes grew damp . But voters still have plenty of doubts about Hillary Clinton .
 A sympathetic voter had just asked her how she coped with the hardships of running for president . She had just been asked how she had dealt with her hardships .
 The former First-Lady-turned-senator knew that her younger rival, Barack Obama, was walking away with a race that had once seemed hers to lose .
 As the media juggernaut gathered speed, the strange intensity of America's relationship with Mrs Clinton was laid bare .
 Supporters hailed the fleeting display of emotion as proof of their heroine’s humanity . Supporters hailed her discipline and caution on the campaign trail .
 Edmund Muskie's presidential bid was derailed in 1972 when he teared up in the face of harsh press attacks . Opponents wondered if the 2008 primary was now over . Muskie was a Democrat whose presidential bid in 1972 was derailed .
Back inside the Cafe Espresso, suspicious journalists surrounded Mrs Pernold Young . Back inside the cafe Espresso.
 Many asked if Mrs Clinton was a planted campaign stooge . Mrs Clinton's relations with the press pack are toxic .
 The candidate herself cornered a press aide and fretted that voters might think her weak, and not ready to be commander-inchief .
Watching footage of his rival as he trundled across New Hampshire in a campaign bus, he thought it a worryingly touching moment .
 David Axelrod, the political guru at Mr Obama’s side, later recalled muttering .
 New Hampshire voters expect to meet candidates in diners and veterans' halls . Voters expect to hear them speak in a neighbour's sitting-room .
 The state has a record of dethroning front-runners who take the state for granted . They have a record.
 Mrs Pernold Young still lives in Portsmouth, and jokes that “The woman who made Hillary Clinton cry’ will be carved on her tombstone .
Over breakfast at Cafe Espresso, she says she will back Mrs Clinton this time round . She supports Obama in the 2008 primary .
 She notes that some friends roll their eyes at another Clinton presidency, especially as no serious Democratic rival has yet emerged .
 Such views are widespread, and have been heard within the Clinton camp . Such views have been seen by many in Clinton camp, according to some .
 Marshall visited New Hampshire and Iowa just before Easter . He also met local Democratic power-brokers .
 James Demers was one of Obama's first big backers in New Hampshire . He was a strategist and lobbyist who was a key supporter of the president .
 The message from Mrs Clinton’s inner circle was that the former secretary of state will run as though she faces a bitterly contested primary .
 She will use the race to explain to America why she wants the presidency, while building the sort of campaign machinery that propelled Mr Obama to the White House in 2008 .
 Terry Shumaker, a lawyer who co-chaired both of Bill Clinton’s campaigns in New Hampshire, says it will be hard for Mrs Clinton to campaign in the traditional way .
 He thinks she must use the “intimacy of the state to communicate with the whole country. But he says she must try, using the "intimacies of the State" to communicate .
 He describes his old friend as an economic centrist, who sees government as a positive force . He believes that business is the engine of the economy .
 Islamic State fanatics on the prowl, voters have a "visceral" need to feel safe, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Voters have a ‘viscal’ need to be safe .
 Martin O'Malley has been active in Maryland . She herself remains uncommitted, noting that a potential rival, the former governor of Maryland, Martin O’Malley, has beenActive .
 New Hampshire Democrats want a candidate who will fight against inequality and for the middle class . In her telling, N.H. Democrats want candidates who will stand against inequality .
 The Supreme Court eased the rules on political spending in 2012 . They worry about climate change, and are unhappy that so much outside money is flowing into their state .
 Mrs Fuller Clark wants to hear from Mrs Clinton how to “move from a plutocracy back to a democracy’ She says Mrs Clinton will tell her how to move from a Plutocracy to democracy .
 The Clinton machine reportedly intends to raise $1 billion . That echoes complaints from other Democrats, such as Gary Hart, who recently said it should ‘frighten every American’
 Mrs Clinton will be grilled about health care, or the lack of full-day kindergartens in half the towns in New Hampshire .
 The challenges of a fresh Clinton candidacy were summed up by Bill Clinton . Clinton is the man with the potential to be the campaign's greatest asset and worst liability .
 No living ex-president enjoys higher approval ratings, as Americans forget the scandals of the 1990s .
 In 2008 an ill-disciplined Mr Clinton caused chaos in his wife’s campaign .
 The former president recently told Town & Country magazine that he was not sure he was any good at campaigning any more because “I’m not mad at anybody,” citing the mellowing effects of being a grandfather .
 Mrs Clinton first entered the governor’s mansion in Arkansas in 1979, and has been in the public eye since .
 The fact that she typically received six-figure sums for such speeches does not help either . The fact she typically receives six-figures for such speech does nothelp either .
 Republicans may be expected to paint her as part liberal-elitist, and part big-government statist .
 Republicans may try to revive memories of Mrs Clinton's failed attempts at expanding health coverage during her husband’s presidency .
 Republicans will try to use her record as secretary of state from 2009-13 against her . Republicans will also try to used her record against her in the Senate .
 Mrs Clinton blamed on the right for her role in offering Russia a “reset’ in relations, for clashing with the Israeli government of Binyamin Netanyahu .
 Many conservatives remain convinced that Mrs Clinton chose out of political calculation not to protect an American mission in Benghazi, leading to the deaths of America's ambassador to Libya and three aides .
 Mrs Clinton used a private server throughout her time at the State Department, preserving for the archives only the e-mails she deemed relevant and deleting the rest .
 Clinton Foundation is a family charity that also serves to keep her in the public eye . She will face queries about donations from foreign governments, some less than democratic .
 Mrs Clinton voted for George W Bush’s Iraq war as a senator. They have not forgotten that she voted for the war .
 Left of the party worries that the Clintons are too soft on capitalism . But mostly the left of the Clintons worry that they are too hard on capitalism.
 Clinton's presidency as a time when the rules on Wall Street banks were loosened, in their view setting the scene for the later financial crash .
 The North American Free Trade Agreement signed by Mr Clinton with Mexico and Canada sucked jobs out of the American heartland . It remains an article of faith among trade unions that the agreement was signed by Clinton .
 No credible Democratic challenger has emerged . Many Democrats see a vacuum to Mrs Clinton’s left .
 Mr O’Malley was hardly a socialist banner-waver, now sides with groups who insist that America can afford to increase federal benefits for the old .
 Warren wants tougher regulation of Wall Street, fewer free-trade deals and more redistribution to the middle class . Warren wants to make a populist bid for the presidency .
 It is in part an attempt to put pressure on Mrs Clinton to tack to the left . It is part an effort to pressure her to take the left.
 She could deal with a different concern-that no one knows what she really believes-but she is in no hurry . She is in a no hurry.
Candidates usually take sharply ideological p ositions during primaries . Candidates usually woo the diehard activists who vote in them, before tacking back to the centre .
 If Mrs Clinton faces no real primary challenger, she may not need to do this . However, if Mrs Clinton is not facing any real primary challengers, she could not face a primary challenger .
 She will need to woo enough Democrats to build a sense of excitement and grassroots involvement, without alienating swing voters . Instead, she will needs to woo more Democrats to make a difference .
 Obama needs to fill the gap in support among black and young voters . She will need to fill it some other way, she says .
 In the past she has campaigned to make it easier for women to sue over alleged discrimination . She has also campaigned for more women to be able to sue for discrimination .
 White voters without a college education have drifted from the Democrats since Bill Clinton's day . White voters make up about a third of the electorate, but have drifted away from Democrats .
 Mr Obama only won 36% of their votes in 2012, and might have done still worse if he had not successfully painted his Republican opponent, Mitt Romney, as their worst nightmare of a boss .
 Mrs Clinton will need to be ready on Day One to deal with Republicans . If she wins the general election, she will also need to face Republicans .
 There is virtually no chance that Democrats will win the House of Representatives in 2016 . Even if they retake the Senate, they will not have a filibuster-proof majority .
 In interviews since leaving the State Department she has said that she urged him to take a muscular approach to Russia .
 She has chided Europeans for failing to stand up to Vladimir Putin . She wants them to send arms to Ukraine, for example . She also wants Russia to help in talks to curb Iran’s nuclear ambitions .
 She has called the latest draft deal with Iran, brokered by America and other world powers, an “important step, whatever that means,’ she says . She has also called the new draft deal an ‘important step’
 Last year she signalled she would be more comfortable with stricter curbs on Iran’s nuclear programme .
 In a rare overt criticism of Mr Obama, she said in 2014 that the failure to help non-Islamist Syrian rebels fight against Bashar Assad had left a “big vacuum’ for Islamic State and other jihadists.
 Mrs Clinton has come close to echoing Republican grumbles that Mr Obama is too apologetic about American power .
 She hints that the time has come for America to reengage with the world . She says America is ready to return to the hubris of George W Bush years .
 In domestic forums Mrs Clinton is fluent in the language of the modern business-friendly centre-left . She is also fluent in English.
 She is keen on public infrastructure, universal education for the youngest children, lowering the cost of college and experimenting with German-style wage-subsidies for the working poor .
 She likes to see church groups working alongside strong trade unions and community organisations . She uses ‘evidence-based’ as high praise for any policy .
 In 2008 she also called for a “time out’ on new trade deals, though as secretary of state she backed new pacts .
 During primary debates she called herself “committed to making sure Social Security is solvent’ She said that the best route to reform lay through bipartisan compromise .
 Even policy experts invited to private sessions with Mrs Clinton in recent months are not sure where she stands .
 One centrist policy adviser says he hopes that she will say that it is a false choice to argue that fairness and economic growth must be in opposition to each other .
 centrists would like to hear her thank Mr Obama for saving the economy from disaster after the financial crash in 2008 . They would also praise him for expanding health care .
 She could turn the country's attention to building an economy for the 21st century, harnessing growth to boost middleclass wages .
 If it sounds to voters more like a third term of Bill Clinton than four more years of Mr Obama, that would suit many Hillary-backers just fine .
President Barack Obama is running for president in 2016 . He has called for people to "rise up" against the "Washington machine" and "the Washington machine"
 Rand Paul became the second Republican formally to announce his candidacy on April 7th . Paul is the second GOP presidential candidate to formally announce his campaign .
 Mr Paul sells himself as a man of fresh ideas who will broaden the appeal of his party . Mr Paul is a man who will be able to broaden his party's appeal .
 Before that, he was an ophthalmologist in Bowling Green, Kentucky, a small town in Kentucky .
 He has spent much of his youth working on his father’s campaigns . But he is still steeped in politics, having worked on many of his father's campaigns .
 His rise has been accelerated by a network of dedicated libertarians assembled by his father . His rise was accelerated by the group of dedicated libertarian libertarians.
 In several areas, he laid out policies that set him apart from the Republican old guard . But in several areas he laidout policies that sets him apart with the GOP .
 Mr Paul was careful to attack Barack Obama for being a weak negotiator . Mr Paul also attacked Barack Obama on Iran .
 He called for “any law that disproportionately incarcerates people of colour’s to be repealed . He also called for the law that “ disproportionately incarcerate people of Colour’ to be replaced .
 A new study finds that 9% of Americans are armed and impulsive O N A grassy strip in South Carolina, a black man turns and runs from a police officer . He attacked Mr The Economist April llth 2015 Guns and anger happy ATLANTA .
 Michael Slager said he shot Walter Scott in self-defence after Mr Scott took his taser . Slager says he shot Scott after he took the taser on himself .
 Video shows Mr Scott was perhaps 20 feet away when he started shooting at him . Mr Slager was charged with murder on April 7th .
 Relatives speculated that he might have run away from the policeman because he owed child support . He did not wish to be jailed for failing to pay it.
 Many were astounded that he should have died over something so trivial. Many were also astounded he shouldn't have died.
 Police are finding it harder than ever to commit abuses without consequence, police say . The fact that bystanders nearly always have cameras in their smartphones means that police are finding the problem harder .
 A new study in Behavioural Sciences and the Law finds that about 9% of American adults have a history of “impulsive, angry behaviour” and possess a gun not required for their work .
 The study used a broad definition of “angry and impulsive’s’ ‘angry’ and ‘impulsive.’ It also included anyone who admitted to having had a tantrum, smashed objects or got into a physical fight .
 The authors drew upon 5,600 interviews conducted as part of an earlier Harvard study . The authors, from Harvard, Duke and Columbia Universities, drew upon the interviews .
 Angry people with six or more firearms were four times more likely to carry guns around with them than happy owners with only one weapon .
 Fewer than one in ten armed Americans had ever been admitted to hospital for a psychiatric or substanceabuse problem, study found .
 Laws to stop mentally ill people from buying guns will only do so much to keep impulsive fingers away from triggers. So laws to stop mental ill people buying guns won't stop them .
Mr Paul hopes that such policies will appeal to young voters and minorities . Mr Paul hopes to make such policies appeal to younger voters .
 He attacks his own party almost as fiercely as Rand against the machine he does Democrats . He attacks himself almost as strongly as Rand does Democrats.
 Mr Paul's speech in Kentucky did not make much of it, but he is in some ways deeply conservative .
 He has sponsored a law that would ban all abortions, even in cases of rape or incest . The law would also apply to cases of incest or rape .
 He opposes a federal ban on gay marriage . He thinks states should decide for themselves whether to allow it-personally, he opposes it .
 His pitch to minorities may partly be an attempt to atone for past mistakes . His pitch may be a bid to at one for minorities to be forgiven for mistakes .
 In 2010 he suggested in an interview that the federal government had no right to tell private businesses whom they could serve or hire . He quickly backtracked and said that the Civil Rights Act's bar on racial discrimination was right .
 Mr Paul will have to convince enough Republican primary voters that his small-government virtues outweigh his squishiness on national security .
Hard sell-libertarians are probably no more than n% of the American electorate . That is a hard sell-sell-libertarian. That's a hard selling-liber libertarians.
 Republicans are trying to woo new voters in the long run . Republicans will probably help the Republicans in the next few years .
 The Golden State imposed mandatory curbs on water use on April 1st, for the first time .
 Communities that have already reduced water usage in recent years will be less affected than their splash-happy neighbours . L.A. County-based communities that have reduced water use will be more affected by this .
 Mr Brown put his foot on urban hosepipes while letting farmers carry on merrily wasting water . Mr Brown said farmers pay far less than urbanites .
 Farmers have guzzled ever more water as they have planted thirsty crops such as almonds, walnuts, and grapes .
 urban water use has held relatively steady over the past two decades, thanks to smart pricing and low-flow toilets . Urban water use is relatively steady, despite massive population growth, despite huge population growth .
 Last year the governor called for all Californians to cut their water use by another 20%; residents fell short of that mark in every month except December .
 It calls for the state to replace 50m square feet of lawns with drought-friendly planting . It also calls for state to replaced 50m sq ft lawns.
 Last year they let roughly 10% of the state’s irrigated land go fallow because of the water shortage .
 Farmers who have already planted their crops cannot instantly switch, but residents can take fewer showers . Residents can take less showers if they don't have to switch .
 California cannot solve its water crisis without pricing the stuff properly and dealing with those who consume the most . California can't solve its problem without pricing it properly, it says .
For years, it was the only state in the West that did not manage how much groundwater landowners could extract from their private wells . For years, the state was only state that didn't manage how many groundwater could be extracted .
 Last year, the governor signed a bill to regulate groundwater extraction . The governor signed the bill last year .
 Communities are required to complete plans for sustainable water management by 2020, but not to manage their water sustainably until 2040 . Communities are expected to complete their plans for sustainability by 2020 .
 United States Drought Monitor San yet monitor groundwater consumption in California . U.S. DroughtMonitor San yet monitors groundwater consumption.
 Israel has built large desalination plants that helped the country cope with a seven-year drought between 2004 and 2010 . The country is 60% desert, which is the driest winter on record in 2013-14 .
 In California, desalination is harder because electricity is costly, thanks to a renewable-energy programme . In California it is harder to get electricity because of the state's renewable energy programme .
 A company called Poseidon will this year complete a $1 billion desalination facility to increase San Diego’s water supply by 7%, but only after six years of permitting and litigation .
 Many other desalination projects around the state have stalled or simply been abandoned . Many other projects around state have been abandoned or simply abandoned .
 Mr Emanuel represents the party’s businessfriendly wing; Mr Garcia, the big-government left .
 Mr Garcia was handpicked by Karen Lewis, the head of the teachers’ union, for his solid record in local politics and his pleasant manner .
 He did better than expected, earning 34% of the vote in the first round in February . Mr Emanuel has been forced into a run-off .
 In seven weeks since he failed to persuade Chicagoans that he has the skill and stamina to tackle the city’s disastrous finances . But in the seven weeks he has failed to convince them that he is capable of tackling the city's problems .
 Mr Emanuel, a former White House chief of staff, made this the main theme of the campaign .
 Mr Garcia said he needed to audit the city’s books before he could say anything specific about cutting spending or raising taxes .
 He refused to reveal who would be on a commission of financial experts that he planned to convene . He said he would not reveal who will be on the commission that he plans to meet .
 His only concrete proposal was to slap a luxury tax on expensive jewellery and fancy cars . He said he wanted to slap the tax on luxury cars and jewellery . He also wanted to impose a tax on fancy cars.
 Mr Emanuel outlined a plan to avert financial Armageddon by imposing a sales tax on services . He also proposed opening a casino and paying for development projects out of the revenues they are expected to generate .
 The casino alone will generate $1 billion for Chicago over the next ten years, he says . The casino will generate more than $2 billion in the next 10 years .
With unfunded pension liabilities of more than $20 billion, America's third city is veering toward insolvency . A payment of $55om for the pensions funds of police and firemen due at the end of this year is due to be paid .
 Moody's, a creditrating agency, downgraded Chicago's debt to two notches above junk in February .
 Analysts say Mr Emanuel will need to raise property taxes, in spite of pre-election promises .
 Performing open heart surgery, as in “Operation, is harder after a few beers, says CNN's John Sutter .
Over Easter Lexington learned a thing or two attending a $79m mock Senate that just opened on the shores of Boston Harbour .
 The discovery of the teenage "senators" is both uplifting and heartbreaking . The discovery is a bit heartbreaking .
 It is cheering to see the legislative branch stripped to its core principles, and to realise that the system can work . It is cheered to see it stripped to the core principles .
 Great care has gone into the Senate Immersion Module used at the Edward M Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate . It follows a vision described by the late senator before his death in 2009 .
 Democratic and Republican Senate staff have worked with think-tanks and universities to simulate the way senators are tugged and pulled between party loyalties and the interests of 50 different home-states .
 The institute is housed in an elegant white and grey complex beside the John F Kennedy Presidential Library . Each day the institute will focus on a single issue .
 It may be historic, such as the Compromise of 1850, which tried but failed to prevent the civil war by appeasing both slave-owning and free states . It may also have tried to prevent civil war.
 School groups spend a total of two hours in committee meetings, party huddles and a final debate in the chamber .
Each visiting pupil receives a detailed Senate identity via a digital tablet . Each visiting pupil gets a detailedSenate identity via the tablet .
 A student might be a Republican hoping to run for Louisiana governor . A first-term Democrat from Alaska faces a tough re-election fight in a conservative state where oil and fish hold sway .
 The first group to visit, from Auburn High School in Massachusetts, considered a big immigration bill . The group is the first to visit the school .
 The students strove to reconcile the demands of farm states and big business, liberal activists and shrink-the-government types . The students played congressional staff and government officials .
 The teenager cast as a Texas Republican channelled a real-life firebrand from that state . He growled that, “worst come to worst,’ he would try to shut the government down .
 The Senate voted to pass a vote threshold to thwart those pushing for total victory over the opposition . But all kept bumping up against the rules of the Senate .
 In more than 46 years representing Massachusetts, he was a divisive figure-a big-government Democrat . He often called conservative policies not just wrong but heartless .
 The institute hopes to lure 175,000 individual visitors a year . In addition to school groups, it hopes to attract 175,00 individual visitors .
Admirers will enjoy a recreation of Kennedy’s office on Capitol Hill, complete with family photos, an Irish road sign bolted to one wall and tennis balls as played with by his dogs .
 Kennedy is a champion of federal action in such fields as education and health care . Critics may splutter at an exhibit named ‘The Lion of the Senate’
 Adult visitors are also invited to stage brief debates in its replica chamber . Between school groups, adult visitors can also stage debates .
 The immigration sim was reviewed by Democratic Senate staff but also by aides to Senator John McCain . McCain worked closely with Kennedy on bills that would have tightened border security .
 Its Republican supporters are from the governing wing of the party-not from the wing that would blow Washington up .
 Teenage mock-senators trying to craft laws which might do some good .
 They can do this, in part, because they face no pressure to raise millions in campaign funds . They can't raise millions, but they can do it, because it's not the same thing .
 The teenagers argue, sometimes hotly, but about principles and home-state interests .
 Hardliners need not fear primary challenges from hardliners who scorn the idea that decisions with broad, nationwide support enjoy special legitimacy .
 Ybor City, near Tampa, Florida, was like Havana today: run down, its hand-rolled cigar industry an historic relic . The Fabulous Rockers were hitting the big time in the late 1950s .
 Havana was as tantalising as Las Vegas. In those days, the place to be was not Tampa or Miami .
 Most ties were severed for the next 54 years . Less than two years later Dwight Eisenhower imposed an embargo .
On May 15th they hope to fulfil it by headlining at the celebrated Hotel Nacional . The hotel is on the seaside Malecon in Havana .
 President Barack Obama's dramatic announcement on December 17th that restrictions on travel to and trade with Cuba would be eased .
 Lawyers, travel executives, bankers, farmers and tech moguls are heading to the island to scope out business opportunities in a post-embargo future .
 Obama and Castro expected to meet for first substantive discussions between U.S. and Cuban leaders in more than 50 years . Summit of the Americas in Panama City on April 10th and 11th .
 Cuba allows banks and telecoms firms to take steps toward operating in Cuba . It also allows banks, telecoms and banks to operate in the country .
 The State Department’s designation of Cuba as a sponsor of terror subjects the country to sanctions that terrify banks . The sanctions are designed to terrify the country .
 The embargo still forbids most American trade and investment, and can only be removed by Congress . But the embargo still bans most American business and investment .
 Lawyers say at least $7 billion of claims by U.S. citizens and companies lost property after the revolution needs to be paid . Before it is lifted, lawyers say, at least some of the claims by American citizens need to be lifted .
 Cuban state controls vast tracts of the economy, including foreign trade, banking and law . On the Cuban side, the state still controls vast portions of the country's economy .
 A dual-currency system is proving difficult to dismantle because of a lack of hard currency . A lack of currency means a dual- currency system is hard to dismantle .
Inefficiencies and arbitrary decision-making can make doing business in Cuba a nightmare. Inefficiencies can make business in the country a nightmare .
 One foreign businessman active in the country says some investors stay away because some have been jailed without due process .
 He believes there is so little Chinese investment in China . That, he believes, even explains why there's so little investment in the country .
 Three types of American business are seeking entry into Cuba, by three different routes . The three types of U.S. business are looking for entry into the country .
 The first are mom-and-pop entrepreneurs, mostly Cuban-Americans who have a personal stake in the island’s development . The first is mom- and-pop entrepreneur, mostlyCubans .
 They have been active in Cuba all along, visiting relatives and putting cash into their fledgling enterprises . They are also putting cash in their fledgling businesses .
Among the hottest items, says the store's owner, Serafin Blanco, are $3.99 bags of flints for mending old lighters .
 Fabian Zakharov, a Russianborn Cuban in Hialeah, imports parts for Lada cars .
 Customers take them to Cuba in suitcases to help friends and relatives fix up their old bangers .
 Easier travel will drum up new business for private guesthouses, restaurants and other small enterprises that have opened up after a cautious liberalisation by Cuba’s communist government .
Financial backing comes largely from remittances from the U.S. Their financial backing comes from the United States .
 Some see the spur to ground-level go-getting as the cleverest part of Obama’s strategy .
 It bolsters independent entrepreneurs, who are likely to be supporters of the dialogue between the U.S. and Cuba .
 The embargo, and Cuba’s entrenched suspicion of enterprise, sets limits . But the embargo and Cuba's entrenched suspicions of enterprise set limits .
 Castro government still makes it almost impossible for most private firms to import supplies or to receive foreign investment . The Castro government makes it nearly impossible for private companies to imported supplies .
 Mr Zakharov says his business suffered recently because his duties on car parts have soared . He says he suffered because his business has suffered because of the increase .
 Cuba owners of private restaurants complain that the government tries to stop them from importing exotic spices . They say the government is a deliberate attempt to keep them from flourishing .
 The second type are bigger businesses hoping to piggyback on greater travel and information exchanges . The third type of businesses are hoping to use piggy back on more information exchanges.
 In February Netflix said it was launching its service in Cuba . Netflix lets you stream films over the internet .
 Some Cubans returning from Cuba have turned their homes into informal cinemas to defray costs . Few Cubans have broadband connections or access to credit cards .
 In February idt Corp, a telecoms company based in New Jersey, pulled off a surprise deal establishing the first direct connection between an American company and Cuba’s state telecoms firm .
 Ferry operators are talking to U.S. and Cuban authorities about relaunching direct ferry routes from the Florida Keys .
 American immigration officials worry that the vessels will bring an influx of illegal immigrants .
 This month Airbnb brought the sharing economy to Cuba by offering American visitors rooms in private homes . This month, the company offered rooms in a private home in Cuba .
New American rules allow microbusinesses under new rules . That is allowed under the new rules because it supports micro businesses .
The third route, taking the biggest American brands into Cuba, is the most difficult . The third route is taking the largest American brand into Cuba .
 Cuban officials shudder at the thought of a McDonald’s in downtown Havana .
 Lawyers say Cuba will want to ensure that its own aircraft are not seized in the United States as forfeit for American property confiscated during revolution .
 Hotel owners also want to enter a Caribbean paradise on America’s doorstep . The embargo has given foreign resort operators a headstart .
 Spanish, Canadian and other hotel chains have entered into joint ventures . But there is no scope for the sort of joint ventures that have been entered into, he says .
 Cuba lacks energy, food and infrastructure to support millions of American tourists . Even if there were, Cuba lacks the energy and food, food, infrastructure to supports millions of Americans .
 The embargo’s ban on the provision of credit. Overshadowing all potential business relationships is the ban .
 Until Cuba is removed from America’s list of sponsors of terrorism, there is ‘no way an American bank can touch a Cuban bank’ says Fernando Capablanca .
 Even American firms allowed to trade with Cuba under the embargo are often thwarted because they cannot obtain letters of credit .
 The hurdles are not stopping lawyers from preparing for what may lie ahead, they say .
 Law firms drafted Iranian specialists into their Cuba teams to advise on postsanctions future . Law firms have drafted Iranian specialist into their Cuban teams .
 The Florida Bar is planning to send a team of international lawyers to Havana in May to learn about Cuba’s judicial system .
 Some lawyers have contacted Spanish, Canadian and Brazilian lawyers to find out about their experiences in dealing with their counterparts on the island . Some have contacted their counterparts in Brazil, Spain and Canada .
 The enthusiasm in the face of obvious pitfalls suggests an element of blind faith . The enthusiasm is the same as a blind faith, says author .
 The Cuban government may become dependent on American dollars as a substitute for reduced aid in the form of subsidised oil from Venezuela .
 The Obama administration has raised expectations to such a degree that backsliding now seems unthinkable, visitors say .
 Mr Herrera tells the story of a Cuban couple who put away their condoms and for the first time tried to have a baby .
 For some older Cubans, the thrill of the thaw will come from the Ybor City Rockers .
 Bolivia may have been independent since 1825, but its rulers had the outlook of the imperialists .
 The president’s mastery of theatre and symbolism go a long way toward explaining his enduring popularity . The rewriting of the constitution to reinforce the rights of Bolivia's large indigenous population is a long-term success .
 His Movement To Socialism claimed two-thirds of the seats in both chambers of the legislature . His Movement to Socialism claimed the seats of both chambers.
 Supporters began talking of a fourth term in office starting in 2020, even though under the constitution he is not eligible to run again .
Results in regional and local elections held on March 29th came as a shock . The results were announced on March 28th .
 Opposition candidates for mayor won in eight out of Bolivia’s ten largest cities, up from five at the last vote in 2010 . Opposition candidates won in seven of Bolivia's ten biggest cities, including one of the largest cities .
 The mas won four of the gubernatorial races in the nine autonomous administrative departments . It was down from seven last time to seven last year .
 In two where nobody won a majority, run-off votes are to be held on May 3rd . In two places, nobody won the majority .
 In those states splintered anti-government forces have an opportunity to unite behind a single candidate . In some states, they have a chance to unite.
 The vote was a stinging rebuke to Mr Morales . The vote is a stinger rebuke to the Economist .
 Most worrying for the governing party was its performance in the department of La Paz, until now a stronghold . Most worrying was the performance of the department.
 It lost both the governorship of the department and the mayor’s race in El Alto, a sprawling settlement populated mainly by indigenous Aymara voters .
 The opposition mayor of the city of La Paz, Bolivia’s seat of government, was re-elected with a bigger majority .
 The mas received just 41% of the votes, down from 61% in October's naBello tional election . The mas enjoyed the benefits of incumbency and the backing of the highly partisan state-run media .
 Mr Morales threatened not to co-operate with opposition mayors and governors . The tactic may have backfired.
Historian Carlos Mesa thinks voters are beginning to resent the self-serving way in which the mas exercises power . Mesa says voters are less impressed by the moral authority that comes from its indigenous origins .
 The president is much more popular than his party, which nevertheless remains a formidable force . The president's party remains a strong force, but his party is still a powerful force .
Local branches are nourished with funds from a powerful national organisation . The local branch is nourished by funds from the national organisation.
 The opposition is fragmented into mostly tiny parties, none of which is strong enough to take on Mr Morales and the mas countrywide . The opposition has been fragmented into mainly tiny parties .
 In 1958 Richard Nixon, then the vice-president, survived an attack on his car by enraged students in Caracas .
 Ronald Reagan was widely mocked after he confused Brazil with Bolivia during a speech in Brasilia .
George W Bush was greeted by a mass rally organised by the host, Nestor Kirchner . Hugo Chavez denounced his country's plan for a Free Trade Area of the Americas .
 Chavez presented Barack Obama with an anti-imperialist tract at a similar summit in Trinidad four years ago . Four years later, at the same summit, Chavez presented Obama with a similar tract .
 Obama's staff thought that their boss would be greeted as a hero at the latest summit in Panama .
 This is the first such get-together attended by Cuba . At Latin America’s insistence, this is first such event attended by the country .
 This is a huge step towards lifting America’s 54-year-old economic embargo against the island . This is the first step to lifting the U.S. economic embargo .
 Many Latin Americans dislike Cuba’s Fidel Castro and his brother, Raul, the current president . They dislike the embargo even more .
 First, talks over reopening embassies have been going more slowly than some had hoped .
 The United States wants its diplomats to be able to travel and operate freely on the island . The U.S. wants diplomats to have access to the island to travel freely .
Until this happens no bank will do business with a Cuban diplomatic mission . Until this happens, no banks will dobusiness with a diplomatic mission.
 American officials say the result of the State Department review might be announced in Panama . U.S. officials say it may be announced.
 Mr Obama and Mr Castro will ‘interact’ informally in the corridors of the summit .
 Last month the Obama administration implemented a law that imposes sanctions on seven Venezuelan officials for human rights violations .
 Nicolas Maduro could turn the summit into another anti-imperialist rally . That has given Nicolas Maduro a chance to turn the country’s embattled president, Nicolas Maduro .
 His demand that it formally condemn the sanctions has the backing of a handful of hard-left regimes, including Cuba’s .
 Few Latin Americans like unilateral interventions by the United States . The sanctions undercut a attempt by the South American Union to mediate between Venezuela’s autocratic regime and the opposition .
Changes are afoot in Latin America that should favour the U.S. The United States.
 The first is that Mr Obama has at last come up with some constructive policies towards the region .
 immigration reform, a downplaying of the war on drugs and a request to Congress for $1 billion in aid to mitigate the drug war’s impact on Central America .
 The administration is also trying to help energy-short Caribbean countries .
 The end of the commodity boom is altering the politics as well as the economics of Latin America . Second, the end of a commodity boom in Latin America is altering politics and economics .
 Economic growth this year is set for justi%, the worst performance since 2009 . Economic growth is set to be the worst year since 2009.
 Dilma Rousseff is facing a massive corruption scandal and the likelihood of a deep recession . She is struggling to keep her job .
 Argentina’s Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner departs in December . Her successor will be more moderate .
 Bolivia's Evo Morales and Ecuador's Rafael Correa have seen opponents make gains in municipal elections . Even Bolivia’s Morales and Correa, the most successful members of South America's awkward squad, have seen gains .
 Mr Maduro will be greeted in Panama by 22 ex-presidents of the centre and right that he free opposition prisoners .
 This does not mean a return to the 1990s and the monolith of the “Washington consensus’s on market economics. This doesn't mean a returned to the 'Washington consensus' on market Economics .
 China, now Latin America’s second-biggest trade partner, is in the region to stay . China is now the region's second biggest trade partner .
 Some of Obama's policies might be scrapped by a Republican successor .
 How the region’s expanded middle classes will react to the economic slowdown is unclear .
 What it does mean is that pragmatism will start to get the better of ideology. What it means is that pragmaticism will get the best of ideology, says author .
 Ms Rousseff plans a visit to Washington, to replace the state visit she scrapped in 2013 . The visit was scrapped over revelations that the National Security Agency spied on her .
 Former chiefs of the Bank of Japan had adopted a defeatist stance towards Japan’s deflationary morass .
 Mr Kuroda was a champion of his desire to revitalise Japan in large part through unorthodox monetary loosening .
 In early 2013, the central bank launched a radical programme of quantitative easing . Mr Abe took office in 2013, soon after he took office .
 The main point of contention is fiscal policy, which to date has been very loose, with a primary budget deficit of 6.6% .
 Mr Kuroda is making it clear that he does not believe Mr Abe is trying hard enough to bring the deficit down . He is not convinced that he is trying to bring it down .
 The government would prefer him to confine his remarks to the bank’s monetary remit .
 A second and related difference is emerging over monetary easing itself . The difference is being seen as a result of the monetary easing .
 The government appears to be signalling that a fresh bout of bondbuying might be too much of a good thing . But the government seems to be signaling that a new bout of Bondbuying may not be good thing.
 Mr Abe now appears to be undermining Mr Kuroda’s ability to reach the inflation target .
For businesses and households alike, such discord is itself a cause of anxiety . For businesses and families, it's a cause for anxiety .
 The government spent more to help ease the pain of a long-planned rise in the consumption tax . The consumption tax rose from 5% to 8% in April 2014 .
 Stronger growth resulting from structural reforms was supposed to soften the effect of a planned second rise in the consumption tax, to 10%, this autumn .
 Japan’s gross national debt, at around 240% of gDP, is easily the rich world's highest . Japan's national debt is at around 230% of the world's total GDP .
 The first rise in the consumption tax helped tip the economy back into recession .
 Mr Kuroda surprised nearly everyone by increasing the bank’s quantitative easing . He promised to buy ¥80 trillion of Japanese government bonds every year .
 Mr Kuroda wanted the government to stick with the plan to raise the consumption tax once more . He is a former mandarin from the finance ministry which is obsessed with fiscal prudence .
 Mr Abe postponed the rise anyway until April 2017, arguing that the economy could not bear it . But soon after the central bank’s action, he postponed it anyway .
 core inflation has slipped back to zero. The government would rather the central bank did not expand its buying of government bonds . The central bank may feel bound to, even though the bank may not have expanded its buying .
 The fall in oil prices can only be good news for Japan’s economy. True, that fall is in part because of a drop in oil price, which is good for Japan .
 Many economists reckon that the bank should have chosen a measure of inflation that excludes the cost of energy . Many economists say the bank shouldn't have chosen an inflation measure.
 The bank has a mandate to reach. Still, zero inflation is far short of the target of 2% . Still, the bank is still trying to reach the 2% target .
 Should deflation return in the coming months, the bank may feel obliged to expand its bond-buying .
 Some of Mr Abe's advisers are against more quantitative easing for political reasons as well .
 It has boosted property and stockmarkets, and driven down the yen, helping big exporters . It has also boosted property, stockmarkets and driven up the yen .
 Many small businesses and households say they are not feeling the benefits, only higher prices for imports . But many small businesses say they aren't feeling the benefit .
 A concern for Mr Abe’s advisers and for the central bank itself is how the government-bond market is showing signs of strain .
 The central bank is by far the biggest buyer of bonds these days . It has chased out other market participants with its massive purchases .
 The lack of a deep secondary market has led to worrying increases in volatility . As it is, it is also a worrying increase in volatility in the market .
 Mr Kuroda is airing his misgivings with unusual bluntness . He is preaching the need for immediate fiscal discipline .
 Hiroshige Seko, a senior government official, plays down the differences . Seko is a senior official in the government of Japan .
 Mr Abe and Mr Kuroda are trying to balance the need to reduce debt against that of boosting the economy . Mr Abe says he wants to balance reducing debt with boosting economy .
 Mr Abe has edged very slightly towards an emphasis on growth, says Mr Kuroda . But, he claims, he has edged slightly towards fiscal discipline .
 There is little to reassure fiscal hawks in the record level of spending budgeted for the fiscal year that has just begun, including swelling outlays on social security .
 The government says it will need to find an extra ¥9 trillion to balance the budget, before interest payments, by 2020 as planned . Even if the economy grows by 3% in nominal terms in each of the next five years, the government says .
 Mr Abe has promised detailed plans in the summer for reducing future deficits .
 Swingeing cuts to social-security spending probably remain politically off-limits . The cuts are likely to be politically off limits .
 They will have to include getting elderly Japanese to pay more for their medical care . They will also have to get older Japanese to get more for medical care.
 A health system that keeps too many people in hospital beds for too long needs to be overhauled . The health system should be revamped, says a health official .
 The most important test of the relationship between Mr Abe and Mr Kuroda will come if inflation picks up in earnest, at which point the central bank will begin to tighten its monetary policy .
 Mr Abe may insist on keeping the monetary taps open to safeguard growth .
 In the early hours of April 7th legislators approved a new bill which reinstates some of the old law’s power .
 The Prevention of Terror Act gives the government panel the right to imprison terror suspects for two years, with multiple extensions . The panel can also restrict their movements for five years .
 Critics spy another blow to civil liberties, which were already under siege .
 The government argued that the new law was needed to combat a mounting threat from domestic extremists inspired by Islamic State . The militia that occupies large parts of Syria and Iraq.
 Officials reckon at least a dozen Malaysians have died abroad fighting for the militants . Officials reckon that at least 12 Malaysians are believed to have been killed abroad .
 Police say that since 2013 they have arrested around 90 people suspected of sympathising with them . Police say they have been arrested since 2013 .
 Police nabbed 17 people who they said were planning attacks on Kuala Lumpur, the capital, and on Putrajaya, the government seat . On April 5th, just hours before Parliament began debating the law, 17 people were arrested .
 The timing looked suspicious to opponents of the act, which include Pakatan Rakyat, the opposition coalition .
 Belgians are thought to have travelled to Syria . Many fewer Malaysians than, for example, than, Belgians . Many Malaysians are believed to have traveled to Syria.
 Malaysia is battling provincial Islamic insurgencies of the sort that trouble its neighbours, Thailand and the Philippines . Malaysia is a moderately Muslim country, but is a moderate Muslim country .
 The government has produced no evidence that such sweeping powers are warranted, a human rights group says . The International Commission of Jurists says .
 It laments that only one member of the government’s detention panel needs legal experience .
 Police may now hold suspects for up to 60 days without the panel’s consent .
 The law will become a new weapon in a worsening crackdown on opponents of umno, Mr Najib’s party .
 In the first three months of this year, 36 people were arrested on suspicion of making comments that violated the Sedition Act . The law is being invoked more frequently than ever .
 Nurul Izzah, a prominent mp, was arrested on suspicion of sedition last month . She delivered a speech denouncing the imprisonment of her father, Anwar Ibrahim, who leads the opposition .
 Mr Najib had promised to roll back the Sedition Act, just as he promised to junk the isa .
 The new anti-terror rules would greatly toughen sentences and forbid speech that denigrates religion . But the government took the opportunity to table changes to the act .
 Both pieces of legislation highlight how far Malaysia has retreated from the reformist policies that Mr Najib espoused during his first term . The legislation was passed in 2013, which ended in 2013 .
 The impact of the Sunflower Movement and other grassroots campaigns has been wide-ranging . The impact on grassroots campaigns is wide- ranging .
Taiwan's political chemistry has begun to change too, but the island’s political chemistry is changing . Taiwan's efforts by Taiwan to liberalise its trade with China faltered .
 The KMT-despite its recent drubbing in mayoral elections, is likely to keep a majority in the legislature . The dpp has a good chance of winning the presidential polls, although the KMT has a poor record .
 The dpp sees former participants in the Sunflower Movement and other social activists as potential recruits .
 Many of them are young people who feel gloomy about job prospects . Many are quick to blame their woes on China .
 One student leader, Chen Wei-ting, told the court that the protesters had saved Taiwan from economic domination by China .
 Tsai Ingwen, the dpp’s presidential candidate, has hired a few young activists to lead party departments .
 Observers speak of a new ‘third force’ in the island’s politics . Activists have campaigned on issues ranging from nuclear power to bullying in the army .
 They sympathise far more with the dpp than with the kmt, but they complicate the strategies of both . They are more likely to sympathise with the Dpp than thekmt .
Fan Yun gave street seminars to students about democracy during the Sunflower unrest . One of them is Fan Yun, an academic who gave seminars about democracy to students during the unrest .
 Other sdp candidates include a lesbian-rights activist who is expected to run in a glitzy commercial district of Taipei . A stuffy kmt lawmaker who opposes gay marriage.
 It is unclear whether any of these new parties will gain seats in the legislature . More than a dozen new parties registered in the past year.
 Third-force parties' emphasis on domestic reforms could help the dpp broaden its alliances . Third- force parties may be attracted by bickering between the two parties over relations with China .
 The new parties have profound misgivings about China’s economic relationship with Taiwan . China's new parties.
 Ms Tsai is relatively pragmatic and wants to keep relations with China on an even keel . She is unhappy with the kmt's cosiness with China .
 She hopes to co-opt the young acAsia 37 Flower power tivists . She may have to take greater risks with the island’s truculent neighbour .
 Even the kmt has adjusted its policies in response to grassroots activism-and not just on matters relating to cross-strait trade .
 In the past year it has halted the construction of a new nuclear reactor complex . The island had long insisted that nuclear power was vital for the island .
 Eric Chu wants Taiwan to become nuclear-free . The kmt’s recently appointed chairman, Eric Chu, says he wants the country to be nuclear free .
 The meat industry wants protecting too W HEN the state of Maharashtra . It was bad news for those, mostly Muslims, who turn the state’s ageing cattle into leather and cheap cuts .
More startling was a declaration on March 29th by the national government’s minister for home affairs .
He said he would try to end cattle slaughter across India . He stood alongside religious leaders who had called for a ban on beef exports .
 Maharashtra’s advocate-general struck fear into the hearts of non-vegetarians . Then on April 6th Maharashtra's advocate- general struck fear in the heart of the non-viggers .
 Very many of India’s Hindu majority are vegetarian, and of the Hindu carnivores, most eschew eating cattle flesh .
 India’s beef industry has flourished, with exports growing tenfold in the past decade . India's beef industry is one of the biggest in the world .
 The country is now the second largest exporter of beef, behind only Brazil . Brazil is the secondlargest exporter in the world .
 Since the government began encouraging farmers to raise and slaughter buffaloes, exports of their meat have boomed . The government has encouraged farmers to increase their meat exports .
 Maharashtra's chief minister has clarified that the state's ban will not apply to buffaloes-India’s cash cows . But since his advocate-general's provocative statement, Maharashtra's Chief Minister has clarified the ban .
 In June it will decide whether to add it to the short list of world heritage sites . Just 46 out of 1,007-it regards it as in danger, according to the list .
 The effect on coral skeletons is similar to that of osteoporosis in humans, says John Gunn of the Australian Institute of Marine Science .
 The Endeavour snagged on its coral in 1770,18 years before Europeans settled Australia . They lashed the reef long before Captain Cook’s ship, the endeavour .
 Six cyclones of Category 5, the highest level, have struck in the past ten years . In the past 10 years, six cyclones have struck it .
 The Australian Institute of Marine Science rates the “massive explosion’ of this lethal starfish strain as second only to cyclones as a cause of the reef’s decline .
 Several interventions, including fencing coral zones and using navy divers to remove starfish, have in the past proved ineffectual .
 Divers have started to inject starfish with solution made of salts from cattlebile .
 A single shot of the substance, discovered by chance during research into starfish diseases, triggers a lethal reaction .
 So far it has only been used in areas prized by divers and tourists for coral . So far, it has been only used in places prized for coral.
Only a fraction of the tens of millions of crown-of-thorns starfish thought to inhabit the entire reef .
 The species has few predators, reproduces profusely and can devastate a reef in months . The species is a very rare species that can reproduce quickly .
 It is native to reefs throughout the Pacific and Indian oceans . It raises questions about the impact on ecosystems of slaughtering them wholesale .
Strong evidence links population explosions to floods that wash high levels of nutrients from farms onto the reef . Strong evidence links the floods to floods.
 Australia’s latest plan for the Great Barrier Reef hopes to convince the World Heritage Committee not to classify it as endangered . It hopes to cut nitrogen loads in half by 2018 and by four-fifths seven years later .
 Some sugarcane farmers along the reef have started cutting back on fertilisers and pesticides . More must follow if the plan is to work, according to experts .
 The intensity of cyclones is predicted to rise, John Gunn, head of the Australian Institute of Marine Science, says .
 The Great Barrier Reef is to be saved from the combined threat of storms, nutrients and the plague of starfish . One of such intensity in the area was in 1918 .
Each has damaged coral and polluted the surrounding water with run-off from farms and cities . Each has damaged the surrounding waters.
 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority is charged with protecting it . It's not clear if climate change is climate change in action, the agency says .
 An Australian government report to the un in January said that protecting the reef would take a “concerted international effort’ to reduce climate change .
 The country's own foot-dragging on climate action makes it a poor advocate. But the country’s own step-dagging on the issue makes it poor advocate .
 Tony Abbott opened a new mine in a Queensland coalmining region inland from the reef . Queensland is one of the world’s biggest coal exporters .
World Heritage Committee put Australia on notice of possible change to Great Barrier Reef's status four years ago . It was a boom in resource exports that prompted the World Heritage Committee to put the country on notice .
 Dredging waste at Gladstone, a southern reef port, is being dumped in waters within the world heritage site . Some of the world's biggest exploration companies are being allowed to start exporting liquefied natural gas .
 A bigger row followed over dredging at Abbot Point, another reef port linked to coal projects by Adani and gvk, two Indian companies .
 In late 2013, the government approved a plan to dump about 3m cubic metres of that port's waste inside the reef’s waters . The plan was approved in late 2013 .
 Mr Abbott flew to Hamilton Island on March 21st to launch Australia’s final pitch to the un to keep it off the danger list .
 Queensland state government will spend about A$2 billion over the next ten years to sustain the reef . Together with the state government, his administration will spend $2 billion on the reef.
 Dumping dredge waste from port expansions in reef waters has now been banned . Dumping waste has been banned from reef waters .
 An ‘in danger’ listing could hit tourism to the reef, which is worth about A$5 billion a year-to say nothing of the country's self-esteem .
 Australia’s marine science institute has tracked coral re-growing in several places where environmental pressure has eased .
Restoring the whole reef to Lady Elliot Island’s immaculate state will be a bigger challenge . Restoring the entire reef will be the biggest challenge to restore the state .
 Most people in coastal cities of Shanghai and Guangzhou think that smog is getting worse . One in China Daily showed that most people in the coastal cities thought smog was worse .
 Two-thirds of respondents in Henan province in central China regard local officials as inefficient and neglectful of their duties . Yet another found that over two-thirds inHenan province regard local authorities as inefficient .
 The party is increasingly seeking to measure that will-and-let it shape some of its policies . Now it is seeking to let it shape at least some of the party's policies .
 The party seized power in 1949. It has repeatedly unleashed public opinion only to suppress it with force . It briefly tolerated critical voices, to the student-led protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989 .
 For the past two decades, the party has effectively bought people’s obedience by promising-and delivering-and-a better, richer future .
 Members of a huge new middle class are demanding more from their government in areas ranging from the environment to the protection of property rights .
 The party must respond to concerns in order to retain its legitimacy . So the party must response to concerns about its legitimacy.
 The public has become ever more vocal on a wide variety of issues-online, through protests and responses to opinion polls and government consultations .
 The party monitors this clamour to detect possible flashpoints . It frequently censors dissent, and it frequently censor dissent .
 The government is consulting people through opinion polls that try to establish their views on some of the big issues of the day . But the government is also consulting people on specific policies .
 Its main aim is to devise ways to keep citizens as happy as possible in their daily lives .
 In the late 1980s officials began turning to universities to conduct polls to gauge popular responses to market reforms . Chinese whispers in the 1980s began to be heard.
 The government's agency for environmental protection undertook its first survey in the late i990s . Environmental concerns were rarely discussed in public-about people’s attitudes towards pollution .
Around the same time party officials organised polls on religious belief . Around the same times party officials organise polls on religion .
 The country's economic growth remains limited, whether by government or others, according to the Chinese government . China's economy remains a major source of growth in the region .
 Yuan Yue pioneered commercial polling in China when he set up Horizon Research, a private company, in 1992 .
 He says reports circulated by his previous employer, the Ministry of Justice, used to state that “the people all agree’- even though no one was asked what they thought . He says he was told by his former employer that ‘the peopleAll agree.
 Most provincial governments have a social-opinion research centre, while official news agencies run opinion-monitoring units . Many university departments conduct surveys, as do commercial pollsters .
 The top rung of leaders rarely commissions polls, but what Mr Yuan describes as “customer satisfaction surveys’ by local governments are used “very extensively’s” He says .
 These evaluate government performance on issues such as social security, public health, employment, employment and the environment . They also assess government performance.
 The party insists that public approval on its own is not enough to guarantee a leader's promotion . They even assess the popularity of local leaders .
 A poll has emerged to sample attitudes towards particular issues such as raising subway fares or increasing the price of petrol or water . Another type of poll has also emerged.
 Greater public involvement, including through polling, has had some effect on policy . Greater public participation has had an impact on policy, according to experts .
 It has worked hard to monitor citizens’ internet doings, and block or filter content it does not like . It has also worked hard.
 Authorities are trying to rein in internet chaos they themselves have wrought . Now authorities are attempting to restore the internet chaos.
 Users seeking the latest official data or the current party line are often frustrated . But users seeking the new data or current party lines are often frustration .
 Some agencies that were long ago disbanded or merged into others have left their old web pages floating around the internet like space junk .
 Some sites work only with certain web browsers, some do not work at all . Some sites contain malware and some contain malware .
 State media have called for the punishment of those responsible for having failed to delete them earlier . State media call for those responsible to be punished for not deleting them .
 Actual government sites have also been hijacked, such as that of the Anhui provincial land and resources bureau . The bureau carried adverts for laser hair-removal and infertility treatments .
 Beijing’s city government has pledged to respond within seven days to comments by users of its site .
 Clean-up effort may also be aimed at tightening control over information that gets released . But clean-up efforts are also aimed at tighter control over release of information .
 The review and clean-up effort, if successful, will bring welcome relief to millions of frustrated users in search of current information . If successful, the effort will bring relief to thousands of users .
 Mr Wen left office more than two years ago . The government's failure to tackle corruption has consistently featured among respondents’ main concerns .
 Mr Xi’s sweeping anti-corruption campaign appears, at least partly, to be a response to such anxieties . Mr Xi's anti- corruption campaign appears to be an answer to such anxiety.
 Last year’s declaration of a ‘war on pollution’ by Li Keqiang similarly had public opinion in mind . Last year's declaration of “war onpoll’ was similar to that by LiKeqiang .
 Opinion polls particularly affect policy at a local level, Mr Saich reckons . He reckons.
Public satisfaction with local government is often lower than it is with central government . Local authorities provide the overwhelming bulk of public services, according to surveys .
 China enters what he calls the “deep water’ of economic reform. But Mr Xi still has reason to worry, as he says he still has reasons to worry .
 In a country so vast, populous and diverse, it is often hard to sample representatively . In the U.S. it is hard to samples representatively.
 Internet penetration is higher in cities and among rich people, which biases online polls, while rural respondents more often refuse face-to-face interviews . Internet penetration in cities is higher than in rural areas, according to online polls .
 The 300m internal migrants are hard to assess because they are on the move . They often work in the grey economy and are suspicious of people they regard as snoops .
 Falun Gong, a once popular quasi-Buddhist sect that the government banned in 1999, or the Tiananmen Square protests . Horizon’s Mr Yuan says he can ask almost anything these days .
 Last year he conducted polls on attitudes toward pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong . But he is guarded about who commissioned him and what he found .
 That makes it harder to call the party to account, and means academics and experts sometimes cannot use the findings to advise on policy . It makes it hard to call out the party.
 The government's interpretation of opinion-poll data is becoming more sophisticated . Still, the government’s interpretation of the data is more sophisticated than ever .
 A survey in Beijing in 1995 found that 90% of people were satisfied with the city government’s performance . Yet some in the government, steeped in the party's traditional view that it enjoys universal public support, worried that as many as 10% were dissatisfied .
 The surveys stop well short of providing officials with the kind of feedback they need . Rising numbers of protests in recent years have been an indication of that .
 The party is ready to allow more open airing of dissent, says Anthony Saich .
 Mr Xi has presided over increasing constraints on the press and on freedom of expression in other areas .
 Five women were arrested last month merely, it appears, for campaigning against sexual harassment . They include five women arrested in the past month .
 The party sees limited interaction between government and citizens as a way of blunting demands for a freer choice of who rules over them .
State-run media do almost daily, but even to report a poll gives weight to the notion that public opinion matters . But even to say a poll, as state- run media do, is not a matter of public opinion .
 It is a message that is sinking in among citizens and fuelling demands for more responsive government . It is also a message of support for a responsive government, it is said .
 Some see it as no more than an empty slogan; others as a thinly disguised Chinese plot to supplant America as Asia's predominant power .
 He mooted a “ Silk Road economic belt’ of improved infrastructure along the main strands of what, centuries ago, was the network of overland routes used by silk traders .
 Mr Xi proposed ‘a 21st-century maritime Silk Road’ in Indonesia . He would reach Europe from cities on China’s south-eastern seaboard via Vietnam, Indonesia itself, India, Sri Lanka, east Africa and the Suez Canal .
 At the time, the proposals sounded rather fluffy-the sort of thing travelling leaders often trot out, harking back to the past of supposedly harmonious exchanges .
 China has gone further toward putting its money where Mr Xi’s mouth is, says Mr Xi .
 47 countries have applied to join as founding shareholders of Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank . American opposition has sparked a race in which 47 countries are applying to join the bank .
 China has earmarked a further $40 billion for a ‘Silk Road fund’ to invest in infrastructure along the land belt and the maritime road .
 Chinese firms hope to win many of the engineering projects that the new “connectivity’s’ will demand . The new ‘connectivity' will demand.
 China seems to have realised this has led to comparisons with the Marshall Plan, America’s aid to help western Europe rebuild after the second world war .
 China sees the Marshall Plan as part of America’s containment of the Soviet Union . China does not like that analogy, since it sees the plan as a part of the U.S. containment .
 Yan Xuetong, a prominent Chinese international-relations expert, has argued that the country needs to “purchase’s friendly relationships with its neighbours .
In Central Asia, battered by low oil prices and plummeting remittances from migrant workers in Russia, the prospect of greater Chinese involvement is welcomed . In Central Asia.
 Russia is wary of China’s steady erosion of its influence in the former Soviet states of the region .
 On the maritime route, however, suspicion of Chinese intentions is rife . On the Maritime route, there are concerns about Chinese intentions .
Arrogant behaviour in the South China Sea has given the impression it feels it can bully its smaller neighbours . It is engaged in a construction spree to turn disputed rocks into islands .
Initial reaction in South-East Asia to the belt and road has been sceptical . So the initial reaction in the region has been skeptical .
 Defence minister Hishamuddin Hussein says maritime Silk Road has raised questions . He says it must come across as a joint initiative, rather than a solely Chinese one .
 Indonesia’s president, Joko Widodo, says he wants to turn his country into a ‘global maritime fulcrum’ Widodo was doubtful at first .
 He now seems inclined to helpunsurprisingly since his own plan involves massive investment in ports and other infrastructure to which, he hopes, China will contribute . But he now seems less likely to help.
 Indonesia did not accept China’s territorial claims in South-East Asian waters . But Mr Joko had also made clear before arriving in Beijing that Indonesia does not accept the claims .
 India's new prime minister, Narendra Modi, has his own approach to these issues . In India, he is the first prime minister to take on these issues.
 He visited Sri Lanka, Mauritius and the Seychelles last month . He promised greater co-operation and spelled out India’s own interests as a maritime power .
 India's response to China’s maritime ambitions has been to reinvigorate ties with small neighbours and to cleave closer to America .
 Mr Modi, who will be in China next month, is unlikely to be critical of the maritime Silk Road .
 Chinese-led institutions playing an ever bigger role in Asian economies . Fast-growing Chinese navy deploying ever more visibly far from China's shores .
 Mr Xi is guided by a dream of regional hegemony, of countries such as South Korea and Japan drifting of their own will away from America’s strategic orbit .
 It is a long-term-and even credibleplan, albeit one that does little to inspire the rest of Asia . It is long-time and even credible plan, but one that doesn't inspire other countries .
 The odds of a momentous agreement have shortened, but it is no dead cert I T IS not yet a done deal . Iran nuclear deal is too soon to celebrate.
 Hardliners on both sides will do their best to sabotage it in the coming weeks. Hardliners will do the best to sabotage it in coming weeks .
 The odds on Iran and six world powers striking a big nuclear deal have shortened dramatically . But the odds on the deal have been reduced dramatically .
 The announcement on April 2nd of the parameters for an agreement to limit Iran’s nuclear programme was more detailed than expected . The announcement was made in exchange for lifting sanctions on Iran .
Several unresolved issues mean there will be much hard negotiating to be done if a deal is to be signed by the June 30th deadline . But several unresolved issues will be difficult to reach a deal .
Experts who had previously been sceptical about the prospect of an agreement think it is within reach . Still, experts who had been sceptic about the possibility of an deal think it's within reach.
So far the reaction from the Arab world's Sunni powers has been measured, even welcoming . Saudi Arabia is Iran's rival for regional hegemony .
 The Israeli government is now talking about how to make the deal better rather than denouncing it-the default position of the prime minister . Binyamin Netanyahu-although the improvements it demands would still destroy the talks .
 The level of detail in the “fact sheet’s parameters that was released by the State Department has not been matched by Iranian statements. True, the level of details in the "fact sheet" about the deal's parameters have not been matching .
 Iran’s ability to produce fissile material for bomb-making is key to curbing Iran's ability to make bombs . Iran has been banned from making bombs by the U.S.
 Iran's nuclear programmewhich has halved Iran’s export earnings and crippled the economy in other ways . Iranians have done pretty well, albeit not as well as they claim .
 America’s initial position had been that sanctions would come off only in stages, and would depend on Iran establishing a record of strict compliance .
 It now seems likely that American and European sanctions will be suspended at roughly the same time, not least because extraterritorial provisions in the American measures would otherwise expose European firms to lawsuits .
 All sanctions would go within days of the signing of the final agreement. In other words, all sanctions would be in place within days .
 The International Atomic Energy Agency “has verified that Iran has taken all of its key nuclear-related steps’-ie, not at the beginning. By contrast, America and its European conegotiators are insisting that sanctions will only be suspended after the IAEA has verified
 Lifting sanctions could take between six months and a year, according to John Kerry, America's secretary of state .
 A further disagreement is over reimposing sanctions should Iran violate the terms of the accord . A further dispute is over whether sanctions should be reimposed .
 The Iranians bridle at the mention of it, but the principle of sanctions ‘snapback’ is key for the West . It is reflected in the careful wording of the undertakings .
 Iran's architecture will remain in place, despite sanctions . Iran can rejoice that sanctions have gone, but the reality is that their architecture will be in place .
 The un sanctions are less painful in economic terms, but trickier politically . They deal mainly with arms and technology transfers, and target individual people and firms .
 The Iranian violation is both severe and flagrant enough even for Russia to refrain from us. Once lifted through a new Security Council resolution they may be well-nigh impossible to slap back on unless the violation is severe .
 sanctions on Iran have nothing to do with its nuclear activities, but have accumulated over the past four decades in response to abuses of human rights, the promotion of terrorism and the country’s threatening missile programme .
 If ordinary Iranians think that all these will disappear too, they are in for a disappointment, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Iranian fact-sheet is silent, beyond the commitment voluntarily to implement the ‘additional protocol’ of the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty .
 Iran must be willing to go even further and allow inspectors to visit any sites deemed “suspicious” The agency has asked about past and possibly continuing research on nuclear weapons .
 Disagreements over verification give opponents of the deal on both sides their best chance of undermining it . Disagreement over verification gives opponents the best chance to undermine the deal .
 President Obama may lose the votes he needs to head off critics in Congress who want the right to review the deal and introduce new sanctions .
 The city of Tikrit was lost in April, but took over the long-suffering Yarmouk camp in Syria .
 Yarmouk has long been held by a mixture of Palestinian and Syrian rebels, and besieged by troops loyal to Syria’s president, Bashar Assad .
Until recently is in Syria was confined mostly to the east of the country bordering Iraq . Until recently it was in the east.
 Syria's declaration of wilayat, or “provinces, has seemed less like wishful thinking . But in other parts of Syria, it has been less like wishesful thinking, says CNN.
 Its men have inched westward from their Syrian headquarters in Raqqa towards Mr Assad’s turf .
 On March 31st they killed at least 46 residents of Mabuja, a village close to Hama .
 The jihadists launched an offensive to take over Yarmouk, just 10 kilometres from central Damascus . Then on April 1st the jihadists launched a offensive, taking over the city .
 Fighting continues, but is said to be in control of roughly fourfifths of the camp . Fighting continues but is still in control, according to reports .
 As well as sending in its own fighters, the camp has found local recruits among angry young camp residents .
 The regime's troops have been starved by the regime’s troops to the point of eating leaves . They also dislike some of the rebel groups that control Yarmouk for playing politics with the regime .
 Observers have long feared that is would advance in Syria as the Western coalition’s plan to ‘degrade and defeat’ is focused on Iraq .
 Syria claims its ‘caliphate’ has effaced the post-colonial borders . But it does not consider the two countries to be separate battlefields .
 Syria-Kurdish fighters pushed it out of Kobane with the help of U.S. bombing-southern Syria is the natural place to seek gains . As is has struggled to make further gains in northern Syria, Kobane has struggled .
 The new is tactics expose the latent contradiction in America’s strategy, says the author .
 America is opposed both to Assad regime and to the Assad regime . In Syria, its plans to support mainstream rebels have not come to much .
 Iran, by contrast, supports both the Iraqi and Syrian governments . Iran is sending fighters from Hizbullah, its Lebanese client, to Lebanon . Iran has also helped form local militias to support them .
 Syria’s rebels in the south are better equipped and less extreme than their northern peers . But even they are receiving only limited help from American and Arab states .
 In a perverse but characteristic contortion, he is claiming to defend the same 18,000 people he has besieged for the past two years .
 Some Arab states appear to be warming to Mr Assad as the lesser evil .
 On April 2nd Tunisia, which last month suffered an attack at its Bardo museum that killed 22 people, announced that it would reopen its consulate in Damascus . The attack occurred at the Bardo Museum in Tunisia .
 Tunisian officials have invited Syrian ambassador back to Tunis . Officials say it is to track Tunisian jihadists in Syria .
 Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s president, is far warmer toward Mr Assad than his predecessor, Muhammad Morsi .
 Syrian president is relying ever more on Hizbullah and other militias backed by Iran .
 Some think Saudi Arabia may yet do more to push Assad out of Yemen . Saudi Arabia is leading a ten-country offensive in Yemen .
 Direct Arab action is unlikely in Syria, but it could get much messier yet . It could get more messier.
 National Mobilisation Unit is a multi-ethnic force being assembled by the governor of Mosul’s Nineveh province . They are among 4,000 volunteers for the National Mobilization Unit .
 Police and military forces melted away in the face of the jihadists’ onslaught last June . They would replace the police and military force that melted away.
 Iraqi soldiers, mainly Iranian-backed Shia militiamen and American air power recaptured Tikrit on March 31st .
 Mosul is the Iraqi base of is, which was present there long before it took the city . Mosul was present in the Iraqi city long before the city took it .
 In Tikrit, Shia militias had to be pulled out after looting and revenge attacks on Sunni residents . Last year hundreds of Shia soldiers were executed, and their bodies are now.
 Hashid alShaabi, the umbrella-group for Shia militias, will not be sent to fight in Mosul . Haider al-Abadi, Iraq’s prime minister, said that the Hashidal al- Abadi, the Iraq's prime minister.
 Mistrust between Sunni Arabs and Iraq’s mainly Shia security forces runs especially deep in Mosul .
 Mosul, Iraq, is home to myriad communities. Unlike other Iraqi cities that are more ethnically and religiously uniform, Mosul has a diverse population .
 Sunni Arabs, Shias, Kurds, Christians and Yazidis have all registered for Mr Nujaifi’s force . Sunni Arabs and Shias are among those registered for him .
 Mosul also has a hard Sunni core, partly fuelled by disgruntled former officers under Saddam who bore the brunt of de-Baathification policy .
 Kurdish president Masoud Barzani said his fighters, known as Peshmerga, would assist in the campaign to retake Mosul .
 Officials say they are likely only to provide support, not enter the city . But officials say they will only provide support and not enter .
 The Iraqi army is still being rebuilt after last June’s debacle . So the task will most likely fall to the Iraqi army .
 Mr Nujaifi says the government pays his men salaries of about $700 a month . But it has not sent them any arms .
 Sunni officials, and some diplomats, say the delay may be due to the Shia leanings of the government .
 Many ministers mistrust the Sunnis, and the most extreme Shia militiamen label them all as is. The Sunnis are considered the most violent of the Shia.
 The battle for Mosul is unlikely to happen this spring. This all suggests that the battle for the city is likely to be over this spring .
 The National Mobilisation Unit is a reminder of what Iraq’s security forces are supposed to be .
 As they train, recruits sing Arabic and Kurdish ditties about a united Iraqi force waging war against is.
 The display of pride rooted in national identity rather than sectarianism sets the unit apart from most of Iraq's militias .
 Its fighters are still too few, and too weak, to make a difference. Sadly, its fighters are too weak to make the difference .
 The Beida government directed the state-run oil company to send its income not to the central bank in Tripoli but to the government’s own offshore account .
 The revenue is being fought over by both sides in the conflict . The one in Beida, the other in Tripoli-and their allied militias .
 The noc and the central bank, both in Tripoli, have somehow preserved their independence, but at a cost . The bank's independence has been preserved by the Tripoli noc .
 The bank has used the oil money to pay consumer subsidies and the salaries of government workers across Libya . The bank is also funding each side's war .
Beida government has tried to get hold of the cash before by setting up a parallel outfit at Ras Lanuf . Few expect the noc’s revenue to end up in the coffers of the Beida government .
 Western companies buy the bulk of the country's oil and have little interest in changing contracts that are paid into central-bank accounts .
 The Beida government has little ability to pay salaries, as the database of government workers is in Tripoli .
 Many think the move is a sign of the Beida government’s increasing intransigence . It has soured efforts by the un to negotiate an end to the conflict .
During peace talks last month Khalifa Haftar, a general allied to the Beida administration, ordered an air attack on Tripoli .
 Western powers fear his war on "terrorists" is really an attempt to seize personal power . But Western powers believe his war is an attempt on personal power.
 Beida government has refused to enable its control of the country’s finances . So although they recognise the government, they have refused to allow it to control its finances .
 The deficit this year is expected to be about twothirds of gdp, and the country’s reserves are running low .
 The president-elect faces enormous tasks, starting with halting corruption . UHAMMADU BUHARI is fast learning what excessive expectations can do .
 The former military ruler last month handsomely beat the incumbent, Goodluckjonathan, in a presidential election . He promised frustrated Nigerians that he would bring change once he is inaugurated .
 The All Progressives Congress will reshape the country, as oil prices and government revenues slump .
 The apc’s main campaign promises were to beat an insurgency in the north-east that has claimed at least 15,000 lives .
Embezzlement by generals is one reason why the army lacks the equipment to defeat the jihadists of Boko Haram .
 Theft of public funds and poor government are the banes of Africa’s biggest economy and largest oil producer .
 The apc includes reformers, but it is also full of veteran politicians used to taking their cut .
 Investigation into opaque operating contracts is the starting place, reckons Thomas Hansen of Control Risks .
 The state-owned oil giant signed operating contracts worth billions of dollars . Part of the building believed to predate the Boer war of 18991902 .
 TheSheds@iEox is a cavernous hall of vendors selling craft beer, flambeed chorizo and artisanal tacos . Now it is TheShings@ iEox, a Cavernous Hall of vendors.
Developers bring fresh life to areas of South Africa's economic capital . This is the latest example of developers bringing new life to pockets of the capital .
 The gentrification of small sections of inner-city Johannesburg is generally welcome . The gentification of small parts of the city is generally welcomed .
 As apartheid waned, white middle-class residents fled to the northern suburbs . Companies shifted their headquarters and moved their headquarters .
 Hard-up black migrants previously relegated to the margins moved into abandoned buildings, seeking opportunities in City of Gold .
 Johannesburg became a fearsome place of filthy streets, a horrendous crime rate and the phenomenon of criminals ‘hijacking’ buildings from their owners .
Young creative types of all ethnicities have been drawn to such areas as Braamfontein and Maboneng . refurbished buildings offer downtown living at reasonable rents .
 The Rough Guides travel book named Johannesburg-not its rival, Cape Town-as the must-visit city of 2015 .
 This first wave of gentrification, accompanied by good security, is still tentative, however . It's not the first time gentrification has been seen in recent years .
 crime is falling, but it is still high, as elsewhere in South Africa . Crime is falling but still high in the country .
 A violent protest in the Jeppestown area of Johannesburg exposed the residual cracks . A recent violent protest exposed the cracks in Johannesburg .
 Maboneng is an area that has been redeveloped into loft apartments, a boutique hotel and an art-house cinema . Residents facing eviction by private developers turned their anger on the area .
 Maboneng’s developers were not to blame for the evictions . They became a target because of their success.
 The destitute still fear they will be sidelined and packed off as the city regenerates . But they still fear the destitute will be left out of the city.
 It is owned by a black entrepreneur who was once a security guard for cars . It is called “The Blaclcanese’s” and it is named after a black businessman .
 Lamido Sanusi was a former central-bank governor sacked by Mr Jonathan for alleging that $20 billion in oil revenue had vanished .
 Opaque “swap’s’ deals, whereby crude exports are exchanged for refined petroleum brought back into the country, may also come under scrutiny .
 Nigerian Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative set up in 2004 to eye deals in oil, gas and mining . In 2014, monitors said the country could be losing $8 billion a year thanks to agreements between the nnpc and traders .
 At the same time, Mr Buhari must keep the current fragile peace in the oil-producing Niger delta .
Since 2009, he has paid former militants to stop them blowing up oil installations and kidnapping workers . He is expected to axe an expensive deal which, since 2009, has paid ex-militants.
 Former generals who were enriched on Mr Jonathan’s watch could stoke violence if they feel aggrieved . But former generals could be aggrieved if they felt aggrieved.
 Some former fighters said they would go to war if Mr Jonathan lost . So far so far so quiet in the region. But some former fighters say they would fight if he lost .
 Mr Jonathan deserves credit for accepting defeat graciously, which has helped stave off the threat of mass violence .
 Mr Buhari is trapped in Nigerians watching his every move . He has been trapped by Nigerians in his own country .
 The Shabab, a fanatical Islamist group that seeks to rule over Somalia, has terrorised neighbouring Kenya . The group has also terrorised Kenya .
 The Kenyan government has been fighting it in Somalia for years . It justifies its carnage on the ground that the Kenyan government is fighting it .
 Most of the students at the new university are from other parts of the country . Ms Onyango, 20, is a 20-year-old student at the university .
 The Kenyan soldiers discussed where the soldiers might be positioning themselves .
 Students tested the students’ knowledge of the Koran, killing those who failed . Meanwhile, they tested the student’s knowledge of Koran .
 Female students tricked out of their hiding places by gunmen’s assurance that the Koran forbids the killing of women .
 Some victims were made to call their parents to blame their death on Kenya’s government for policies that supposedly led to the killing of Somalis and Muslims .
 President Uhuru Kenyatta called for three days of mourning-and swore vengeance on the killers . President Uharu Kenyata called for a three-day mourning.
 Five Kenyans and a Tanzanian have been arrested on suspicion of involvement in the Garissa attack . So far five Kenyan and aTanzanian are arrested .
 Kenya’s central bank governor suspended the licences of 13 Somali remittance firms operating in Kenya . More than 80 individuals and entities suspected of financing terrorism were also suspended .
 Islamist assaults on Kenya have been mounting since 2011 . The Shabab proclaimed its allegiance to alOaeda in 2012 . It still controls swathes of the country in the centre and south .
 In September 2013 it butchered at least 67 in Nairobi’s Westgate shopping mall .
 In June last year it slaughtered 60 in the town of Mpeketoni, near the island of Lamu . The slaughter took place in June 2013 .
 In November and December it murdered 36 labourers in a quarry and 28 people whom it hauled off a bus . The quarry also hauled 28 people off the bus .
 Both atrocities were carried out near Mandera, in Kenya’s far north-east .
 Criticism of the government’s tardy and incompetent response to the slaughter in Garissa has welled up fast . The government has been criticised for its tardy, incompetent response.
 interior ministry spokesman insists it was “not as bad’ as during Westgate fiasco . Security forces took four days to defeat four terrorists and looted the mall .
 Nairobi-based journalists jumped in their cars in Garissa hours before Kenya’s General Service Unit .
 Garissa two guards had been deployed to protect the students . The students had been at the center of the conflict in Garissa .
 The day before the attack, Mr Kenyatta had lambasted the British government for warning its citizens against travel .
 After the Westgate attack he had been loth to sack any of the ministers or generals in charge of security . But eventually a few heads did roll, and he was eventually sacked .
 A particular worry is that the appeal of Islamist violence is spreading beyond the extremists among Kenya’s 2m-plus Somalis . The coastal region that caters to many tourists.
 The Garissa attack was launched the day after the anniversary of the assassination of a prominent pro-jihadist cleric in Mombasa .
 Many young Muslims on the coast fear they will be targeted by the authorities in the wake of the Garissa outrage . Many young Muslim people fear they are being targeted by authorities .
 In recent years they have accused the government’s counter-terrorism units of extrajudicial killings, disappearances and arbitrary detentions .
 In poor areas such as Garissa they also accuse Kenyans from inland, including members of Mr Kenyatta's Kikuyu tribe .
 A railway and pipeline from Lamu towards prospective oil wells in north-west Kenya, Uganda, South Sudan and Ethiopia would run close to Garissa .
 Mr Kenyatta’s government is facing an unusually fierce wave of criticism across the country as a result of a probe into grand-scale corruption that benefited members of the ruling elite .
 If it fails to deal with the Shabab and its homegrown allies better than before, popular discontent could rise alarmingly . If it does not, it could be worse than before .
 Italy's PM Matteo Renzi promised to push through a daunting list of reforms at the breathtaking speed of one a month . The biggest ones will take years to complete, but the biggest ones could take years .
 Those who knew Italy well were sceptical, and indeed Mr Renzi has not kept to his schedule . Those who know Italy well are sceptical .
 Mr Renzi’s economic and political position will be stronger than at any time since he took office .
 Italy appears to be emerging from a recession that has lasted for more than three years . The recession is the longest on record .
 Falling oil prices, the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing and a weaker euro are all doing their bit . Falling oil price, the ECB's quantitative easing, and weaker euro all do their bit.
 Even the opening in Milan of the latest world expo on May is not a boost for gdp . The opening of the new World expo in Milan on May should boost gDP .
 Mr Renzi has undertaken reforms over the past 14 months are starting to have an effect. They argue that reforms he has undertaken over the last 14 months have started to have a effect .
 A cut in a much-criticised regional tax on company turnover, fiscal incentives for employers in a new labour reform . An €80 monthly cut in the tax bill of lower-paid workers .
 Mr Renzi stands tall on a battlefield littered with his vanquished enemies . He stands tall and humiliated allies .
 Abrupt turning points are characteristic of Mediterranean politics, based on patronage . Abrupt turn points are common in Mediterranean politics .
 When a politician demonstrates conclusively that he is the one in charge, his former enemies often switch allegiances .
 Mr Renzi succeeded in pushing his choice for president, Sergio Mattarella, through Italy's electoral college .
 Silvio Berlusconi is the leader of the biggest conservative party in parliament . But he was unacceptable to SilvIO Berluscon, the head of the largest conservative party .
 The Economist had expected a say in choosing the new head of state . The Economist cial support for constitutional and political reform .
Mr Renzi made it clear that he could outwit Mr Berlusconi and even dispense with his help . By ignoring him, Mr Renzi makes it clear he can outwit him .
 One of the ncd’s three ministers resigned over allegations of corruption . The prime minister replaced him with a member of the pd.
 Mr Alfano's party's share in the polls has dwindled to only about 3% . He had no appetite for torpedoing the government and risking an election .
 The pd by contrast is polling at about 38%, and its opponents are in disarray . The poll is at 38% and the pd is at about 40% .
 Berlusconi's support for the government cost him a split in his Forza Italia party . The party now trails a resurgent, more radically right-wing Northern League .
 Italy's prime ministers hesitate to make cuts. In fact the ratio has fallen only once, in 2008, largely because Italy’s prime minister hesitate to cut .
 The cabinet this week agreed to reduce spending by €10 billion . To avoid that, the cabinet agreed to cut spending by€10 billion.
 In Italy, cuts of that magnitude are hard to achieve, but experience shows that in Italy cuts are difficult to achieve . But experience shows, in Italy, the cuts are harder to achieve than in other countries .
 The government faces obstacles including a tortuous legislative process and administrative inertia .
 Italy cannot truly change until it has a government with a solid parliamentary majority, he says . He believes Italy can't change until the government has a solid majority .
 To that end, he has given priority to constitutional reform and a new electoral law . He has also given priority on constitutional reform.
 Mr Renzi's constitutional reform can only be passed after being bounced between Parliament’s two chambers . An identical text has been approved twice by each chamber in votes at least three months apart .
 Unless the bill wins majorities of two-thirds in both houses on the second vote, it will need to be put to a referendum .
 Berlusconi has lost his slim hopes of avoiding a time-consuming nationwide vote .
 Ahmet Davutoglu boasted that security forces had conducted a “successful’s operation, killing both gunmen . Hours later the prime minister boasted that the operation had been successful .
 Mehmet Selim Kiraz, the prosecutor, had been killed too . No matter that the prosecutor was killed, he was killed too.
 Only when they complied with a court order to remove the pictures did they come back online .
 He sometimes claims social media is being manipulated by an unnamed global “mastermind’s’ trying to overthrow him and his Justice and Development party .
 A foreign diplomat in Ankara says Erdogan is creating imaginary enemies to stoke artificial crises and justify repression .
 Fethullah Gulen is a Sunni cleric based in Pennsylvania . He once made common cause against army tutelage in the early days of aic rule .
Mr Gulen's followers in the security forces and judiciary fabricated evidence for an alleged coup plot, known as Sledgehammer . He has since patched things up with the generals, and now claims Mr Gulen’s followers fabricated evidence .
 Mr Erdogan has aired similar claims about a corruption probe into his inner circle .
 Thousands of alleged ‘crypto-Gulenist’ public servants accused of establishing a “parallel state within a state’ have been sacked or demoted .
 More than 70 people investigated or convicted for ‘insulting’ Mr Erdogan since he became Turkey’s first popularly elected president last August .
 Reforms passed by ak during its first two terms in power, from 2002 to 2011, are being rolled back . The reforms were passed during the first two years in power .
 A new security bill permits police to shoot at demonstrators and detain suspects for up to 48 hours without a court order .
 If Erdogan succeeds in attempts to rewrite the constitution to give himself what he calls a “Turkish-style executive presidency, it would concentrate power in his hands .
 To push through constitutional change, ak must win at least two-thirds of the seats in parliamentary elections on June 7th . ak must be elected to parliament to push through changes to the constitution .
President and prime minister clashed over conduct of peace talks with Abdullah Ocalan . OCalan is imprisoned leader of Turkey’s autonomyseeking Kurds .
 Mr Erdogan wants to link any concessions towards Kurds to backing for his executive presidency .
 Mr Davutoglu, ak insiders say, wants the issues to remain separate because he too wants to keep Mr Erdogan's power in check .
 Many worry that Mr Erdogan’s obsession with an executive presidency could drive him to new extremes .
 In the past he has invoked sectarianism by targeting the Alevis, who practise a liberal form of Shia Islam, to shore up a Sunni base .
 His diatribes against Iranian and Shia influence suggest he may resort to such tactics again . His recent diatribe against Iranian, Shia influence suggests he may use such tactics once again .
 The transcripts stir up some of its supporters’ old conspiracy theories about Russian responsibility for the crash .
 Presidential elections are due on May 10th . Pis had hoped anti-Russian sentiment, along with the government’s unpopularity, would help it to victory .
P Pis, which has not won a national race since 2005, is struggling to moderate its religious-nationalist image . Instead Pis, it has not been in the polls since 2005 .
 The current president is Bronislaw Komorowski, who succeeded Lech Kaczynski . The favourite in the race is the current president, Bronislwomorowski .
 He is backed by the centre-right Civic Platform party, which has held power since 2007 . The party has been in power since 2008 .
 Mr Komorowski has framed the election as a contest between a ‘rational Poland in the heart of united Europe’ and a “radical Poland’s peripheries’
 Andrzej Duda is a 42-year-old moderate conservative who serves as a member of the European Parliament . For its part, pis has reached out to educated voters .
 Mr Duda will not be speaking at the party’s annual commemoration of the Smolensk disaster in Warsaw .
 Mr Duda has kept the spotlight on economic topics, particularly the euro . Poland is committed to adopting the euro but which pis oppose .
For a campaign stunt last month he travelled to neighbouring Slovakia, which adopted the euro in 2009, to show that groceries are more expensive there .
 The war in Ukraine has made national security the top concern of voters, according to polls . But the war has also made the war a top concern for voters .
 With parliamentary elections due in the autumn, some polls put the two parties neck-and-neck .
 Ewa Kopacz, the Civic Platform prime minister, faces strikes by coal miners angry at government reforms .
Donald Tusk has struggled to fill the shoes of her predecessor, Donald Tusk, who left in September to become president of the European Council . Tusk is a former European Council president, who has been in charge of European Council since 2007 .
 She has tried to pick up support by embracing socially liberal issues, for instance, by ratifying an international treaty on violence against women .
 Smolensk crash strengthened voters’ emotional bond with Mr Kaczynski . Some pis supporters believe his time is up .
 Andrzej Nowak, a historian discussed as a possible pis presidential candidate last year . The atmosphere inside the party is like a “besieged fortress,’ says Nowak .
 Mr Nowak caused a stir in February by suggesting that Mr Kaczynski, 65, is too old to lead the party .
 Many in Kharkiv favour closer ties with Russia, but few support separatism, says Pavel Tishenko, leader of pro-Russian labour group .
 The brutality of the war in the Donbas has shattered any illusions of a peaceful break-up . The brutality has shattered the illusions of peaceful break up .
 The leaders of Kharkiv’s anti-Maidan movement last spring have taken refuge in Russia .
 A separate battle is under way between Ukraine's central government and Kharkiv's mayor, Gennady Kernes, a former ally of Yanukovych .
 He barely survived an assassination attempt that has left him in a wheelchair . He has now been left with a wheelchair after being shot by a gunman .
 Mr Kernes insists that Kharkiv is a Ukrainian city, yet he refuses to call Russia an “aggressor nation’s official term .
 Ukraine’s general prosecutor has opened a case against Mr Kernes for kidnapping and torturing pro-Maidan activists . The charges are politically motivated, says the prosecutor .
 Ukraine’s interior minister, Arsen Avakov, also hails from Kharkiv . Avakov is a longtime rival of the interior minister of Ukraine .
 Serhiy Zhadan, a local activist and writer, says financial insecurity worries people more than terrorism does .
 Kharkiv’s big enterprises are built to trade with Russia . As elsewhere in Ukraine's economy, Kharkov's business is built to connect with Russia.
Reorienting them would require capital investment that is difficult to attract in a country at war . Reorienting the war-torn countries would be difficult for them to attract investment .
 Kharkiv’s products are more competitive in Russia than in the European Union . Lower quality combined with proximity make Kharkov’'s products more competitive than in Europe .
 Ukraine’s economic pain creates openings for pro-Russian political parties. Ukraine's economic pain created openings for anti-Russian parties.
 National polling data now show the Opposition Bloc outpacing the People's Front party of Arseniy Yatsenyuk . The prime minister won last year's elections and has borne the blame for the country's economic woes .
 separatism caught fire in Donetsk and Luhansk, but it faltered in Kharkiv . But while separatism broke out in Donetsk, it fell out in Kharksiv .
Ukrainian nationalists felled the Lenin statue last autumn, leaving only a shoe .
 Sergei Yangolenko, commander of the Kharkiv-i national-guard battalion, says the days when the city might have joined the rebels are over .
 Kharkiv, just 40km (25 miles) from the Russian border, remains tense . It is just 40 km from the border .
Ukrainian authorities say the attacks are part of a Russian terror campaign . Ukrainian authorities say they are a part of the terror campaign.
 Ihor Rainin says he spends three-quarters of his time on security issues . Rainin: "I spend three- quarters of my time onSecurity issues"
 In late February a blast at a parade commemorating the Maidan anniversary left four dead .
 The following week two landmines blew up a local battalion commander’s car, landing him and his wife in hospital .
 Other targets have included military installations, infrastructure, volunteer offices and even a bar popular with pro-Ukrainian activists .
 A Greek prime minister last visited Moscow in search of a handout . It has been five years since a Greek PM last visited the Russian capital . Russian suspected of organising the BELARUS RUSSIA .
 Alexis Tsipras swore that he would not be asking Vladimir Putin, the current president, for cash . The current president's country's finances are in a more parlous state now than they were in 2010 .
 The two leaders’ meeting produced little beyond a warm atmosphere and pledges to “restart and revive’s relations. In the end, the two leaders' meeting produced nothing beyond awarm atmosphere .
 Mr Tsipras welcomed a proposed Russian gas pipeline across Greece’s territory . He criticised European Union sanctions as he has before .
 Mr Putin pledged to refrain from using relations with Greece to divide the eu. Mr Putin said he would not use relations to divide Greece .
 Mr Tsipras's trip to Moscow was the most striking example to date of the gesture politics that the Greek government has used to keep its approval ratings high .
Both Greeks and Russians celebrating Holy Week ahead of Orthodox Easter . It comes as both Greeks and Russian celebrate Holy Week .
 Russian and Greek cultural organisations will be officially strengthened in 2016 . The year-long cycle of festivities will be held in Russia and Greece .
 IMF; Hellenic Statistical Authority touted by Russia’s state-owned energy giant, Gazprom .
 The pipeline would have shipped gas across the Black Sea and through the Balkans to central Europe . That pipeline would be used to transport gas to the Balkans .
 South Stream was abandoned last year following eu pressure on Bulgaria . South Stream has been abandoned by South Stream since 2011 .
 Greece has an opportunity to join Turkish Stream, its successor to Turkish Stream . Turkish Stream would cross western Turkey before passing through Greece, Macedonia, Serbia and Hungary .
 Russian state-owned transport companies want to acquire the Greek state railway and northern port of Thessaloniki as a package deal .
 Taiped, the Greek agency for privatising state assets, was rejected by Taiped . The previous administration had rejected the proposal .
 Cosco, a Chinese shipping giant, already controls a container terminal at Piraeus, Greece’s largest port . It is tranFrench radio Vive la resistance sporting goods from it by special train to central Europe .
 His government's priority is to reach a deal with creditors to unlock €7. billion of loans and avoid default . But his government’s priority is not to default .
 Greece managed to scrape together its €458m repayment to the imf on April 9th, but another €95m comes due in May . Greece is due to repay €458 million in April .
 For the second month in a row the finance ministry is scrambling for cash to pay pensions and salaries . The finance ministry has been scrambling for money for a second month.
 Greek firms fear motorway projects could soon be stalled . It is raiding unspent eu funds, to the dismay of Greek firms .
 Mr Tsipras’s dreams of Russian investment will quickly fade.
Employees at Radio France began a strike on March 19th . A rotating playlist has been interrupted only for the occasional news update and apology .
 The longest strike in French radio’s history, it has paralysed programming and exasperated listeners .
 It encapsulates the difficulties of reforming the French public sector . It is the first time the French government has taken steps to reform the public sector.
 The strike began as a protest against a cut in the public subsidy and an attempt to control Radio France’s deficit, which will reach €2im this year .
 Radio France, with nearly 5,000 employees, runs two symphony orchestras . Mathieu Gallet, its new boss, has raised the possibility of merging them .
 Mr Gallet had refurbished his office in Radio France’s headquarters at the cost of €100,000 . But resistance to reform hardened after it emerged that he had been refurbished .
 The circular 1960s Paris landmark has itself cost €430111 to revamp, twice the original estimate . The construction of a brand-new auditorium for €42m is also the cost .
 Mr Gallet is regarded by journalists as a sharp-suited beancounter . He talks about branding and about a digital transformation .
 Parisians claim there would be no budget to send reporters further than the ring road . Soon, they claimed, there would no budget for reporters to go further than Paris .
 Radio France's taste for spreadsheets and new furniture masks a real problem at Radio France .
 A crushing report published this month by the public auditor pointed to a financing crisis and long-running management failures .
 Between 2010 and 2013 the payroll bill increased by nearly 10%, even as the headcount remained stable . The audience dwindled at two flagship stations, France Info and France Inter .
 Journalists with over eight years of service, it noted, get nearly 14 weeks of paid holiday a year . Journalists with more than 8 years of work get 14 weeks off a year.
 Only a tiny minority of the staff about 6-10% have taken part in the rolling strike .
 Many journalists have turned up to work on programmes, but because technical and production staff have stayed at home, they are unable to broadcast them . Many journalists are working on programmes because they have been unable to get to work .
 The government has urged an end to the strike and summoned Mr Gallet, supposedly an independent appointee, to explain himself .
 This looks like a case study in how not to go about it. So far, though, this looks like an example of how to not go about this .
 U NTIL science unlocks the secrets of time travel, the world will have to make do with Belarus .
 Poland emerged blinking into independence after the Soviet disintegration in 1991 . The landlocked country of 10m souls is tucked between Poland and Russia .
 Statues of Lenin dot the wide, wellordered streets of Minsk, the capital of Russia .
G grim-faced officials recite tractor-production statistics as a guide to the strength of the economy . Over three-quarters of which remain in state hands .
 Even the food, shrouded in gelatine, mayonnaise and dill, recalls the canteens and mess-halls of an earlier age .
 Alexander Lukashenko will undoubtedly win a fifth term in November’s presidential election . The mustachioed strongman has ruled for over 20 years . He has ruled the country for 20 years.
 The colour revolutions that overturned autocracies in Ukraine and Georgia never had a chance in grey Belarus . In 2010 an opposition demonstration after a fraudulent presidential vote was put down by Mr Lukashenko’s goons .
 European Union sanctions, including a travel ban on Mr Lukashenko, remain in place . European Union restrictions, including travel ban, are still in place.
 Belarus remains in the deep freeze, but the world around it turned upside down . Belarus is still in a deep freeze .
 Last year's revolution in Ukraine and Russia’s aggressive reaction to it have jangled nerves in Minsk . Russia's aggressive reaction has inspired a partial strategic rethink.
 Mr Lukashenko condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea . He did not join its embargo on eu agricultural exports .
 U.S. has hosted two rounds of peace talks in Minsk, Belarus . He urges America to get involved in Ukraine and has offered Belarusian peacekeepers .
 Mr Lukashenko, an autocrat of the oldest school, has not suddenly changed his spots . The autocrat is not changing his spots.
 Belarus’s command economy stays afloat on the back of vast energy subsidies from Russia . Polls show Belarusians prefer integration with Russia over Europe .
 New atmosphere of instability has given Mr Lukashenko room for manoeuvre . But new atmosphere of stability has given him room for maneuvering .
 Unlike previous pre-election periods, he has not felt obliged to pull fiscal or monetary levers to pump the economy .
 Mr Lukashenko looks a better bet than an unknown newcomer . The region is in flames, with the region in flames . The security of the Ukrainian president looks better than a newcomer .
 It avoided chaotic privatisations of Russia and Ukraine, and has no oligarchs straddling business and politics . It avoided the chaotic privatisation of Russia.
 Day-to-day corruption is minimal, public services mostly work, and unemployment is low, even if the official figures are massaged .
 Belarus is the only Eap country that has no territorial disputes with its neighbours . Belarus is one of only two countries in the Eap region with no territorial dispute with neighbours .
 Belarus's economic model is creaking, and the troubles of its Russian patron exacerbate its difficulties . Belarus’s economic models are creaking.
 Last year the tumbling Russian rouble forced Belarus to devalue its own currency and impose capital controls . Last year Belarus imposed capital controls and devalued its own currencies .
 Belarus asked the Kremlin for a $2 billion loan, but received just $nom . Earlier this year Belarus asked for $2.3 billion loan .
 Real wages are falling, and workers in state-owned firms have been forced to take unpaid holidays . State-owned workers have been told to take compulsory holidays .
 After 20 years of isolation, officials realise they need European advice and money . European officials need European Advice and money.
 Belarus was always an easy place for the West to conduct a values-based foreign policy . The West has always been able to conduct its values- based foreign policy.
 Belarus officials acknowledge that the policy of disdain simply drove Belarus closer to Russia . But now they acknowledge that it simply drove the country closer to the country .
 The eu, including hardline members like Britain and the Netherlands, is now rethinking its approach to the eu . The eU, including Britain and Netherlands, has now rethought its approach .
 It will not abandon its calls for democracy, or its solidarity with the Belarusian opposition . The Belarusian government has been in power for more than a decade .
 Belarus is considering a range of ways to work with Mr Lukashenko’s regime . But it is considering speeding up its visa-application process to support for Belarus's membership of the World Trade Organisation .
 An Eap summit in Riga next month will be watched closely for signs of a thaw, particularly if Mr Lukashenko is allowed to attend .
 He fears giving the impression of bowing to pressure. But that would require him to free the handful of remaining political prisoners . He fears that he would not be able to free them .
Officials in Brussels will have to wait until after the presidential election . Bigger changes are expected to be made in the coming months .
 Some fear a repeat of the humiliation of 2010 when the eu’s last attempt at a rapprochement with Mr Lukashenko died in the post-election crackdown .
 Belarusians believe they have identified common interests with the regime and will work to fulfil them . They believe they will not wait in vain for their democratic example .
 Mr Lukashenko is desperate to preserve Belarus’s shaky independence . Thanks to Mr Putin, Europe looks better placed to help him, says Mr Putin .
 The snp's rise from an irrelevant party in the 1960s to one that may soon be Britain’s third biggest-and-and her own .
 It is a reminder of what Ms Sturgeon calls the ‘disgust at what the Thatcher-led Tory government was doing’ that first recruited her to the party .
 Alex Salmond has had a sometimes vexed relationship with Ms Sturgeon . Salmond is the former leader of the snp .
 She was expected to become leader in 2004 after Mr Salmond’s first crack at the job . Then he suddenly fancied another go at it, and shunted her aside .
 Ms Sturgeon grew up in a working-class family near Ayr, on Scotland’s west coast . She then served as his deputy for a decade.
 She got her chance after Mr Salmond again stepped down last September, having led Scotland closer to independence than even the snp had previously considered possible .
 Ms Sturgeon has presided over an astonishing surge in support for the party . She is Britain's most powerful female politician .
 Crazy paving Nothing about the snp’s recent rise was inevitable . The brush with national dismemberment it occasioned last year was inevitable.
Back in 2011, the snp won a shock majority in the Scottish Parliament . That is how, under an electoral system designed to preclude this, which triggered the referendum . Back in 2011.
 The snp’s latest achievement is to have retained much of the activism and mass enthusiasm it worked up during the referendum campaign .
 Its membership has ballooned from 26,000 to over 100,000 in six months . The membership of the organization has risen to more than 50,000 .
 It may well hold the balance of power in the next British parliament . No one party is likely to hold a maj ority, in which no one party holds a maj .
 Scots will oppose any Tory bid to form a government. This is a retort to their Labour opponents .
 Her party will even seek to do so if Labour is the second-largest party, she adds . She says her party will also seek to be the second largest party .
 The Britain section is looking for an intern to work for several months in The Economist's London offices this summer .
 Ms Sturgeon envisages her mps (led by Mr Salmond, who is standing for parliament in Westminster) ‘perhaps forcing Mr Miliband to avoid spending cuts,’ she says .
 Some suspect snp's raison d’etre is secretly rooting for Tories .
 Ms Sturgeon faced claims that she had confided in the French ambassador to Britain that she wanted Mr Cameron to remain prime minister .
 Both she and the diplomat deny this; but the snp could undoubtedly gain from another Conservative-led administration .
 Opposing a Tory-led government would probably contain few, or possibly no, Tory mps in Scottish seats, would afford the snp an endless opportunity for nationalist grandstanding .
 The referendum on Britain’s membership of the eu Mr Cameron has promised . A full transcript of ourinterview with Nicola Sturgeon and a separate video appear on our online election hub .
 Scots would not vote to leave; if Britain does, the snp will naturally demand another independence referendum .
 Ms Sturgeon’s claim that she most wants a Labour government may be sincere .
 Scotland’s move towards secession is out of her control is wrong, she says . But her suggestion that Scotland's move towards independence is wrong is wrong . Scotland's vote for independence is not a referendum on whether to leave Scotland .
 Whether Scotland holds another referendum, as she well knows, will be heavily influenced by her leadership, and she is playing a long game . Scotland holds a referendum on whether it will hold another referendum .
 If a majority of Scots still don't want independence, the snp's formidably impressive leader is happy to wait .
 As her unionist rivals discovered on April 2nd, they underestimate her at their-and-the union's-peril .
 Labour leader promised to abolish the “non-domiciled’ tax status . It is a peculiarly British ruling whereby some wealthy Britons and foreigners known as non-domics enjoy special tax exemptions .
 The main benefit is that they can limit the tax they pay to the British treasury on their earnings outside the country . They can also limit their tax to the UK treasury on earnings abroad .
 To many, the non-dom rule has become a symbol of privilege for the wealthy . It is a target for a left-wing politician on the campaign trail scrapping for votes .
 Mr Miliband's predecessor Gordon Brown shied away from doing the same when he was chancellor of the exchequer . But the fact that Mr Miliband’s predecessor and political mentor Gordon Brown shunned the same.
 Some of the regulations are mysterious and open to abuse . It was introduced during the Napoleonic wars and some of its rules are mysterious .
Non-doms have to prove their foreign status, for instance, but often by arbitrary means . Non-doms must also prove their international status .
 Non-dom status can be passed on within families, but only via the father’s side . The father's side can also be seen as a non-domant .
 In 2008, when Mr Brown was prime minister, the government introduced a charge of £30,000 on those who claim non-dom status but have lived in Britain for seven years .
 George Osborne raised that to as much as £90,000 a year for those who have lived in Britain for 17 of the past 20 years . The current chancellor of the exchequer, George Osborne, raised the figure .
 Mr Miliband now wants to do away with it altogether, mainly on grounds of fairness . Mr Miliband wants to end it altogether .
 The treasury may lose revenue when all parties are under pressure to cut the deficit . But the fear is that the treasury might lose revenue .
 There are three ways that could happen, if some non-doms decide to leave the country .
First, the treasury would forfeit the tax they pay on their British earnings . First, the Treasury would forfeit their tax on British earnings.
 London's resident Russian oligarchs. This applies especially to the super-rich, such as London’s resident oligarchs .
 The treasury would lose the charges that non-doms pay to keep their special tax status . Second, the treasury would also lose the charge to keep the tax status.
 Five thousand people paid these charges in 2012-13, according to data obtained by Mark Davies & Associates, a tax-advice firm .
Rich non-doms could pull the plug on their investments in Britain when they go, harming the economy . Lastly, rich non-doments could pull a plug on investments in the UK.
 Under Labour's plan, temporary exemptions would be allowed for students and foreign workers seconded to Britain for short periods of time . Under Labour’s plan, students and foreigners would have to be seconded.
 The non-dom system is an anomaly, but Britain should not stop the flow of slulled foreigners the economy needs . Britain needs to stop slulling foreigners, the government says .
 Liberal Democrats have seen their vote shrink by twothirds-to about 8%-in five years . Labour and Tory voters intermingle in the centre of the centre .
 That was partly a response to the polarising effects of economic malaise and cuts. That was part of the response to a polarising effect of the cuts and malaises .
 Blair’s ability to attract hordes of Tory voters was also unusual, and given that he won his last victory, in 2005 .
 Only in 1979, when a similar number went the other way, has there been a comparable migration between Britain’s main parties .
After the downturn, the Tories have presided over a recovery which too few Britons feel . Nothing like such clear signals now apply, says the PM .
 Mr Miliband's and Mr Cameron's efforts to shore up their leaky base are a big reason for their unimaginative campaigns .
 Mr Miliband and Mr Cameron are to some degree captured by events, but they are also partly to blame .
 Mr Cameron launched a modernisation programme, stressing volunteerism and the environment . In the first flush of his leadership, he launched a new programme .
 Mr Cameron then abandoned it was self-defeating. That this was blown offcourse by the economic storms was understandable .
 Tories would be much better placed to claim the majority their economic lead would normally warrant-and not only by taking Labour votes . Had he pushed on, trumpeting the compassionate conservatism he claims to be driven by, so drawing the poison from his party’s reputation, the Tories would
 In Britain's new fractured polity, the centre is less a pivot between two big parties than a collection of the attributes-competence, decency, moderation that most voters prize .
 Mr Miliband considered it impossible-the conviction that Labour was responsible for the downturn was too deep-or-or, more likely because he considered it unnecessary .
 He thought the financial crisis had shunted public opinion to the left, giving him a handy opportunity to disown Labour’s record .
 Labour has little prospect of winning votes beyond its Tory-hating base. Belatedly, he realised his error; having no credibility on the economy, Labour has no credibility .
 Lib Dems' collapse means more of their vote has broken left than right . It remains competitive purely because, in the chaos of the Lib Dems’ collapse, more votes have broken left .
 Britain’s main parties to adapt to them have been poor, says David Cameron . But the efforts of Britain's main parties have been nonetheless poor.
 David Cameron refused to rule out cutting the top rate of tax to 40% . If affordable, it would be reasonable to cut the top tax rate to 40%.
 The British state does not offer high earners anything like Scandinavian-class public services to go with near-Scandinavian-level tax rates it levies .
 The trouble with these statements was not the message, or the messenger, but it was the dismally predictable combination of the two .
 In a deadlocked contest, Labour and Tory ratings are entwined in the low 30s, it might even have been a game-changer .
 Labour and Tory campaigns are typically of the Labour and Conservative campaigns . Instead, these gambits reinforce the two parties' reputational weaknesses .
With the polls stuck, that narrowness is causing disquiet in their ranks .
 The Tories are hammering relentlessly on their decent economic record . A Tory mp divines the need for a “fuller, richer, warmer, warmer” pitch .
 The party has done a list of counter-intuitive promises, such as boosting adoption and introducing gay marriage .
 Half the Labour frontbench is quietly despairing at the dearth of enterprise and aspiration-hallmarks of Tony Blair’s campaign .
 Blair's speech on business and Britain's place in the world emphasised what was missing .
 Both utilities and their customers must play their part P OWER consumption used to march in lockstep with economic growth .
 A new study for the un Environment Programme concludes that two factors are at work . The study was conducted by the Un Environment Programme .
 This includes better insulation, advanced heating and cooling systems, and energy-efficient device s . This includes light-emitting diodes, which turn most of the power they use into light .
 Most scientists think that climate change risks being dangerous and irreversible-energy use and economic growth need to part ways once and for all . But if global warming is to be held to no more than 2°C by 2050-the level above which most scientists think is the level above .
Global spending on energy efficiency needs to rise from $300 billion a year today to $680 billion . The International Energy Agency reckons that for the 2050 target to be met, global spending will rise to $ 680 billion . It is a research organisation for countries which import fossil fuels .
 Lighting, heating, cooling, cooling and ventilating buildings account for roughly another third of buildings . Lighting and heating, heating and cooling and ventilation account for about a third of the buildings .
 The average annual consumption of an American light commercial vehicle built to 2010 standards is the equivalent of 1. tonnes of oil . Standards to be introduced in 2016 will cut that to 1.1. tonnes .
 The new standards use insulation and heat exchangers to capture and reuse thermal energy generated by the inhabitants’ activities .
 Add solar panels and geothermal energy, and it is possible to create ‘net-zero’ buildings that put as much power into the grid as they draw from it .
 Big efficiency gains can come only from making existing buildings less wasteful. So big efficiency gains are only from existing buildings .
 The simplest measure is to persuade consumers to stop throwing energy away, for example, by heating or cooling empty rooms . The easiest measure to persuade people to stop using energy is to heat or cool empty rooms.
 Spotting waste and helping to cut it is becoming a decent business. Spotting such waste and cutting it is a good business, according to experts .
 Opower crunches figures on size, occupancy, location and energy bills to find trends and make suggestions to 50m households .
 Opower’s chief executive says efficiency gains in the first year are typically 2%, says Alex Laskey .
 20% of energy use thought to be wasted in a typical American home . This is a mere nibble out of the 20% used in the average American home.
 Once customers’ attention is engaged, it is easier to interest them in bigger changes, such as replacing inefficient appliances .
 Further gains can come from managing demand rather than simply ramping up supply to meet it .
 In places with poor interconnections, such as Britain, this saves on dirty, costly standby diesel-fired power .
 In any system, it saves money, since satisfying peak demand requires costly generating capacity that is unused most of the time . But in any system it saving money, it can save money, if it is used to meet peak demand .
Global investment in “smart systems’-hardware and software that adjust power consumption in response to price signals-rose by 5% in 2014 to a record $37 billion .
 That includes smart appliances, such as boilers that switch off when power is costly, and distributed storage . That includes batteries that can be charged during off-peak hours .
 Storing off-peak energy as ice is particularly useful for air-cooling systems . Ice is one of the industrialised world's biggest energy systems .
 Air conditioning in commercial buildings accounts for about 5% of America’s electricity use . Air conditioning is used inCommercial buildings in America .
 Cooling systems from Calmac store energy by cooling water mixed with antifreeze when power is cheap . They release it when it is needed, rather than relying on power-hungry compressors .
 Mark MacCracken likens the approach to preparing ice cubes before a party rather than waiting for a guest to ask for a drink .
 At first glance, it is puzzling that more of this sort of thing is not already happening . At first look, it's puzzling.
 The iea reckons that only one-third of the available energy-saving opportunities with a cost-effective payback period are taken up .
 For businesses and residents alike, factors including ignorance, inertia and misaligned incentives still rule . For businesses, ignorance and inertia still rule for businesses, residents alike .
 A typical outlet could cut its energy use by at least a fifth-and by up to four-fifths by using solar power . A recent study commissioned by McDonald’s suggested that a typical outlet would have to use solar power.
 Individual franchisees will struggle to assess the potential savings from capturing heat from a fryer . But that depends on decisions made by individual franchisees .
 Renewable energy investment rose by a sixth in 2014, to $270 billion, according to G LOBAL . Some savings can seem too low to be worth the hassle, such as buying a new renewable energy .
 America’s 30% federal tax credit for solar projects. This was partly because of subsidies in the rich world .
 Consumers with small solar installations can sell surplus power to the grid at the same price as they pay for power flowing in . Under a system known as “net metering’s’, consumers can buy surplus power at same price .
Solar electricity could displace 9.7% of U.S. retail electricity sales by 2019, Bernstein reckons . Bernstein, a research firm-over 30 times the share today, reckons Bernstein .
 Since big solar installations are more cost-efficient than small ones, that makes little economic sense . Big solar installations have been more expensive than smaller ones, but they are also more efficient .
 The days when renewables were largely a sop to richworld consumers’ consciences are clearly over . But the days of renewables are over, say experts .
 Nearly half of last year’s investment was in developing countries . China's energy concerns have more to do with the near term than with future global warming .
 It wants to clean up its cities’ air, made filthy partly by coal-burning power plants . It worries about energy security, and it wants to improve its air quality .
 ihs reckons the cumulative fall will be 90% by 2025 . The overall cost of a solar-power system is down by 75% since 2000, says ihs .
 A study published on April 7th by Rocky Mountain Institute, a think-tank and consultancy, highlights changes that plunging costs could bring .
Commercial customers will need to take only a quarter of their power from it by 2030-and less than 5% by 2050 . Most commercial customers depend entirely on the grid today .
 Renewables account for nearly a tenth of global power generation . Renewables, excluding large hydropower schemes, now account for almost a 10 per cent of global energy generation .
 It will take another step change in efficiency for them to play a decisive role in limiting global warming . But it will take a step change to help them to reduce global warming.
 tenants are unlikely to invest in energy-saving measures that will benefit their successors most .
 New business models must encourage consumers to use less energy rather than rely on them to use ever more . Their new business models need to encourage consumers.
 At the same time, to replace elderly, inefficient power plants and transmission lines, they need margins healthy enough to support massive investment .
 Rocky Mountain Institute reckons upgrading America’s creaking grid alone will take $2 trillion by 2030 .
 Italy has one of Europe’s best-developed solarpower industries . The sun faded from the sky, solar output collapsed and other generators had to take up the slack .
 The eclipse cost Italian consumers around €iom . Cosma Panzacchi of Bernstein, a research firm, reckons .
 Italy’s network-keeping capacity in reserve for cloudy days-by-half . Overall the boom in solar has increased the cost of “balancing’ing capacity .
 utilities to keep profit margins as consumption falls is to increase fixed charges, which users pay regardless of how many kilowatt-hours they consume . utilities are trying to keep their profit margins from falling .
 Consumption-based tariffs hit poor customers hardest, since they are unlikely to have the sort of homes that can accommodate large installations of solar panels .
 Another option is to charge users by the capacity of their connection to the grid, rather than the electrons that actually flow across it .
 The good news for utilities is that for the nimblest, at least, there will be plenty of opportunity to profit .
 Mr Panzacchi reckons-€40 billion annually for European utilities alone, and much more worldwide . Managing demand via smart systems, together with distributed generation and storage, could be a huge business .
 Utility firms can build storage and solar capacity far more economically than individual consumers can . With their large scale, utility firms are able to build storage, solar capacity more economically .
 Customers have information on behaviour and technology to guide their customers through the increasingly mystifying choices they must make .
 That is the kind of muscle needed to make a real difference to the future of the planet. That's what is needed to change the world's future, says scientist .
Britain's third largest energy company, bg Group, is Britain's thirdlargest energy company . Bg Group is the UK's third biggest energy company.
 In recent years it has been notable for its great prospects, troubled operations, wobbly management-and lately its weak share price, down by 20% in the past 12 months .
 Shell has pounced with a £47 billion cash-and-shares offer . It pays shareholders a 50% premium on what their holdings were worth just before the bid .
 The merger will be completed early next year . Barring regulatory objections, the merger is expected to be completed next year.
 The deal-one of several involving bg that has been rumoured, on and off, for years . The deal shows that for the beleaguered international oil giants, buying reserves, even juicily priced, is cheaper and easier than developing them .
 The fall in the oil price has sent companies scrambling to cut costs and pacify investors . It also highlights the scope for consolidation since the fall in oil price last year .
Halliburton bought Baker Hughes, a smaller rival, for $35 billion in November . Halliburton, an oil-services company with headquarters in Houston, bought the smaller rival in November.
 By 2018 its output will overtake that of its American rival ExxonMobil by market capitalisation . By 2018, it will be second only to ExxonMobil.
 Shell is not replacing its reserves speedily enough to secure its long-term future . That assuages one worry for Shell’s investors.
 It expects the takeover to generate $2. billion of cost savings, in everything from purchasing to trading .
 The deal underlines the way the money is moving in the energy industry . The deal is expected to be announced in the coming weeks .
 Shell managers highlight the increasing attractiveness of midstream and downstream activities . Midstream activities offer less risk and fatter margins than finding new oil and gas .
 One of bg’s strengths, for example, is in the liquefaction, transport and storage of gas .
Shell's fleet of giant tankers will boost Shell’s clout in the world gas market . Shell's fleet will boost its clout in world gas markets .
 The purchase demonstrates that gas is a more promising business than oil . The purchase also demonstrates that oil is a better business than gas .
 bg has promising offshore assets, including in east Africa, Kazakhstan and Trinidad . The market is growing, supplies are abundant and the environmental outlook is friendlier than for oil .
 Shell has tripped up in shale ventures in China and America . Shell is now betting heavily on offshore gas .
 Simon Henry, its finance chief, says he doubts the gas glut will persist .
 In any case, a bigger and stronger company is better placed to ride it out, says John Sutter .
 The last oil-price crash in the 1990s brought a wave of mergers . Other deals may follow, just as the last oil price crash in 1990s.
Small companies with exciting but risky projects are particularly exposed in current conditions . Such small companies are particularly vulnerable to current conditions.
 Britain’s largest energy company, which no longer looks too big to buy, could be on the horizon . But bigger acquisitions could be in the future, perhaps even involving bp .
 Chevron or ExxonMobil could try to regain dominance by making a move on bp. But the deal could prompt one of its two main American rivals, Chevron and ExxonMobil.
 Shell and bg are merging mainly from necessity. For all their enthusiasm for the deal, Shell and Bg are combining .
 Norway's main oil partner in Brazil, Petrobras, is mired in a corruption scandal . Bg had stopped disappointing shareholders, and had brought in a capable new boss .
 Assuming bg delivers, the deal solves both problems, and strengthens Shell’s cashflow . If bg deliver, it solves both these problems, says Shell .
 The fall in the oil price has highlighted the weaknesses of energy companies that place big, long-term bets on difficult production and exploration projects .
 When times were good they excited their engineers with technical challenges, and boosted their executives’ egos with everbigger balance-sheets .
 Firms are now dealing with rising debts-those of the largest American and European energy companies have risen by $31 billion so far this year . Falling share prices, down by a fifth since the summer, have also fallen by 5% .
 Shell-BG deal, and speculation of more mergers to come, is an even more fundamental shift in the energy industry .
 The oil-price fall has not derailed the American shale boom, according to analysts . The U.S. shale boom has not been derailed, they say .
 The small, flexible and innovative firms that specialise in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing are proving better at cutting costs, raising productivity and adapting to market fluctuations .
 Da-Jiang Innovations has its headquarters in Shenzhen, China, in the city of Shenzhen .
 The drone was made by dji, a pioneer in the nascent market for commercial unmanned aircraft . It belongs to a drone made by the company .
 Even the basic model has a built-in camera that takes 12 megapixel stills and video at the “io8op’s high-definition standard .
 The firm, founded in 2006 by a mainlander who studied engineering in Hong Kong, has become a leading light.
 dji’s drones are lightweight and relatively easy to use . It is launching lawsuits against rivals it suspects of infringing its intellectual property .
 Newer models come with built-in gps and a motorised mount that stabilises the camera while letting it rotate .
Dji is today leading the charge in transforming civilian-drone manufacturing from something for hobbyists into a proper business . Boeing did with commercial airliners in the 1930s .
 WinterGreen forecasts that global sales of civilian unmanned craft will approach $5 billion in 2021 .
 Venture capitalists and technology companies are now pouring money into drone firms . Boeing and Qualcomm, from Boeing and ge to Qualcomm, are among those pouring money in the drone industry .
 An American outfit, 3D Robotics, raised $5om in venture capital in February . The company was founded by Chris Anderson, a former journalist at this newspaper .
 rumours are swirling in Silicon Valley that dji is looking for its first injection of outside cash . Ehang Guangshi Technology, another Chinese drone startup, recently got $iom in venture-capital funding .
 It is thought to have made around $500171 in revenues in 2014 . It may be on track to become the first maker of consumer drones to reach a billion dollars in sales .
 As dronemakers’ sales soar, so will customers’ expectations of good service. As a result, customers will expect good service .
 A Phantom drone crashed onto the White House lawn in January . In response, dji rushed out an upgrade to its drones’ onboard firmware that included many new “no-fly zones” to head off the risk of outright bans .
 America’s Federal Aviation Administration plans to relax its curbs on drones . It will still have to stay within sight of human operators and only fly by day .
 Dji is bound to face a rising number of competitors, from China and abroad . Such is the civil-drone industry’s potential.
 It argues that it has a technological edge, including tens of millions of hours of flights, that newcomers will find hard to beat . It says that it will be difficult to beat.
 The fact that this model is now obsolete speaks volumes for how quickly the industry is advancing . The industry is rapidly advancing, says the author .
 Within a five-week period, two of the broadcaster's shows drew such large audiences that its online streaming service collapsed .
 hbo Now delivers shows via the internet to viewers without a cable-television package . The firm could not afford further hiccups during its launch this week of the over-the-top service .
 Major League Baseball's media-technology arm, mlbam, has become a leader in the video-streaming business . Mlbam has been a leading player in the game's video streaming industry .
 It would be hard to design a better incubator for a live-video startup than baseball . It's not easy to design for live video startups .
 Sports are the type of content that viewers are keenest on watching in real time, which has driven rights fees to record levels . Mlb holds 2,500 games per year- and thus produces far more content than other sports .
 Most of its games are only broadcast locally, and cannot be seen on tv by fans in other cities . Most of the games are broadcast locally .
 In the internet’s early days, connections were too slow for live video . In the early days of the internet, the internet was too slow.
 By 2000 baseball’s officials foresaw mass broadband, and its 30 teams launched mlbam as a joint venture .
Next, mlbam focused on improving quality and on complementary software, such as online ticketing and an app for Apple smartphones . Next,mlbam will focus on improving the quality of the app .
 By the mid-2000s other content owners began to notice its technical prowess . By the late 2000s, many content owners had begun to notice it.
 It is far pricier and slower to build video architecture from scratch than to use mlbam . It can withstand crushing demand loads, and authenticate and geo-locate viewers in milliseconds . It is cheaper and faster to build a video from scratch.
 In 2010, the firm began handling online distribution for espn, a sports network owned by Disney .
 In 2011 it powered the launch of TheBlaze, a conservative news channel . The Blaze is a conservative media channel .
 World Wrestling Entertainment hired it to run a new ott offering in 2013 . The company has been in charge since 2013 .
 In March Sony unveiled PlayStation Vue, which uses mlbam to transmit television shows over game consoles . In March, Sony unveiled the new system, which can transmit TV shows.
 Last month Twitter said it had acquired Periscope, which lets users share live footage from their phones . Twitter says it has acquired the company, which allows users to share live video footage .
 Businesses built on such ‘social streaming’ could create a new category of customers . Businesses build on such 'social streaming' could create new customers .
 Mlbam enjoys strong barriers to entry, but is sure to attract competition . The mlbam has a strong reputation for being difficult to enter .
 content owners are willing to pay up for a provider with a proven record . Since reliability is paramount in live video, content owners have been willing to buy a provider .
Drug dealing The net closes The web’s two largest drug markets go down, panicking dealers and buyers 4 4 T JUST can’t bear this any longer .
 The “dark web” is a hidden corner of the internet accessed with anonymous browsing software . The site is used by many users to buy illicit supply .
 The two main drug-dealing sites suddenly locked buyers and sellers out . In the past month the online market for drugs has been rattled .
 The illegal-drugs trade, worth perhaps $300 billion a year, has been creeping onto the web .
Drug dealers can undercut the high street by spending less on maintaining a physical presence and employing salesmen . Like other online retailers, online retailers can undercut high street drug dealers.
 Consumers like the convenience and safety of shopping from home . Online product reviews are especially useful when buying potentially deadly substances .
 One in seven U.S. drug users have ordered a fix online, according to one survey . The fix is a fix for one in seven American drug users .
 Evolution Marketplace, the Amazon of the dark web, vanished in a puff of pixels on March 18th .
 Evolution seems to have been taken down by the people who ran it. Unlike Silk Road, Evolution was shut down by a fbi in 2013 .
Anonymous administrators apparently made off with up to $i5m in Bitcoin payments that they were holding in escrow . The site’s anonymous administrators are accused of making off with the money they are holding .
 A few days later, users reported that Agora, the next-biggest drug-peddling site, was inaccessible . The site was inaccessible for a few days .
Administrators reassured buyers and sellers that they were simply carrying out technical upgrades .
 A rush of users from Evolution may have put its servers under strain .
 The site has also suffered ‘denial of service’ attacks-by law enforcers or rival dealers .
 Evolution and Agora were responsible for 82% of online drug listings . Digital Citizens’ Alliance monitors illicit online markets .
 A dozen smaller players, such as Nucleus Marketplace and Black Bank, stand to benefit from their problems . A dozen small players, including Black Bank.
 The recent trial of Ross Ulbricht, Silk Road’s creator, showed how deeply police have infiltrated the dark web .
 Another user suggests to Megan that if she can’t get hold of OxyContin online, she could ask local dealers for heroin .
 The Economist's 60 Business The Economist is a weekly look at the world's leading news stories . This week's featured stories from around the world from across the globe .
 Wall Street banks have been encouraging it to go public since 2005 . Apple-watchers have identified it as an acquisition target . Technology could help the tech giant secure exclusive content for Apple tv, an ott service .
 mlb has no interest in disrupting networks like espn, whose rights fees help keep it afloat . Bob Bowman, mlbam’s head, insists that it is only pursuing minority investments from partners within its industry .
 MLB.tv meticulously blanks out nationally broadcast and “in-market’s games. So its own subscription service, MLB.TV, meticulously blasts out nationally broadcasts and ‘in- market’ games .
 D ESIGNING underwear to fit human curves is tricky. This means that fans who want to fit their curves are tricky .
 Wacoal, a global manufacturer of lingerie based in Kyoto, has been measuring the female form and making products that factor in time and gravity .
 The company’s sales to senior citizens-who are just as interested in a graceful silhouette as women decades younger are growing by double-digit rates each year .
 Many societies are ageing, from America to China, but Japan has a head start . Japan has an ageing population of around 50 per cent .
 The country is serving as the world’s laboratory for selling to older consumers . So the country is selling to Older consumers .
 Elderly Japanese outspend younger ones, says a study by the Boston Consulting Group .
 Many of the country’s biggest firms have adjusted their strategies to tap into the grey yen .
 Panasonic has rolled out a string of new products, including foot heaters and lightweight vacuum cleaners . Panasonic is a maker of domestic appliances .
 Aeon, a giant retailer and shopping-centre operator, has a ‘Grand Generation’ strategy . It ranges from providing one-stop medical clinics on the premises to making in-store signs easier to read .
 Fujitsu has sold 20m of its ‘Raku Raku’ mobile phones, with larger buttons and simplified functions . Fujitsu is now introducing them into Europe .
Japanese firms have been equally inventive in the area of medical products for the elderly . Japanese firms have also been equally innovative in the areas of the elderly.
 Flowever, streaming video could shift the balance of power between upstart ott services and legacy cable providers . Flowever is a streaming video company.
 Numerous ott platforms now carry the espn network . Mlbam’s technology has been used to develop the network .
 Sports fans may increasingly dump the cable firms’ expensive tv packages in favour of cheaper ott ones . Sports fans might increasingly dump cable firms' expensive TV packages in favor of cheaper ones .
 cable firms may be relegated to mere “dumb pipes’ providing only internet access . If so, cable firms might be reduced to just “ dumb pipes,’s only access to the internet .
 It gained approval for clinical use in Europe in 2013, but it has yet to do so at home . It is yet to be approved for clinical uses in Europe .
 Testing for medical products is costly as well as slow in Japan, and getting new devices covered by health insurance is a long and arduous process .
 Having opened up a lead in robotics for nursing care, the country risks losing it . The U.S. risks losing its lead in the field of nursing care .
 Businesses are finding it is easier to invent products that the elderly might find useful than it is to market those products to them . The elderly may not be able to find useful products that they might use .
 Older consumers do not appreciate being reminded that they are old. One reason is that older consumers don't appreciate being told they are older .
 Japanese firm Bridgestone made the mistake of promoting a new line of golf clubs as being for senior citizens . A rival brand did better by avoiding any explicit mention of age .
 Advertising campaigns often tread delicately around the age issue . Must be accompanied at all times .
 Toyota uses silver-haired, middle-aged models to target ageing babyboomers . Those of pensionable age seldom appear in ads of any kind unless accompanied by young actors representing their children or grandchildren .
 Some companies have created separate brands and marketing campaigns for their new products designed for older consumers . Wacoal has created separate campaigns to avoid damaging the “young image of their main brand”
 ‘The Silver Market Phenomenon’ coeditor Florian Kohlbacher argues that it is often better, instead of creating separate products just for the old, to bridge the generations .
 Toyota increasingly loads its cars with lasers, cameras and sensors to prevent collisions . Toyota also loads cars with cameras, sensors and lasers, for example .
 Debates such as these will soon be part of boardroom discussions outside Japan, too .
 All managers will have to find ways to market to the old without offending them or putting off younger consumers, says Mr Kohlbacher .
 The elderly have more experience of shopping, after all, than anyone else . They might start by actually talking to the elderly, rather than the elderly .
 The euro area’s top 50 blue-chips gained almost 18% in the first three months of the year .
 American mutual funds are yanking their money out of other assets to invest in European stockmarkets . The move is aimed at European stock markets .
 Bank of America Merrill Lynch polled 18% of global fund managers in January . Europe is the region they would most like to go overweight on in the coming 12 months .
 European Central Bank plans to buy €60 billion ($65 billion) of financial assets a month until September 2016 . Similar programmes did in America and Britain .
 The euro zone, long a drag on world growth, is starting to help it. But it is also a response to signs that the euro zone is also helping it .
 The euro has fallen by 12% against the currencies of the zone's principal external trading partners in the past year . One cause of the turnaround is the weakness of the euro.
 The euro area is a net exporter of goods, and the currency’s weakness is helping it to sell more abroad . The euro region is aNet exporter.
The ecb’s bond-buying is pushing already-low borrowing rates even lower . The ecb's bond-buyers are pushing already low borrowing rates.
 Credit conditions are easing for small and medium-sized firms, including for small firms .
 European business activity is increasing at its fastest pace since May 2011, according to Markit’s latest composite purchasing-managers’ index . New orders are driving growth in manufacturing and services, Markit says .
 Economists are falling over themselves to revise their growth forecasts upward . Economists have revised their growth forecast upward .
 The oecd, a rich-country think-tank, now reckons the euro area will grow by 14°/° in 2015 and by 2% in 2016 . The euro area is expected to grow by 15% in 2015, according to the report .
 The ecb and the creditrating agencies and investment banks think along similar lines . The Ecb and credit rating agencies think along same lines .
 France and Italy, hitherto laggards, are expected to show slightly perkier growth too . Germany, where real wages are rising, will do most to pull the euro zone out of the mire .
 Spain’s central bank thinks its economy could expand by as much as 2.8% this year .
 All of this is helping companies which produce the goods and services that customers buy when they have a little more cash in their wallets, and confidence in the future .
 Analysts are upgrading earnings estimates for carmakers and their suppliers . Health care and chemicals are joining their ranks, says Sharon Bell of Goldman Sachs .
 The benefits of this changing mood are not evenly distributed, however, according to experts .
 Europe's myriad small firms are still in a wait-and-see mood rather than a go-for-growth one . Europe’s myriad small companies are still still in the wait and see mood .
 The Economist firms’ lobby group has been inching upwards since early 2013. Thomson Reuters; The Economist.
 Biggest firms always benefit first from an uptick in demand, says Chloe Magnier of cm Economics . It takes time before they pass orders on to smaller suppliers, she says .
 Sanofi, a French drugmaker, reckons foreign-exchange movements added three percentage points to its revenue growth in the fourth quarter .
 Many large European firms hedge their currency exposures to some extent, both by using financial instruments and by moving production to where customers are .
 Continental, a German maker of car tyres and other parts, is among those benefiting from lower oil prices .
 Cheap fuel has been especially helpful in America, says Wolfgang Schafer . Schafer says sales of new cars have soared in recent years .
In Europe, it has prompted an increase in miles driven, which means more tyres need replacement . In Europe, this means more people need replacement tyres .
 Last year sales of new cars began growing again in the European Union, after falling for six years . The European Union has seen a rise in new cars since 2008 .
 Total, a French oil company, reported sharply lower revenue in the last three months of 2014 . Total has been busily downsizing since then .
 Companies that make capital equipment destined for the oil sector are struggling, too . The oil sector is also struggling .
 Such firms are outnumbered by those gaining from the combination of cheap energy and a cheap euro . But such firms are out of the market, according to analysts .
 The largest businesses in the euro zone’s 19 member countries are among the world's most internationalised . The world's largest businesses are in Europe's largest economies .
 Over three-fifths of the sales of the companies that make up the main stockmarket indices in Germany, France, Italy and Spain are from outside their home markets .
 They are often prime movers in a global market with little dependence on the European economy . They are also often prime mvers in the global market.
 booming demand for planes from emerging Asia and elsewhere has kept factories going at full tilt .
Better opportunities outside their sluggish domestic economies have encouraged many onceparochial companies to seek new export markets . Better opportunities outside the sluggish domestic economy have encouraged companies to move to new markets .
 A similar realisation has dawned on Italian businesses, says Nino Tronchetti Provera of Ambienta, a private-equity fund .
 Sales to non-EU countries are growing by around 7% a year . Italy’s exports are still equivalent to just 29.3% of gdp .
 Elemaster Group was almost wholly focused on Europe and made 60% of its revenues in Italy . Five years ago the electronics firm, Elemaster, was almost entirely focused on the continent .
Private-equity fund brought in to help it become more international . It brought in a private-Equity fund to help the fund become more global .
 Today Italy accounts for 35% of sales, the rest of Europe another 35% . Italy is more distant and more distant markets than the rest.
 Political and social constraints have prevented large-scale labour-shedding, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Many European manufacturers are continuing to make progress in reducing nonlabour costs . Many manufacturers are still making progress in cutting costs of manufacturing .
 Germany’s three big carmakers-Volkswagen, Daimler, and bmw— are sticking to their cost-cutting targets despite the gathering recovery at home .
 Consolidation, to improve pricing power and profits, is also in the wind and has been for a year or so .
Some highly fragmented European industries-mobile telecoms and airlines are prime targets for takeover activity . Some highly fragmented industries- mobile telecoms, airlines and telecoms are among the targets .
 Shell's mammoth bid for bg Group may prompt further consolidation among Europe's struggling oil and gas firms .
 Non-European buyers are also sniffing around, in part because fears that a Greek exit from the euro might send shock waves across the region seem to have subsided .
 FedEx launched a €4. billion offer for tnt Express, a Dutch rival, this week . It said it wanted to strengthen its presence in Europe .
 Italy's recent spate of bids from abroad, the €7. billion Chinese takeover of Pirelli, a tyremaker, stands out . The Italian government is considering a bid to buy the Italian company .
 France's government is still ambiguous about foreign takeovers . France’s government, however, is still unclear about foreign takesovers .
 Chinese firm psa Peugeot-Citroen welcomed investment in psa. It welcomed the investment in the carmaker by a Chinese firm .
 An American firm, ge, bought most of Alstom, an energy and transport conglomerate . It reluctantly came to terms with an American firm,. ge, buying most of alstom .
 Dailymotion has just stymied an Asian bid for Dailymotion, an online-video firm . But it has just been rejected by an Asian firm .
 Renault will spend up to €1.23 billion increasing its stake in the carmaker . It will force the company to implement a new rule granting extra rights to long-term shareholders .
 The Economist Tour-quarter moving average ning to do big deals once more .
 Merck said in September that it would buy Sigma-Aldrich, an American life-sciences firm, for $17 billion . Merck, a German pharmaceutical company, is a German company .
 If households are anxious about their prospects, they may be reluctant to start spending properly again . If households remain anxious about the prospects of spending again.
 Many firms hoard cash in case they need it later, with banks still somewhat hesitant to lend .
 European Commission to mobilise €315 billion of private and public money for investments in infrastructure, energy and other ‘strategic’ areas . The eu’s contribution looks too small to prompt businesses to provide their share .
Spending on broadband in Europe fell from €106 per person in 2008 to €90 in 2013, says Business Europe . Japan raised its investment to €226 and America to €178, says pressure group .
 Alcatel-Lucent boss Michel Combes says underinvested in digital infrastructure is Europe's real weakness .
 The big question is not whether the euro-zone economy can grow, given the current, extraordinarily favourable combination of a cheap currency, low oil prices and low financing costs . The big questions are whether the economy will grow, according to analysts .
 The ecb’s bond-buying stops. It is whether that expansion will be self-sustaining by the time the euro and oil prices steady .
 Klaus Wiener, chief economist at Generali Investments Europe, is among those who believe that a rising tide of higher exports will eventually raise all boats, but at very different speeds .
 Italy has just embarked on serious reform after a decade and a half of stagnation . To many foreigners with cash to spend it is now the bloc's most interesting market, with France a big step behind .
 Firms that have reduced costs and become more efficient will enjoy the biggest gains . Firms have expanded into new markets far beyond their home countries .
 Europe’s recovery will most benefit those businesses and places that have used the crisis to become less European .
 megachurches are springing up across America . It was the most striking of a new crop of megach churches in the U.S.
 Twelve storeys high and made from 10,000 panes of glass, it made worshippers feel they were praying in the Orange county sun .
 Mr Schuller was the most successful of a new breed of televangelists who realised that technology was their friend . He was the first televangelist to realise technology is their friend.
 He may have lacked Jimmy Swaggart’s swagger and Jerry Falwell's political clout . He may also lack Jimmy Swagart's swagger.
 Dr Schuller, as he always called himself, preached the Word not just to the 3,000-strong congregation .
 He opened his first ministry in 1955, in a drive-in cinema in Los Angeles . He had started preaching at the age of five, to his father's cows .
 Mr Schuller abandoned his hot-dog stand as his audience grew and the tithes rolled in .
 In 1980, his flock still swelling, he built his $2om Crystal Cathedral . He built the $2m Crystal Cathedral.
 Pastorpreneur says a megachurch should provide everything from Bible studies to dance classes . He argues that a good shopping centre should provide all things from groceries to shoes . He says a pastor should know his flock .
 He conducted regular surveys of his audience and, more important, the people he wasn’t reaching . He did not reach people he was reaching .
 He recognised that the precondition for success in retailing of any kind, spiritual or secular, was good parking .
 His sermons also conformed to his belief in giving the audience what they wanted . His sermonings also conforming to his beliefs in giving them what they want .
 He recognised that the fire-and-brimstone preaching of the old Evangelicals had limited appeal in the world of McDonald's and Disneyland .
 Norman Vincent Peale preached a different Protestantism, that owed as much to Martin Luther . Peale was the author of “The Power of Positive Thinking, as it did to Luther .
 Economies of scale helped him reduce the costs of reaching a bigger audience . The ‘Hour of Power’ made him the world's most widely watched preacher .
 The cathedral was built from glass, installed one of the best organs in the world . He invited a constant stream of celebrities, including presidents and film stars .
 Mr Schuller’s seminars on church leadership attracted crowds of would-be pastorpreneurs who paid handsomely.
 In his obsession with positive thinking he ignored the problem of failure, he ignored failure . But he also ignored the issue of failure in his own life .
 The field had become crowded with ever more vigorous vicars, particularly from emerging economies like Brazil . The field of vicars has become crowded.
 He installed his son as chosen successor in 2006 but removed him two years later, citing a "lack of shared vision" He eventually replaced him with his oldest daughters .
 In 2010 Crystal Cathedral Ministries filed for bankruptcy, with debts of more than $43m .
 Mr Schuller sold his Crystal Cathedral to the Roman Catholic diocese of Orange for $57-5m in 2012 . He sued his former ministry for $501 for copyright infringement and breach of contract-he was awarded a lesser sum .
 Mr Schuller’s downfall offers a true-life parable for the denizens of Silicon Valley .
 Tech titans and televangelists may breathe the same Californian air, but they see themselves as belonging to different mental universes .
 There are more similarities between the two tribes than either would care to admit . But there are more similar similarities than they would care for each other .
 Mr Schuller’s business empire collapsed, in part, because he failed to think about how to adapt it to a changing and more crowded market .
 The same may one day be true of some of the Valley’s booming tech empires .
 Our new bilingualapp delivers insightful analysis on globaltrends in business, finance and technology .
 America’s economic blip could become a trend Growth in America . Careful now T HE people of Royersford are feeling pinched .
 In Main Street Cafe, in the town centre, a man complains that his pension payments will soon be frozen .
 Sheena, a waitress, says business is brisk, but rues the “teeny tiny’s pay rises she and her friends have received . Sheena: Business is brisk. Sheena says business has been good, but she rues pay rises .
 The worries of those in this Pennsylvanian borough are familiar across America . The borough is one of the largest in the country .
 The world’s largest economy still fails to instil confidence in its workers . But it has chugged along far better than other rich countries .
Some question the strength of the U.S. economic recovery .
After years of weighing on growth, higher spending is now helping the economy . The economy is now seeing a boost in growth .
On a trade-weighted basis, the dollar has appreciated by 13% in the last year . The dollar has appreciation by 13%.
 America is not especially exposed to the vagaries of international trade-exports of goods and services . U.S. exports equal 14% of gdp, compared with 26% for the euro zone .
 dollar’s recent rise makes American products less competitive on world markets . But problems are emerging, and the dollar's recent rise has been so dramatic that problems have emerged .
Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics is expecting a 14% annualised, inflation-adjusted decline in exports over the first quarter of this year . He says the decline is expected to be 14% in the first half of the year .
 The euro zone is expected to grow by just 1.4% this year, and the Canadian economy also slowing . Demand for American wares from important trading partners threatens to be lacklustre .
Corporate profits fell by 1.6% in the fourth quarter of 2014 and were 6.4% lower than in the same quarter of 2013 .
 As profits have been squeezed, so investment, the third component of gdp, has stalled . The third part of the gdp has been squeezed.
 The IMF gets gloomy 68 Cracking open shell companies 68 Cash in Argentina 70 Free exchange . Industrial machinery-dropped by 1.4% in the previous month .
 The American economy lives or dies by what happens to consumer spending, which makes up the lion’s share of gdp .
 If buoyant, it could prevent the economic blip from turning into something more serious . The economy could become more serious if buoyant continues to improve .
 Americans have seen a windfall from a halving of the price of oil and outstanding consumer credit has grown for 42 straight months . Americans have also seen a rise in consumer credit and oil prices .
 Unusually bad weather earlier this year partly explains what is going on this year . The weather has been unusually bad in recent months .
 A freezing winter forced Americans to stay indoors instead of going to the shops .
 The biggest thing working against stronger and more sustainable consumption growth is pay. But the biggest thing is pay, says the author .
 In Royersford’s part of Pennsylvania, real hourly earnings fell by 1% last year . The state's real hourly wages fell 1% in a year .
 Sweet Ashley’s Chocolate's owner says she would like to hire, but can only afford to pay minimum wage .
 One of her friends has three jobs, one of them full-time, to make ends meet . One of the friends has a full- time job, one has a job to make Ends meet .
 The most recent jobs report, for March, was muted, but that served to highlight just how robust the data have been over the past two years . The most recently jobs report was muted.
 Economists expect that wages should rise faster in such circumstances . Employers have to compete for workers, they say .
 A research paper from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago estimates that if real wage growth had followed its historical relationship with the unemployment rate, by mid-2014 it would have been 3. percentage points higher than it actually was .
 America’s unemployment-insurance system underwent a big change at the end of 2013 . The unemployment system underwent an overhaul in 2013 .
 Before then, the average American could get 53 weeks' worth of unemployment benefits . In three states they could get 73 weeks’ worth of benefits .
 Employers in some sectors quickly took advantage of this newly cheap pool of workers . Employers are taking advantage of these newly cheap workers .
Firms in typically well-paying sectors are being tight-fisted with their workers . Even firms in traditionally well-paid sectors are tight- fisted.
 The paper argues that when the financial crisis hit, employers found it difficult to reduce the cash value of the wages paid to their staff .
 Inflation was too low to take a big bite out of real wages by keeping nominal wages flat . Inflation is too low.
 employers fired their least productive workers, keeping the best ones happy . Instead, employers fired the best workers .
 median wages did well even as unemployment shot up. That helps explain why, counterintuitively, median wages do well even though unemployment is up .
Firms are willing to offer new recruits only low wages to those who got through the recession . Firms are also willing to pay low wages for staff that got through recession .
 The same goes for “discouraged’ workers, those who want a job but say that there is no point in looking .
 Few in number of people involved in the labour market can sway wages, but few in number can influence wages .
 Both measures have fallen since the recession ended, but are still much higher than before the crisis . Both measures are still higher than they were before.
 According to a Chicago Fed paper, the pter rate is a particularly important determinant of wage levels .
 A 1% increase in the pter rate is associated with a 0.4% fall in real wage growth, according to the study . It finds that a 1% rise in pter rates is linked to a fall in wages .
 David Blanchflower of Dartmouth College and Andrew Levin of the imf found similar results in a paper published in March . The imf's results are similar to those of the Dartmouth College pair .
 Workers may feel unable to ask for higher wages, since what they really want is more hours . When the pter rate is high, workers may be unable to request higher wages .
 Nervousness about asking for more pay may ripple through the labour market, says Daniel Aaronson of the Chicago Fed .
 Economists also debate the effect of America's “participation rate’s ‘participation rates’ The number of people in work or actively looking for jobs is a proportion of the population over 16 .
 A pool of idle workers, though not officially looking for jobs, stops those in work from pushing for better pay . They are worried that their employers will replace them .
 If wages do rise, those out of the labour force can simply rejoin it, pushing them back down . If wages rise, they can simply be pushed back down, pushing back down.
 This assumes that low labour-force participation is down to economic conditions . However, this assumes that high unemployment rates are down to poor economic conditions.
 It posits that the falling participation rate among working-age people mainly reflects structural factors, such as technological changes that push some workers out of the labour market .
 Brookings research also tackles the question of why the participation rate fell so sharply around 2007-08 .
 The recession had an impact, but demographic factors may have been more important, according to the study . The recession may have had a negative impact on the economy .
 The first baby-boomers turned 62, the minimum age to receive retirement benefits . About that time, the first baby boomers turned 62 .
 The paper suggests that the participation rate will fall further in coming years . Using similar reasoning, the paper says that the rate of participation will drop further .
 There will be fewer workers willing to be sucked back in to the labour force . If its explanation is right, then as the economy improves wages should grow, it should grow .
 One survey found that 70% of American companies expected to increase wages by at least 3% in the year from March . The survey also found that the average wage increase is expected to be 3% .
 The boss of Comfort Keepers, a social-care provider, notes employees at Walmart are getting a pay rise . He may be forced to emulate the move he may be forcing to emulate .
Average hourly earnings of private-sector workers during the first quarter of this year was the fastest since the recession . David Doyle of Macquarie, a bank, says that the change in average hourly earnings was the highest since the Recession .
 If healthier wage data keep coming, interestrate rises from the Federal Reserve will soon follow .
 America’s economy, despite the blip, is on the way back to normal. That would suggest that the economy is on its way to normal .
 Future generations of startups seeking to raise money by selling equity should be given a smoother ride under new rules . New rules soon to come into force.
 For all of America’s perceived openness to innovation and finance, regulators have energetically restricted the ways corporate tiddlers can raise money .
 The general public has been banned from risky, early-stage investment opportunities . All in the name of consumer protection, consumer protection .
 Rules approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 25th come into force . That will largely be reversed from May when rules approved on March25th come in force . The rules will mostly be reversed when rules are approved by May .
 These will overhaul the process of raising equity in ways that will make it far easier for firms to finance themselves . The changes will be made to make it easier for companies to fund themselves .
 Under one of the provisions of the jobs Act, companies will be able to raise up to $50m in what is commonly referred to as a “Mini ipo’s” or initial public offering .
 Many of the intrusive constraints found in garden-variety ipos will be waived . Sec agreement will still be required, although sec agreement will be required .
 The most controversial aspect of the rules is tied to who may invest in such offerings . The rules include who may be able to invest in these offerings .
 The globalfinancial crisis was a scarring experience for rich economies . Typically access to anything out of the ordinary requires an investor to be I The global economy .
 A sharp, short-term decline in gDP has given way to a steady erosion in growth expectations . A sharp decline in the growth rate has been seen in recent years .
 emerging economies are also entering an age of diminished hopes, says the IMF . The latest "World Economic Outlook" from the IMF explains .
 Potential output is an estimate of an economy's speed limit . It is an estimates of how rapidly an economy can grow before inflationary overheating setsin .
 Itis determined by growth in the labour force, the capital stock and productivity . It is determined by the number of people in the labor force .
 The imf reckons that potential growth in advanced economies was already on the decline in theyears before the crisis . It is due to weak productivity growth and ageing workers .
 Potential annual growth, which averaged 2.2%in 2001-07, fell to 1.5%in 2013-14 . Potential annual Growth, which average 2.1% in 2001-2007, fell from 2.3% in 2011-13 .
 The IMF reckons potential growth should rebound a bitin the rich world in coming years . The IMF says potential growth could rebound in the coming years.
 Productivity growth will slow as the scope for catch-up growth between rich and poor countries continues to narrow .
 Anyone will be able to invest up to io% of their income in earlystage ventures . A type of investment that makes stockmarket gyrations look dull.
 The likes of Kickstarter and Indiegogo already allow people to back small firms . punters typically get rewarded with earlyrelease versions of their products .
 Pernickety state watchdogs of the sort that kept Apple out of Massachusetts will lose their say . Apple will lose its say.
 Companies will no longer have to list on an SEC-accredited exchange, which often comes with onerous disclosure standards . Companies will be able to list their companies on the exchange .
 Financial results will have to be filed twice a year, rather than quarterly, instead of quarterly . Financial results to be released on September 1, 2015 .
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act was passed in the wake of Enron's implosion in 2001 . Firms can forgo an ‘independent’ audit committee of board members .
 The reforms will make it cheaper for firms to raise money, says Sam Guzik . Guzik is an attorney who represents companies going public . He says the reforms will help firms raise money .
 That should enable faster growth and an easier path to a conventional stockmarket listing . That should allow faster growth. That should be easier for investors to buy stock market shares .
 Sceptics worry that crowdfunding venues will become a playpen for fraudsters targeting the poor and credulous . Sceptic say crowdfunding venues are becoming a playspen for scamsters .
 In Britain, where equity crowdfunding is already thriving, regulators have warned investors it is ‘very likely’ they will get wiped out . In the UK, investors are already thriving.
 That will still sound like a reasonable trade-off to lots of American investors . But it will still look like areasonable trade-offs to lots.
Campaigners' hunt for profit aligns neatly with calls for greater financial openness by campaigners . Occasionally, their hunt forprofit aligns with calls to greater financial openness by campaigners.
 Elliott Management looks to enforce court rulings demanding Argentina cough up $2 billion it owes to the hedge fund . It has proved as Elliott Management has proved that Argentina owes it $2billion .
 A collateral benefit of the fund’s hunt for assets is that it has put a crack in the wall of secrecy around American shell companies . shell companies are among the world's most impenetrable and often used for nefarious purposes .
 The case involves $6sm suspected of having been embezzled and laundered abroad . Lazaro Baez is a building tycoon with ties to Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, Argentina’s president .
 Elliott joined the sleuthing, its logic being that any stolen money was misappropriated state funds and could therefore be grabbed to satisfy judgments in its favour . Elliott's logic is that the stolen money is misappropriation.
 The U.S. record-keeping requirements are minimal even by American standards .
 Elliott sued in Nevada for information on shell companies from their agent, mf Nevada, and by association, Mossack Fonseca, the Panamanian law firm understood to be mf’s parent .
 A judge recently ruled Mossack was subject to the jurisdiction of American courts and had to comply with the information subpoena . The judge said Mossack's mf was an "alter ego" of Mossack .
 This is a big win for Elliott-and for anyone wanting to know more about shell companies . This was a big victory for Elliott, and for anyone who wants to know.
 America is on some measures less compliant with anti-money-laundering standards for corporate vehicles than any other country . The U.S. is on the list of countries with the highest anti- money laundering standards .
 Over the past decade the peso has tumbled and inflation has increased sixfold . Official statistics on which have been manipulated for years have been altered for years . The official statistics have also been manipulated.
 Ms Fernandez has refused to allow a higher-value banknote . Despite these drains on Argentines’ purchasing power, Ms Fernandez refuses to allow it .
 Shells it helped set up have been linked to tax evaders and lcleptocrats . Shells were set up to help set up and set up the Shells that helped set-up .
 Elliott is not alone in trying to penetrate the murk, but its combination of money, tenacity and legal nous is rare . Elliott's combination of cash, money and tenacity is rare, but it is also rare .
Black market flourished after 2011 when Ms Fernandez throttled foreign currency dealings . If relevant records are in Panama, they are unlikely to be produced in a hurry .
 This erosion of the peso’s value means that banks must handle evergrowing volumes of cash . The peso's value has been eroded by more than a decade .
 Consumers tend to make even big purchases in cash. Things are equally inconvenient for consumers, who tend to buy in cash .
 Properties, cars and big events such as weddings are commonly paid for with paper notes .
 Before the government stemmed access to foreign currencies, many big purchases were transacted in dollars, meaning a smaller pile of notes .
 Axel Brostrom is the boss of Binswanger Argentina, a property group . The volume of pesos needed to buy even a small apartment cannot be carried on foot .
 Once the vehicle arrives at the site of the sale, bricks of pesos are shuffled inside using duffel bags .
 Ms Fernandez is unlikely to allow a more valuable banknote . With only eight months left in office, she is likely to allow more valuable notes .
When it comes to inflation, she has long been counterfeiting the facts . To do so, she would acknowledge that when it came to inflation. She has been counterfeited the facts.
 Elliott has won an order in the Seychelles, requiring Mossack to provide information on firms linked to Nevada entities . Elliott has also won a order to provide info on firms there linked to the Nevada entities.
 Elliott is confident it can build a clear picture of the alleged fraud and use it to claw back some of what it is owed . Elliott has been accused of fraud in the past but is confident of building a clear image .
 Argentina’s elites are no longer universally hostile towards the firm . Some of them applauding its fight to expose the corruption of political and business rivals .
 To succeed in business, you need to push the boundaries, explore new possibilities and seek growth .
 HSBC is a global bank for global trade and receivables financing needs . Many companies rely on HSBC for their global trade. That's why so many companies are relying on HSBC .
 HSBC has a presence that covers over 87% of global trade . HSBC has the global reach to help you identify and seize new opportunities .
 Our local expertise can help facilitate both sides of every trading transaction . And our local expertise helps facilitate both side of every transaction .
 HSBC M United States persons are subject to United States taxation on their worldwide income . They may be subject to tax and other filing obligations with respect to their United States and nonUnited States accounts .
 U.S. persons and entities should consult a tax advisor for more information . United States persons and individuals should consult the tax advisor .
 Foreign currency exchange rates may apply to certain trade transactions . The rates may also apply to some trade transactions.
 Many countries lionise brave outlaws who take from the rich and give to poor . From England’s Robin Hood to America’'sjesse James and Mexico's Pancho Villa many nations lionise outlaws .
 The best-off are small in number, so taxing their mansions seems likely to win more votes than it loses .
 The idea that redistribution could help spur growth has long attracted adherents . The idea of redistribution has attracted adherents to the idea .
 In 1920 Arthur Cecil Pigou argued that an annual transfer of resources from the “relatively rich to the relatively poor’s” would increase national output . In 1920 Cecil Pigu argued that a transfer ofresources from ‘relatively wealthy’
 Shifting purchasing power to the poor would do little to hurt rich folks’ spending, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The outcome of soaking the rich, decreased investment, would be outweighed by purchases of better food, clothing and education by the poor .
 Pigou's argument rests on the idea that poor families would spend more if they had the means . The wealthy would be able to smooth consumption if they suddenly lost income .
 For each household they totted up income from salaries, public handouts and private transfers such as alimony payments for each household .
 This group, whose consumption has to adjust as income changes, is likely to spend most from a government windfall . This group is those that live “hand to mouth” and would likely spend most on government windfalls .
 The median American holds some liquid wealth in bank deposits, but hardly any shares or bonds . The data show that the median U.S. holds some of the most liquid wealth .
 Around 30% of households live from payslip to payslip . Two-thirds of these cash-poor people have sizeable illiquid wealth .
 Once total debt approaches the value of the house, a much higher number-close to 50%-are income-constrained . The house's value is much higher than that of its owners, according to the house's owners .
 The likelihood of genuine poverty tends to fall with age as workers build up buffers . However, the chances of being wealthy and cash-strapped peak around the age of 40 .
 The wealthybut-income-constrained react most, spending 30% of any windfall, suggesting they are even more cash-strapped . The wealthy but- income-con strained react more, spending more than 30% on windfall .
 Study by Bank of England and Paolo Surico of London Business School found that Britons with large housing debts react sharply when taxes are raised or cut .
Taxing those with large but illiquid assets could cause more of a fall in spending than previously expected . In other words, taxing those with big but illliquid assets could lead to more spending .
 If policymakers need to draw more nuanced distinctions between rich and poor, they also ought not to assume that hard-up citizens will support redistribution . Growing old conservatively, they should be more conservatively .
 The over-65s are different, perhaps because there are fewer in the “cash-poor’s category . There are fewer people in the cash-poor category than the over- 65s .
 In the 1970s, when surveys began, they were more supportive of redistribution than the rest of the population . The 1970s were the most supportive.
 By the mid-20oos they were much less in favour, fearing that help for the poor would cut health benefits .
 Politicians betting on their Robin Hood credentials should be wary of greying voters .
 Your personal information and details will be stored in a database controlled by MVCI Europe Limited and may be used and transferred outside the EU .
 This is neither an offer to sell nor a solicitation to buy to residents in jurisdictions in which registration requirements have not been fulfilled or where marketing or sale of fractional residence club membership is prohibited . Your eligibility and the membership clubs available for purchase will depend upon the jurisdiction of your residency .
 Key information is available upon request by contacting 47 Park Street Grand Residences by Marriott, Mayfair, London, W1K 7EB, United Kingdom .
 Marriott Vacation Club International and the programs and products provided under the Grand Residences by Marriott brand are not owned, developed, or sold by Marriott International, Inc. and its affiliates .
 Frequent travel and hotel stays can be soulless and fatiguing, while buying a second home for occasional use . Tax implications and commitment of managing a property outright rarely seems justified .
 Our privileged members enjoy luxuriously furnished apartments to fit around their time in London .
 We know our members by name and cater to their tastes and preferences, ensuring that every visit feels like coming home .
 A number of companies have bold ambitions to use satellites, drones and balloons to bring the internet to the unconnected . Expanding the internet Sky-Fi E VER since the early 1990s, the internet has grown relentlessly .
 Another 4 billion people live an internet-free existence . But that still leaves another 4 billion who live a internet- free existence .
 Only 32% of people are online, compared with 78% in rich countries . Most of the bereft are in the developing world, where only 32% are on the internet .
 Like most infrastructure, the internet is easiest to provide in cities . The internet is easier to provide than in many cities .
 People scattered in the countryside- even those in rich countries-must often do without . People scattered.
 Four technology companies are pursuing ambitious plans that could provide reasonably fast, high-quality connections to almost everyone on Earth .
 Google dreams of doing so with a globe-circling flock of helium balloons .
 Facebook’s plan requires a fleet of solar-powered robotic aircraft, known as drones .
SpaceX, a rocket company, and One Web, a startup based in Florida-aims to use swarms of cheap, low-flying satellites .
Local telecoms firms should be able to provide high-speed, third or fourth-generation mobile-phone coverage to areas far away from the big cities . By providing an easy route to the internet at large, local telecoms companies should provide high speed, thirdor fourth
 The top-down approach makes sense, for the familiar terrestrial technologies are not well-suited to covering the globe with lots of fast connections .
 Providing the sort of cabling common in rich cities to every home on Earth would be prohibitively expensive . It would be expensive to build such a home in wealthy cities .
 Mobile-phone masts do away with much of the wiring, but the masts themselves still require ‘backhaul’-a high-bandwidth connection to the internet .
 Fast mobile networks are far from ubiquitous even in rural parts of the rich world . As a result, fast mobile networks have become more widespread in rural areas .
 A satellite can see (and be seen from) huge chunks of the planet’s surface .
In theory, that allows the provision of data to millions of people at once . In theory, this would allow people to use their own personal data .
 I Wider world web Individuals using the internet, % available, but prices tend to be high, bandwidth limited and data allowances small . Satellite internet services are already widely available .
 Many existing satellites fly in geostationary orbits, some 36,000km high . They stay over a fixed point on the Earth's surface .
 The strength of a radio signal falls off rapidly with distance, so beefy transmitters and good power supplies are needed to contact them .
 It can take at least half a second for a request for a webpage to travel from the ground to the satellite and back down again . Then the page itself to make the same trip in reverse .
 A tenth or less of the speed of a wired connection, even before other internet latencies . That may not sound like much, but it is a tenth or more of the speeds of a wireless connection .
 This will provide a latency similar to that offered by a fixed-line connection . This will be similar to a fixed line connection. This will also offer a latency like that offered in fixed-lines .
 OneWeb will offer its services to airlines and military customers, as well as emergency services and disaster-relief organisations . OneWeb plans to attract individual customers through deals with local telecoms firms .
 A single satellite will be able to provide backhaul to dozens of villages at a time . Mr Wyler hopes that local operators can afford to build phone masts or internet base-stations .
 Low orbits offer much bet. But they are also more complicated, says the Economist .
 Unlike geostationary satellites, low-flying ones move relative to the ground . Hundreds of them would be required to provide reliable coverage across the entire planet .
 Doing that successfully requires a lot of tricky signal processing, says Mr Wyler .
 It is only in recent years that aerials and chips have become so sophisticated and cheap enough to make such a system possible . It is not the first time aerials have been so sophisticated.
 OneWeb is helped in this by Qualcomm, an American firm that makes chips for mobile phones . Qualcomm is one of its early investors .
 Elon Musk, a billionaire cofounder of PayPal, wants to do something similar . Musk's companies now include Tesla, a maker of electric cars, and SpaceX .
 Mr Wyler's constellation would orbit at a similar altitude, but the satellites would be slightly more sophisticated than the sort that he intends to fly .
 They would also provide the internet to the unconnected, too . They would serve another market, too, they would serve the internet .
 Mr Musk has pointed out that light travels more than 40% faster in space than it does inside a fibre-optic cable .
 His low-flying satellites could offer faster transmission of data over long distances than a cabled connection could on the ground . His satellites could be able to transmit data faster than cabled connections .
 For time-sensitive information, such as that used in some financial trades where split seconds count, such a service might be highly appealing .
 Mr Musk and Mr Wyler both seem to have the technical expertise to make these new satellite services a reality .
 One of Mr Wyler's existing firms, 03 B, specialises in providing satellite-internet to oil rigs, cruise ships and other businesses .
 Mr Musk is an experienced disrupter of technological industries . SpaceX's rockets offer some of the cheapest launch prices .
With hundreds of satellites to put into orbit, that would keep his outgoings down . With hundreds of satellite satellites, that could keep him outgoing down .
 Costs will ultimately determine whether such projects can be successful, says author .
 SpaceX and OneWeb’s potential customers in poor countries will not be able to pay much for connections .
 Both firms hope to take advantage of cheap, off-theshelf parts, rather than the expensive electronics typically employed in big satellites . Both companies hope to use cheaper parts, instead of expensive electronics .
 OneWeb reckons its hundreds of satellites might cost just $350,000 each . Total cost for the proj ect of around $2 billion, OneWeb says .
 Both will have to fight off competition from incumbent satellite operators such as Intelsat, which are busy launching more potent geostationary satellites .
 Facebook plans to plug specific gaps in the existing infrastructure . The social networking site plans to provide global coverage of the world .
 Facebook's most ambitious project is for a fleet of solar-powered, propeller-driven drones . The drones will fly at altitudes of 20km or more, and beaming an internet connection down to users on the ground .
 The drones will be able to communicate with each other using lasers . They will relay data until it can be passed to a ground station and on to the rest of the internet .
 Facebook bought Ascenta for $20m in 2014 . The firm has already carried out flight tests in Britain .
Solar-powered drones will be able to stay aloft for months at a time, coming down only for repairs and maintenance .
 Drones can circle above one specific location that lacks connectivity . The drones can circle around one specific spot that doesn't have connectivity .
Mr Maguire says launching a drone is always going to be cheaper than putting a satellite into orbit . And he says launching drones is always cheaper than launching a satellite .
 Each will carry a solarpowered wireless transmitter and will be capable of relaying traffic from other balloons . The balloons will also be able to relay traffic from others .
 Loon balloons may be used as flying base stations, capable of talking directly to mobile devices on the ground . In contrast to rival companies, which are mostly concentrating on providing ways to deliver the internet to mobile-phone towers or Wi-Fi relays .
 Google's latest models are capable of remaining airborne for six months or more . Google’s latest models can remain airborne for up to six months .
 The winds in the stratosphere are stratified, as the name suggests, stratified . The balloons will fly in a stratosphere .
 The balloons will have the ability to change altitude, letting them hitch a ride on winds blowing in different directions at different speeds .
 A constantly updated computer model will keep track of each balloon, directing their trips around the world . There will never-or only very rarely-be holes in the coverage .
 Google's balloon will go up 74 Science and technology and technology The Economist April 2015 . By taking advantage of different wind speeds, the balloons should be able to minimise the time they spend over uninhabited areas .
 The internet is a much more important part of the global economy now. But the internet is still a big part of what's happening in the world .
 The hope is that demand for the myriad services available online will continue to grow strongly, helping business case .
 Rules and regulations Regulatory approval will also be crucial to the success of the projects .
 Facebook must contend with regulators in some countries that heavily restrict the use of drones . Facebook must also contend with regulatory restrictions in countries that restrict drones .
 Google will need to develop infrastructure capable of launching and retrieving what could amount to hundreds of balloons a day . Google will have to develop an infrastructure that can launch and retrieve what could number to hundreds a day.
 Satellites must be disposed of at the end of their lives, whether by boosting them into a stable “graveyard’s orbit or having them burn up in the atmosphere .
 Drones and balloons can crash, so safety regulators will need to be persuaded that the risks are acceptable . Drones can crash.
 Google and Facebook run some of the most popular sites on the web . The involvement of Google has caused some eyebrows .
 Facebook’s Internet.org app allows mobile-phone users to connect to the internet without incurring charges . The app is available on Facebook's website .
 Facebook is considering making its drone designs available for anyone to copy . The firm did in 2011 with its designs for advanced computer servers .
 Google expects to begin commercial trials of its balloons next year . The company is expected to launch commercial trials next year.
 If any of them succeeds, then the idea of the internet as a “global village will be more than just a quaint metaphor . The device uses ultrasound, machine vision and a robotic needle-dispenser to make a central venous catheter a push-button affair .
 The operator lays the wireless device on a patient’s arm, leg or neck and views an ultrasound image on a computer screen .
 The system identifies the centre and edges of each blood vessel, as deep as 15cm inside the body and as narrow as 0.5mm in width, making it particularly useful for treating children .
 Dr Guterman envisages his device being used by most clinical staff, including paramedics . The device could be used by doctors, nurses and paramedics .
 In a demonstration, your medically untrained correspondent used the prototype to carry out a simulated needle placement in under two minutes . It's less than a quarter of the time that a doctor typically needs for a manual procedure .
 The system will not deploy the needle if it cannot sense a suitable vein at the target location, minimising complications . The needle will not be deployed if it can't find a vein at a target location .
 The prototype is designed to place the special needles required for paediatric and adult central lines . Dr Guterman expects the technology will also work well for other needle-based procedures .
 These could include breast, prostate and liver biopsies, some cardiac procedures, and the precise delivery of radiotherapeutics or anti-cancer drugs to tumours .
 The system has already undergone successful testing on live, anaesthetised pigs and is now heading for pre-clinical testing and regulatory approval . The system is currently being tested on live pigs and has now been approved by the FDA .
 America’s Food and Drug Administration is wary of any fully autonomous medical devices .
 The ultimate barrier to adoption will be persuading doctors that a robot can do a good job .
 A number of startups are developing robots to insert intravenous needles . The robots are also being developed by startups .
 As such robots can fire needles through skin and flesh much faster than a human hand can, it causes less damage to tissues and should mean less pain, too . Such robots can also cause less pain to tissues, too.
 Some may have inherited a tendency to faint when jabbed . Others develop phobia after painful injection or a botched blood sample .
 Central venous catheters, or central lines, are commonly used with critically ill patients to administer drugs, fluids, food or blood products close to the heart .
 placing needles inside veins deep in the body is notoriously difficult . However, placing needles in the veins is difficult .
 Portable ultrasound can be used to produce an image of the position of blood vessels to help insert needles .
 This has reduced errors, but the technique still requires a highly trained physician . The technique is still required to be highly trained .
 Anyone wanting a clear sense of what he thinks should look at what he does rather than what he says. Anyone wanting to see what he said should be seen as what he did rather than his words .
 Mr Enwezor has been a curator and critic for 30 years . He is intent on stretching the canon of traditional Western contemporary art and testing what it might become .
 Nka, a journal about contemporary African art, was founded in 1994 . Nka is a journal for contemporary art .
 Mr Enwezor curated the fledgling Johannesburg Biennale . Shortly after, he got his first big break, curating the new biennale.
 Haus der Kunst is a cutting-edge museum that is a natural springboard for Venice . Now he heads the museum in Munich, Germany .
 The Venice Biennale is made up of over 80 national shows and a central exhibition curated by the artistic director .
 The Biennale's own sprawling show has generally shunned politics . Whereas the national pavilions are often rich with explicit geopolitical connotations .
 The Biennale will be held in London in the coming months . It will be the first time he has been invited to mock the global financial establishment .
 Two years ago a British artist, Jeremy Deller, created a mural in which a giant William Morris hurled a superyacht belonging to Roman Abramovich, a Russian oligarch, to its doom .
 Mr Enwezor has invited Mr Deller back to create an installation honouring factory workers from the 1860s . This time he’ll create a tribute to factory workers.
 The forces behind the global economy are one of Mr Enwezor’s obsessions .
 Andreas Gursky’s record-priced, large-scale photographs of stock ex-photographs . Hans Haacke's controversial opinion polls have, for over 40 years, asked the public questions about the politics and finances of individual artworld patrons .
 The show's second main theme derives from Mr Enwezor’s zeal for discovering and promoting the work of unknown young artists .
 Serious contemporary-art buyers increasingly feel that their collections are lacking if they do not include carefully chosen works by leading black artists .
 Mr Enwezor has invited a number of well-known black names, such as Mr Ligon, Chris Ofili, Wangechi Mutu, Ellen Gallagher and Ellen Gallagher . Theaster Gates and Lorna Simpson have also been invited .
 The artworks explore the history of race relations and the politics of beauty . They all have their own particular stamp on contemporary art .
 A new generation of artists who live and work in Africa will also be on show . A new generations of artists will be on the show .
 Ibrahim Mahama, 28, from Tamale, Ghana, will have the largest work in the Biennale . The 28-year-old will be working in the biennale for the first time .
 15 years of civil war left behind tonnes of armaments in Mozambique . Found materials like this are also an important feature of the work of many artists in the country .
 Traditional artistic materials like paints and pencils are likely to be used for graphic ends .
Young Tunisian will show his “martyr drawings, which depict flayed and dissected bodies in frightful anatomical detail . Nidhal Chamekh, a young Tunisian, will show the drawings .
 Karo Akpokiere, from Nigeria, will present a series of droll paintings inspired by the fast-moving pop culture that has emerged in Lagos .
 Mr Enwezor is bringing to the world’s biggest art exhibition .
Warlords, Tycoons, Smugglers and the Systematic Theft of Africa's Wealth. Warlords,Tycoons and the systematic theft of the wealth .
 The continent abounds with natural riches yet suffers, too, from greedy rulers, bad government and entrenched poverty .
 Many blame colonialism or so-called neocolonialism for the continent's woes . The replies range from the outright racist to the climatic .
 Tom Burgis is a journalist with the Financial Times . He says Africa's wealth of natural resources is paradoxically the problem .
 The author's book is published in the U.S. and UK . It is the first time a book has been published by a British publisher . The author has written a book on the subject .
 Aff ica-with a third of the Earth’s mineral deposits and some of its weakest institutions are vulnerable to the predations that arise from the combination of mineral wealth and poor governance .
 He presents a lively portrait of the rapacious ‘looting machine’ in which international mining companies contrive with local African elites to strip the continent of its resources .
 In Angola he points to a small group that controls the state and has amassed great wealth . In Angola, he says the group has amassed a great wealth.
 In parts of Nigeria these resource rents are shared between an elite that controls the state and armed warlords who hold it to ransom .
 Mr Burgis fails to explain why some states with bountiful natural resources manage them in ways that deepen democratic institutions and benefit the poor .
 Botswana gets a mention for its economic dependence on diamonds . But less so for its democratic traditions, excellent health and education systems and stability .
 Mr Burgis offers a rich collage of examples showing the links between corrupt companies and African elites .
 He fails to argue convincingly that natural resources are the primary, or even a major, source of Africa’s troubles .
 She has fashioned an autobiography in the form of a diary that Aubrey never wrote . The diary is based on his manuscripts and letters .
 Aubrey made himself so present in his pages, he wrote so informally that Ms Scurr's invention feels entirely natural .
 She has modernised his spelling and stitched in clarifications, but on the whole this is Aubrey speaking . On the whole, she is speaking .
 Aubrey published only one book, complaining to the end that so much remained unfinished-“upon the loom.”
 The reader can watch him at the warp and weft-observing, thinking and asking questions . Now the reader can see him at a warp and think and ask questions .
 England’s past, its ancient remains, traditions and stories. What fascinated him most, though, was England's ancient remains .
 A literary omnivore, he owns 30,000 books and boasts a output of writing to match . He owns a book collection of more than 20,000.
 He is best known for artfully arranged miscellanies about books and libraries . He ranges across many genres, but he is also known for miscellans .
 Reading Mr Manguel is like taking a city walk or an unhurried meal with an erudite, cosmopolitan friend .
 An Argentine diplomat's son, he knows many languages, and he lived in many places before settling in France . He is the son of a former diplomat who worked in France.
 Scientists and philosophers either spend a lifetime working on or teach their students not to ask questions .
 Homer, Plato, the Sanskrit Vedas, the Hebrew Talmud, the Christian Gospels, and the Persian and Arabic classics are among the world's most popular classics .
 The topics to which his big questions lead him include exile, illness, climate change, pets, cultural barriers, social identities, and financial greed and death .
 Some of those topics are too modern for the ancients to have anything direct to say .
 Mr Manguel does not claim to possess. But to say much that is striking, new or true about those would take aphoristic gifts or an astringency of mind .
 Montaigne would be the first to acknowledge his famous quote . He would be first to admit that he is a 'puffery'
 "Curiosity" is the author's love of Dante, according to the author’s love of the author .
 Mr Manguel picks episodes that shed light for him on his chosen themes . He picks episodes to shed light on his themes .
 Rather they show us on their own account what generous, attentive reading can do, they say .
 Mr Manguel reaches back seven centuries and almost takes Dante by the hand . He reaches back 7 centuries .
 Mr Manguel’s book has illuminating things to say about the idea itself .
 As a mental disposition curiosity, he tells us, he has had a double reputation as virtue and vice . He tells us that he has also had adouble reputation as vice and virtue .
 It betokens both care with detail, love of truth and modesty about what we can’t know or shouldn't ask . But also pedantic fussiness, snooping and intellectual pride, says author .
 In the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, antiquarians collected odd artefacts and natural objects they found .
 Such items were curious in having no obvious place in the settled cosmic inventory of the old medieval world .
 Modern Divine Dante science, on the other hand, had not yet found its own place for them . Modern Dante science is not yet a science .
 Mr Manguel’s imagination occupies a similar in-between space, somewhere between fantasy and knowledge .
 Few readers have collected more curiosities from the world of books than he has . The author has written more books than ever .
 Relish the celebration of Dante and treat the rest like an antiquarian’s cabinet . The rest of the world should be treated like an Antiquarian's cabinet .
 Henry Ford so admired his friend Thomas Edison that he supposedly trapped his last breath in a test tube . Henry Ford was so admired that he apparently trapped his final breath .
 Two new memoirs try to capture the essence of the people the authors love but have lost .
 Elizabeth Alexander is a professor of African-American studies at Yale . She is best known for composing “Praise Song for the Day’s inauguration poem in 2009 .
 One of their sons found him unresponsive by the treadmill in their basement in New Haven, Connecticut .
 Ficre pins snippets of poems that evoke their marriage and family, and recipes that she enjoyed . She pins them onto an impressionistic canvas .
 The family's home was a hearth, where everyone gathered to enjoy food and laughter . The hearth was a family home, with a family of four .
 Ms Alexander evokes sweeping emotional tracks through simple imagery . Ms Alexander is at her best when she evokes emotional tracks.
 Ms Alexander’s meditations are mostly personal, but her book asks bigger questions, such as how to cope with death .
 Betty wants her son to stay with her so that she can continue living at home . Betty has mild dementia and a temper, but she wants to keep her son with her .
 He captures a generation of widows who came of age at a time when it was taboo to air vulnerabilities and emotions . The widows come of age when it is taboo to be open to vulnerability and emotions.
 Mr Hodgman is gay and cosmopolitan, but he only talks about his sexuality once with Betty, who confesses his father had never discussed it with her .
 She wears a locket with pictures of strangers in it, never having replaced the stock photos . She wears the locket.
 Both books are occasionally sentimental, but so are most mourners when they recollect their loved ones . The books are sometimes sentimental.
 "The Wolf Border" is set in her birth place, Cumbria . It revolves around the plans of the Earl of Annerdale to introduce “the god of all dogs’, the wolf, to his estate .
 The lives of wolves become entwined with the lives of men, political games, murky truths and the ever problematic dynamics of family are laid bare in the book .
 The story's protagonist is Rachel Caine, a wolf expert who has spent most of the last decade on a remote reservation in Idaho .
 She returns home to Lake District to take on the ambitious rewilding project but also to confront her past . She returns to the Lake District for the ambitious project .
 As adults, Lawrence and Rachel must take responsibility for the people they have become . As adults they must take responsible for their children's lives .
 Lawrence struggles with the demons that punctuate his seemingly normal life . Rachel must address her own destructive tendencies if she is to form real relationships .
 It is a compelling, psychological drama; one that perhaps dominates to the detriment of other parts of the book . It is one of the most compelling dramas in the book, according to the author .
 A storyline involving a protester in a wolf mask and sinister threats aimed at the project is never resolved . The darker side of the earl's family does not feel fully explored .
Rachel Hall's journey is unfeigned and captivating and Ms Hall’s writing demands recognition .
 The reintroduction of keystone creatures into Britain is part of a rewilding movement that has been gathering momentum in recent years .
 Many of the characters in the book will also be familiar from the current political climate, from the “beige Etonians’ ruling the country to Scotland’s tartan warriors calling for independence .
 The author is able to examine the emotion behind the issue and the people behind the politics . But in the hinterland between truth and fiction the author can examine the emotions behind the story .
 The earl, “a behemoth among ordinary men’s, is a study of power and the old boys’ club . The earL, ‘a study ofPower and the Old Boys’ Club.
 Ms Hall’s commentary on the House of Lords feels a bit outdatedhereditary peers no longer dominateher point remains strong .
 This is dangerous even if it may be the only way for Britain to return to owning a truly untamed place, says David Cameron . "Where the streetlights end and wilderness begins," he says .
 Courses Oxford Executive MBA Go from a game player to a successful game changer .
Oxford Executive MBA is your opportunity to transform yourself and your ambitions . The Oxford Executive MBA can help you transform your ambitions.
 Our participants are making a difference in every walk of life, influencing the rules of the game for businesses across the world .
 modular programme offers you the chance to join one of the world’s most powerful networks .
 MCF*, the Master in Corporate Finance at SDA Bocconi School of Management, is the Master of Corporate Finance .
 Wharton Executive Education Programs drive success through experiential learning . The program is based on the experience of students in Wharton .
 Our top-ranked faculty will lead you through an intellectually charged experience . You'll learn alongside international peers who are the best at what they do .
 Specific procurement notices for contracts to be bid under the Islamic Development Bank’s international competitive bidding procedures will be announced, as they become available, in IsDB Website and in international and local newspapers .
 Interested bidders who wish to be included on the mailing list to receive invitations to prequalify/ bid under ICB procedures . Interested consultants should contact the address below and not the Bank .
 Ministry of Infrastructure Attention Mr Nexhat Krasniqi is the Director of the Procurement Department Address, Ex Germia building .
 FSDA's largest single budgetary allocation is for change management projects to strengthen organisational capacity in banks .
 Your EOI should not exceed 3 sides of A4 . excluding CVs, company brochures and company documents . Your EoI should also not exceed three sides of a4 .
 The closing date for submission is 4th May 201S no later than 10.00m.Tanzania/ local time . The closing time for submission for submissions is 5.30m. Tanzania.
 The 3rd East Africa Community Heads of State Infrastructure Retreat, held in November 2014, identified $100 billion of priority regional infrastructure projects to be commenced within the next decade .
 No response shall be given for queries submitted less than 7 days prior to submission deadline . No response will be given to queries submitted under 7 days before deadline .
 Any queries must be directed to p Only applications from firms/consortiums shall be accepted . Any queries may be directed.
 TMEA cannot answer any query relating to this tender three days or less prior to the submission deadline . The closing date for submission is 11 ™ May 2015 .
 The Bank's main product lines comprise of Trade Finance and Project & Infrastructural Finance and to a lesser extent, equity finance and guarantees .
 PTA Bank seeks to assess its Information Technology automation requirements . The bank is seeking to become the preferred development finance institution of choice in the Eastern and Southern African region .
 PTA Bank is inviting qualified and experienced consulting firms to submit 1 proposals to undertake the study . The study will be conducted by the bank's bank .
Any proposals received after this date and time will not be considered . Any proposals received before this date will not | be considered.
 The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be liable to any person for loss or damage incurred or suffered as a result of his/her accepting or offering to accept an invitation contained in any advertisement .
 The Economist April nth 2015 83 Economic data % change on year ago Gross domestic product Latest qtr* 2015* Industrial production latest Consumer prices latest 2015* rate, % Current-account balance latest 12 % of GDP months, $bn 2015* Budget balance % of
 The Wall Street Journal OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS Mb is available wherever books are sold .
 I www.oup.com/us 84 Economic and financial indicators . The Economist April llth 2015 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index Apr 8th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 17,902 .
 I The Economist poll of forecasters, April averages Real GDP, % change Consumer prices Current account Low/high range average % change % of GDP 2015 2016 2015 2016 2016 2016 2015 2015 2016 2014 Australia 1.9/3 .
 Index one in local in $ Apr 8th week currency terms United States 2,081 . Index in U.S. currency terms in $Apr 8thweek currency terms 2,000 .
 The mirrors in Fredric Brandt’s clinics showed the possibilities, and the profits, to be gained from needle and syringe use .
 The masterpieces of modern art on the walls highlighted his aesthetic tastes . His handiwork on patients’ faces displayed his craftsmanship .
 It took only a few minutes twice a year, and a few hundred dollars each time . It took just a few hours to make the difference .
 A young doctor was a young doctor when he first encountered the dermatological drudgery . It was a big change from the dermatologist he encountered as a doctor .
 In those days, skin medicine meant dealing with sunspots, moles and unsightly infections .
 Plastic surgeons pioneered beauty treatment, sawing away outsize noses and tightening withered skin over unforgiving cheekbones . They used general anaesthetic, scars, scars and bruising to treat scars .
 He did not criticise his sawbones colleagues, but he thought his own countenance showed that the needle worked better than the knife .
 The Economist April llth 2015 Visitors will be invited to check behind his ears for the telltale signs of a facelift .
 Some thought his strange appearance exemplified the cost of battling the years . Some thought it was a sign of the years.
 Others thought his wispy blond hair and fair skin might be a sign of Scandinavian roots .
 Critics muttered that the "Skincare Svengali" was engaged in a nightmarish science project, making a fortune from human weakness .
They wanted to feel better about themselves, to remember the people they had been . They wanted to stay competetive in a society that prizes only youthful beauty .
 The "Baron of Botox" had a weekly radio show, and a range of cosmetic products . Their catchy names were matched by exotic prices and carefully worded claims .
 Appreciative clients said a session at his clinic could fix your laughter lines-or give you more .
New comedy show lampooned a deranged, pretentious and Botox-loving beauty doctor-seemingly a direct caricature of him .
 Friends denied that this prompted his suicide; he had suffered from depression for some time . Friends denied this prompted him to commit suicide .
 The Economist Espresso Unlimited provides news and analysis throughout the week . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on Economist.com .
 The full weekly edition in print, at Economist.com and via our apps for a range of mobile devices . The full week edition is in print.
 The audio version of each week's issue of The Economist is read by professional broadcasters . The audio versions of each issue are released by broadcasters .
 A head start each weekday morning with our new daily briefing, via smartphone app or e-mail . The daily briefing will be available via e-mails or phone calls .