 President Petro Poroshenko tells FBN’s Liz Claman that President Trump and Defense Secretary Mattis have said they are ready to support his nation .
 Ukraine has been locked in a slow-burn war with Russia for the past three years . In 2014, Russia invaded and annexed Ukraine&apos;s Crimean peninsula, sparking fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian government forces . More than 10,000 people - many of whom were
 At the time, both the United States and the European Union widely denounced the annexation, slapping strict sanctions on Russia .
 That support would be strictly limited to defense weapons rather than lethal weapons, he says . That support, he said, would be limited to weapons, rather than weapons .
 It marks the first time in years that a U.S. president will flex American military power in the eastern European nation .
 Crimea remains a source of friction between the U.S. and Russia amid a time of sanctions and accusations of election meddling between the two nations .
 President Trump has said he expects Russia to return Crimea to Crimea . Moscow has refused to bring Crimea to the negotiating table . President Trump says he expects Crimea to return .
 In July, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson threatened that sanctions would remain in place until Russia began de-escalating tensions in the region .
 President Trump approved an energy trade deal in order to sell coal and steel to Kiev . Kiev is currently fighting to take back the Black Sea peninsula .
 An unbridled Poroshenko lashed out at Russian President Vladimir Putin for instigating the insurrection against Ukraine .
 The president said he was blindsided by both the annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbass .
 Russia has continued to claim the annexation, and the war, as legal . Despite international outcry, Russia has claimed the annexation as legal.
 Poroshenko was adamant that the annexed lands would be returned to Ukraine . Whether or not U.S. involvement affects the war remains to be seen .