 One year ago, on September 5, 2014, Russia signed an agreement in Minsk, Belarus, with representatives of Europe, Ukraine, and the Russian-backed separatists who have been waging war in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine .
 The Minsk Protocol was supposed to end the fighting, return the border between Russia and Ukraine to the Ukrainian military . That agreement was meant to establish local elections, governed by Ukrainian law and monitored by international observers .
 A small army of Russian special forces, volunteers, armored and airborne units, tanks, advanced anti-aircraft systems, and a seemingly infinite supply of ammunition and fuel to keep the war machine running .
 Russian troops led every major battle between May 2014 and today, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russian troops are taking advantage of the nominal “ceasefire’s” to expand proxy-controlled territory .
In eastern Ukraine today, the carnage left by last year’s invasion by Russian troops has been replaced by a permanent, foreign occupation of Europe .
 Each day violence is reported near the border between Ukraine controls and the edge of “Novorossiya,’ or “New Russia,” the territory controlled by Russian proxies and occupied by Russian military units .
 Ukraine continues to increase its military spending to match this threat . Despite having to cut back government spending overall, Ukraine has increased its spending overall .
 More than a million Ukrainians have been internally displaced because of the illegal annexation of Crimea and the fighting in the Donbass .
 The Russian ruble is replacing the Ukrainian hryvnia as the currency in a kind of “creeping institutionalization,” which violates both the spirit and letter of the Minsk Protocol . In territory controlled by Russian proxies, the ruble has rapidly deteriorated
 The UN warns of a growing humanitarian crisis in Donetsk and Lugansk . UN aid workers have just been forced out by the “de facto authorities’s” ‘de factoAuthorities’ who run Donetsk.
 The international community placed Russia in the driver’s seat of diplomatic efforts to ensure that conditions agreed to by Russian-backed proxies were adhered to .
 Russia continues to increase military support for the Russian-backed fighters . Russia has failed to hold up its end of the bargain, it says .
 The Secretary General for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe confirmed to this author that the Minsk Protocol is in charge of monitoring the ceasefire . The “militants in eastern Ukraine continue to get stronger, supplied by an outside source, despite yet another ceasefire that was
 Other aid workers and NGOs in Donetsk are in the process of pulling out, fleeing physical violence and intimidation against their workers . Kim Sengupta of The Independent recently interviewed other aid workers in Donetsk .
 Dozens of Western and Ukrainian reporters have said they have had their “accreditation’s pulled by Russian-backed proxies . Some have said, some privately to this author and some publicly, that they have been pulled .
 Russia and its proxies, it seems, do not want the outside world to see what happens in territories they have effectively and illegally annexed .
Despite the stark realities on the ground in Ukraine, the fighting has decreased since the ceasefire . Russia is once again engaging with the international community, some of which is hailing this false “peace’s” as a victory for diplomatic relations with Moscow .
 Russian soldiers and jets are building their presence in Syria . Some of them are being shipped from Russian-occupied Crimea .
 There are calls, in the Western media and perhaps even from political advisers to President Obama, to work with Vladimir Putin to help solve the crisis in Syria .
 Putin's speech to the U.N. General Assembly must be assessed. It is against this backdrop that Putin’s speech to United Nations General Assembly is assessed .
 Putin used his first address in a decade at Turtle Bay to lay out his vision for ‘peace’ in the Middle East .
 It was a speech filled with lies and distortions that have become the dominant worldview inside the Kremlin and propagated outward on state-controlled media . The speech was filled with Lies and distortions.
 He claimed the West fomented a “military coup’ in Ukraine and was busy cutting secretive trade deals to expand its own economic sphere of influence . He claimed that the West had been busy cutting trade deals in Ukraine .
 The European Union's Association Agreement with Ukraine was negotiated out in the open . The former Yanukovych government even campaigned on its promise . Putin had earlier expressed his support for Ukraine's signing it .
 Putin even hinted darkly that ISIS was a Western invention designed to weaken or overthrow “secular’s autocratic regimes .
 Bashar al-Assad spent a decade underwriting al-Qaeda in Iraq, the predecessor of ISIS . He dispatches into Iraq foreign jihadists freshly arrived in Damascus for the purpose of blowing up U.S. forces .
 Assad released from prison many of the jihadists his security organs were arrested upon their return to Syria . They'd radicalize what started as a peaceful protest movement .
 IHS Jane’s Terrorism and Insurgency Center says the minority were against ISIS . ISIS returned the favor, according to the center .
 Both parties instead preferred to annihilate the moderate opposition which Putin insists simply never existed in Syria . Assad's warplanes have even bombed targets the jihadists’ ground forces were simultaneously besieging .
 ISIS sells oil it pumps from seized Syrian refineries back to Damascus . To this day, ISIS sellsOil it pumps back to Syria .