 The descendants of the Russian emigration live in the territory of many countries of the world . Most of them are in the USA and Western Europe .
 They will tell about themselves and answer questions concerning Russia and the whole Russian world . They will also answer questions about their country and their country .
 We will communicate with several representatives of the Russian diaspora living in the U.S. We will also communicate with some representatives living in America .
 My mother's parents emigrated from Lithuanian Rus, when she was still part of the Russian Empire at the beginning of the 20 century . She was still in Russia at the time of World War II and before the revolution and the coup .
 In November 2013, I arrived in Kiev, agreeing to accept the post of President of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine . In November 2014, he was in Kiev for the first time since arriving in November 2013 .
 Ukraine's President Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign the Association Agreement of Ukraine and the resulting Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement . It precipitated an unprecedented political and social crisis in Ukraine .
 President Yanukovych refused to resort to the use of force against the rebels . President Yanukovych refuses to use force.
 The highlight of my stay in Ukraine was a visit to the Russian embassy in Kiev in early February . The U.S. Embassy in Kiev organized the Euromaidan revolution, and about two weeks before the coup, that would put the neo-Nazi junta, the controlling government
 The United States is trying to create a destabilized anti-Russian state with a center in the Mothers of Russian Cities . The U.S. wants to create an anti-Russia state.
 The ultranationalist shock troops in balaclava, armed with baseball bats, organized by the Right Sector after Saturday in the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra of 15 in February of 2014 .
 President Yanukovych fled from Kiev through Kharkov, then went to the Crimea . He went to exile in Rostov-on-Don .
 President Yanukovych and Russian President Vladimir Putin stated that the Armed Forces are pursuing the President of Ukraine . The overthrow can only be viewed as a coup d'état, they said .
 I hoped and prayed that God would save us from the fascists who had come to power . I hope and prayed for God to stop them from coming to power.
 Russia responded by providing security to the Crimea on Saturday, February 22 2014 . I was euphoric. Therefore, when Russia responded, I was Euphoric .
 President Barack Obama blamed Russia for the crisis in the region . The President of the U.S. blamed Russia.
 President of U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine tried to maintain balance between Russian Orthodox beliefs and pro-American, anti-Russian stakeholders .
 The Chamber then decided to endorse our apolitical charter and remain politically neutral during the crisis . The Chamber also decided to remain politicallyneutral during the Crisis .
Ukrainian ultranationalist militants interpreted as pro-Russian political statement . However, as it turned out, even a simple attempt to remain apolitical was interpreted as a pro-Russia statement .
 I met regularly with U.S. Ambassador Payette and his officers, expressing my support for the democratically elected President Yanukovych and his opposition to the revolution .
 Ukraine's legal government removed me from meetings between business leaders and legal government of Ukraine . They refused to accept my opinion, and removed him from meetings with business leaders .
 I closely followed the actions on the streets on the most brutal days of the Euromaidan war, but decided to close the office only on 1 ½ days when people were killed . Public transport was not fully operational .
 Residents of Lugansk, Donetsk and Mariupol voted for the independence of Ukraine from Kiev junta . It is also alleged that this military campaign was ordered by the United States government .
When the crisis broke out in Ukraine, it is not surprising that various interested parties were pushing me to serve as a peacemaker .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk says he is ready to work in an advisory capacity to help de-escalate the political and geopolitical crisis in Ukraine . He says he wants to reconcile all parties to the conflict inside and outside Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s economic and trade relations with its largest investor and trading partner, Russia, have worsened . subsidized gas and cheap loans exchanged for market gas and promises of IMF loans with socially disastrous conditions . de-industrialization has led to a decrease in gross domestic product, corporate profits and
 Ukraine has become a raw materials appendage of the West . Ukraine has not replaced the lost economy from de-industrialization .
 The Kremlin no doubt recognizes that the Kiev regime will not comply with the Minsk Protocols on its own . U.S. or the EU put pressure on it, and that it will continue to escalate the use of heavy artillery against the civilian population of Donbass .
 The first anniversary of the October Revolution and creeping desovietisation in the Russian Federation . The October Revolution was the first anniversary in Russia .
 I fully support the de-communization in Russia and the condemnation of the communist system . The King, the Anointed God, ruled the Russian empire, ruled by the King.
 Syria is another U.S. invasion of a sovereign state, using Islamist terrorists as proxies, and, again, our people, Orthodox Christians are being killed . It is the democratically elected presidents Assad and Putin who are protecting us .
 Kiev junta, schismatic leaders and Ukrainian ultranationalist terrorists will undoubtedly be inspired by giving schismatics of canonical status and escalating their campaign to persecute the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church . If he does not do this, then he will be inspired.
 This will further exacerbate geopolitical tensions between Russia and Ukraine and between the U.S. and Russia . This will also exacerbate tensions between the two countries, according to CNN.
 Orthodox Christians in Ukraine will not betray Christ, nor the canonical leader of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Metropolitan Onuphrius of Kiev and All Ukraine, as St. St. Kiev .
 Russia's economic integration of the Pacific region with Japan and the rest of the APEC countries has been appreciated since the participation of the future Tsar Nicholas II in the opening ceremony of the Trans-Siberian Railway in Vladivostok .
 Japan has developed the third largest economy in the world, despite its limited natural resources . The country has also been developing the Russian economy, according to the Japanese government .
 The Tsar's trip was conceived partly as a spiritual mission to spread the Orthodox faith among the new peoples of the Asia-Pacific region . However, recognizing that the Tsar was intended to spread his Orthodox faith, I consider the multi-billion dollar spending of the Russian
 I support the signing of a peace treaty between Russia and Japan . I hope that the dispute with the Kuril Islands will be resolved peacefully . I support signing of the peace treaty.