 A partially damaged billboard with a portrait of Russian President Vladimir Putin is seen on a roadside near Simferopol, Russia-annexed Crimea, January 2016 .
 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny says President Vladimir Putin's decision to annex Crimea has come at a significant financial cost to Russian citizens and a large political cost to the president himself .
 Russia invaded Crimea and annexed the Black Sea peninsula from Ukraine in 2014 . The annexation followed street protests in Kyiv that resulted in the ouster of pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych .
 It marked the first forcible seizure of territory in Europe since World War II . U.S. and EU-led sanctions have since wreaked havoc on Russia's economy .
 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny is seen at his office in Moscow, Russia .
 The strategically important peninsula had been Russian territory until it was ceded to the then Soviet republic of Ukraine by Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 .
 Polling in 2015 by private Moscow-based Levada Center shows annexation of Crimea helped Putin recover from sagging approval ratings .
 Putin enjoyed a record-high approval of nearly 90 percent for months after annexation of Crimea .
 Russian army vehicles on patrol in the area of Arimah, just west of Manbij, Syria, Jan. 2019 .
 Russia has expanded its portfolio of military training and commercial engagement, including arms sales, across the African continent . Beyond conventional military commitments, recent reports also show Russia is expanding its portfolio.
 Yevgeny Shabayev said there could be as many as 1,000 armed Russians based in Central African Republic alone .
 Three Russian journalists were killed last summer while investigating allegations of Wagner's presence there . One Russian private military contractor, the Wagner group, was thrust into the spotlight last summer .
 Shabayev said anywhere from 5,000 to 10,000 Russian paramilitary operatives are present across Africa . Shabaysev said any of the Russian operatives in Africa are present in Sudan, South Sudan and Libya .
 Putin's record-low approval ratings have been dropping consistently since his 2018 reelection . He added that the Kremlin's neglect of domestic problems explains Putin's low approval ratings .
 Putin used his annual State of the Nation address in late February to vow increased social spending and popular handouts . Navalny said the gesture may be too little too late .
 Navalny said he saw an unusually diverse range of citizens expressing frustration with Putin even in third-tier cities and rural enclaves that have historically been pro-Kremlin strongholds .
Protester wearing a hat depicting Russian President Vladimir Putin and reading 'Putin equals stagnation' is seen during a protest rally against a planned retirement age hike .
 Petersburg tends to attract the majority of publicly vocal opposition activists . The city is known for its anti-government protests .
 Navalny, who mounted a grassroots presidential campaign before he was barred from running in the 2018 election, has instead chosen to focus on a "demonopolization" of the political power that Putin's United Russia party has over the electorate .
 The campaign to loosen United Russia's grip on power will involve virtually any political minority candidate who appears to have a chance at unseating a United Russia politician . Called "smart voting," the campaign will support virtually any candidate who has a chance to unseate a politician .
 The next round of regional legislative elections are scheduled for this fall . The next year's elections will be held in regional elections .