 Ukraine's close relations with U.S. and NATO may not be easily contained, if it breaks out . Russia and the United States are in a deepening confrontation .
 Political affinities and emotions should not stand in the way of exercising cold reasoning and assuming responsibility . Political Affinities should not be allowed to exercise cold reasoning.
 No one should be given a license to provoke a shooting conflict that might engulf Europe . No one shouldn't be given the license to trigger a shooting war .
 An analysis of the developments off the coast of Crimea leads to the following conclusion . The analysis is based on the developments of the Crimea region .
 The Ukrainian vessels sailed through the waters that Ukraine regards as its own, and Moscow, since 2014 . The vessels, en route from Odessa in the Black Sea to Mariupol in the Sea of Azov, sailed through Ukraine's waters .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea is illegal; its control of the Kerch Strait is unacceptable . Freedom of navigation must be upheld, and freedom of navigation should be upheld .
 Three Ukrainian sailors were injured in the incident . They physically blocked the strait, rammed one of the Ukrainian vessels, and opened fire . All three craft with 24 crew members were detained .
 As late as September 23, Russia allowed two Ukrainian ships to cross into the Sea of Azov on the basis of an agreed-upon procedure .
 Kiev chose not to follow the protocol. This time, for whatever reasons, it did not follow the protocols .
 Russian security services are genuinely worried about possible attacks against the recently constructed bridge across the Kerch Strait .
 The first-ever direct clash between the Ukrainian and Russian militaries has so far not escalated . The incident is a first- ever direct clash.
 At some point, they will be handed over or maybe exchanged for several Russians held in Ukraine .
 Russian actions have been predictably condemned by the United States, the European Union, and Canada .
 Ukrainian parliament agrees to impose martial law for a shorter period than requested by President Poroshenko . Only in the country’s border regions .
 Now is precisely the time to reflect on what has happened and think ahead. Now is time to think ahead and think about what happened .
 No one besides Turkey recognizes the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus . No one else recognizes Turkey's Republic of Cyprus .
 Only a handful of countries apart from Russia back the sovereignty of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Russia is one of the few countries in the world that has sovereignty over the region .
 Serbia refuses to recognize Kosovo, which is not a member of the United Nations . Kosovo is also not a United Nations member .
 Nagorno-Karabakh is formally regarded by everyone as part of Azerbaijan . It is officially regarded by all of Azerbaijan as a nation .
 Any attempt to substitute the legal position for the geopolitical reality in any of these cases is bound to lead to a collision . Yet any attempt to replace the legal positions for the political reality in all of these situations is bound.
 Crimea belongs in the same category, only the consequences of the collision are likely to be on a much higher order . Crimea belongs to the same type of collision .
 The Kremlin's hopes for a “more sensible’s cast of characters to emerge next year on the Ukrainian political stage will probably soon be dispelled .
 Kiev will condemn Moscow’s aggression, its annexation of Crimea, and occupation of Donbas . Kiev will go on condemning Moscow's aggression, Crimea's annexation.
 It will not win Ukraine back, and can destroy even the small chance of improving relations with Western Europe . It will also destroy even a small chance to improve relations with the West .
 Responding to Ukrainian actions needs to be firm in spirit but smart in execution, says Ukrainian official .
 Ukraine is a long-term issue for Russia, and this requires Moscow to show patience and develop a strategy . Five years after the Maidan, it is time to accept that Ukraine is an issue for the Russia .
 Ukraine's major resource is appealing for outside support against Russia . Ukraine’s major resource, Ukraine's main resource, is appealing to outside support .
 The United States and its European allies will continue to back Ukraine politically . There is no doubt that the U.S. and European allies would continue to support Ukraine .
 Ukrainian leaders should not get the idea that whatever they do to provoke the Russians to “show their true colors’ will pass. Ukrainian leaders shouldn’t be worried about what they do .
 Mikheil Saakashvili started a war to liberate part of Georgia’s sovereign territory in 2008 . The 2008 experience should serve as a warning, he says . The United States forces were not rushing to his rescue .