 On November 2, 2014, residents of Donetsk and Luhansk regions in Eastern Ukraine held illegitimate elections . The elections were held under the watchful eye of Russia-funded militants .
 The proceedings had all the earmarks of the Putin chapiteau that led up to the annexation of Crimea .
 Diehard fans of the USSR lined up to receive free cabbage and other cheap vegetables on their way to polls .
 Free cabbage got participants so worked up, they managed to produce 100.1% of votes for the candidates .
 The Soviet Union celebrated pseudo-elections in classic Soviet fashion with music, free food and burly gunmen . Afterwards, they gathered to celebrate pseudo-Elections in traditional Soviet fashion .
 Ukraine’s Western allies see the vote as another step toward a long-term frozen conflict . Russia will use the vote to exert pressure on Ukraine, as it has done in Georgia and Moldova .
 Transdniestria, Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia and South Ossetia failed to secure any meaningful international recognition . Russia allowed Russia the opportunity to exert pressure over the central governments .
 Putin's piracy expanded to Ukraine, but will most likely continue elsewhere . Putin’s piracy will most probably continue elsewhere.
 Ukrainian government and the West have strongly condemned the vote . The vote violates terms of a cease-fire agreement signed by Russia, Ukraine and separatist leaders in Minsk, Belarus, in early September, 2014 .
 The peace deal included an agreement that local elections would be held in Donetsk and Luhansk in accordance with Ukrainian laws . The deal was signed in December of this year . The agreement also includes an agreement to hold local elections in December .
 This is not the first time Ukraine discovers that deals with rogue nations and the terrorists are not worth the paper they are written on . The terrorists are the terrorists that Ukraine has written on.
 One-sided cease-fire agreements, callously disregarded by Russia-funded separatists, have already claimed many lives . Russia- funded separatists have already killed many people .
 This statement is inconsistent with the fact that the Minsk agreement did not “sanction’s unconstitutional elections in November . This is not the same as the fact the agreement didn’t ‘sanctions’ in November, it says .
 EU’s new foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini said that Brussels will not recognize the results of the illegitimate elections in Eastern Ukraine .
 The United States will not recognize the quasi-elections, which contravene Ukraine’s constitution and the Minsk protocol signed at the OSCE-mediated talks in September .
 Russia Today journalist Paula Slier lied, by publicly claiming that OSCE observers have inspected polling stations in Eastern Ukraine . Slier claimed OSCE inspectors have inspected the polling stations .
 OSCE was crudely thrown together as a Bizarro World version of international monitoring . Instead of OSCE, an “ASCE’s ‘ASCE,’ was a ‘Bizarro world’ instead of an ‘
 The ‘Agency for Security and Cooperation in Europe’ is comprised of extreme far-right party “monitors’ from Austria, Italy, Hungary and South Ossetia .
 Putin hypocritically accuses Ukraine of being far-right and fascist . Putin has forged close ties with Europe’s far right parties .
 Alessandro Musilino of Italy’s far-right Forza Italia and Austrian Ewald Stadler of Die Reformkonservativen publicly admitted to illegally entering Eastern Ukraine through a separatist-controlled border crossing .
 Musilino and Stadler were confident that the elections would be free of violations . There were no voter lists, but plenty of gunmen, and there were no voters lists .
 "International monitors" are the most easygoing "international monitors" any illegitimate elections could hope for . Those are the easiestgoing monitors to monitor any illegitimate election .
 Another military convoy of 40+ trucks passing #Khartsyzk toward#Donetsk . Another convoy of 50+ trucks passed #KartsyzK toward #Donetsk.
 Ukrainian military reports “intensive’ movement of Russian troops and equipment pouring in across the border . The separatists anxiously await the annexation of the beleaguered region.
 Putin's claims that locals simply purchased uniforms, tanks and anti-aircraft missiles at the shop . The West can fully expect to hear Putin’s claims that savvy locals simply bought uniforms and tanks .
 Top DNR guy from Russia told me he hates most of DNR leadership and wishes them dead . He hopes for similar armed uprising in Russia .
 Putin has sown the wind in the Cabbage Republic of Donbass . Putin should be prepared to reap the tempest back at home .