 Kalb will present "Imperial Gamble" at Politics and Prose, Washington, D.C. on September 27, 2015 at 1pm .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin seized Crimea in late February 2014, in one stroke transforming the post-cold war diplomatic calculus . Many Western statesmen, angry and disappointed, criticized him, bemoaning the return of a new harshness in East-West rhetoric . They also threatened economic sanctions and
 An international border was, after all, an international border, not to be violated by a powerful neighbor when it suited his interests .
 Russia has signed a string of solemn agreements with the West guaranteeing the “territorial integrity’ of all of the newly independent nations in Eastern Europe . Those that were formerly part of Moscow’s communist empire disintegrated in late 1991 .
 Putin gobbled up Crimea, and in short order instigated a pro-Russian rebel insurrection in the southeast corner of Ukraine . Despite these agreements, Putin gobbling up Crimea and instigated the rebel insurrection .
 Many of us hoped that a new dawn in international cooperation was rising. For a time, many hoped that Russia would play a positive role .
 The Russians, sadly, came only an occasional, and obviously reluctant, acceptance . But from the Russians, unfortunately, came just an occasional.
 Putin built a kleptomaniacal autocracy, which he has ruled like a modern mix of Stalin and Peter the Great .
 He cracked down on the media, narrowed the field of play for all foreign companies operating in Russia . He made it painfully clear that he would tolerate only gentle domestic criticism .
 Russia's 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics star has been recognized and respected as a global player . He basked in the glory of the 2014 Winter Olympics, and while strutting around the world like a spoiled Hollywood star .
 His brash diplomacy was often a convenient cover for Russia’s traditional insecurities . He was also known for his brash diplomacy .
 Massive anti-Russian demonstrations began to rumble in Kiev’s Maidan Square, threatening the position of Putin's client, Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych .
 In February 2014, Yanukovych fled from Kiev, angry mobs barking at his heels . Then, only a few months later, a frightened Yanukovych fled the country .
 Putin’s answer was to seize Crimea, a low-hanging fruit that had been a part of the Russian empire since 1783 . Catherine the Great took it from the Turks in 1783, when she took it.
 Crimea had been in and out of Russian hands for more than a thousand years . One of the out periods was from 1954 to 2014, when it officially was part of Ukraine .
 Putin's pretext was that the Russians who lived there, roughly 60 percent of the population, had to be protected from Ukrainian oppression . Putin’s pretext for the Russians was that they lived there.
 Putin imagined the coup leaders in Kiev were secretly plotting to occupy the Russian naval base at Sevastopol, Russia's only warm water port .
If the "fascists" did occupy Sevastopol, he feared, then NATO would not be far behind . He feared if the “fascist’s” did occupy the town, he said .
 Sevastopol was, for Putin, as for any Russian leader, a vital national interest, and, like the Russians living in Crimea, it too had to be protected . The Crimea region was a vital part of the Russian government .
 Crimean airports, railroad stations, and radio and TV stations took control of the peninsula . Within a matter of days, "little green men" operating in uniforms without insignia appeared .
 A short time later, the same “little green men,’ by this time identified as Russia’s elite special forces, showed up in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . Many Russian-speaking Ukrainians lived in the region, where many Russians lived .
 The West pointed an accusing finger at the Kremlin, but Russian leaders pretended they had nothing to do with the rebel uprisings .
 The Russians had miraculously become Prussians . This all happened with an unSlavic efficiency, as though the Russians were Prussian .