 The document and trademark contained herein are protected by law . This document is protected bylaw .
 This representation of RAND intellectual property is provided for noncommercial use only . This representation is provided by RAND for non commercial use only.
 Permission is given to duplicate this document for personal use only . As long as it is unaltered and complete, it can be duplicated .
 Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse, any of its research documents for commercial use .
 The Daily Discussion is a weekly feature on CNN.com.com's iReporter's weekly Newsquiz . Please submit your photos to the Daily Discussion . Please share your photos with us at www.rand.org/pubs/.
 The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities safer and more secure, healthier and more prosperous .
 RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors .
 This report documents research performed by RAND Project AIR FORCE in the spring and summer of 2015 . Support RAND Make a tax-deductible charitable contribution at www.rand.org/giving/contribute .
 The report examines the specific challenges associated with Russian hybrid warfare in the Baltics . The report also looks at how to respond to the threat of hybrid warfare .
 Russia will have difficulty using nonviolent or covert action to subvert the Baltics absent the use of conventional force . The main vulnerability stems from Russia’s local superiority in conventional forces .
 The Baltics depend on adopting policies to reduce the likelihood of Russian aggression across the conflict spectrum . Addressing the Russian irregular threat remains important nevertheless, since effective defense and deterrence in the Baltics are important .
 The project was sponsored by the Director, Plans, Programs, and Analyses, Headquarters United States Air Forces, Europe . The project is funded by the Department of Air Force .
 The U.S. Air Force aims to inform leaders about ways to respond to Russian threats . The goal was to help inform them about ways they might respond to and anticipate challenges posed by Russian Federation .
 RAND Project AIRFORCE is the United States Air Force’s federally funded research and development center for studies and analyses .
 PAF provides independent analyses of policy alternatives affecting the development, employment and combat readiness .
 Force Modernization and Employment; Manpower, Personnel, and Training; Resource Management; and Strategy and Doctrine. Force Modernized and Employment: Manpower.
 The research reported here was prepared under contract number FA7014-06-C-0001 . The research was prepared by the National Institute of Research .
 The draft report, issued on October 19, 2015, was reviewed by formal peer reviewers and U.S. Air Force subject-matter experts . The report was released by the United States Air Force .
 Avoiding the Risk of Conventional Deterrence Initiatives Fomenting Irregular Provocation . Avoiding risk of Con conventional Deterrence Initiative .
 Estonia and Latvia have significant Russian-speaking minorities . These tactics are of particular concern in the Baltic countries .
 Russia will likely have difficulty using nonviolent tactics to destabilize the Baltics . Given the gains in standard of living and increasing integration of many Russian speakers in theBaltics, Russia may have difficulty.
 Russian forces that are covertly or unofficially deployed are unlikely to succeed on its own . Security forces of Estonia and Latvia are preparing to “shoot’s Russian “little green men’” Russian forces .
 The preparedness and relative competence of these security forces would likely compel Russia to choose between losing the conflict or escalating to conventional war with NATO members .
 The main vulnerability of the Baltics lies in Russia’s local conventional superiority . The Baltics are considered the most vulnerable to Russia.
 A large-scale Russian incursion into the Baltics, legitimized and supported by political subversion, would rapidly overwhelm NATO forces in the region .
 NATO leaders will likely need to deploy additional forces to the region to deter an attack . If NATO leaders are to have confidence in their ability to deter such an attack, they will need more forces .
 The United States and its NATO allies should address the potential for all forms of Russian aggression across the conflict spectrum . The U.S. should reduce the likelihood of miscalculation and to strengthen deterrence and defense in the region .
 The U.S. and NATO should avoid basing forces in Russian-dominated areas . The United States should consider measures to increase transparency or avoid the perception that deployed forces may be used to pursue regime change, says the author .
 David Ochmanek is the project leader of the project. I would also like to thank him for his consistent and invaluable insight, advice, and encouragement .
 The Baltics are the Baltics, the region of Russia and the Baltic region . The region is the most important region in the world, and the region is home to the European Union .
 Christopher Chivvis and Paul Stronski reviews are very helpful . I also very much appreciate two detailed and very helpful reviews from Christopher ChIVvis andPaul Stronsky .
 Estonia and Latvia are NATO members, bordering Russia, with sizable Russian minorities . Estonia, Latvia are both members of the NATO alliance . Estonia and Latvia are also NATO members .
At the heart of many analysts’ and policymakers’ concern is a fear that Russian actions will appear ambiguous . It may impede a response from the EU and NATO, given the need for consensus for a decision .
 Russia could hypothetically gain influence in the Baltic countries, support a separatist region, or capture territory . The failure of the alliance’s commitment to its eastern-most allies undermines the larger agenda of Euro-Atlantic enlargement .
There are significant questions regarding how serious the threat of hybrid warfare in and of itself may be .
 Estonian and Latvian defense leaders say they are not especially worried about the hybrid threat . They are more concerned about the prospect of a large-scale conventional attack .
 Others argue that the tenn hybrid warfare is vague and unhelpful, and in any case the term seeks to address are not especially novel .
 critiques raise questions about what exactly the “hybrid threat is, how the U.S. and NATO should respond, how to respond to it .
 This report addresses these questions in the case of the Baltics, drawing on the record of Russian aggression in Ukraine . It also includes the discussion of hybrid warfare and related terms in the literature .
 Quoted in Mike Collier with Mary Sibierski, “NATO Allies Come to Grips with Russia’s ‘Hybrid Warfare’
 The Baltic countries are not especially vulnerable to covert violent actions by Russia . I find that the Baltic countries aren't particularly vulnerable to nonviolent or covert violence by Russia.
 Russia will have difficulty provoking large-scale protests or separatist movements . Given the loyalty of many Russian speakers in the Baltics to their home countries, it will be difficult to provoke protests .
 Covert violent Russian actions are also unlikely to succeed, given preparations in these countries to deploy security forces sufficient to defeat Russian covert forces or compel Russia to escalate .
 A large-scale conventional Russian incursion into the Baltics would almost inevitably be hybrid . It would include some effort at political subversion .
 The danger of such an attack lies in NATO’s local conventional inferiority, not in Russian propaganda or proxy warfare . NATO needs to establish a more credible conventional deterrent, according to NATO .
 The limited vulnerability to irregular warfare does not mean that a United States or NATO policy can focus exclusively on conventional warfare in deterring or defeating Russian aggression .
 effective defense of the Baltics depends on reducing vulnerabilities to all forms of Russian aggression . Effective defense of Baltics depend on reducing vulnerability to Russian aggression.
 The greater the perceived vulnerabilities of the Baltic countries to a particular form of aggression, the more likely that Russia is to undertake it .
 Russia could miscalculate or detennine that the possible benefit is great enough that risk is justified . Even if the objective risk of success is limited, Russia could be miscalculated or detened .
 Russia and NATO forces could unintentionally come into conflict, as they did when Turkish forces shot down a Russian plane in November 2015 .
 Failure of Russian-backed groups could lead Russia to escalate to avoid defeat . The cycle could lead to largescale conflict and even nuclear use .
Even if Russia prefers to avoid conflict, a crisis could nevertheless emerge . The crisis could still emerge.
Strengthening the overall resilience of the Baltic States can reduce the risk of low-level aggression and unintentional escalation . Strengthening Baltic States' resilience can reduce risk of aggression, unintentional escalation.
 The report suggests several implications for U.S. and NATO policies to limit the potential for Russian hybrid aggression . I conclude this report by suggesting several implications.
Russian language and citizenship rights in Baltics are under pressure from Western allies to improve language, citizenship rights . First, with regard to nonviolent subversion, it is probably impractical .
 The U.S. and NATO should pursue a more sophisticated and subtle communication campaign . The campaign will start with supporting local Russian-language broadcasters within the Baltic countries .
 Continued support for Baltic countries’ security forces is clearly beneficial . Second, with regard to covert violent action, continued support for the Baltic countries' security forces was beneficial .
 The U.S. Air Force can help improve the intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities of the Baltic states by strengthening their technical 5. 2 capabilities for border control and air and maritime domain awareness .
 NATO and its member states can also do more to share intelligence of Russian policies and actions . NATO can also help conduct whole-of-government exercises to better prepare for covert or denied Russian aggression .
 Additional research would also be beneficial to develop and evaluate responses to a wide range of Russian covert tactics .
 Third, in developing a credible conventional deterrent in the Baltics, the U.S. and NATO should try to reduce the risk of low-intensity conflict .
 NATO may be able to deploy forces in a way that would reduce the risk of Russian aggression or subversion . There is no way to prevent Russia or Russian speakers in the region from misperceiving NATO’s intent .
 Such actions may include avoiding basing forces in areas dominated by Russian speakers, increasing transparency, limiting activities that appear intended to achieve regime change .
 The term hybrid warfare has no consistent definition and is used by Western analysts and officials in different ways .
 Some use the term to refer just to irregular tactics, others use hybrid to describe a range of irregular and conventional tactics used in the same battlespace . Others use it to describe the New Generation Warfare doctrine articulated by the Russian General Staff .
 Some criticize the term as a meaningless buzzword or catchall that does little to help us understand the specific nature of the threat from Russia .
 Russia has pursued hybrid warfare in Ukraine, Georgia, and other neighboring countries . It may be likely to pursue such activities in the future .
 hybrid warfare is supported by conventional or nuclear forces, to influence the domestic politics of target countries . These activities, and hence the term hybrid warfare, are best described as covert or deniable .
 hybrid warfare influences domestic politics, says U.S. State Department . This definition highlights the role of the population in the target state in resisting or responding to Russian activities .
 In Moscow’s Shadow, July 6, 2014, is the latest in a long line of events in Russia .
 This recognizes the domestic target of hybrid activities but fails to take into account how the use of conventional forces may play an important role in the effectiveness of Russian activities . This is not only the deterrent value, but also the impact of conventional force .
Hybrid warfare is a term that sought to capture the blurring and blending of previously separate categories of conflict .
 Russian activities in Ukraine or the Baltics are different from statecraft or warfare more generally . 5 necessarily distinguish Russian activities from those in Ukraine and Baltics .
 activities under hybrid warfare are distinct because they are not admitted as official policy . They primarily seek to influence domestic politics rather than target the anned forces of a given country .
 hybrid warfare may require substantially different responses than other military threats . The authors say hybrid warfare is a greater priority on increasing the resilience of the targeted societies .
 The term is used for Russia's activities, it is imperative to describe the threat concretely in order to analyze its threat to the United States and its allies .
 There are a wide range of activities and tactics that could be covered under the definition of hybrid warfare, including cyber warfare, propaganda, proxy warfare, and conventional invasion backed by political subversion .
In the next section, I disaggregate the “hybrid threat in the Baltics into different categories of scenarios . In the next part, I will disaggregated the ‘hybrid’ threat into different scenarios . The Baltics are the most
 Identifying combinations of tactics with different characteristics makes it more feasible to evaluate vulnerabilities to Russian activities . The U.S. and NATO may respond to the Russian threat .
 The analytic lens of the paper focuses on the discrete ranges of tactics under the overall category of hybrid warfare, rather than on the meaning, content, and utility of the term hybrid warfare .
 Ukraine is a key part of the Ukraine-Russia conflict . It is valuable to outline competing ideas about what hybrid warfare consists of .
 The term hybrid is to describe exclusively the irregular tactics used by Russia to influence and subvert the population . One common understanding of the term is the use of irregular tactics.
 Russia has not relied solely on irregular warfare in its actions in Ukraine, Georgia, or other neighboring countries to date . Russia has been involved in the conflict in Ukraine and Georgia .
 Any ‘hybrid’ offensive against the Baltics would likely depend on presence of conventional forces across the border in Russia or deployed in the Baltic states .
 There may be a sense of conceptual drift from the original use of hybrid to refer to conflicts in which state, nonstate, and criminal actors were engaged, as in the 2006 war in Lebanon .
Future adversaries exploit access to modern military capabilities including encrypted command systems, man-portable surface-to-air missiles, and other modern lethal systems, as well as promote protracted insurgencies that employ ambushes, improvised explosive devices, and assassinations .
 In Crimea, Russia initiated a large exercise on February 26 and 27, 2014, that served as a launching point for unmarked Russian forces to seize strategic points .
 Russia initially denied the presence of its military forces . Russian propaganda paradoxically sought to legitimize Russian military actions . Russia's military forces were denied by Russia .
 Russian propaganda and the use of unmarked forces created a challenge for Western countries to initially attribute responsibility . The presence of large numbers of Russian conventional forces in the region also helped to deter a strong Western response .
 Polls in early 2014 indicated little desire in eastern Ukraine for separatism. Polls showed little desire for separatistism.
 There is an indication that the anti-Maidan movement only adopted the goal of separatism in 2014 .
 International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 2015, is published at the International Institute of Strategic Studies .
 The Russian Billionaire Linking Moscow to the Rebels. The Jamestown Foundation, August 8, 2014; discussions with U.S. think tank analysts and Ukrainian officials . 7 training, under-investment, embedded corruption, and refusal to see Russia as an enemy .
 Russia may have intended for its large conventional presence on the Russian border to deter a Ukrainian attack . Russia may also have intended to deter the Ukrainian attack.
 Russia responded with more-conventional tactics, including firing artillery from its side of the border . It also increased its delivery of heavy weapons to the separatists, and sent Russian military forces over the border.
 Russia has embedded advisors in separatist formations, and support from regular, albeit unmarked, Russian forces in eastern Ukraine . Since August 2014, Russia has embeded advisors in separatists' formations .
 In short, the use of irregular tactics on their own in eastern Ukraine was not especially successful, even with the deterrent threat of Russian forces over the border .
 Even the relatively weak post-Maidan government was able to defeat the separatists, likely in part due to its ability to deploy sizable formations .
 One Ukrainian officer observed that the troops were unprepared to even drive over a field of newly planted wheat in the spring of 2014, much less to actually fight the separatists .
 The Ukrainian President announced the creation of the National Guard, Mobilization of Armed Forces .
 Ukraine's volunteer battalions and armed forces began to see Russia backing into a hybridized approach . It was only at the end of May, when irregular warfare had run into too much resistance from Ukraine’s volunteer batt battalion and armed force .
 Russian soldiers are intermixing with individual Russian soldiers among separatist forces .
 This was Russia's third attempt to get the Ukrainian leadership to concede to its political demands . We should keep in mind that this was Russia’s third try to get Ukraine to concede .
 Elements of some Russian reconnaissance and special operations units have operated on Ukrainian soil since 14 July . They have been generated by six units .
 The term fails to adequately describe Russian military action in eastern Ukraine . The concept of hybrid warfare does not include conventional warfare, says Peter Bergen .
 Analysts have described Russian hybrid warfare based on the Russian concept of New Generation Warfare . Other analysts have also described Russian hybrids based on Russian concept.
 analysts have identified a "Gerasimov doctrine" and begun to associate his thinking with hybrid warfare . Indeed, analysts have also identified a “Ger asimov doctrine’s”
 Russian authors writing on New Generation Warfare are also focused on changes in the conventional battlespace . They are focused on the impact of the growing use of high-precision weapons .
 Adamsky is critical of using the Western lens of ‘hybrid warfare’ to understand Russian thinking or behavior .
 A U.S. Army Special Operations Command white paper observes, citing the Gerasimov paper, Russian UW is the central, most game-changing component of a Hybrid Warfare effort .
 subversion and domestic influence also draw on the use of “political technologies’ — manipulation of political outcomes through deception or manipulation — in Russia's domestic politics .
 A range of works have criticized the use of the tenn hybrid, or its utility in understanding Russian activities .
 Some question the value of focusing on the irregular elements of hybrid warfare in Ukraine . The Russian “hybrid warfare’s’ performance in Ukraine is questionable, some say .
 These measures are intended to prevent the use of armed force against Russia, and to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Pukhov quotes the International Institute for Strategic Studies’ definition of the use of military and non-military tools in an integrated campaign designed to achieve surprise, seize the initiative and gain psychological as well as physical advantages .
 Moscow has paid high costs for its operation in eastern Ukraine that may lead Russian policymakers to question repeating a similar campaign . There is also an argument that Moscow has pay high costs.
 Estonian and Latvian officials, as well as Western analysts, say it is unlikely that Russia will repeat the same tactics again .
 Samuel Charap also writes ‘there is no evidence to suggest the emergence of a hybrid-war doctrine’ and notes the campaign in Ukraine was limited and in a relatively unique context .
 There are also questions about how directly Russia is in control of events in eastern Ukraine . Reports of assassinations of separatist leaders and competition between the Russian security services .
 Strelkov was removed from the leadership of the separatist movement, escorted back to Moscow . He later became a critic of Russia’s policy by urging a more aggressive approach in Ukraine .
 The principal-agent problems between Russia and its proxies in Ukraine would likely reoccur in future operations . The principal agent problems between the two countries would likely continue in future.
 Russian military officials are making observations about the U.S. threat, rather than describing Russian activities . A second criticism of Russia’s use of hybrid warfare claims that Russia is using hybrid warfare .
 Discussions by the Russian General Staff include Gerasimov and John O'Loughlin . They also emphasize the perception that Russia is threatened by Western ability to use combinations of military and military .
 ‘hybrid war’ is merely a label attributed to Russian actions in Ukraine by the West, says Kofman and Rojansky . Russia seems to have been caught off balance in the Ukraine crisis, they say .
Gerasimov and others have spoken out about the threat to Russia . It may make the most sense to view statements by Gerasimov as identifying changes in the nature of warfare . Russia is looking to adapt its capabilities to meet this new threat in kind .
 The concept of hybrid warfare is contested, but it remains a useful framework to understand a potential Russian threat in the Baltics .
Russian officials are thinking about how to combine deniable or covert activities with other military tools to achieve their political objectives . Russian officials are also thinking about combining deniable activities with military tools .
 Events in Ukraine offer a useful set of examples of how Russia may engage hybrid warfare in practice .
 Ukraine's use of proxies and propaganda is not universally effective, says the author . 41 and irregular forces may need to call on conventional support, he says .
 Russian tactics in the Ukraine may differ substantially from those used in the Baltics . Russian tactics may differ significantly from those in theBaltics .
 It is critical to understand what forms Russian aggression may take and the vulnerability of the Baltic states to different scenarios .
 Moscow perceived the situation in Syria as a result of a U.S. effort, albeit one which failed to conduct HW against the incumbent regime along the lines of the Libyan scenario . Moscow perceived it as the result of the United States effort .
 Moscow's demarche was a countermeasure to such a perceived United States effort, but was shaped along similar operational lines . Moscow’s Demarche, although driven by the interplay of several factors, was driven by several factors .
 The three categories seek to include scenarios proposed by officials and analysts in the United States, Baltics, and other NATO countries . These three categories include the scenarios proposed in the U.S. and Baltics .
 Analysts outside of the Baltic countries generally agree that low-level nonviolent subversion is currently happening and could intensify in the future . But covert violent action is unlikely but possible, and could divide NATO .
 Baltic officials agree that nonviolent subversion is ongoing and likely but poses limited risk . They generally downplay their vulnerability to Russian covert violent action .
 Baltic officials’ view of Russia and the potential for subversion is likely influenced by their proximity to Russia, and their greater awareness of the threat it might pose .
 Baltic officials may downplay the dissatisfaction of and risk of subversion by Russian speakers to imply that their efforts at integration are more effective . The states based on the identity of the titular group (i.e., Estonian, Latvian, or Lithuanian) are sustainable,
 The division of scenarios into three categories is not meant to imply that Russian activities would need to be limited to a single category during a particular crisis or series of events .
 Russia could easily decide to escalate to covert violent action or conventional attack if its efforts at nonviolent subversion are not successful . Russia could also decide to take action if it is not successful in nonviolent subversions .
 Analyzing each type of Russian aggression makes it possible to better understand vulnerabilities and formulate appropriate responses . Russian aggression is a common form of aggression in Russia .
 Together, these responses can be integrated into an overall policy for defense and deterrence . Together, they can be combined into a policy fordefense and deterrence.
 The majority of Russian speakers came to Estonia and Latvia during the Soviet era, thanks to policies intended to dilute the dominance of the majority ethnic group in these countries .
 Lithuania did not experience significant in-migration of Russian speakers . By 2011, Lithuania had only 8 percent Russian speakers, including Ukrainian, Belarussian, and other nationalities whose primary language was Russian .
 Estonia had 30 percent Russian speakers, of which 25 percent are ethnic Russians, in 2011 . Latvia had 35 percent speakers of which 27 percent were ethnic Russians . In Estonia, 30 percent were Russian speakers .
Many in Lithuania are concerned about Russian influence in their country . Many in Estonia and Latvia are concerned.
 Harvard Kennedy School, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, August 2015 . The Kennedy School is located in Washington, D.C.
 The Estonian Statistical Office of Estonia, Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia, and Statistics Lithuania, 2015, is the largest statistical bureau in the country . The Baltic Republic is the country's largest statistical agency .
 Concentrations of Russian Speakers in Estonia and Latvia. RAND RR1577-3 .
 The newly independent Baltic States sought to establish a clear identity in line with their own language and nationality . With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the new Baltic States seek to establish an identity .
 Estonia and Latvia adopted a policy of legal continuity with the pre-World War II governments . Individuals who could not trace their ancestry in Estonia or Latvia to before 1940 had to apply for naturalization .
 The key requirement for naturalization became a language exam . It effectively disenfranchised the Russian-speaking population who could not or would not pass an exam .
 Nevertheless, there remains a perception of discrimination, especially in Estonia .
 One possible step would be to recognize Russian as an official language, thereby facilitating relations between minorities and the state . The language would also facilitate relations between these minorities and state .
 Estonia and Latvia fear that official recognition of the Russian language would compromise the usage of the language . Estonia and Latvia have been trying to integrate Russian speakers .
 Russian speakers in Estonia and Latvia are concentrated mainly in the major cities or in Russian-dominated regions .
 Harju, which contains Tallinn, and Ida-Viru, is in the northeast of Estonia . Harju is a city in the north of Estonia, and is located in the east of Estonia.
 "Riigikogu Simplifies Granting Estonian Citizenship to Children and Elderly,’ The Baltic Course, January 22, 2015 .
 Russian speakers are an underrepresented minority of overall voters . Estonian and Latvia parties are wary of considering them as potential partners given fears of Russian influence .
 There is important variation in the level of social, economic, and political integration of the Russian population across Estonia and Latvia, within different regions .
 Russians in Latvia appear to be somewhat better integrated than those in Estonia . One-third of marriages are interethnic, and 15 percent of those serving in Latvia's armed forces are Russian speakers .
 Estonian thi nk ta nk study distinguishes different “clusters’ among the Russian population based on their level of linguistic, political, and social integration . “successfully” integrated 19 Russia in general also has higher inequality, the study says .
 Knoema, “Leningrad Region—Gross Regional Product Per Capita,’s multiple years,” multiple years . “Pskov Region” “Gross regional Product PerCapita” has multiple years in Estonia .
 Exchange rates from Internal Revenue Service, “Yearly Average Currency Exchange Rates,’ 2016. Exchange rates, ‘Yearly average Currency Exchange rates’
 For inequality data, see World Bank, “GINI index (World Bank Estimate),’s 2016 .
 The Economist quotes a Latvia expert, noting, ‘Harmony joining any ruling coalition would be breaking two taboos at once.’ ‘‘’’
 Russia has sought to maintain a connection to and influence among the Russian speakers in the Baltics . The Baltics are the region of Russia and the Baltic countries .
 Its Compatriots Policy, for example, funds pro-Russia organizations in the Baltics . It also supports educational exchanges and seeks to protect the interests of Russians abroad .
 Russia justifies the Compatriots Policy as a legitimate cultural institution . Baltic analysts see this policy as a strategy of impeding the integration of the Russian population .
 Russian propaganda, controlled and funded by the state, also has a tremendous influence on Russian speakers in the Baltics .
 Russian television is easier and more enjoyable to watch, observers say . Many observers also note that products on Russian media generally have significantly higher production values than locally produced shows .
 Russian speakers therefore exist in a “separate informational space’ from Estonian or Latvian population . Russian speakers are in a "separate information space" from Estonia, Latvia and Estonia .
 The situation crystallises in a warehouse outside Tallinn, where a volunteer group is collecting humanitarian aid for civilians in rebel-held eastern Ukraine .
 Boxes stuffed with food and clothes lean in precarious stacks, waiting to be sent to hospitals, schools and villages throughout the Donbas .
 Mr Ponjatovsky in Narva, Estonia, calls Estonia home . But even these activists, like Mr PonJatovsky, call Estonia home.
 Russians in Estonia “already have a different mentality,’ says Elina Esakova, Dobrosvet's leader .
 Most of the Russian-speaking population derives its information and views on history and current events from Russian television channels that are directly subordinate to the Kremlin and can be used as a mechanism of propaganda .
 The 18 Russia has historically used proxies, propaganda, cyber attacks, and possibly other means to foment pro-Russian protests and instability in the Baltics . The 18 Russians have historically used proxy, propaganda and cyber attacks .
 In 2007 in Estonia, riots broke out after the Estonian government announced plans to move a statue from central Tallinn to a military cemetery . The statue commemorates the victory over the Nazis .
Local Russian speakers immediately followed rumors of the movement of the statue . Protests by local Russian speakers followed rumors.
 There are also reports of Russia unsuccessfully testing the potential for protest and separatism in eastern Russian-dominated areas prior to the conflict in Ukraine .
 Estonia supports Nazism; Russian-speaking people are discriminated against in Estonia en masse . Estonia is a dead-end state that only causes problems for its Western partners . Estonia supportsNazism; Russia is discriminated against.
 The Latvian Security Police says Russia actively used information space in 2013 to spread information . Latvia's security police say Russia used information to discrediting Latvia in 2013 .
 For several years already, the opinion of alleged “rebirth of Fascism and its glorification” in Latvia was intensively spread . “violation of Russian-speaking rights’ in Latvia in 1940.’s occupation of Latvia was denying occupation.
 There is some evidence that Russian influence and geopolitical instability can shift the opinions of Russian speakers over time .
 Estonian think tank report links support for NATO among Russian-speaking Estonians from 2000 to 2014 to coverage in Russian-language media .
 An additional challenge is the presence of organized criminal networks with links to Russia . The Russian government says it will not be able to crack down on organized crime .
 Russia may exert influence over one of the Baltic countries through a proxy, such as a political party with close links to Moscow or use of organized criminal networks .
 Many Latvian analysts express concern about Harmony Centre’s funding and close ties with Moscow . They claim that the Latvians would view Harmony's entry into a governing coalition as a security risk .
Major parties in both countries are unlikely to go into coalition with any Russian-dominated party . Estonian and Latvian majority are worried about Russian influence .
 The exact mechanism is different to specify, as such an activity would necessarily be covert . The opportunity would depend on the particular individuals involved, says the author .
 There are real limits on which an individual or party could counter the overwhelming pro38 Ariel Cohen, “Putin Explores Legal Loopholes to Take Back the Baltic Nations’’
 Other sources note money-laundering operations in Latvia, and links between Russian organized crime and Lithuanian politicians . Other sources also note links between Russia and Lithuania .
 Russia may be far more able to achieve smaller gains on noncore interests than on being able to organize a fundamental shift on policy to reflect Russia’s interests on foreign and security policy .
 A second commonly raised scenario is the development of a locally organized separatist or protest movement in the Russian-dominated areas of eastern Estonia or Latvia .
 In 1993, a referendum for autonomy was organized in Narva, potentially as a prelude to secession . The referendum was held in 1993 .
Narva voted for independence, but the vote was illegal . The town's government decided to respect the opinion of an Estonian court, which ruled it illegal .
 Pro-Russian organizations in Estonia and Latvia have pursued greater language rights . But none appears to have pursued a separatist agenda .
 Residents of Narva and other towns in the region consistently downplay any desire to rebel against Estonia or join Russia . Douglas Mastriano, “Defeating Putin’s Strategy of Ambiguity,” War on the Rocks, November 6, 2014.
 Latvia’s Security Police, the domestic intelligence agency, have struggled to trace the source of the appeals . They believe the appeals originated in Russia .
 Estonian and Latvian security services do not specifically observe groups voicing separatism . Note also that Estonian, Latvians and Estonian security service not specifically observing groups voicing separatistism .
 During his visit to Narva in July 2015, there seemed little evidence of tension that might escalate to violence .
 A strong desire for separatism was not evident in eastern Ukraine prior to 2014 . The insistence of residents is not necessarily evidence that a similar situation could not arise in the Baltics .
 Russia could covertly infiltrate pro-Russian groups in Estonia or Latvia to influence their policies and preferences . Russia could organize relatively few individuals into a new movement, according to the author .
 There are significant demographic and social differences between the Russian-dominated areas of the Baltic states and eastern Ukraine . But there would likely be a significant portion of the population not joining a separatist movement .
Unlike Estonia and Latvia, eastern Ukraine was closely integrated into Russia politically and economically for many years . Unlike Russian areas of Latvia and Estonia and Estonia, eastern Ukrainian areas were closely integrated with Russia politically.
 Russian speakers in the Baltic countries are generally relatively better off than many in Russia . The same 48 Interviews with Estonian and Latvia academics and staff of think tanks, Riga and Tallinn .
 When you cross into Ivangorod, straight away you can see the atmosphere there, says Brokk .
 In Narva, Russian is the lingua franca, Russian media is the main source of news, and orange-and-black St. Petersburg is the most popular language .
 Russians of Narva . . . call the European Union and NATO their home . But the Russians ofNarva .. call the EU their home.
 Estonian government in Tallinn wants to join Russia . Few say they want to follow the example of Crimea in Crimea .
 In his early 60s, he still hasn’t learned Estonian or obtained citizenship .
 He shows off his Russian passport, even though he has lived most of his life in Estonia . He has lived in Estonia for more than a decade .
 The young Estonian hostess at the coffee shop where we meet doesn't speak Russian . He’s monolingual and gripes that the young Estonians at the shop don’t speak Russian.
 Mr Chuikin recently moved to a new suburban home in Tallinn next door to his daughter, who married an ethnic Estonian and has bilingual children .
 The other daughter moved to Stockholm, married a Swede and is raising her own multilingual kids . His other daughter also moved to Sweden and is now raising her herself .
 Every few weeks, he makes a quick flight over the Baltic Sea to see them .
 His Estonian residency permit lets him travel around Europe without a visa . He has been living in the country since 2008 .
 Russia would probably not have the local support necessary to camouflage its origins from Estonian, Latvian, or even NATO authorities .
 The absence of local support would undermine the ambiguity of Russian subversion . It would make it more likely that there would be a strong NATO and EU response .
 Russia has an incentive to use nonviolent means to radicalize Russian speakers living in the Baltics to gain influence in the region . Russia clearly has a incentive to using nonviolent means.
 Russia may hope to encourage a separatist movement that would undermine the sovereignty of the Baltic countries . Russia may also hope to use its influence to encourage Baltic countries to adopt policies more friendly to Russia .
 Russian minorities in Estonia and Latvia do give Russia a variety of options and points of influence for subversion . But the actual ability of Russian agents to mobilize the Russian minority in the Baltics appears quite limited .
 A second general category of hybrid Russian aggression is the use of covert or denied violence by Russian forces . Covert Violent Action is not necessarily mutually exclusive with nonviolent subversion .
 Russian covert action might seek to undermine the Western agenda of Euro-Atlantic integration . The West would not or could not protect the sovereignty of the Baltic countries .
 Russia Spetsnaz seized control of a town or city dominated by Russian speakers in Estonia or Daugavpils in Latvia .
 Covert action might make it difficult for NATO or its member states to attribute the secession to Russian aggression, which could undermine NATO response .
 Russian annexation might also deter NATO from responding by indicating that Russia would go to war with NATO or use nuclear weapons to defend its territory .
 Russia’s conventional forces might play a role in deterring a response by the Baltic countries or other NATO members, but would not cross over the border .
 The scenarios draw from discussions with U.S. and NATO officials and analysts, June and July 2015, and February 2016 .
 Russian intelligence or special operations forces could co-opt and encourage local pro-Russian movements to declare a separatist agenda . Russian intelligence and special ops forces could also encourage pro-Russia movements .
 Russia might provide arms and advice rather than significant numbers of forces . Russia may provide arms, advice, but not significant numbers.
 Russian-backed groups could operate covertly, attacking the government forces . Russian- backed groups could attack government forces in this scenario .
 Russia would be creating instability within an EU and NATO member, thereby undermining the alliance’s credibility .
 Russia’s ability to act covertly could be essential to prevent NATO from attributing the political conflict to Russian involvement .
 A third scenario, raised by a former Latvian official, is the possibility of Russia instigating a terrorist campaign against the Baltic governments .
 Russian agents could attack Russian speakers visiting a Soviet monument, pretending that it was the work of Baltic fascists .
 Russian agents then could facilitate the development of terrorist cells to undertake attacks within the Baltic capitals .
 In each of these scenarios, Russia could deny its presence and claim that any action was carried out by the local population . Russia could also deny its involvement in any action .
 Russia's claim that no Russian forces are involved in any violence is more plausible than that of the Baltics .
 The ability of Baltic countries to control their territory and to limit the movement and freedom of action of covert Russian forces will undermine Russian objectives in the first scenario and make insurgent/separatist activities under second and third scenarios far more difficult .
 Estonia and Latvia have a significant Russian-speaking population that might make them vulnerable to Russian covert action . Like Crimea and eastern Ukraine, the eastern portions of Estonia, Latvia are proximate to Russia .
 Baltic countries appear to be a less fertile ground for covert subversion than Ukraine . In general, however, the Baltic countries seem to be more fertile ground.
 Russia was able to seize and maintain control over Crimea, where its conventional forces maintained dominance . The success of covert actions in eastern Ukraine was ultimately less successful, as discussed above .
 The Baltic countries are better positioned than Ukraine to defend against and deter Russian covert action . The Baltic nations are better position to defend and deter Russia's covert action.
 They have greater control over their own territory, through the development of their internal security forces, as outlined below . They have more control over the country than they have over the past few years .
 Furthennore, they are members of NATO, and so benefit from 54 . There are of course other scenarios for Russian covert action, but the effectiveness of each them centers around the ability of Baltic forces to identify, attribute, and stop Russian activities .
 Interview with think tank analyst, Riga, July 2015 . 24 assistance from other NATO countries, including under Article 5 .
 NATO member countries are committed to respond to an attack on any of the Baltic states . Unlike Ukraine, NATO support to Ukraine was limited to nonlethal equipment after Russia used conventional forces to support separatists .
 Estonian and Latvian Ministry of Defence officials indicated confidence in their ability to deal with covert Russian activity because of their greater state capacity .
 NATO hopes to deter Russian covert action by relying on NATO to provide conventional deterrent .
 Baltic countries may hesitate before attacking Russian forces operating in their territory because of fears of Russia’s willingness to escalate .
 Russia may also be able to seize territory and establish a new status quo before the Baltic states are able to respond .
 The Baltic countries recognize the importance of rapidly alerting NATO of Russian aggression under Article 4 or 5 .
 Interviews with Latvian and Estonian defense officials, Riga and Tallinn, July 2015 .
 National Review, May 14, 2015. See also Andrew Stuttaford, “On Shooting ‘Little Green Men,’
 He stressed that all society working together is a functioning society . You can deal with it only with the cohesion of the nation, he said .
 Gen. Terras says NATO needs to stand behind his country and go to war in the event of Russian interference . Kiev was initially unable to do so, he says .
Despite confidence of Baltic officials, it remains important to evaluate the readiness, capabilities, and coordination of the security forces in the Baltic countries .
 Estonia appears to have a relatively well-prepared security structure, albeit small and dependent on rapid mobilization of reservists . Estonia is a small country with a small number of reservist units .
 Estonia has an active duty ground force of 5,500 soldiers, of whom 2,700 are conscripts . Estonia has two brigades, one of which is organized into two brigade .
 The two brigades are at low readiness and mainly serve to train conscripts for eight to 11 months before they are moved into the reserves . With the exception of one professional highreadiness mechanized battalion, these two brigade are at high readiness .
 There are also four teams of American-trained special operations forces, who have repeatedly deployed to Afghanistan .
 The Kaitseliit, a 15,000-strong National Guard, contains some well-trained and -equipped fighting units that would coordinate with the special operations forces in an invasion .
 Estonian officials claim that a two-battalion force would be able to hold off Russian special forces until a broader mobilization occurred . The Estonian government says the force would include a U.S. or NATO battalion .
 Estonian officials confident in their ability to monitor Russian activity within their territory . It is uncertain how effectively this information can be shared with other NATO member countries .
 A July 2015 visit to Narva revealed a modem multilayered border post that would require a not insignificant effort to circumvent . The post would require an attempt to circumvent the modem .
Estonian government officials claim coordination was quite good and straightforward in large part due to the small size of the Estonian security establishment . Western officials were skeptical of the extent of coordination between the Ministry of Defence and internal security forces .
 Estonian officials attribute the kidnapping to the investigation by the border agent of smuggling in the region by Russian government forces .
 Russia sentenced the official to 15 years in prison on espionage charges in August 2015 . The official was sentenced to a 15-year prison term for espionage .
 26 example, involved 13,000 Estonian personnel and revealed gaps in mobilization times that the government is seeking to address .
 The readiness and preparation of the Latvian military is more questionable than usual . The readiness of the military is not as well as its readiness and readiness .
 Latvia spends only 0.94 percent of GDP on defense, in comparison with Estonia’s 1.93 percent in 2014 . Latvia spends 0.95 percent of its GDP ondefense, compared with Estonia's 1.92 percent . Latvian forces are smaller than
 This force is organized into a single brigade with two active duty battalions . The force also includes highly trained special forces .
Latvian officials are confident of their intelligence gathering related to Russian covert actions . Estonia is also confident of gathering information related to Russia's covert actions.
 They observed that they had dealt with the Russian covert threat for many years . They said they had been dealing with the threat for years .
 68 Western-trained observers noted serious interagency coordination problems . Latvian defense officials noted good interagency information sharing, contingency planning, and coordination .
Latvian and foreign observers have also questioned the effectiveness of the Latvian border guard relative to those of Estonia and the Nordic countries . Latvia's border guard is based in Estonia and Finland .
 Additional research is necessary to fully evaluate the tactical ability of the Baltic forces to respond to Russian covert action .
 L further investigation of Russian tactics in Ukraine and other contingencies would be useful . Lurther investigation of Russia's capabilities for engaging in covert activities even in the presence of opposing security forces would be helpful .
 A more detailed investigation of the Baltic countries’ forces could also help illuminate gaps in training, equipment, and doctrine .
 The Baltic countries are high-functioning European states that have control throughout their territory . Nevertheless, the Baltic countries have control of their territory.
 Officials in Estonia and Estonia have practiced their response to Russian action . There is good reason to believe that they would be able to deploy sufficient forces to respond to the presence of Russian covert forces .
 The Telegraph, May 12, 2015. Ben Farmer and David Blair, “Estonia Stages Biggest Military Exercise in Country’s History Amid Fears of Russian ‘Aggression’
 The Atlantic Council, September 2011, 3.3. The Regional Agenda and the Global Role, is the Atlantic Council's annual conference .
 Such an attack could seek to capture territory, replace the government of the Baltic countries, or shift the military balance in an ongoing internal conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia could seek to demonstrate that NATO’s security guarantees are not credible . The United States is unable to defend its allies in the Baltic countries .
 The Baltic countries may seek to drive ground forces across the Baltic countries to their capitals . They might seek to seize the countries before a significant Western response .
 Russian forces might limit their offensive to a small “bite’ of Baltic countries . Narva is a Russian-dominated city near the border, such as a land bridge between Belarus and Kaliningrad .
 Russia may bargain that NATO is unwilling to risk war to recapture an area of strategic importance to Russia . There is some ambiguity about whether there is support for Russian action by the local population .
 Russia would likely use its anti-access and area-denial capabilities to inhibit NATO deployments in the region and give it more time to consolidate its gains . Russia would also use its Anti-access capabilities to block NATO deployments .
 Russia has discussed the possibility of deploying tactical nuclear weapons to Crimea and nuclear-capable ballistic Iskander missiles to Kaliningrad . Russia has said it would use such weapons to defend its territory .
 RAND has recently undertaken a series of tabletop exercises to better understand the prospects for a Russian conventional attack in the Baltics . The exercises are part of a set of exercises to understand the prospect of a conventional attack.
Based on open source estimates, Russia could muster approximately 27 maneuver battalion tactical groups to attack the Baltic countries in a short-warning attack . Russia could be supported by significant long-range fires, according to the estimates .
 NATO forces would be light, outgunned, and outmaneuvered by Russian heavier units, and fixed in place or destroyed while Russian forces maneuvered toward the capitals .
 Russia would have significant freedom to deploy its forces to limit its vulnerability to air power . Furthennore could deploy significant air forces without heavy NATO ground forces present .
Russian forces were on the outskirts of Riga and Tallinn between 36 and 60 hours after the start of the war . Russian forces were in the area for between 36 to 60 hours.
 It would likely take at least several weeks until armored reinforcements from the United States could arrive in numbers that would be capable of ejecting Russian forces .
 The chances for Russia's conventional success in the short term appear high, given the substantial numerical superiority of Russian conventional forces in the region . The success of Russia’s actions in the ‘small bite’ scenario may vary depending on the degree of surprise .
 Russia could only use conventional forces and eschew political subversion or covert action . These unconventional tactics have the potential to reduce the likelihood of a NATO response .
 Russia could provoke a conflict between Russian speakers and Baltic governments . It could create a perception that local Russian speakers support Russian military action .
 North Atlantic Council makes decisions based on consensus . Any disagreement about Russian intent could delay or vitiate a NATO-backed response to Russian provocations .
 Russian leaders made an extensive effort to rationalize and justify their actions in Crimea . It seems likely that Russian aggression in the future would be accompanied by similar activities to justify its actions .
 Russian covert action could also be used to delay or undermine Baltic countries’ ability to deploy their security forces to respond to Russian forces .
 The greatest danger posed by Russia in the Baltics appears to be its local conventional superiority .
 Without the threat or actual use of a conventional attack to inhibit a decisive response to Russian subversion, the efficacy of nonviolent or covert efforts would be limited against competent states such as the Baltics .
 Russia’s geographic advantages with a strengthened NATO defense posture may be the essential precondition for maintaining political stability in this region . Offsetting Russia's geographic advantages may also be the key to maintaining stability in the region .
 The nature of such a deterrent is the focus on other research and beyond the scope of this report . It is also the focus of other research, including other research .
 NATO forces will likely be deployed to the region. It suffices to note that such a deterrent will likely involve a significant deployment of NATO forces .
 Baltic countries have requested that the United States pennanently deploy a United States Anny battalion in each country . The Baltic countries, for example, have asked that the U.S. deploy a battalion in every country .
 The report concludes that the major vulnerability to hybrid warfare in the Baltics lies in Russian conventional forces that may “back up’ or accompany nonviolent or covert Russian aggression .
 The United States and NATO can focus solely on providing an effective conventional deterrent and ignore other threats . This does not mean that the U.S. and NATO should focus on providing a conventional deterrent . It does not means that the United States should focus solely.
 NATO will strengthen its defense and deterrence at all levels of conflict, including cyber warfare, to covert action, to conventional warfare . It will be important for NATO to strengthen itsdefense and deterrence.
By reducing vulnerabilities of the Baltics, reducing Russian perceptions that it can exploit the vulnerabilities of Baltic states, the potential for conflict and escalation is diminished .
 Actions to address these vulnerabilities may also be beneficial for other reasons . Actions could be beneficial to address the vulnerabilities .
 Better integration of Russian speakers may help to build more-cohesive societies in Baltics . For example, better integration of Russians may help build more cohesive societies .
 NATO's efforts to strengthen deterrence of a conventional attack may increase vulnerability to covert Russian action . It is also important to consider the risk that NATO’s efforts to stronger deterrence may increase the vulnerability to nonviolent or covert Russia action .
 Russian speakers in the Baltics may interpret NATO's actions as intended to encircle or threaten Russia, or exercise control over the Baltic countries .
 The first set of possible policy responses concern how to advance the integration of Russian speakers within each of the Baltic countries .
 The first is to increase political and civic rights for Russian speakers, especially with regard to citizenship, education, and official recognition of the Russian language . The first will be to increase the rights of Russian speakers .
 Greater recognition of the Russian language, increased funding for Russian-language education, and citizenship for Soviet-era migrants would diminish Moscow's influence .
 The EU did put significant pressure on Estonia and Latvia to grant greater rights to the Russian minority during and following accession negotiations . There are reports of ongoing discussions about increasing rights for Russian minority .
 The problem is that granting greater rights to Russian speakers is to some extent in conflict with the nationalist narratives surrounding the creation of Estonia and Latvia . The problem, however, is that the issue is that giving greater rights is not the same as giving Russian speakers greater rights .
 Baltic countries have made significant progress in integrating the Russian-speaking population . Baltic countries recognize the legitimate role of Russian speakers who learn the titular language and are loyal to their country .
 There remains a widespread view that further compromise to the Russian-speaking population would be a further compromise .
 The European Union, or EU member states such as Germany, do have a great deal of influence among the Baltic states . Citizenship, education, and related issues are clearly the prerogative of the Baltic countries themselves .
 The importance and sensitivity of the position of the Russianspeaking population in Estonia and Latvia means that even private pressure from Western countries is liable to be a waste of effort or even counterproductive .
 A second area where Western attention could have a greater impact is in the field of strategic communications . A second place where Western Attention could have greater impact was in the fields of strategic communication .
There has been much discussion of efforts to counter Russian propaganda . There has been a lot of discussion about counter-propaganda efforts .
 The EU considered creating a pan-European Russian-language station but has instead settled on developing content for local media stations in Eastern Neighborhood countries such as Georgia and Ukraine .
 Estonia has established the Russian-language television station ETV+, which will broadcast in Russian . Latvia's parallel effort to establish a Russian- language TV station confronted political and economic difficulties .
 Continued funding for Russian-language broadcasts by Deutsch Welle, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty could help around the margins . But content directly funded by Western countries is unlikely to be credible .
 Steve Tatham criticizes Western official information campaigns and urges greater social science research to understand Baltic populations . Tatham urges greater research to better direct NATO's strategic communications efforts .
 NATO and EU are not but nor do they need to be so; the answer to propaganda is not more propaganda . NATO and the EU do not need to do so.
 The answer is to properly understand its effect and put in the place the necessary mitigation, which may not be communication, to extinguish its flames . The answer to the question is to better understand the effect .
 In the short tenn, additional funding for the Estonian and Latvian government-supported Russian-language television stations may be the best available option .
 The relatively small audience makes it difficult to develop a functioning station with reasonable production values . The relatively smaller audience makes the relatively small audiences make it difficult for the station to develop .
 A modicum of Western funding and support could help create stations that provide a relevant, objective, and competitive alternative to Moscow-controlled stations .
 Better intelligence gathering and coordination and a clearer understanding of the signs of Russian covert aggression can help bolster defenses against active subversion .
 U.S. Air Force assets, such as unmanned aerial vehicles and ground-based radars, could be beneficial at filling gaps in countries' intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities .
 NATO's structures and processes for intelligence sharing remain cumbersome and dependent on often-reluctant nations to share . NATO has made progress in developing institutions for intelligence Sharing .
 NATO’s slow progress in this area could be valuable, according to NATO . Further developing bilateral intelligence sharing between the Baltic countries and the U.S. or other NATO countries could be useful .
 Additional research could also contribute by identifying the signs and mechanisms of past instances of Russian covert activities in Georgia, Crimea, and eastern Ukraine .
 There is little open source information about how to differentiate between “everyday’s Russian exercises and influence operations and the start of a large-scale campaign mirroring the operation in Crimea .
 33 clearly identifying the modus operandi of Russian agents would help to separate out the cases that justify a NATO deployment and those that might not .
 The capacity of the Baltic countries to counter covert action can certainly be improved . The ability of theBaltic countries to combat covert action could be improved.
 U.S. special operations forces have conducted extensive engagement with Baltic counterparts . There is a sense of saturation, especially given the small size of the Baltic special ops forces .
 Additional research may be beneficial to identify gaps in the Baltic countries’ capacity, including within civilian agencies .
 Support for Baltic states to counter covert action may also strengthen their ability to resist Russia in the event of an invasion . Support for the Baltic states may also help them resist Russia.
 The U.S. Air Force may be able to assist with the development of technical capabilities for border control, air and maritime domain awareness, and intelligence gathering .
 U.S. may be able to offer assistance in planning exercises and war games to improve contingency planning and coordination . Latvia is one of the countries where the United States may help .
 The United States, NATO, and Baltic countries can do more to think through how a response to Russian covert action would proceed . The U.S., NATO and Baltic nations can also think about how to respond to Russian action .
 It remains uncertain how new, more responsive forces would be employed if there was warning of a significant Russian covert military action in the Baltics .
 The VJTF and implementation of the Readiness Action Plan is complex and will take time . It is highly beneficial for the United States and other NATO allies to think through on a practical level how a high-readiness forces would deploy and be employed in the Baltics .
 Avoiding the Risk of Conventional Deterrence Initiatives Fomenting Irregular Provocation Russian propaganda harps on the theme of NATO’s aggressive intentions .
 The Swiss Approach, Santa Monica, California: RAND Corporation, PE-179-RC, 2016 .
 There is a concern that the presence of significant U.S. or NATO forces could further shift the opinions of Russian speakers toward Moscow . The population is more susceptible to Russian influence, according to CNN.
 NATO deployment of NATO conventional forces to the region may make conventional war less likely . It may paradoxically increase the risk of Russian subversion and lower-intensity conflict, with the potential for escalation .
 The risk of Russian action, miscalculation, and/or escalation could increase. Based on the findings above, nonviolent subversion and covert action will likely remain difficult .
 United States Anny deployments in Baltics may be larger in numbers of personnel . The same challenges of avoiding provoking opposition from local Russian speakers apply to U.S. Air Force deployments .
 U.S. and NATO forces are deployed in the United States and NATO countries . This is not to argue that the deployment is ill-advised, but that it is important to manage perceptions of these initiatives .
 There is no way to prevent Russian propaganda from misrepresenting U.S. or NATO activities in the Baltics, or from claiming that United States or NATO actions are provocative .
 The United States and NATO can reduce the risk that a deployment will increase the vulnerability to irregular Russian aggression . Russia will take preventative action because it misperceives a U.S. or NATO deployment as threatening its security .
 NATO should avoid basing forces in heavily Russian-speaking areas. First, NATO should be careful to avoid heavily Russian speaking areas .
 NATO forces could be perceived as occupying forces, and any accidents or confrontations between Russian-speaking civilians and NATO personnel have potential to escalate .
 To some extent, this limitation poses a challenge for a response to a covert or limited Russian action against a Russian-dominated border area .
 Russia may be able to seize a small amount of territory as a fait accompli . NATO forces far away from the border might have difficulty reacting quickly .
 The need to avoid possible provocation might justify the added risk . Nevertheless, the need toavoid possible provocation may justify the risk .
 To date, NATO forces do not appear to have been based in Russiandominated areas .
Rotational forces are mainly based at Tapa and the Amari airfield . Thus far in Estonia, for example, rotational forces have been based in Estonia .
 Russian leadership is concerned about NATO forces in the Baltics being used to support a color revolution or other action to depose the regime . Second, while Russia will inevitably exaggerate the intention of NATO to use its position in theBaltics to undermine the regime, the
 The Estonian Ministry of Defence says 12 Russian leaders may be motivated by such claims .
 The United States and NATO cannot prevent misperception, but they can take action to improve transparency or limit activities or forces that might be intended for regime change .
 The development of a sound public relations campaign associated with U.S. forces in the Baltics is critical . The development is critical, says the author .
 The provision of services by U.S. or NATO civil affairs teams is highly beneficial, especially in predominately Russian-speaking areas .
 There are reports of U.S. soldiers helping to rebuild an orphanage and pursuing other humanitarian missions . For example, there are reports that soldiers are helping to build orphanages .
 If managed carefully and if coordinated with the local government, they can help convince local Russians that NATO is not deploying forces against them .
 The Current Russian Art of Strategy,’s current Russian art of strategy, was published in November 2015 . The current Russianart of Strategy is called ‘The Current RussianArt of Strategy’ .
 "Russians of Narva Not Seeking ‘Liberation’ by Moscow,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, April 4, 2014, .
 "Russia Jails Estonia Security Official Eston Kohver,’s. BBC, “Russia Jail Estonia Security official Eston Kohvers’.
 "Kremlin Threatens Response to United States Nuclear Bomb Deployment in Germany," says Matthew Bodner .
 The Jamestown Foundation. Fringe Christian Orthodox Financier of the Donbas Separatists . The Jamstown Foundation .
 Emerging Opportunities for Engagement, Santa Monica, California: RAND Corporation, RR-1467-AF .
 Farmer, Ben, and David Blair, “Estonia Stages Biggest Military Exercise in Country’s History Amid Fears of Russian ‘Aggression,’
 "Gerasimov Doctrine" and Russian Non-Linear War. "The Gerasimov doctrine" and "Russian Non- Linear War" are two of the two wars .
 Hille, Kathrin, “Russia Censors Discussion of Involvement in Ukraine’s Ukraine,’
 Jozwiak, Rikard, “EU Plans to Step Up Fight Against Russian Propaganda,’’s ‘EU plans to Step up Fight Against Russia Propaganda’
 "Russia Threatens to Deploy Nuclear Weapons in Crimea,’s National Interest, June 1, 2015 .
 Kravchenko, Stepan, “The Rebel Leader Who Makes Putin Look Cautious,” Bloomberg, February 4, 2015 .
 Latvijas Republikas Saeima, “Saeima Adopts Provisions on Recognition of Dual Citizenship,’s May 9, 2013, is the first time the two have been together .
 "Latvia Struggles with Restive Russian Minority Amid Regional Tensions," says Matthew.
 Sources and Implications . Santa Monica, California: RAND Corporation .
 Pifer, Steven, Steven and Hannah Thoburn are the authors of the book "Nuanced Views in Eastern Ukraine" The book was published in April 2014 .
 Russian Federation, ‘On the Russian Federation’s National Security Strategy,’ December 31, 2015, copy with author .
 "The Problem with Hybrid Warfare" is published on April 2, 2015 . "War on the Rocks" is a book by Schadlow, Nadia, and other authors .
 Wargaming the Defense of the Baltics, Santa Monica, Calif., RAND Corporation, RAND Corporation.
 Estonia: Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD COE), 2010 .
 "Hybrid War, Does It Even Exist,’s. Van Puyvelde, Damien, “Hybrid war, does it even Exist.’
 Russian Soft Power and Non-Military Influence in the Baltic States, Sweden Defense Research Agency . The agency is based in Stockholm, Sweden .
 Russia will have difficulty using nonviolent or covert action to subvert the Baltics absent the use of conventional force . Baltics' main vulnerability stems from Russia's local superiority in conventional forces .
 The United States and its NATO allies should also address the potential for all forms of Russian aggression across the conflict spectrum .
 The author recommends an improved strategic communications campaign aimed at Russian speakers . He also recommends measures to strengthen Baltic states' security forces .