 Ukraine erects walls Russia will protect its markets Risks for Russia New principles for our relations . In the late fall of 2013, when the crisis broke out in Ukraine, no one could imagine the fallout of this ""bitter November"" in a neighboring country .
 There was an outbreak of radicalism involving in-your-face demonstrations of Nazi symbols .
 In a matter of one year only memories remain of the country that was close to us . We maintained friendly trade relations, and we maintained friendly relations .
 The Ukrainian elite could come up with a strategic program for the development of the country . I’m genuinely sorry that this is the only strategic program that the Ukrainian elite can come up to .
 The worst for our neighbors is still to come, says Prime Minister David Cameron .
 No matter how they try to attack us verbally, we cannot fall for these provocations, we can't fall for them, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The people living on the other side of the border are close to us in their outlook on life, culture and mentality . We do not have the right to forget that the people living in the other part of theborder are close.
 Ukraine is denying objective facts, including our common culture, faith and centuries-long common history . Ukrainian officials are trying to pit their two nations against each other, official Ukraine says .
 They are speculating on the past, imposing ideological constructs that have nothing to do with historical reality . They're speculating about the past. They are trying to impose ideological constructs on history .
 It was a determining factor in the relations between our two countries after Ukraine became independent, in any case, no less than the economy . Ukraine's independence was a key factor in relations between the two countries .
 It was more important than other factors for millions of people from Russia and Ukraine, whose lives and families have always been tightly knit .
Ukrainian culture is close to every Russian, and we listen to Ukrainian folk songs as if they were our own . After all, Ukrainian culture is closer to every Russians, and they listen to each other .
 Ukrainian soil has given world artists, musicians, poets and writers a common heritage . Repin, Kuindzhi, Yaroshenko, Bulgakov and Babel are among those whose work is Ukrainian heritage .
Ukrainians have lived many years of their lives in Ukraine, and expressed their feelings in their paintings, novels and short stories . They maintained warm feelings for it.
 Russian literature was greatly embellished by Ukrainian motifs in the works of Pushkin, Tolstoy, Kuprin, Chekhov, Blok, Pasternak and Mandelstam .
 Tolerant and open, it has always brought us closer to each other . Tolerance and open has always been a source of concord between us .
 It brought up in us similar values and ideals, principles of human relations, and rules of behavior in society and family . It also brought up similar values, ideals, and principles ofhuman relations, as well as human relations .
 Even when we started living in different states, we kept reading the same books, enjoying the work of the same actors and watching the same movies .
 Almost a third of Ukrainians consider their native tongue, which is understood by everyone in Ukraine .
 We thought that there would never be any spiritual or cultural borders between us . And we thought that we would never have any spiritual and cultural borders .
 Ukrainian industry was united by common historical and spiritual roots, but also the close interconnectedness and interdependence of our economies .
 Ukraine emerged as a major industrial region as part of a single state with Russia . The Donets Basin is one of the key mining and metallurgical centres in the country .
 As a part of the Soviet Union, Ukraine became stronger, but also became a developed industrial region . Ukraine became an agrarian republic.
 Dneproges, Europe's largest hydroelectric power plant, was built in Ukraine by a truly nationwide effort . It is Europe's biggest hydroelectric plant .
 Kharkov Tractor and Turbine plants, the Krivoy Rog Metallurgical Plant, the Zaporozhstal and Azovstal steel plants, and a network of seaports have been built .
 Yuzhmash, Yuzhnoye Design Bureau and Paton Centre were created . Unique manufacturing and research and technical centres, such as Yuzhamash, were created.
 Ukraine became one of the most technologically advanced Soviet republics . As a result, Ukraine became a technologically advanced country .
 The bulk of its industry, agriculture and trade was financed from the budget of the Soviet Union . It was financed by the SovietUnion .
 The Druzhba oil pipeline, five nuclear power plants and seven hydroelectric power stations, were built by many people from many Soviet republics . The pipeline, which now form the basis not only of Ukrainian energy, but also the entire national economy.
 Ukraine still has basic aerospace technology and can manufacture competitive products in certain aircraft-building segments . Also, thanks to the scientific and technological potential created in the Soviet era, Ukraine still can make competitive products .
 Almost one-third of all missile and aircraft enterprises and design bureaus built in the Soviet times are now located in Ukraine .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union, all of this went to Ukraine .
 In 1991 its initial conditions for economic growth were among the best in the post-Soviet space . That is why in 1991 its conditions for growth were best in post- Soviet space .
 The economy of independent Ukraine managed to remain afloat. And that's precisely why the economy remained afloat, says the author .
 Special support from Russia allowed Ukraine to successfully develop many sectors of its economy, including the aviation and space industry . Russia helped Ukraine to develop many industries, including space and aviation .
 Russian investments in engineering, metallurgy and metal processing, aviation, shipbuilding and oil refining played an important role for the Ukrainian economy . Russian investments played a key role in Ukraine's basic industries .
 Russian investments were also a major factor that strengthened the banking sector . Russian investments are also a key factor in Russia's banking sector.
 Ukrainian lending institutions were strapped for cash due to a mass-scale loan default and a bank run . The bulk of these investments were made amid the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .
 Favourable conditions in the energy sector were created by Russia for Ukraine alone . Favourably conditions were created in Ukraine for Russia for Russia alone .
 For a long time, the price for gas sold to Ukraine was extremely low, at $40-$50 per 1,000 cubic metres . The price of gas in Ukraine was very low, with a price of $40-50 a cubic metre .
 The amount of gas supplied to Ukraine exceeded that which Gazprom was selling to Germany and Italy combined . Gazprom is selling gas to Germany, Italy and Germany.
 Ukrainian economy was propping up the country's economy for decades . Ukraine was, in fact, propped up the Ukrainian economy for years .
Since a separate contract for transit was not available, we paid for it with gas . Since the separate contract was not Available, we pay for the gas .
 Ukraine started illegally pumping, or to be more precise, stealing gas intended for European consumers . When we limited the supply, Ukraine began illegally pumping.
 Russian side proposed giving up barter deals and going straight to cash settlement and separating supply and transit . Russia was trying to negotiate with Ukraine in order to put cooperation on a civilised track .
 It wanted to charge European prices for transit and enjoy low prices for Russian gas for itself . The Russian gas industry wanted to be able to charge Europe prices for transport .
 Ukraine was the last former Soviet republic to adopt market relations in its dealings with Gazprom . The country was a former Soviet Republic .
 In 2009, for the first time in the history of relations with that country, a long-term contract was signed . The contract is fully consistent with the international practice of doing gas business .
 On 19 January 2009, following talks between Vladimir Putin and Yulia Tymoshenko, Gazprom and Naftogaz signed new long-term contracts .
 The price for gas and transit tariffs have since been calculated according to the generally accepted European formula . The price is based on a formula that is generally accepted by the EU .
 Ukraine continued to violate its payment commitments and continued to illegally pump gas . But even after that Ukraine continued the payments, it continued to pump gas.
 Ukraine extended the stay of the Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol for 25 years . Russia reduced the price per 1,000 cubic metres by $100 .
 Naftogaz was to pay $268. per 1,000 cubic metres, a significant discount . On 1 January 2014, Naftogsaz paid $268 per 1-000 cubic metre .
 The Russian Government issued a loan of $3 billion to Kiev, which was to be used to pay off the gas debt . The loan was also used to help pay off a gas debt.
 In April 2014, Ukraine was forced to cancel the December discount, and switch to the price of around $485 dollars per 1,000 cubic metres . Ukraine didn't like the price, which Ukraine didn’t like, and the discount was cancelled .
 Gazprom asked Naftogaz to prepay all its gas supplies starting in June . Gazprom has been asked to pre-prepay all gas supplies .
 The Russian side has never used the economic factor as a lever in addressing any political issue . The economic factor has never been used as a leverage in addressing political issues .
 The signing of the CIS Charter by Ukraine, the establishment of the Russian-Ukrainian state border or the Black Sea Fleet stay in Crimea were addressed on the basis of international law .
 Russia can be interpreted in a negative way, such as expansion or addiction, which is what some are actually doing . Clearly, any move by Russia could be interpreted as an addiction or expansion .
Ukrainian citizens and taxes to the Ukrainian budget. However, they disregard the fact that we are talking about the jobs and wages of Ukrainian citizens .
 The economy of independent Ukraine was created largely owing to Russia’s support . But the truth is that the economy was created mostly owing to the Russian support .
 Russian investments, easy loans and supplies on favourable terms have so far exceeded $100 billion . The amount of Russian investments and easy loans has so far exceed $100billion .
Not a single former Soviet republic has ever received that much financial aid . Not a single ex-Soviet republic has been given that much aid .
 In fact, we were not just helping the Ukrainian economy, but maintaining it . We were maintaining it, in fact, according to the government .
 Kiev is unlikely to have received such gifts for decades from any other country . It is unlikely that Kiev could have gotten such gifts from other countries .
 Ukraine's economic reality was improperly construed by the Ukrainian leadership, according to the Ukrainian government . But, unfortunately, this economic reality is improperly construed, says the Ukrainian leader .
 The outgoing year will go down in the history of Ukraine as one of the most difficult and tragic. TURBULENT presents Ukraine on the brink of a precipice .
 President Yanukovych negotiated an association deal with the EU . He promised a “European choice for the country, while trying to continue to play nice with Russia .
 He looked at the economic analysis of all the risks and possible consequences . He decided to put the brakes on the EU association process .
 Ukraine's leadership has led the country to the edge of economic disaster where it remains poised . Subsequent actions by Ukraine’s leadership, including its military, have led to the country's economic disaster .
 Many countries, not just Ukraine, are experiencing difficulties, and that includes Russia . I'm not going to delve into detailed social and economic statistics, especially since many countries, including Russia, have experienced difficulties .
 Ukraine is plagued by an external debt which will exceed GDP by late 2014 . It's unclear if the country will be able to finance it.
 The potential for default and the looming threat of social and economic collapse in Ukraine were not dreamed up by political strategists in the Kremlin or anywhere else .
 Russia has invested about 33 billion dollars in Ukraine, including bank capital, loans, and Gazprom money . Just in the past few years, Russia has spent about 33 billions in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian elite tries to reassure itself and ordinary Ukrainians that ‘everything will work out’ thanks to the country’s “European choice,’ the EU Association Agreement and “independence’ from Russia .
 Many of Ukraine's problems can be traced back to when the leadership in Kiev, clearly prodded by their Western partners, started talking about the need to reduce the country's dependence on Russia .
 Major projects, including economic ones, were evaluated through the prism of possible changes in the balance of political forces worldwide .
 In economic terms, the European approach looked more like simply dictating to Ukraine, in detail, what to do in almost all areas of life . The European approach looks more like just dictating the country's economic policies .
 A small European country with a population of several million people is one of the largest countries on the continent . The small country is home to the largest country in the world .
 Ukraine requires that Ukraine bring its legislation fully in line with EU standards as part of a “deep and comprehensive free trade area’s” Despite not receiving EU membership, Ukraine needs to amend it accordingly .
 Ukrainian law is set to establish absolute supremacy of European regulations and directives over Ukrainian laws . The same token, over Ukraine’s national interests, is the same token.
 The right to property can be claimed not only by Ukraine, but also by citizens of Russia, Poland and other countries, whose ancestors owned property before 1940 .
 In terms of economic cooperation, the EU-Ukraine relationship looks more like neo-colonialism . The EU- Ukraine relationship is more like a "neo-colonialist"
 Europe pushed for advantages for European companies and Ukrainian firms they worked closely with . Under the guise of “fair competition, Europe push for advantages.
 The European Union needs Ukraine primarily as a source of raw materials and as a market for European companies . The EU needs Ukraine to be a source for raw materials .
Vast majority of imports include consumer goods, while exports are dominated by commodities . Ukraine's trade with the EU is a key part of the country's economic growth .
 A significant portion of Ukrainian enterprises will not be able to compete with the European products that will flood Ukraine in the free trade area created under the terms of the Association Agreement .
 No one seems to have thought about what will happen to the Ukrainian producers in these conditions . No one has thought about the situation in Ukraine .
 No one can say how much real opportunity there will be for Ukrainian enterprises on the European market .
 However, that is unlikely to compensate for even a fraction of future losses . But that is not likely to be enough for any future losses.
 Tariff liberalisation will cover up to 98 percent of goods coming from Europe . It will gradually result in European goods ousting all competitors' products from Ukrainian market .
 The second wave of the European trade “tsunami’s’ will carry these goods to the Customs Union markets, harming the business environment within its bounds .
 Ukrainian exports to Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan could cost Kiev up to $15 billion . We will respond by drastically reducing exports of Ukrainian goods to Russia and Belarus .
 Ukraine’s agricultural sector accounts for 17 percent of its GDP and 27 percent of exports . The country has always been a breadbasket .
 Ukrainian farmers are getting the short end of the stick, in no small part because of the subsidies received by European farmers . Ukrainian farmers can only dream of being able to grow their crops in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has unmatched quality of farmland and proven high skills of the country’s agricultural workers .
Experts say Ukraine will face a discriminatory quota system that is inconsistent with the principles of free trade . Under the Association Agreement with the EU, Ukraine will be subject to a quota system .
 The annual quota for wheat exports to the EU is set at 950,000 tonnes, rising to 1 million tonnes in five years . For example, the annual quota is set to rise to 950,00 tonnes .
 Only 50 percent of wheat exported to the EU will be free from export duties . That means that only 50 percent will be allowed to export to the European Union .
 Transitioning to European technical standards and regulations will also come at enormous costs . The manufacturing industry and agriculture will have to do several years from now .
Machine engineering will need to switch to EU standards in just two years, according to EU rules . For example, machine engineering will be required to change to the EU standards.
 Ukraine will have 5 to 10 years to travel a path that took industrialised countries of Europe 50 to 60 years . The path will take place between 50 and 60 years. Ukraine will be one of Europe's most developed countries .
 A significant share of Ukrainian enterprises still use Soviet-era equipment and production processes . To understand whether this is realistic, consider the fact that a significant number of Ukrainian firms still useSoviet-era technology .
 The EU will require major funding, but expecting the EU to cover these costs is simply naive . In any case, the EU will need major funding.
 Ukraine is not welcome in the EU. Unsurprisingly, the funding promised to Ukraine by the West is becoming increasingly modest .
 Ukraine needed 1.45 billion euros to pay in advance for Russian gas . Europeans recognised the need for help, but refused to provide it .
 In the end, Kiev said it would dip into its foreign exchange reserves, which are heavily dependent on foreign aid . Kiev is heavily dependent.
 No one is eager to give Ukraine money even to cover its most pressing needs . In fact, no one is interested in giving Ukraine money .
 Europe may provide a loan to finance Ukraine’s debt, as the country is on the verge of default .
 Brussels will not help Ukraine the way it helped Greece, Spain, Ireland and others during the 2008 crisis . It took the EU a while to do what was needed .
 Ukraine's leaders are repeating Yanukovych's mistakes by talking about their country's "European choice" and the possibility of joining the EU in the near future .
 Ukraine has assumed all the obligations of a candidate for EU membership without gaining the status of an EU candidate . It doesn't tell them that Ukraine has taken on all obligations without a candidate .
 Ukraine hasn’t had a public discussion about what’s in the Association Agreement or an honest accounting of its pros and cons for the economy .
 For a long time, a Ukrainian translation of the document wasn’t even available .
 The Association Agreement does not contain any commitments to accept Ukraine into the EU . It does not even mention the prospect of membership .
 No one is talking about the possibility of Ukrainian representation in the European Parliament . Not to mention equal rights on par with EU citizens, European-level healthcare and social services .
 The EU is in no hurry to give Ukraine a seat at table of European powers as an equal partner . The EU has no plans to let Ukraine sit on the table of powers .
 Turkey signed an Association Agreement 51 years ago and still is not a member of the European Union . Turkey signed the Association Agreement with the EU in 1991 .
After Bulgaria joined the EU in 2007, unemployment rose from 6. percent to 11. percent in a matter of six years . For example, after the EU joined, unemployment in Bulgaria rose to 6.% .
 The amount of foreign investment declined over the same period almost nine-fold from 9.051 billion euros to 1.092 billion euros .
 These countries are not inferior to Ukraine in any respect, and are roughly comparable in terms of economic development and climate . They are roughly similar in terms to Ukraine's economic development.
 The EU should mention the role played by the EU’s desire to push Ukraine to sign the Association Agreement . On a separate note, we should mention that the EU's desire was back during the times of Yanukovych .
 Each time, EU dignitaries said that Russia had nothing to do with it, that it’s a two-way process . Moscow should wait on the sidelines, they said .
 The new Ukrainian leadership is growing increasingly aware that they can't ignore Russia’s position . Even the new leadership that replaced Yanukovych is growing more aware of Russia's position .
 Ukraine, Russia and the EU on association-related issues wouldn’t have been held in Brussels in July . The parties wouldn't have agreed in September that certain provisions of the Agreement would be delayed until 2016 .
 There was a dramatic sequence of events between the refusal and then the consent to jointly discuss these issues . However, there was a 'dramatic sequence' of events .
 Hundreds of thousands of refugees wouldn’t have had to seek refuge in Russia .
 We will continue to provide humanitarian aid to those troubled regions . Of course, we will still provide humanitarian help to those regions .
 Ukrainian authorities should realise that returning things to normal there is primarily their responsibility . Crimea decided to return to Russia in the 16 March referendum .
 Kiev is not willing to take responsibility for its eastern regions . Donbass and Lugansk now face an economic blockade imposed by the central government .
 Eastern Ukraine to follow the rest of Ukraine down the European path. Ukraine is the “strongest argument to convince Eastern Ukraine’s government to follow Europe down the EU path.
 These props are being moved from the political theatre to the real economy . The props have been moved from political theatre.
 Ukraine is prepared to sever trade and economic ties with Russia, or at least minimise them wherever it is not possible . We hear that Ukraine is ready to sever its ties to Russia, and we hear that they are not .
 The Odessa-Brody oil pipeline is a way to reduce the transit of Russian oil via Ukrainian territory . U.S. support for the project has been actively promoted by Ukrainian authorities, with United States support .
 A lot of effort went into searching for alternative natural gas suppliers, and while this may have helped exercise the imagination, it had no basis in reality .
 Russia will protect its markets, but it can still cause severe damage to its markets . I seriously doubt that the strategists in Kiev will be able to realise their plans to end all trade and economic ties .
 Russia isn't happy about the losses, but economically, it will get over them . Russia isn’t happy about it, but economic, it'll get over it .
 Yuzhmash, Ukraine, is now on the verge of bankruptcy . No one in Ukraine has explained how the loss of those orders will be compensated for .
 In November, a Russian-Ukrainian carrier rocket Dnepr was launched from the Yasny base in Russia’s Orenburg Region . It launched into orbit a Japanese remote sensing satellite and another four Japanese spacecraft .
 Ukraine is trying to destroy it within a matter of months . It took decades to build up this cooperation, and now it's trying todestroy it .
Ukraine's economy will lose at least $33 billion a year, according to some estimates .
 customs duties for goods from Ukraine to the level set by the Customs Union for non-members . It will be enforced if provisions of the Association Agreement come into effect before 1 January 2016 .
 EU goods disguised as Ukrainian appearing on the Russian market at dumping prices . We have also launched a system to monitor the implementation of the economic part of the Association Agreement .
 The watch list includes virtually the entire range of Ukrainian goods – from pork to ships .
 "Ukrainian" goods will be found in order to protect producers against unfair competition . The appropriate duties will be applied if such “Ukraineian’s goods are discovered .
 If Ukraine complies with its obligations to harmonise the legal and regulatory environment in the country with EU standards, we expect a sharp reduction of information exchange between customs services .
 Ukraine is being gradually stripped of its sovereignty in customs regulation . Ukraine is essentially being gradually removed from its sovereignty .
 This will significantly complicate preliminary information exchanges between us as neighbours and impair the customs control mutual recognition system . This will greatly complicate information exchanges. This will help expedite customs clearance on the border, which helps expedite Customs clearance .
 Moscow and Kiev will have to talk via Brussels, instead of communicating through long established channels . Ukrainian officials will simply carry out orders from European bureaucrats .
 Ukrainian agricultural producers will be unable to enter the Russian market because of differences in technical regulations, norms and standards .
 Spot checks were conducted on Ukrainian agricultural products, which were found to have been violations of our quality and consumer safety standards .
 Belarus, which does significant trade with Ukraine, is one of the most important countries in the EU . Belarus is also a member of the Customs Union, which is based in Ukraine .
 Risks for Russia are not directly related to the agreement . There are a number of other problems associated with this new economic reality in Ukraine .
 We are alarmed by cases of violations of Russian companies’ property rights and by populist slogans like “don’t buy Russian’s” heard in Ukraine .
 There were isolated cases of pressure long before the events of this year, it is now widespread . It is now a widespread problem.
 Many business owners have admitted that it is becoming increasingly difficult to protect property rights under the new Ukrainian authorities .
 Russian oil company Lukoil forced into selling a petroleum station in Ukraine . Lukoil is able to operate normally in Iraq, but can operate normally even in Iraq .
 Armed men raid Russian banks and companies under pretext that they are funding terrorism . Armed men raided Russian banks, companies under the pretext they were funding terrorism.
 Russian banks and companies meet all their obligations. I'll note that oversight bodies have had no complaints against Russian banks .
 The fact that Ukrainian securocrats do not protect Russian businesses suggests that it is official policy . The fact of the lack of protection for Russian businesses is not what it is .
 Ukrainian leadership's effort to scuttle nuclear power cooperation. We can’t help but be concerned by the Ukrainian leadership’s attempt to scottle nuclear cooperation .
 The attempts to use American fuel in Soviet-made nuclear reactors at Ukrainian stations is a grim example of the dangerous influence that politics can have on the economy .
 The experiments conducted under pressure from American producers are not safe . Meanwhile, the experiments conducted by U.S. producers are also not safe.
 There had already been attempts to replace Russian fuel with U.S. fuel in Ukraine and Eastern Europe . Czech Republic, Czech Republic and Ukraine have already seen attempts to substitute Russian fuel .
 These experiments ended in serious technological problems and shut down reactors . The experiments ended with serious problems and closed down reactors.
 Russia and Ukraine reached agreement on nuclear fuel supplies for the coming year . Common sense prevailed and common sense prevailed .
 Russia fully honoured its commitments to supply nuclear fuel to Ukrainian power stations . Even at the peak of the domestic conflict in Ukraine, Russia fully honour its commitments .
 Ukraine planned to build its own fuel production facility with Russia’s assistance . Ukraine plans to build the facility with its own assistance .
 Ukraine won’t build the necessary production facilities in the Kirovograd Region . We have already developed a number of production technologies .
 The risks to pipeline and other forms of transit through Ukraine are growing considerably, despite the major advantage the country's geography gives it in this respect .
 Customers are dubious about the safety of shipping by road and rail or using Ukrainian ports .
 Many customers in Russia will probably have to alter the routes of their shipments to Central and South Europe .
 Ukraine has continued participation in East-West and North-South global transit routes . This calls into doubt Ukraine’s continued participation on the routes .
 working in Russia is the only source of income for many Ukrainians . Working in Russia was the only income source for many Russians .
 Russia will have to shut down this source due entirely to actions taken by Ukraine . The source will be shut down due to Ukraine actions .
 quasi-legal Ukrainian guest workers that make up the majority of arrivals will not be able to work without a permit . Starting 1 January, quasi- legal guest workers can't work without permit .
 We will monitor more closely the length of their stay in the country . We will enforce the limit of 90 days in any six-month period .
 In the past it was possible to leave Russia and come back to work for the next three months without a problem .
 Russian border guards will give more scrutiny to Ukrainian travellers who lack permits . The move is a step towards more scrutiny for Ukrainian travellers .
 Ukrainians stand to lose an estimated $11-$13 billion, or about seven percent of Ukraine’s GDP, from not being able to work as freely in Russia . Ukraine's GDP is estimated to be $11-13 billion .
 Ukrainian politicians are factoring in this additional burden on the national budget, not to mention the budgets of Ukrainian families . It would be interesting to know whether Ukrainian politicians were factoring into this extra burden on national budget .
 New principles for our relations have convinced many Ukrainians that they can discard centuries of shared history, start with a clean slate .
 Ukrainian society is already paying for the illusions fostered by ruling elites who dream of European passports for themselves .
 Soldiers and civilians in Ukraine continue to die despite the ceasefire. Soldiers and civilian deaths continue to be reported .
 More victims are inevitable in a country where people don't have enough money to buy food and medicine, or provide for and educate their children .
 Even if neighbours have a very vague idea of the final price to be paid, they are entitled to their opinion, even if it's mistaken .
 Russia finds it difficult to accept such a choice, but not because of the ‘imperial ambitions’ attributed to Moscow . Russia, of course, finds it hard to accept the choice .
 "We have been united in times of joy and trouble, and, of course, in our common victory in the Great Patriotic War," says the author . "We are united in time of joy, trouble and trouble," he says .
 The best way to prove that Russia respects Ukraine as a sovereign nation is to recognise its right to the choice that it has made. Russia has made a decision to recognise Ukraine's right to its own right to be sovereign .
 Ukraine should keep in mind that any choice comes with responsibility . But Ukraine should be careful of any choice that comes with Responsibility .
 In a prosperous European future, you can’t do the bare minimum, you have to work hard . The EU's future is in the future, and you can't do the minimum .
 Russia is one of the world's most popular countries to live in Europe . Russia is the country where Russia is based . Russia has the largest population in the world, with more than 80% of its population .
 From now on, this cooperation will be strictly “European,’e.e. rational and pragmatic. However, from now, this will be “rational and pragmatic,”e.
 Russia will act in its national interests and firmly uphold them, as with any other equal partner . Russia will also uphold its own interests, as well as any otherequal partner .
 We will leave our emotions and feelings of kinship out of it, as we proceed to build our relationship in a new environment . We'll leave our feelings of kinship out of our relationship, as they proceed to building our relationship .
Gas transit through Ukraine has been on our agenda for a long time . Of course, gas transit through the Ukraine has also been on the agenda for years .
 According to the agreements reached in Brussels, Ukraine must pay off $3. billion of the $5 billion it owes to Gazprom before the end of 2014 and prepay in the future .
 Ukraine will enjoy a discount of $100 per 1,000 cubic metres from 1 November 2014 to 31 March 2015 . The price of Russian gas for Ukraine in November and December will be $378 per 1.000 cubic metre .
 In early December, Naftogaz paid $378 million as an advance payment for 1 billion cubic metres of gas . In December, the company paid a total of $378million as a advance payment .
The EU understood the threat Ukraine posed to the transit of Russian gas to Europe . The EU understood that Ukraine posed the threat.
 The terms of future cooperation will be the subject of negotiations and depend on Kiev’s strict adherence to the payment schedule . The terms will be subject of talks.
 Another brick in the wall being erected by the Ukrainian authorities are their plans to introduce visa regulations with Russia . Another brick is also being erected in the Ukraine .
 The decline in remittances sent home from Ukrainians working in Russia will hurt. The decline will hurt, says one Ukrainian worker .
 As of today, there are almost 400,000 highly skilled Ukrainian professionals who hold work permits or patents in Russia . There are also more than 300,000 Ukrainian professionals with work permits and patents .
Official statistics don’t provide the full picture given our close ties and open borders with Ukraine . These are the official statistics.
Experts say about 6 million Ukrainians are employed seasonally in Russia . About 6 million people are employed in Russia.
Over 4 million Ukrainians have entered Russia since 1 January 2014 alone . Over 4 million people have entered the country since January 2014 .
 Russia is a second home to them – a place of family, friends, and work, including seasonal jobs .
 eastern Ukraine works for Russia, while western Ukraine works in Russia . It’s like the saying, eastern Ukraine worked for Russia. It”s like a saying,Eastern Ukraine works to Russia, but western Ukraine does for Russia .
 Perhaps a dash of cold political and economic pragmatism is what our countries needed in the years following the collapse of the Soviet Union .
After all the hardships and losses, we have a chance to build truly businesslike and mutually advantageous relations . Now, after all the setbacks and losses. Now, we are building a truly business-like, mutually advantageous relationship .