 U.S. President Barack Obama, through his chief agent on Ukraine, Victoria Nuland, had imposed upon Ukraine, by means of an extraordinarily violent coup in February 2014 . It appears that there is realistic hope for an end to the brutal, far-right, regime that Obama
 There were signs that none of the three leading Presidential candidates in Ukraine’s upcoming March 31st election would veer far off the coup-installed regime’'s hard-right path, that has changed drastically in recent days .
 He was tactfully tactfully, so as not to be killed by the racist anti-Russians who had carried out the coup on behalf of Obama . He rejected the constant refrain by Petro Poroshenko and Yulia Tymoshenko that Ukraine must invade and conquer Crimea .
 The far-right were passionate about restoring Crimea to Ukraine . It had been starting in 1954, and up till the coup in 2014 .
 U.S. President Barack Obama was steadfast in his support of Ukraine's far-right, to the extent even of overriding his Secretary of State John Kerry . Kerry ordered Poroshenko to stop promising Ukrainians that he would return to Ukraine .
 Obama sided with Kerry’s subordinate, Nuland, against Kerry, and told Poroshenko that invading Crimea and Donbass would be okay . Obama sided then with Kerry's subordinate,Nuland.
 Zelensky was now saying that the restoration to Ukraine of the two rejectionist territories would require a change-of-government in Russia . Zelenski is now saying the restoration would need a change of government in Russia and a change in the residents of those two former Ukrainian regions .
 He tactfully avoided noting that neither condition would be possible anytime soon, and probably never . He tactly avoided saying neither condition will be possible soon .
 Any Russian Presidential candidate who would repudiate Putin’s support of those rejectionists couldn’t stand any chance of being elected as a President of Russia . Zelensky knows this; but, perhaps, Ukraine”s voters don’T, and he needs their
 Zelensky himself had been endorsed on 21 February 2019 by NATO’s Atlantic Council .
There is now immense pressure from the EU against the U.S. regime's insistence on Ukraine's conquest of those two former Ukrainian territories . The EU is now under immense pressure.
 Zelensky is at the very least pretending to be decent. But now, with his clear break away from Kolomoyskyi’s political record, he is pretending to have a decent record .
 Zelenskiy is the only leading candidate who is against invading Crimea and Donbass . The EU and even NATO are clearly coming out against the virtually unanimous policy of the United States Congress to push Ukraine toward outright war against Russia .
 The present international trend is toward a break-up of the Western Alliance . The current trend is towards a break up of the West Alliance .
 The tensions toward ending NATO are increasing, regardless of what the outcome of Ukraine’s Presidential election turns out to be . There is bipartisan, near-100%, support in the U.S. Congress for that anti-Russia policy .
 This entry was posted in General and tagged fascism, neofeudalism, New Nobility, Obama, propaganda, Russia, Trump, Ukraine .