 A Challenge for Our Democracies report by the Policy Planning Staff and the Institute for Strategic Research .
 The Policy Planning Staff, known as CAPS, created in 1973, reports to the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs .
 CAPS produces trans-disciplinary and forward-looking analyses of mediumand long-term developments in the international arena for the benefit of the French Foreign Minister and French authorities .
 It also proposes foreign policy recommendations and strategic options drawn from its own analysis and interactions with the world of think tanks and academic research in the field of international relations .
 The Institute for Strategic Research, created in 2009, is the research institute of the Ministry for the Armed Forces .
 IRSEM's primary mission is to promote French research on defense and security issues . IRSEM is composed of around 40 people, including civilians and military personnel .
 CAPS and IRSEM each produce independent analyses that do not constitute official positions . The analyses are not official positions, they are independent analyses .
 The authors of the report are only those of the authors . The French government is in no way a fortiori, the French government .
 A Challenge for Our Democracies is a report by the Policy Planning Staff of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs . The report was published by the Institute for Strategic Research.
 The evolution of the Russian approach .53 The ‘newgeneration warfare’ .55 “Information warfare” .57 b. The “Newgeneration Warfare’’s’ ‘Information warfare.’
Users’ awareness of the risks and challenges of information manipulation will be raised .
 Contain the dissemination and impact of information manipulation campaigns .148 4.4.4 .148 .148.
 Our investigation is the product of an awareness of the existential danger that information manipulation poses to our democracies .
 Second, the attempted interference in the 2017 French presidential election, captured French attention . French attention and demonstrated the importance of studying this subject .
 In September 2017, acting on our own initiative, we decided to set up a joint working group . It brought together members of the Policy Planning Staff of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs .
 The purpose of this working group was to explore the possibility of creating an inter-agency task force to combat information manipulation . Initially, the purpose of the working group had been to explore possibility of a task force .
 This group gave itself the task studying the underlying problem, its causes, its consequences and the solutions that can be brought to bear . But, above all, this group gave themselves the task of studying the problem .
 This working group was intended to respond to the inherently interdisciplinary nature of information manipulation, which lies at the crossroads between international relations and war studies .
 intelligence studies, media studies, social psychology and social psychology are included in intelligence studies .
 This working group was designed to study the problem from an international perspective . It took into account the transnational nature of information manipulation, which transcends sovereignty and individual legal systems .
 The issue of information manipulation is universal. While certain cases are more well-known than others, the issue is universal . The issue is more common than others .
 It is an issue that affects civil society as well as the governments of many States . It is not only in Europe and North America, but also in Asia, in the Middle East, in Africa and in Latin America .
 Each case is different and is tailored to fit different target audiences . Information manipulation is also diverse in nature and is different in nature .
 It is important to distinguish between exogenous manipulations, which originate from outside the targeted State, and endogenous manipulations. It is also important to differentiate between the exogenous manipulation and endogenous manipulation .
 We must distinguish between attempts that are caused by state actors and those caused by nonstate actors . We must also distinguish between state actors' attempts and attempts by non state actors .
 The report will focus on the study of information manipulation orchestrated by foreign States, or in other words, foreign interferences .
 We produced a dozen internal memos within the relevant ministries and departments, a published research paper 1 . We also organized several public events including a seminar cycle at the IRSEM .
 The Foreign Minister’s closing speech is the longest and most detailed French official statement on the subject of information manipulation to date .
 In his speech, the Minister mentioned the present report, which was then in the making, and is the principal result of our research .
 Report does not and should not be considered as reflecting an official position of the French government. It must be noted that this report does not reflect a government position .
 CAPS and IRSEM enjoy a degree of autonomy within their respective ministries . CAPS, IRSEM and CAPS enjoy autonomy within the respective ministries.
 The 2016 U.S. and 2017 French elections shed a critical light on this phenomenon . The 2016 United States and 2016 French elections have shed an important light on the phenomenon .
In some cases, the impact of information manipulation is sometimes called into question . The impact of such manipulation is often called intoquestion .
In order to identify what actually constitutes information manipulation. They require in-depth examination in order to find out what actually is manipulation .
 The latter term is INFORMATION MANIPULATION 12 understood as the intentional and massive dissemination of false or biased news for hostile political purposes . The second term is Information Manipulation 12 .
 The report proceeds as follows. Working off of this definition of information manipulation and drawing on our numerous interviews and reviewing the abundant literature on the subject .
 The report explores the causes of information manipulation, which exist partly at the level of the individual . The report also explores the reasons behind information manipulation .
After analyzing each of these causes, we then identify the beneficiaries of these activities .e.e. The actors carrying out information manipulation are identified .
 We focus specifically on States that manipulate information outside their territory or, in other words, who interfere in the internal affairs of other States .
 We also explore information manipulation in regions other than the post-Soviet space, Europe and North America . We focus on the Middle East, Africa and Latin America .
 The "Macron Leaks" failed to achieve their intended purpose, says John Sutter . Sutter: They stand apart from recent history of election meddling precisely because they failed .
 It is important to understand why and to draw lessons from this isolated incident . It is also important to draw Lessons from thisisol incident .
 We identify future challenges in Russian "information warfare" and possible future scenarios . We also identify future trends in Russian “information warfare’s” and potential future scenarios.
 We propose 50 recommendations operating on the assumption that information manipulation will remain a problem in the future . We also suggest 50 recommendations for the future. They say it will constitute a long-term challenge for our democracies .
 In the face of this challenge, democracies must provide a participatory, liberal response that respects fundamental rights, says David Cameron .
 In closing, we anticipate some of the criticism that our recommendations will receive and note some of our responses to these objections . In closing: We expect some of these objections to our recommendations.
 Information is increasingly seen as a common good . It falls into all citizens concerned with the quality of public debate .
Civil society is duty of civil society to develop its own resilience. Above all, it is the duty of Civil Society to develop own resilience, says author .
 They should not be in the lead, but their role is still crucial, says David Cameron . They cannot afford to ignore a threat that undermines the foundations of democracy and national security .
 French and English sensationalist pamphlets (known in France as Parisian canards) of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
 Protocols of the Elders of Zion constitutes one of the first famous examples of the Protocols. The Protocols are a famous example of the Zionists' methods .
 The rise of totalitarianism served as a catalyst and the Cold War, too, had its share of well-known episodes .
 Vladimir Volkoff, Petite Histoire de la disinformation, and Ed. du Rocher, 1999. The author of the book, "Vladimir Volkoffs," is known for his work on disinformation .
 clarifying the terminology is an essential prerequisite to our analysis. For this reason, clarifying this terminology is a key part of our analysis .
In this introduction, we will review the existing terminology and then justify our decision to use the term “information manipulation’s” The term is best suited to the context, we believe . In this introduction.
 Our goal is both to define the terms of the debate and to demonstrate the importance of this issue . We want to show the effectiveness of and the challenges posed by these kinds of manipulation .
 “Fake news’ is the most commonly used expression, even in French . It is sometimes translated into “fausses informations ” (false information) Although it might be more accurate to speak of falsified, counterfeit, counterfeit information .
 Soviet Bloc Intelligence and its AIDS Disinformation Campaign.
 The term was popularized in 1999 by The Daily Show, a satirical American show that tampers with information and news for comedic purposes .
 This first generation of fake news, a humoristic one, lasted for around fifteen years .
 The term has become so overused that it is not uncommon, even for certain heads of State, to use it for all news that they dislike . The notion of “political warfare,’ which applies to all non-military and non-lethal operations, is simply too broad
 These terms entail a militarization of information and of the academic literature devoted to this phenomenon . These terms are used in academic literature.
 "hybrid warfare" refers to war waged across the full spectrum, from clandestine operations to nuclear intimidation . This critique also extends to “hybrid Warfare,” a widespread but confusing notion, which in reality refers to a full spectrum .
 hybrid warfare associates non-kinetic elements with kinetic ones . “Propaganda,” defined as “an attempt to influence the opinion and behavior of society in order for people to adopt a particular opinion and behaviour,’ * 11 is also too vague .
 The term propaganda implies the defense of an alternative world view. Above all, it does not apply to our subject, says the author .
 ‘Influence’ and “public diplomacy’ are also very broad and, above all, they are not in themselves problematic . This is an element that the current observed phenomena, which is centered on the denigration of others,appear to lack .
 The European Commission, A Multi-Dimensional Approach to Disinformation, Report of the Independent High Revel Group on Fake News and Online Disinformation .
 The distinction proves useful when responding to the line of argument that views RT and Sputnik as merely the Russian equivalents of mainstream media .
 The intention is rarely clear, 13 and can only be assumed . The problem, of course, remains that the intention is often unclear .
 This definition of the subject is probably the least bad from among the most commonly used terms . This definition is likely the most common use of terms .
 It is too broad in the sense that it includes benign information that lacks a hostile intention . It's too broad. It's not clear what the information is about .
At the same time, the concept of disinformation is too narrow because of the problems that we encounter are not all, strictly speaking, forms of disinformation .
 Sometimes information is not false, but simply exaggerated, biased or presented in a very emotional way, such as in a tabloid . Sometimes it is not true, but just exaggerated, and presented in an emotional way .
 These processes do not all imply a dichotomy between truth and falsehood. These processes don't all imply the dichotomy.
 Most of the time, the manipulator does not position himself relative to the truth . He or she is simply trying to produce an effect, he says .
 Some experts, including the European Group of Experts, define disinformation as “false, inaccurate, or 12,’s .
 Terms for Problematic Information, Data & Society Research Institute, 2017, 4.3-4.5-4 .
 A report by the Irish government and a report from the Belgian Group of Experts. 14 — a definition that has been reused in various publications .
 To us, it seems preferable to use the generic term, “manipulation,” because it is more inclusive, we say . To us.
 The notion of a “coordinated campaign” refers less to an orchestrated operation with certain actors giving orders and others carrying them out . The notion is less to the idea of an orchestrated campaign with certain actor giving orders .
Political intent behind information manipulation campaigns is a defining criterion of the phenomenon .
 It doesn't mean that the field is limited to political or national affairs . It does not mean that it's not only political or National affairs .
 The campaign may seek to undermine the legitimacy of an electoral process, ruin the reputation of a large corporation abroad or create a hostile environment for an external military operation .
 We are de facto excluding the numerous information manipulation attempts whose intention is neither political nor hostile from the scope of this study . We are also de facto excluded the numerous Information manipulation attempts .
 We must not overemphasize the distinction, as we sometimes do, between commercial manipulation and political manipulation, says John Sutter .
 The former may also be used to make money, for the media, digital platforms and even 14 . The former has real political consequences, whether intended or not .
 The European Commission, A Multi-Dimensional Approach to Disinformation, op. cit. cit . The Commission has published a book on the topic of the European Commission .
 In other words, there is an overlap between political and economic interests . In other terms, there's an overlap in political and financial interests .
 We have been advocating for the use of the expression “information manipulation’ in our internal memoranda since the beginning of 2018 .
 In 2013, the World Economic Forum listed online “misinformation’ as one of the ten trends to watch in 2014' It proved to be premonitory, given the non-negligible role that information manipulation played in the Ukrainian crisis .
 All the polls confirm that it is now a major concern for populations, journalists, NGOs and governments around the world . The poll confirms that this type of manipulations can cause to society .
 There is also a common tendency to underestimate the effectiveness of information manipulation, and thus the importance of the subject .
 This tendency is less pronounced in countries that are traditionally more aware of the issue . Central, Eastern and Northern 16. The tendency is more pronounced in those countries .
 The city of Veles, in Macedonia, had become a breeding ground for fake news . The youth had, sometimes without any political motivation, de facto supported Trump in the American campaign .
 The operation was discovered they were no longer able to sell to Google . Today, some of them continue to mass produce fake news, but they earn much less .
 European Commission conducted online public consultation on fake news and disinformation online from November 2017 to February 2018 .
 countries who believe they are insulated are susceptible to underestimating the threat . France in the so-called “Macron Leaks’ affair’s” affair has been targeted .
 Strong persuasion is then necessary, sometimes within government itself, and in public debates, to bring about the realization that this is no minor issue . "Strong persuasion" is then needed, sometimes in government itself .
 Information manipulation has numerous, very real effects, according to experts . In order to do so, it could be helpful to state that information manipulation has many, real effects .
 In the last few years alone, it has interfered in the democratic processes of multiple states, including the presidential elections of the world’s major powers, and destabilized large digital companies .
 Information manipulation has divided public opinion, and sowed doubt as to the veracity of the information provided by the media . It reinforced a rejection of traditional media.
 It played a role in various diplomatic crises . It has also contributed to the saturation of digital spaces with troll communities that harass and intimidate internet users .
 On a smaller scale, in only two months in India, dozens of people were lynched after false information circulated about them .
 Authorities temporarily cut access to some online platforms . As a result, authorities decided to temporarily cut online access to certain platforms .
22 is an indication of both the gravity and the effectiveness of information manipulation . The fact that many States are mobilizing and civil society is launching numerous initiatives to protect itself, says the author .
 Annie Gowen and Max Bearak, “Fake News on Facebook Fans the Flames of Hate Against the Rohingya in Burma,’ The Washington Post, 8 December 2017.
 May be Indians should not be allowed to use WhatsApp,’ India Today, 2 July 2018 . May be Indian should not use WhatsApp .
Mexican Carlos Merlo claims to control millions of bots and dozens of sites . See for example the case of Mexican CarlosMerlo .
 Victory Lab provides services such as “managing bots, containment, cyberattacks, and the creation of fake news sites” at prices ranging from 49,000 pesos to one million pesos per .
 Nevertheless, the assessment of the effectiveness of information manipulation remains a challenge . See Ben 23 INFORMATION MANIPULATION 24 .
 During and after the Cold War, U.S. intelligence agencies commissioned meticulous surveys in an attempt to accurately measure the permeability of targeted groups to Moscow's disinformation campaigns .
 Information manipulation can also occur through images, which are much more difficult to analyze automatically . Another limitation on the methodology is the reliance on textual analysis, which can also be used to manipulate images .
 Facebook is one of the most popular social networks on the internet . It is crucial that attention be drawn to the role of platforms like Facebook .
 Disinformation through images also raises the issue of manipulation aimed at children . Disinformation also raises issue of manipulating children .
 Measuring the effectiveness of information manipulation is almost impossible because the link between a broadcast message and subsequent behavior involves too many other variables . Measuring effectiveness ofInformation manipulation is impossible because of too many variables .
 We can distinguish the impact in the digital environment, which is relatively measurable and quantifiable, from the broader effect, which can merely be hypothesized .
 The Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, Medium.com, is based in Mexico . It is the first time the Atlantic Council has hosted a digital forensic research lab .
 The Special Reports S was issued by the intelligence community by the U.S. Information Agency .
 The State Department and the CIA consider social science studies an essential tool for the implementation of their respective strategies . The CIA and the State Department also consider such studies .
 The Office of Research and Intelligence produces dozens of “Special S reports,” and collaborates with many departments and academic research laboratories . The office also collaborates.
 We know that it works, we have seen it at work abroad and also in France . We have also seen it in France and in France.
 Democratic process is profoundly distorted because of the fake news, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "The indignation that stems from this fake news is explosive and prevails over reflection" Zelizer says .
 Anthropological gamble made by those who manipulate these channels. And that is the somewhat anthropological gamble, says the author .
 The question is whether information manipulation can succeed in generating new opinions or merely reinforce existing ones . It's not clear if information manipulation is used to generate new opinions .
 manipulation does not generate new opinions, but sows doubt and confusion and, sometimes, facilitates action . From our investigation, it appears that manipulation doesn't generate new opinion, but it sows confusion .
 Sometimes information manipulation transforms a passive conviction into an active conviction . The process is similar to the process of radicalization, author says .
 Information manipulation may tempt heads of government to infringe upon civil liberties . Information manipulation could tempt government leaders to infringen on civil liberties.
 This ultimately contributes to the deepening of divisions within society, says the author . This is because of a growing divide in society, he says .
 It is important for the State to properly monitor its efforts against disinformation, so as to respect civil liberties .
 It appears essential to have the means to conduct independent research into the science of information and communication . It will allow for the evaluation of the reception of information manipulation campaigns .
In the meantime, immediate action is necessary, given the very real effect of these phenomena, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says.
Fighting effectively against information manipulation requires first and foremost to identify the roots of the problem . Fighting effectively against Information manipulation requires a strong focus on the root of it .
 There are cognitive weaknesses and a crisis of knowledge that makes us particularly vulnerable to information manipulation . There are also cognitive weaknesses.
 There are also collective causes, related to the dynamics of social life, a crisis of trust in institutions, and the crisis of the press .
 The internet was supposed to liberate us, but we instead find ourselves confined by it .
After analyzing each of these causes, we will identify the beneficiaries,e.e. The actors conducting information manipulation will focus on state actors .
 Information manipulation is particularly prolific in times of war . It benefits all the more from the “despecification’s of war, that is, from the increasing ambiguity between war and times of peace .
 Marc Bloch on the causes of fake news: “The masses are aroused by false stories.’ The masses are arousing byfalse stories.
 Items of false news, in all the multiplicity of their forms, have filled the life of humanity .
 The historian who seeks to understand the origin and development of false news, disappointed by the reading of documents, will naturally think of turning to psychologists .
 The error propagates itself, grows, and ultimately survives only on one condition . That it finds a favorable cultural broth in the society where it is spreading .
People unconsciously express all their prejudices, hatreds, fears, all their strong emotions . Through it, people unconsciously express their prejudices and hatreds .
 The events of the last few years can elucidate those relating to false news are at the forefront . Only great collective states of mind will have the power to transform a misperception into a legend .
 For four and a half years, everywhere, in every country, at the front as in the rear, we saw them being born and proliferating . We saw them be born, proliferating, and they were born, and proliferated .
 They troubled minds, sometimes overstimulating them and sometimes sapping them of their courage . The troubled minds are often overstimulated by their troubled minds .
 Cicero and Quintilian have more disciples in editorial bureaux than we commonly believe . An item of false news always arises from preexisting collective representations .
 It's fortuitous only in appearance, or, more correctly, all that is fortuitous about it is the initial incident . It's not the first incident that sets the imagination in motion .
 This setting in motion occurs only because imaginations have already been prepared and are secretly fermenting . But this setting inmotion occurs only as imaginations are already prepared and fermenting.
 An event or misperception does not go in the direction where all minds are already tending can at most constitute the origin of an individual error, not a popular and widespread instance of false news .
 Bloch's text is worth revisiting because it shows the extent to which the fundamental elements of the “fake news’s’ debate have not changed .
 “modern propaganda is based on scientific analyses of psychology and sociology. Causes at the individual level,’s cause at theindividual level, says author .
Disinformation exploits a natural intellectual laziness, says John Sutter . Disinformation is characterized by the failure to systematically exercise critical thinking, he says .
 Conspiracy theorists demand that we provide evidence that their theories are incorrect and far-fetched, which is contrary to journalistic standards .
 "reasoning has not evolved in order to establish reality, but only as a means to win against our adversaries," says Pascal Engel . "Reasoning is not a way of establishing reality," he says .
 A recent study showed that fake news spreads faster than accurate news for psychological reasons . The study was conducted by researchers at the University of New York .
 Real news is often not that new; it is often merely a confirmation of what we already know or suspect .
 It merely adds to the accumulation of knowledge, and is quickly forgotten . It merely Adds to the collection of knowledge .
 Fake news is written to surprise and to go against the doxa. By contrast, fake news surprises are written to shock and go against doxa .
 It's written in a spectacular, emotional and often alarmist style, playing on fear and anxiety . It's not as prioritized in the realm of real news, but it's a great story .
 It is therefore our cognitive biases that contribute in large part to the spread of fake news. It is also our cognitive bias that contribute to the fake news spread .
 Pascal Engel: ‘Si on ne peut pas prouver que le monstre du Loch Ness n’existe pas, c’est qu’il existe...’
 Soroush Vosoughi, Deb Roy and Sinan Aral, “The Spread of true and false news online.” Science, 9 March 2018, 1146-1151 .
 An epistemological crisis Information manipulation is only one of the manifestations of a much larger phenomenon that integrates pseudoscience and conspiracy theories .
 Some countries have been particularly affected, such as Kazakhstan and Indonesia .
 Stephane Foucart and David Larousserie, “Alerte mondiale a la fausse science,” Le Monde, 19 July 2018 .
 How we surrendered to conspiracy theories, quack medicine, bogus science and fake history . Atlantic, 2008.
 The Journal of Applied Research in Memory in Memory and Cognition 6:4, 2017, 360 .
 The third is deconstructionism, an approach which seeks to unveil unsaid things . Derrida, according to the writings of Derrid, seeks to unearth unsaidThings .
 All in all, the contemporary epistemological crisis lies in the wrong interpretation, the author says . "All in all," the author writes .
 The rightwing is most often the source of fake and biased news, it is due to the fact that progressive citizens generally consult a larger variety of sources of information . Conservatives have a stronger tendency to consult sources and networks that conform with their political opinions, and tend to
 "There is a view, which I shall call the conspiracy theory, which holds that the explanation of any social phenomenon consists in finding out who is interested in the occurrence of this phenomenon.
 conspiracy theories feed mostly on crises and violent events . For this reason, conspiracy theories are inevitable and feed mostly onto crises and violence .
 A small minority of the population is ready to take violent action . But others can have destabilizing effects, even if they are only shared by a very small percentage of the people .
Radicalism and world views fueled by conspiracy theories often go hand-in-hand .
 conspiracy theorists are neither foolish nor irrational but simply lack good sources of information . Most conspiracy theorists don't know what to do with their information .
 The theories they defend are unjustified in light of all the information available, but not according to the sources they consult, which make these arguments seem plausible . The theories are not based on the information they consult .
 The cause of the problem is the epistemic poverty of their environments, says the author . The cause is the "epidemic poverty" of their environment, he says .
 Conspiracy theorists pose a particular difficulty because they are highly resistant to debunking, especially if attempted by the State . The State says it is trying to debunk the theory .
 conspiracy theories hold that certain people have disproportionate power with which to conceal their actions . These attempts can become absorbed into the narrative of the plot, says the author .
 We are experiencing a crisis of knowledge, an epistemological crisis, says author . But this is nothing new, he says, and it's nothing new .
 The Journal of Political Philosophy, 17:2, 2009, 219. Causes and Cures,’s Journal of political Philosophy, is published in the journal of political philosophy .
 Never before before today has the distinction between episteme and doxa was so threatened .
 The era in which we currently live is very different from the epistemological crises of the past . The era of the present is different from that of the previous era .
 We find ourselves not in an ideological era, in which we replace one truth with another, but rather in a skeptical or relativist era . We question the very existence of truth, says author .
 Oxford dictionaries declared the term “post-truth’ to be the word of the year . The Oxford dictionary says the term is the word for the year.
 The post-truth imposes no particular truth and it is precisely in this way that it sows confusion and doubt . The post of truth imposes no specific truth, it's precisely in the way that the truth sows doubt and confusion .
 A survey of more than 33,000 people in 28 countries in November 2017 showed that distrust of institutions was on the rise . Media ranking first in terms of the least trusted institution, while trust in social media platforms was decreasing . Trust in journalism was increasing, but trust in journalism is increasing
 70% of the population reported feeling worried about the weaponization of fake news . In addition, almost 70% said they were worried about fake news.
 It speaks of the treachery of elected officials, the media’s appropriation of public discourse and a number of 21 . The media's appropriation of the public discourse is one of the worst examples of treachery .
 Sabrina Tanquerel, “Quand l’exigence de verite devient secondaire’s.’ The Conversation, 12 February 2017.
 Sebastian Dieguez, Total Bullshit lAu cceurde la post-verite .
 The depreciation of the truth is one of the manifestations of this crisis of confidence, says David Frum . The devaluation of truth propagates the crisis ofconfidence, Frum says .
 From the United States to the Philippines, hatred for the establishment seems to be shared by all populist outsiders, real or purported .
 This tendency includes phenomena such as the erection of walls (Israel, the United States, Hungary, and the imposition of refugee quotas, etc. This tendency also includes the expansion of gated urban communities, the creation of new cities, the impositionof refugee quotas .
 The crisis of the economic model is not new and is largely the result of the decrease in press advertising revenues . It is largely due to the competition it first faced from the advent of television, and then later on with the invention of the internet .
 Many agencies and news organizations have had to lay off journalists, doll out severance payments and terminate certain news outlets . Many agencies have been forced to layoff journalists and terminate some news outlets.
 This precarious situation renders the press even more vulnerable to information manipulation, says the author . "There are less people and less time to detect them," he says .
 There is room for hope in this case too, namely because these excesses generate fatigue within the population, which prompts more serious media outlets to demonstrate their added value .
 The internet became more of an accelerant in the last decade with the rise of social media . The internet, in particular, became even more of a accelerant.
 The digital revolution has changed the playing field in the last fifteen years . The accessibility of broadband and the development of social media have changed the game .
 Social media has become omnipresent in the lives of billions of individuals . Social media is now omnipresent.
 Social networks are used as a source of information by 62% of American adults and 48% of Europeans . Social networks used by 62 per cent of Americans and 48 per cent by Europeans .
 Google and Facebook now account for more than 70% of web traffic . Other sites, including news organizations, get most of their audience from these platforms .
 Web 2.0, blogs and citizen journalism have brought many to believe in the emancipation of the people from their States . The growth of social networks has led to the rise of citizen journalism .
 The Snowden Affair revealed that States had not renounced their strong grip over society . This optimism was followed by disappointment several years later .
 "The spread of digital publishing technologies has made it easier to create false stories," says Ben Nimmo .
 It took the KGB nearly four years to spread the rumor that the AIDS virus was created by the Pentagon .
 As of 2010, search results in Google are not the same for all users . They depend on the preferences of the user as deduced from his or her search history and geolocation .
 Originally, these algorithms served a commercial purpose by offering the user results as close to their expectations as possible . Originally, the algorithms served the commercial purpose of offering the results to users .
Internet users cocooned in closed cognitive spaces where they were only exposed to content that supported their beliefs . But this practice also had the perverse effect of cocooning internet users “in closed cognitive space’s’S”
 The problem is that for most users, these platforms are the “gatekeepers of the web’s web, the access routes to the rest of the internet . The problem for most is that they are the "gatekeepers" of the Web .
Personalization algorithms close people in cocoons to confirm prejudices rather than confront them with prejudices of others .
We do not like to be contradicted, and these platforms’ content-creating algorithms ensure that we are not, by providing us with information that bolsters our opinions. As already stated, we do not want to be contradicting, and this is the case .
 The digital revolution may actually be pushing us to close us back in on ourselves .
 The French Digital Council has contributed to the analysis of French digital data . We thank the General Secretariat of the French digital Council for its contribution .
 Katharine Viner, the Editor-in-Chief of the Guardian, demonstrated how this occurred in the case of Brexit .
 Users relay information posted by their close contacts without necessarily checking or even considering whether that information is true . This also creates the phenomenon of “cascading information:’s users relay information.
 The more the information is shared, the more we tend to trust it and the less we use critical thinking to assess it . The more we trust it, the less our critical thinking.
 This phenomenon favors the most interesting or scandalous content because that is most likely to make us react, regardless of truth or accuracy . This phenomenon favours most interesting and scandalous material because that's most likely.
 This model contributes to the polarization of public opinion by reducing the visibility of nuanced content, which is considered to be less engaging . This model has been used in the past to create a more nuanced version of the media .
 Platforms invest huge amounts of money in studies of what it is that attracts our attention and produces weaknesses of will . Platforms spend huge amount of money on studies.
 journalistic ethics, the traceability of sources and the verification of facts are sacrificed in order to make something go viral . For all of these reasons, journalistic ethics are sacrificed .
 This race to increase advertising revenues and to attract investors corrupts press companies at the expense of serious journalism . This race is to increase the number of page views, to increase ad revenues and attract investors .
 It encourages lurid titles, sensationalism, clickbait to the detriment of the truth . It encourages the use of sensationalism to make headlines .
 The vulnerabilities identified in the previous pages constitute fertile ground for information manipulation . The vulnerability identified in previous pages constitutes fertile ground to manipulate information .
 These vulnerabilities are used by actors who perceive them as opportunities to defend their strategic interests . These vulnerabilities can be used by actor to defend strategic interests.
 Katharine Viner, ‘How technology disrupted the truth,’ The Guardian, 12 July 2016, is published in The Guardian .
 The Internet tricked you into thinking Trump wouldn’t win, says Matthew Hughes . See also Matthew Hughes, “How the Internet tricked us into thinkingTrump wouldn't win.
 We will begin by examining other scenarios of information manipulation . However, we will also look at other scenarios .
 The report concerns itself with non-state actors primarily in their role as a relay, or sometimes a stimulus, of information manipulation by States .
 Information manipulation techniques are also used by non-state actors acting on their own behalf to promote their own agendas .
 The case of nationalist and/or populist movements within our Western democracies is a separate category, writes David Frum .
 Those efforts stemmed from a different logic as the agenda of these movements overlapped with those of state actors . Those efforts stem from different logic.
 As the so-called “Macron Leaks’ will be the subject of a separate chapter . We will first consider the examples of the first two instances .
 In 2005, Ayman al-Zawahiri said, “we are in a battle and more than half of this battle is in the media.’s media, he said .
 The propaganda used by ISIS is multidimensional, multi-vectored and carefully targeted . The propaganda is multi-vigorous and carefully targeted .
 It is based on a simple, conspiratorial vision of a Manichean world to explain our social lives . It is multidimensional firstly because it's based on the conspiratorial view of a manichean.
 It involves BBC-type reports presented by John Cantlie, a hostage-reporter, speaking about the good living conditions in Mosul .
 It further includes theology courses, based on extremist readings of religious texts .
 ISIS propaganda pairs speeches that are supposedly truth-oriented with more emotional elements . This combination allows the group to acquire discourse credibility and conquer ‘the hearts and minds of their disciples’
 The group communicates through its media center Al-Hayat 4 ' and the “jihadosphere’ The group has experienced significant development since the official proclamation of the caliphate in 2014 .
 ISIS claimed responsibility for the attacks of November 2015 in Paris via an official written statement . It was also repeated in song to a much younger audience .
 In a video published by the Islamic State in January 2015, the reporter proposed a tour of the city .
 The video appeared to be a direct response to an article by The Guardian . The article stated that the residents of Mosul lacked water, food and electricity .
 John Cantlie presented the city as pleasant despite the conflict, repeating that there were no power outages in the area .
 Kierat Ranautta-Sambhi, in NATO Stratcom COE and the King’s College London, Fake News .
 These audiences are subject to meticulous targeting that seeks to exploit the social, economic, political, political and cultural vulnerabilities of certain communities . The audience is subject to the targeting of these audiences .
 The multiplication of memes and videos suggests that young people are the principal target of the so-called Islamic State conspiracy theories .
 ISIS offers these vulnerable young people answers to the challenges that come with entering the professional world and building an adult identity .
 The problem arose in 2012 and more recently in 2017, during the gubernatorial elections in Jakarta, which sparked numerous disinformation campaigns attempting to set Muslims against Indonesians of Chinese origin .
 One of the main targets was the then governor, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, who was accused of blasphemy . He was the first Christian of Chinese origin to hold this post .
 The following year, in West Kalimantan, an innocent man was beaten to death by a mob following a false rumor that a child kidnapping scheme had taken place . A more sophisticated one as it used the police logo, it used a police logo .
 By the time the group was arrested in August 2017, its members had already succeeded in exacerbating anti-Chinese sentiment .
 The president has since declared “war on fake news and civil society has launched a number of initiatives to detect fake news . TurnBackHoax is among the initiatives launched by the president .
 The government has also created a National Cyber Encryption Agency to counter religious extremism and fake news online . The agency is also trying to combat religious extremism.
 States in the face of social movements launched by or with the aid of digital platforms, in particular Twitter and Facebook, have had two successive reactions .
 They initially reacted with a strategy of information scarcity, by censuring content and blocking access . Many examples from the early 2000s in China, North Africa and the Middle East.
 authoritarian governments quickly became aware of the potential for these technologies to surveil and influence their own citizens . These authoritarian governments soon became aware that these technologies could be used to spy on citizens .
 Second generation in internet control of the population, in contrast to the first, actually benefitted from the overabundance of information .
 The NGO denounced the actions of 30 governments (compared to only 23 countries denounced in the 49-county list. The NGO says 30 governments were denounced in 49 countries .
 How Governments Are Deploying Disinformation as Tart of Broader Digital Harassment Campaigns, Institute for the Future, 2018, 8.8. How Governments are Deployingdisinformation as tart of Broading Digital Har harassment Campaigns .
 The case of the United States was peculiar in that it revealed that another State, Russia, had used manipulation to advance its interests and influence abroad .
 governments manipulate the information given to their own people in order to strengthen and solidify their power . In most cases, the information is given to the local population .
 President of Freedom House says control techniques developed by China and Russia have become a “global phenomenon. They use control techniques such as those developed by Russia and China .
Michael Riley, Lauren Etter and Bibhudatta Pradhan. See also Michael Riley and Lauren Etters .
 Bots are waging a dirty war in Mexican Social media, says media.com.com .
 Inside, the Secret World of the BJP’s Digital Army, Juggernaut Publication, 2016 .
 The object of this report is not to identify all the information manipulation implemented by States against their own population . It is to analyze those attempts aimed at foreign populations targeted, above all, at our democracies .
 The Guardian: How governments endorse hate campaigns against critics . The Guardian, 12 July 2017.
 Manipulation targeted at a foreign population. This category concerns far fewer States than the other .
 This does not mean that only these two States manipulate information outside of their borders . This doesn't mean, of course, that only those two states manipulate information .
 Other States also do it, or attempt to do it. But with much less success and far fewer means in the international arena than the two mentioned above .
 There is no “Russophobia’s” observation that all recent interference attempts in referenda and elections are tied, directly or indirecdy, to Russia . Russia is not afraid of interference in elections, it says .
 Our interlocutors among European authorities attribute 80% of influence efforts to Russia .
 For a number of countries that have been exposed for many years, Baltic and Scandinavian countries are exposed . Baltic and Scandinavia are among the most exposed countries .
 These States have long been the targets of information manipulation campaigns . The U.S. has been the target of information manipulating campaigns .
Until 2014, attempts to bring attention to this phenomenon were only met with indifference and irritation from the "great powers of Western Europe" until 2014 .
 Western political leaders no longer hesitate to call out Russia's actions . Western leaders are no longer hesitant to call for Russia to be punished .
 The Role and Impact of Mon-Traditional Publishers in the French Elections 2017, 19 April 2017, 18 April 2017. The Role, Impact of the Mon- traditional Publishers in France is the French elections 2017, 17 April 2017 .
Russian official doctrine is to weaken the West as will be demonstrated in the subsequent pages . These tactics have been integrated into Russian official doctrine, which is to be demonstrated .
 CSIS: We should speak about the "Kremlin" rather than "Russia" so as not to conflate the governing power with its people . To be exact, and as recommended by the CSIS, we should talk about the ‘Kremlin’
 The National Security Strategy was launched in 2012 . It is the first time it has been published in the past 12 years .
Germany challenges Russia over alleged cyberattacks . "Germany Challenges Russia"
 The other elements are of a political, diplomatic, military, economic and cultural nature . The other element is of apolitical, diplomatic and military, military and economic nature .
 A Soviet tradition Russian disinformation has a long tradition dating back to the Soviet period . It includes interviews with fake experts, counterfeit documents, retouched photos and videos .
 The first significant operation was Operation Trust, which targeted White Russians in exile . Operation Trust targeted White Russian in exile.
 The Interpreter is a project of the Institute of Modern Russia . It is based in Moscow, Russia's capital, and is located in Russia's most populous cities .
 A Minority Staff Report prepared for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate, 10 January 2018 .
 Vasili Mitrokhim was an archivist for the KGB for thirty years before going to the West in 1992 . He was anarchivist for 30 years before joining the West.
 This Soviet rumor remains popular today and is used by the Kremlin to defend itself from certain accusations . The Kremlin claims that these accusations are merely false flag operations .
Fake news of the Soviet era were stories alleging American responsibility for the 1961 putsch of French generals, the assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II in 1981, and the “creation of the AIDS virus.
 These strategies include disinformation, infiltration or manipulation of youth organizations or trade unions . The use of pro-Russian or mainstream foreign media to disseminate information .
 For a time, the White House refused to respond directly to these operations . The White House has not responded directly to the operations .
 The Reagan Administration created an inter-agency group to analyze and organize a means of response in the form of reports presented before Congress and briefings to major media outlets . It was only in 1981 that the Reagan administration created the group .
This is the sole example of a coordinated and effective response by the American institutional apparatus to the threat of Soviet influence . This is the only example of an effective response to the Russian threat .
 On April 12, 1982, KGB Director Yuri Andropov ordered all agents to take “active measures’ to prevent Ronald Reagan from being reelected .
 Moscow also launched a "massive propaganda campaign" to see Helmut Kohl defeated in the 1983 federal election in Germany .
 There is a mimetic component to the Russian approach, which draws inspiration from the latest Western communication and public relations techniques .
 Russia's Military Doctrine’s military doctrine is the subject of a new book, Point of View, 50 .
 Russian interferences have given up any pretense of ideology. The evolution of the Russian approach is a major difference with the Soviet period .
 The continuation of Soviet techniques occurred in several stages . The continuation and adaptation of Soviet technique occurred in many stages .
 Moscow observed that its narrative of the Chechnya War, from 1999 onward, was not adopted by international public opinion . The majority of the Russian population rallied around new President Putin and his stated desire to exterminate Chechen terrorism .
 Russia then worked to strengthen and redefine its tools of international influence . Russia then tried to redefine and strengthen its international influence.
 Valdai has tried a classic approach to soft power, based on attraction, by creating a club and recruiting communicators . The Valdai club was founded by former members of the Valdai community . The club is based on the success of Valdai.
 Russia Today was created in December 2005 with the aim of improving Russia's image abroad . It was to this end that Russia today was created .
 The 2008 Georgian War confirmed the weaknesses of the Russian information system . But the fruits of these efforts took time.
 Russia Today failed to influence the international public’s perception of the conflict. Despite its efforts, Russia Today fails to influence public perception of conflict .
 Peter Pomerantsev and Michael Weiss, The Menace of Unreality, op. cit. cit . 18.
 It was after this episode that the Kremlin incorporated “the protest potential of the population’ into its military doctrine . The Kremlin perceiving it as one of the most important variables in armed conflict .
In September 2012, the Kremlin closed USAID, which it described as an agent of influence . This policy advocates targeting Russians first in order to quell protests through the repression of NGOs under the law on foreign agents .
The Kremlin perceived both Euromaidan and the fall of the Yanukovych regime as serious setbacks . The Kremlin perceived the fall as serious setback .
 Moscow was a worrying signal of the success of the regime change approach,e.e. A Western-led idea. They were, for Moscow, a worrying sign of the successful regime change approaches .
 These events took place near Russian borders, and more importantly, in Ukraine . Adding to the anxiety, these events take place near Russia's borders .
 This trauma pardy explains Russia’s subsequent military intervention in Ukraine . It was first in Crimea and later in the Donbass .
 It explains the intensity of the information war waged by Russia from the start of the Ukrainian crisis . It also explains theintensity of the Russian information war .
 The Kremlin has strengthened its information offensive towards the States of the “near abroad’ and Western States . It has implemented a series of measures aimed at curbing the protest potential of the Russian population .
 Since 2016, the sophistication of these techniques has advanced with the adoption of a new information doctrine . In 2017, a strategy for the development of the information society and the creation of ‘cyberbrigades,’ the extension of the National Guard’s jurisdiction over informational
 The U.S. considers itself the victim of an information war waged by the West, especially by the United States .
 The defense of democratic and liberal values and support for civil society are seen as subversive acts whose purpose is regime change . The defense is seen as a defense of democracy and the defense of liberal values .
 The perception of Western dominance in the information field puts Russia on the defensive . The perception is based on the observation that major American and British media have much larger audiences than RT .
 No proof was provided in support of this claim, according to the electoral commission . If the central electoral commission observed these cyberattacks on the day of the vote, they did not identify any perpetrators .
 The term "Gerasimov doctrine" is common in the West, named after the Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces .
 In the twenty-first century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace .
 The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in 55 86, has grown . In 55 years, the role ofnonmilitary means has grown to be a key role in achieving political goals .
 56 many cases have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness . Many of the most powerful weapons have been used in the past .
 Russia reproduced what it thought Westerners had done during the color revolutions, the Arab Spring and Euromaidan . In Ukraine in 2014, Russia reproduced the same thing it believed Westerners did during the revolutions .
 The concept of "hybrid warfare" was first written in 2005 in the United States from the pen of a certain General James Maths, now Secretary of Defense .
 The Value of Science Is in the Foresight is published in Military-Industrial Kurier . It was translated from Russian by Robert Coalson .
 Moscow, 2010, quote in Peter Pomerantsev and Michael Weiss, The Menace of Unreality .
 The Military Academy of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia devotes an entry to this term in a glossary . The term is meant to distinguish the Russian meaning, applicable at all times, from the Western meaning .
 This confirms the Russian continuum between war and peace, on the Russian side, of their difference, compared to the Western approach . It confirms the Russians' conviction on the Russia side of their differences .
 In March 2018, several members of the Duma evoked the possibility of introducing the concept of “information war’s” into Russian legislation .
 Mikhail Degtyarev declared that “it is the continuation of the information war launched against Russia’s Russia .
First, the democratization of information through the internet, especially in democratic countries, creates fierce competition for major Russian media . First, the democracy of the internet is a key part of the Russian media's success .
 RT remains well below BBC, CNN, CNN and 92. In terms of the number of viewers, on television and even on social networks.
 Sergei Chekinov and Sergei Bogdanov, ‘Asymmetrical Actions to Maintain Russia’s Military Security,’ they say .
 Keir Giles, The Next Phase of Russian Information Warfare, NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016, is the next phase of Russian information warfare . The next phase is the NATO Strategic Communication Centre of excellence .
 Cited by Keir Giles, The Next Phase of Russian Information Warfare, op. cit., 2.3 .
 Dar’ja Rynochnova: “AerrapeB npeAAOKHA BHecra b 3aKOHOAaTeAtcTBo nomrrae ‘HH^opMaijHOHHOH BoHHH�
 This same process of democratizing information is also ambivalent and creates more relays and means of reaching certain audiences . However, this same process also creates more Relays and reaches certain audiences.
 The Kremlin does not create crises so much as it exploits existing vulnerabilities, divisions, and political or inter-community tensions . In addition, the Kremlin doesnot create crises as it exploit existing vulnerabilities .
 China The People’s Republic of China has a long history of ideological struggle and use of propaganda .
Today, this know-how is at the service of Chinese interests on a global scale . Today, this knowledge-how has been used to help Chinese interests in China .
 Beijing develops tools of influence and interference that are specifically geared towards offensive intentions . Beyond the maintenance and improvement of its image, Beijing develops a range of tools to improve its image .
 The organs of propaganda and influence are placed high up in the political hierarchy . The organs are placed in thepolitical hierarchy .
 The regime’s number five, Wang Huning, heads the “Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization,” which determines ideological content and manages its dissemination at the national and international level .
 The Confucius Institutes are the preferred relays of influence and propagation of official messages . These vectors are complemented by networks that broadcast cultural content for educational and academic purposes .
 China created a state-owned global broadcasting group called the China Global Television Network in 2016 . In the media field, China created the ChinaGlobal Television Network .
 The programs broadcast content in a coordinated manner, for the most part, provided by the Xinhua State News Agency .
 The main English-language Chinese newspapers, the People's Daily, the China Daily and the Global Times, are similarly distributed through digital media .
 In recent years, the nature of the content broadcast by these media has changed dramatically . The nature of these media's content is changing dramatically, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Chinese critiques of Western powers have become more regular and more elaborate . China’s rise to the rank of superpower and involvement in the strategic and security issues of the day .
 This is the case, for example, with the media’s treatment of the Syrian crisis . The media's treatment of Syrian crisis has been criticised by some .
 At the international level, these two bodies rely on a dense network of broadcasters and operators . Information Office of the State Council and Ministry of Foreign Affairs share supervision .
 This is part of a counter-influence attempt aimed primarily at Eastern European and African audiences . This is one of several attempts aimed at Eastern Europe and African audience .
 These operations are part of a global propaganda campaign that seeks to counter and reduce the influence of democratic, liberal values and messages . These operations have been carried out in the U.S. and Europe .
 The establishment of the Belt and Road Media Community contributes not only to promoting Chinese interests, but to countering or extinguishing the influence of external media .
 The ideological content is not only used to seduce or influence, but also to guide public opinion and interfere if needed .
 Chinese tactics are growing in number and sophistication. This proactive dimension is less aggressive than that used by Russia today, but Chinese tactics have grown in number .
 Information warfare is an integral dimension of China’s strategy of influence and intimidation . It is a key part of China's strategy of influencing and intimidation.
Chinese strategists have been working on the implementation of the “three wars’ in the field of information . Since the beginning of the 2000s, Chinese strategists are working to implement the "three wars"
 Combining the war for public opinion, psychological warfare and legal warfare, this approach is intended to control the dominant discourse and influence beliefs and perceptions . The PRC is also reducing the ability of adversaries to respond to the war .
 This strategy, which explicitly targets public opinion in democracies, exploits the vulnerabilities of open societies . This strategy is aimed at public opinion, which targets open societies, in democracies .
 The Ministry of State Security, the Ministry of Public Safety, the second department of the People’s Liberation Army and the department of international liaisons of the PLA have engaged in a similar reflection in recent years . The Central Committee of the CCP has also engaged in
 China's efforts to reinforce the Chinese narrative are now associated with clandestine operations aimed at boosting China’s influence capabilities .
 China's rise to power in the international arena is closely linked to its self-assurance . The development hinges on the combination of both the Russian example, from which Beijing draws its inspiration, and the 100th anniversary .
 Beijing organizes numerous conferences that seek to shape the content of media stories and influence a new generation of journalists . Beijing also organizes many conferences that try to shape media stories .
 Lu Anqi, ‘Chinese and African Media Discuss how to tell good stories,’ Chinafrica .
 American retreat from the international sphere, initiated by the Trump administration, was initiated by Trump administration .
 Europe continues to show comparatively little concern for this threat even as Chinese operations continue to increase . There were some heated discussions brought about by Chinese interference in Australia and New Zealand .
 The implementation of this multi-sectoral influence has already led to policy responses and the build-up of new security measures in several democracies, including Australia, from wDch Europe .
 Beijing enjoys systematic and multi- vector counter-influence and information-control capabilities . Today, Beijing enjoys systematic and multi-vector counter-Influence and information- control capabilities .
 CDnese content that is broadcast in French-speaking Africa often conveys positions and principles that are contrary to French interests .
 TDs dimension goes well beyond the framework of Franco-Chinese bilateral relationsDp and is part of a strategic global competition .
 62 Chinese interference in Australia is a prime target of Chinese influence in Australia . Australia is prime target for Chinese influence .
 The CCP exploits vulnerabilities linked to the Australian model of financing universities, media and election campaigns in order to expand its influence and ‘buy’ itself access to the country’s political and scientific communities .
 There are certain corrupt political figures who, in exchange for funding from Chinese donors, advance the CCP’s positions on international issues .
 Some Australian universities have become vehicles of Chinese propaganda . Australian universities for example have also been used as vehicles of propaganda .
 Australia has become aware of these concerning developments . It is partly the result of the premium placed on counter-terrorism over counter-espionage in the post-9/11 years .
 Canberra has increased its legal arsenal in order to monitor foreign investment in its territory . Canberra is currently in the process of rebalancing its priorities .
 In June 2018, the Parliament passed news laws against espionage and foreign interference . The Parliament also passed news law against espionage.
 Certain common features have emerged, in terms of vulnerability factors and means employed . From our analysis of attempted information manipulation in some twenty countries, some common features emerged .
 This section of the report exposes those commonalities and then explores other incidents of information manipulation outside of the well-documented cases in Europe and North America .
 minorities Manipulation attempts are facilitated by the presence of minorities, says the author . The presence of minority groups is facilitated by their presence, he says .
 The large Russian-speaking minority, particularly in Latvia, 1 is not in itself a threat to national cohesion because these communities are diverse .
 There are several Russian-speaking communities of different nationalities . In fact, there are several of them, including Estonia .
 The Russian-speaking minority in Latvia is the largest in the Baltic States . It is compared with 29% in Estonia and 6% in Lithuania . Latvia is also the largest of the Baltic states .
 Russian communities in the Baltic States enjoy a better quality of life and greater freedom of movement than they would otherwise enjoy in Russia .
 13-year-old girl disappeared for 30 hours after disappearing from Russlanddeutsche community . Girl claimed to have been kidnapped, beaten and raped by three men who appeared to be of Arab descent .
 Russia immediately picked up the story, first on the major national channel, then in Russian media outlets abroad and on social networks . The story was relayed notably by far-right groups .
Demonstrations were organized by both Russlanddeutsche and neo-Nazi groups . Through Facebook, demonstrations were organized.
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov made two public statements in which he accused the German authorities of concealing the reality of the situation behind political correctness . He challenged the competence of the German police and judicial system .
Frank-Walter Steinmeier accused Russia of political propaganda . His German counterpart Frank-Walters Steinmeier said Russia was political propaganda.
 Berlin must put in place a mechanism with which to react to these challenges as soon as possible . It also showed that the Russlanddeutsche community is one of Germany’s vulnerabilities .
 The incident was allowed to develop as much as it did because the story was refuted too late . The story was let to develop because of the story being refuted too soon .
Kusslanddeutsche is a small, but important local Russian-speaking community . In Germany, there is a community of Kussland deutsche .
 They are descendants of the Germans of the Volga transfered there by Catherine II in the 18 th century . They were deported by Stalin to Central Asia and later repatriated to Germany after reunification .
 The existence of this community provides fertile ground for manipulation, the author says . The primary purpose is to accentuate the divisions between these Kusslanddeutsche and other Germans .
 Information manipulation can have an effect on social and political divisions within our democracies . Even where there is no significant diaspora or easily exploitable minority group, attempts at information manipulation can be insidious .
 At first glance, it seems that the country would offer little opportunity for Russian manipulation attempts .
 70 years of communism has immunized the population to Russian propaganda . In addition, 70 years ago, the population has been immunized from communist propaganda .
 The country has neither a Russian-speaking minority nor a Russophile political party and anti-Russian sentiment is widespread . Furthermore, the country has no Russian-language minority or Russophile party .
 Moscow is taking advantage of the political divisions, which have lately been increasing . Moscow's political divisions have recently been increasing.
 Oxford researcher studied Polish social networks and showed that only a few days after the Euromaidan movement in Kiev, a large number of fake accounts appeared on Facebook and other platforms .
 The researcher also pointed to the growing difficulty of detecting and attributing these actions to Russia . Russia has increasingly succeeded in normalizing these actions .
 External divisions between neighboring countries are also exploited . Tensions between neighboring nations are also exploiting .
 Moscow is working to sow discord between Poland and its neighbors, Belarus, Lithuania, Germany and Ukraine . Poland, Lithuania and Germany are among the countries involved .
 The objective is to make Poland the outcast of Europe, by weakening its relationship with both its immediate neighbors and the EU as an institution .
 In Lithuania in 2017, authorities observed a strong resurgence of messages directed at the local Polish community . The messages were aimed at exacerbating inter-community tensions .
 Moscow tries to isolate Baltic States by portraying them as paranoid, Russophobic hysterics compared to the more “moderate” States of Western Europe . At the European level, Moscow is trying to isolate the Baltic States .
 One of the Kremlin's prime objectives is to maintain and caricaturize the existing divisions between European countries on Russian matters .
 The Macron Leaks failed to have an effect on the 2017 French presidential elections . The French media ecosystem is relatively healthy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The population relies mainly on traditional media sources with high journalistic standards. By this we mean that the population relies mostly on traditional sources .
 The media landscape is fragmented and conventional media outlets are weak, which can arouse distrust in part of the population and accelerate a variety of populist and conspiracy theories’ vectors .
 State Security Department of the Republic of Lithuania, National Threat Assessment 2018, 42. State Security Dept. of Lithuania is the largest agency in the country .
 Latvia and Lithuania temporarily blocked the Russian channel RTR-Planeta, accusing it of inciting hatred towards Ukrainians . A few years ago, the channel was temporarily blocked by the two countries .
 Local channels have a hard time competing with Russian channels, which have considerable resources and very popular entertainment programs . Russian channels have very popular programs.
 In Latvia, authorities rejected the idea of creating a Russian-language channel, while Estonia launched ETV+ in 2015 . In Estonia, the channel was launched in 2015.
 The idea of a single, common Russian-speaking channel is not feasible anymore because of rivalries and differences in perception .
 Latvian authorities refused to register Sputnik on the .lv domain .
 The most effective sites for spreading Kremlin propaganda are not those associated with Moscow . Instead, they are sites which appear local, such as Vesti.lv, or regional, suchas Baltnews or Rubaltic .
Baltnews was launched in 2014 in three distinct editions for each of the Baltic States . Baltnews belongs to Rossiya Segodnya through front companies .
 The content of its sites is partly determined by Russian diplomats in Riga, Vilnius and Tallinn . The content is based on the content of their sites .
Latvian proRussian activist Yuri Alexeyev is trying to gain footholds in Belarus and Ukraine . There is also the IMHO Club, a network of Russian-language blogs owned by Latvian anti-Russian activists .
 The first part of this report demonstrated how distrust in institutions was one of the main reasons for the rise and effectiveness of attempts at information manipulation . The report also showed how distrust is a key factor in the rise of attempts to manipulate information .
 It makes democratic institutions and public policies easy targets by constantly causing doubt . It makes a government’s so-called “hidden agenda’ or the effectiveness of government action .
 The Baltic States are brimming with corruption that would collapse without the support of Western powers . The Baltic states are being manipulated by manipulation attempts in Baltic States .
 "There is always a segment of the population, in every democracy, that is critical of and disappointed with its government" "This narrative is all the more dangerous," says the author .
 The Kremlin has systematically challenged authorities in Ukraine by accusing them of inefficiency, corruption, etc. Since 2014, the Kremlin has consistently challenged authorities .
 These social networks use pro-Ukrainian symbols and nationalist rhetoric to call for the organization of a third Euromaidan .
 One could add a fifth category of individuals abroad who serve as pawns in the manipulation of public opinion or local relays of foreign policy .
 The Kremlin is trying to “capture’s intellectuals through forums such as the Valdai club . These “useful idiots,” an expression attributed to Lenin, may be intellectuals, the Kremlin says .
Political figures may be political figures from far right or far left movements or activists from various movements . They may be from the far right, far left or activist groups .
 There is also “black’ propaganda, that is, propaganda that can be reasonably denied, according to CNN.com .
 Proxy Groups in the Contested Neighbourhood, Chatham House, April 2016 . The first time the group has been in the house .
 A case study in how Russia's propaganda machine works, DFRLab Medium.com, 23 January 2018 .
 The Voice of Russia and RT were established under the name Russia Today in 2005 and renamed RT in 2009 . Russia Today was renamed Russia Today and RT in 2005 .
 The Kremlin quickly realized that Rossiya Segodnya and RT did not succeed in this endeavor . However, the Kremlin later realized that the two failed .
 CNN, BBC and Al-Jazeera dominate the media environment in the international arena . These media receive little attention.
 They are successful with audiences in the far left and far right political camps or those easily taken in by conspiracy theories . They are also successful with audience in far right and far left political camps .
 In the Baltic States, most of the Russian “journalists’ who publish Russia-oriented reports are working there illegally . They are often working on tourist or business visas often issued in Europe .
 "journalists" interview small, local personalities who are opposed to the governing party . "Journalists" interviewed local personalities opposed to governing party.
 They film protest movements, exaggerating their scale in order to give the impression of a divided country on the brink of civil war . They also film protest movement, exaggerate their scale .
 Russian TV channel NTV made its way to Rinkeby, a Stockholm suburb, to cover clashes with the police .
 Rape and sexual crimes in general are one of the most favorited pro-Kremlin disinformation stories . They arouse passions all the while illustrating a state of insecurity, of moral decadence and of the “barbarization” of Europe .
 The year before, Russia 1 also aired a report in France on islamization that is riddled with lies . The journalist who went around Parisian streets notably insisted that “practically nobody speaks French.’
 One out of two women wears a burqa or a niqab . At the market, they only sell Halal meat one out of three women wears the burqa .
 Allyson Jouin-Claude, “Le Petit Journal denonce les manipulations d’une chaine publique russe,’s FeFigaro, 21 May 2016 .
 It is still too early to predict the effect that this new player will have on the Russian disinformation arsenal .
 Even if information manipulation is spread into the virtual world, it also has real-life effects . Even if the information is spread, it can also have real- life effects .
 Information manipulation relies on various mechanisms of influence, in the political, media, economic, and even cultural spheres .
 One of Moscow's biggest achievements is to have individuals or groups that are not Kremlin-related endorse its narratives .
 These individuals or groups all share a common suspicion or disdain for democratic institutions .
 Moscow's policies are in line with Moscow's interests, even in those countries where no significant political force is explicitly supporting Moscow’s policies . They also defend ideas that are inline with Moscow”s interests .
 The story of Russia’s new private propaganda oudet,’ EUvsDisinfo, 16 April 2018 .
 In Sweden, associations with no outward connections to Russia hold positions that coincide with those of Moscow . Sweden has no outward ties to Russia .
 Swedish Peace Council, on the far left, and Swedish Doctors for Human Rights deny chemical attacks in Syria . The group denies that chemical attacks occurred in Syria.
 Other alternative movements, such as the anti-vaccination movement, are progressively becoming pro-Russian . In addition, other alternative movements are becoming Pro-Russian.
Research centers and institutes that have more or less overt links to Russia propagate Russian positions on foreign policy . Finally, different research centers and institutions that have a more or more overt link to Russia.
 strategic infrastructure projects that are likely to advance either European integration or energy independence are targeted . As far as the economy is concerned, in the Baltic States, infrastructure projects may be targeted .
 The rail project Rail Baltica was presented as economically unsustainable and evidence of aggression, as its purpose was allegedly to transport NATO troops . The project was presented by the European Union as an example of aggression .
 The Polish project to link the Vistula to the Baltic Sea by a canal was criticized for being ecologically irresponsible, economically unsustainable and militarily aggressive . The project was also criticized by the Polish government for being economically unsustainable .
 The Kremlin’s objective is not to persuade us to doubt in an alternative truth, but to believe that objective truth even exists, in order to sow confusion .
 It does not have to defend an ideological view point, as already mentioned, as compared to the Soviet era . As such, it does not need to defend a major change in the way it does .
 The Kremlin can simultaneously support far right and far left movements, so long as they are in competition with one another . The Kremlin supports both sides of the political spectrum .
 The UK authorities have so far identified about 2,800 Twitter accounts which are likely to be bot-managed and have reached 7. million users .
 British attempt to divert attention from rampant pedophilia in the country, that Skripal was trafficking in chemical weapons, a NATO toxin, etc. They spread stories of a Fentanyl overdose, Russophobia, a British experiment, a plot to justify Russian sanctions, an attempt to influence the
 Ofcom has opened seven investigations against RT, which it suspects of partiality in the handling of the case . Ofcom says it has also opened seven probes against RT .
 The narratives primarily target the most populous and influential States . The narratives mainly target the majority of the United States .
 The messages are tailor-made, adapted to specific audiences, depending on the socio-economic profile, age, etc. of the individual .
 The vectors are similarly adapted to the media ecosystem of each country . The vectors have been adapted to each country's media ecosystem .
 The topics are diverse, but certain recurring topics emerge (immigration, crime, American or NATO hegemony, moral decadence, etc.) which is no coincidence .
 The Kremlin first targets divisive, fear-inducing topics in our societies . The Kremlin also targets divisive issues in our society .
 Aleksander Krol, “Russian Information Warfare in the Baltic States’s Baltic States—Resources and Aims,’ op. cit, . . The author, 61, is a former member of the U.S. intelligence agency . Krol: “
 Many people are less rational and more easily manipulated when it comes to emotional subjects . This pathocentered tactic rightly assumes that many people are more rational and less easily manipulated .
 These subjects do not materialize out of thin air nor do Russian secret services invent them. These subjects don't materialize from thin air or Russian secret service invent them .
Tensions often have a firm and legitimate basis, which makes their manipulation all the more credible . These tensions often have the firm anditimate basis, says author .
 This is more than the official account of the Black Lives Matter movement . This was liked by 360,000 people .
 The account helped mobilize, incite and accelerate the movement with messages encouraging action against the police . The account was created to help mobilize and encourage action .
 The account was revealed to be Russian and indeed part of the Russian effort to divide communities in the United States by tapping into racial tensions .
 The lesson for the online black American “community’s” to be extremely vigilant and double check the source of the information and the identity of the account holders before forwarding messages .
 One of the accounts created a counter-protest to a gathering of white nationalists which was planned to be held in Washington DC in August .
 Flistory museums in the region place the Soviet and Nazi occupations on a similar footing, which is difficult for Russians to accept .
 Russians tend to describe the Soviet period as positive for Baltic States and try to minimize the crimes committed against Balts .
 The Baltic States were in fact much wealthier under the USSR, a “Soviet Silicon Valley’s” The idea is that their integration into the West allegedly crippled their high-tech industry .
 In July 2017, NATO posted a video honoring the “Forest Brothers, who were Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians who fought against Soviet occupation .
 Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman: "Forest Brothers" were "fascists" and "collaborators" with the Nazi regime .
 According to the narrative, the Baltic States will return to Russia’s sphere of influence . The narrative, sooner or later, is that Russia will return.
 The Continental Hockey League can also be seen as a way of reinvigorating old Soviet ties . The Balts remain in the Russian zone of influence .
 A memorial is currently under construction at the site of the Soviet memorial to the victims of the Great Patriotic War . For example, there is a memorial dedicated to victims of communism in Tallinn .
 This has generated controversy and debate in the Russian-speaking community . This has been subject to complains from Moscow .
 Information manipulation derives its effectiveness from the viral character of its diffusion on the internet . Privileged places and mechanisms are used by various relays, automated or otherwise .
 It is clear that their viral character owes nothing to chance . It's clear, however, that the viral character is not to blame for their popularity .
 It is the result of a thoughtful, coordinated and meticulously implemented strategy that relies on a chain of actors . It is not only in the mass dissemination of manipulated information, but also on a sort of information ‘laundering’ as it is taken up by actors from the media and
 "The Nazi-obsession of pro-Kremlin propagandist," EUvsDisinfo, 21 July 2017 . See also “The Nazi/Kremlin propaganda’s” EUvs.Disinfo .
 The places the most advantageous place for manipulation is the digital platform . The places most advantageous are the digital platforms .
 Through the algorithms that these sites use, the platforms rank content and set the conditions for the diffusion of that content, which is then shared and published . The algorithms that the platforms use are used to rank content .
 “Digital platforms, including social networks, can shape opinion more insidiously and are often vectors of values that are not those of the French Republic. An attack against national defense and security “can shape opinionMore insidly and is often a vector of values, not those
 In certain cases, they can be used for the purposes of disinformation and spreading propaganda to French citizens, particularly to the yougest ones . In some cases, it is used to spread propaganda to the French citizens .
 This feature is often underemphasized by the platforms themselves, who prefer to consider themselves as “technology companies’ that host, more than edit, the information and content that is exchanged .
 The way platforms present their features, which is critical to defining their status, is a challenge for them .
 Such platforms have long been presented as technology companies that host, without editing, information and content . Such platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, have been criticized for their lack of editing .
 French National Digital Council, La Neutrality desplateformes^ June 2014 . The council is based in Paris .
 Platforms today have, in large part because of outside pressure, modified their position and manner of approaching this subject . Platforms now have changed their approach to this subject.
 Mark Zuckerberg acknowledged that Facebook is responsible for its content, even if it does not produce the content itself . Zuckerberg’s statement to the United States Congress in April 2018 perfectly illustrates this change of stance .
 This statement goes against the strategy employed by this particular actor in prior years . This statement was surprising because it goes against a strategy used by the actor .
 These platforms benefit from networks effect, “these positive externalities of the information economy,’ says the author . 29 platforms have a large number of subscribers and a high rate of retention .
 The most advantageous location for information manipulation campaigns, which by definition are massive and large-scale . They are therefore the most advantageous locations for information manipulations .
 Other digital platforms, which are restricted to smaller circle, are not the focus of this report . In this respect, other digital platforms are restricted.
 The term ‘social network’ does not adequately cover the variety of actors involved in such activities . It runs the risk of conflation with unrelated actors, says the author .
Fake news has the power to increase or decrease the visibility of that information . It does, however, play a significant role in the dissemination of fake news, as it has the ability to increase and decrease it .
 The French "Russosphere" is “neither homogenous in terms of the individual profiles that compose it,’s political orientations. They show that the French ‘Russosphere’ is ‘neitherhomogenous in term of the individuals that compose the individual
 The French ‘Russosphere’ is a diverse galaxy of which a significant portion could exist even without Russia playing any role .
 Large digital platforms are not the only ones to relay and amplify information manipulation campaigns . Information manipulation campaigns are often used to amplify information campaigns .
 The “Macron Leaks’ were first published and attracted the attention of internet surfers .
 Discussion forums often serve as a launching pad for manipulation campaigns and for the propagation of rumors .
 Discussion forums are susceptible to the spread of fake news. Users are often conscious of the controversial nature of the content exchanged and of the fact the content is potentially untrue .
 The debate often takes place among a small group of users who exchange their opinions anonymously .
Fake news can be used to launder false information, say experts . It is used to give the impression that the information actually originated from actors who have no ties to the political aim pursued .
 With the amount of mobile equipment in use being high and constantly growing, the barriers to entry are minimal . applications are a means of achieving a high threshold of exposure while enjoying a complete absence of moderation .
 Information manipulation campaigns can involve the use of stolen documents . Information manipulation is a form of information manipulation .
 Sometimes these documents are auctioned off and broadcast on the Darknet, a sphere that does not abide by the rules governing the internet . It is particularly conducive to the exchange of illegally acquired information .
 Bots are first, automated or semi-automated actors, like bots or netbots . They are also known as "netbots" or "bots"
 This tactic involves fake Twitter or Facebook accounts that allow for the rapid diffusion of fake news through biased retweets and likes . This tactic is known as fake Twitter and Facebook accounts .
 Ben Nimmo will appear before the Singaporean committee on 22 February 2018 .
Rachel Lavin and Roland Adorjani. “L’lrlande a deja trouve la parade aux fake news (mais on ne pourra pas la reproduire),’s Slate, 13 June 2018 .
During the 2018 Colombian presidential election, the amplification process was essentially human, originating from politicians or notable supporters from both political camps . For example, during the 2018 presidential campaign for the 2018 elections, the amplified process was basically human .
 This activity is pardy institutionalized, but is also carried out autonomously by individuals of all nationalities . The activity is not only institutionalized but is carried out by individual nationalities. It is also autonomized .
 A large number of Kremlin supports suddenly appeared on these networks to create controversy, sow discord, and ultimately weaken the adversarial communities . The Kremlin has been accused of supporting a number of anti-government groups .
 The Internet Research Agency is a Russian company located in St. Petersburg . The company is located in the Russian city of Petersburg .
 In reality, it is a “troll factory” financed by the Kremlin . The existence was discovered in 2013 by Russian journalists pretending to be candidates applying for jobs there .
 The regional press, including Finnish and Polish news outlets, then got hold of the story . It was followed by 34, followed by the regional press .
 "Everyday Misinformation in Colombia: Humans, not bots, were the main vectors of misinformation," @DFRLab, Medium.com, 20 July 2018 .
 A tribute to the Russian journalists who exposed the ‘troll factory’’
 Propaganda and Trolling as Warfare Tools,” European View, 10 May 2016 .
 Mueller indicted the IRA, two companies owned by Yevgeny Prigozhin, as well as 13 individuals, one of whom was Prigzhin himself . In the midst of his investigation into Russian interference, the IRA was indicted by Mueller .
 The IRA is accused of having led an operation to influence the U.S. electoral campaign . The IRA has been accused of trying to influence American elections .
 The IRA would have begun targeting the United States around April 2014 . The IRA was receiving funding from 14 affiliated companies in Concord .
 The IRA alone controlled 3,814 human accounts and 50,258 hots on Twitter . 1. million Americans interacted with the IRA on Twitter, with 1.1 million interacting .
 The indictment of the U.S. Special Prosecutor has provided detailed information on the operations of the agency . The indictment has been released by the Special Prosecutor .
 The Russian government does not accuse the Russian government of anything . It does not acknowledge that the IRA succeeded in influencing the vote .
 The agency showcases this phenomenon, it draws attention away from other troll factories present elsewhere on the Russian territory, as well as abroad .
 The IRA is not an isolated case, and must not become the tree that hides the forest . However, the IRA must not be a tree that hide the forest.
 Office of the Director of National Intelligence. Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent United States Elections, Washington DC .
 Ben Popken & Kelly Cobiella, “Russian Troll Describes Work in the Infamous Misinformation Factory,’s ‘Russian Trolls’ are on NBC News .
 In 2015, Russian trolls and bots began exacerbating racial tensions . They began attacking Hillary Clinton and began attacking her .
 It was during 2016 that the first coordinated operation took place, involving cyberattacks and information manipulation, against Hillary Clinton and in favor of Trump .
 The troll may do so himself by posing as a third person who challenges the post . He provokes a reaction and draws others into the exchange . If no one challenges the message, the troll may have done so himself .
 When a user has “bitten the hook by engaging in the discussion, the troll reels him in by systematically challenging his comments .
 The troll varies the characters involved and the tone of the comments . To keep the “discussion’s going, the troll varies.
 aggressive trolls that proceed through intimidation, brutality and even harassment are the most effective means of saturating the debate and silencing opposition voices . Among them, the aggressive trolls go through intimidation and brutality through intimidation .
 A number of investigative journalists and well-known personalities have been victims of such attacks . Russian interests have been targeted by a number of journalists and personalities .
 Finnish journalist Jessikka Aro dissected the intimidation techniques of 42 people .
 NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence. Robert Szwed, Framing of the Ukraine-Russia Conflict in Online and Social Media, May 2016 . He is the director of the NATO Strategic Communication Centre.
 NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016, is based on the study . The study was carried out by the NATO Strategic Communication Centre.
 The NGO Reporters Without Borders dedicated a report to this issue . Since journalists are particularly targeted, the NGO Reporter Without Borders has dedicated its report .
 In order to discredit someone, trolls often accuse the person of colluding with foreign intelligence services and/or of committing treason .
 A number of comments can give the impression of a majority opinion even when it is not at all the case . It is enough to have a paralyzing effect on others .
 The trolls participate in a wider phenomenon, which is the brutalization of online public debate . The trolls thereby participate in the wider phenomenon.
 Ben Nimmo, a researcher at the Atlantic Council, uncovers networks of trolls . He provides detailed descriptions on their functioning .
 These analyses are extremely useful for detecting and, in fine, countering them . These analyses can be used to help detect and in fine .
 Around 40 cases were identified from 2006 to 2017 . The most known cases were the 2010 American diplomatic telegrams on Wikileaks .
 Mueller points to existence of second Russian troll operation focused on activist groups and foreign policy .
 Pierre Gastineau and Philippe Vasset, Armes de destabilisation massive. Armes of destabilisation is massive, they say . The two men have been involved in a major political crisis .
 This method is increasingly used to serve political or economic interests . However, this method is becoming increasingly used by political and economic interests.
 Leaks can be used to discredit a target, who may be either a victim of hacking, or a third party . Leaks may form part of an information manipulation campaign, such as the American presidential election and French presidential election (2017 Macron Leaks)
 Journalists would have a lot of trouble with verifying these documents because they do not in general have access to the original source .
 In Sweden, there are several famous cases, such as the image of a car on fire which supposedly illustrated the rising crime rate caused by migrants .
 Disinformation and Phishing With a Russian Nexus,” The Citizen Tab, 25 May 2017, is a weekly feature on the Citizen Tab .
 The Russian Ministry of Defence Publishes Screenshots of Computer Games as evidence of U.S. Collusion with ISIS,’s Eliot Higgins . “Screenshots of computer games as Evidence of United States Collusion.”
 In reality, the photo was of a young Welsh girl attacked by her dog in 2008 .
 In March 2017, a fake article appeared in a Belgian newspaper alleging that Emmanuel Macron was the preferred candidate of Saudi Arabia . The article was published during the presidential campaign .
 This article was circulated by a number of people, including Marion Marechal-Le Pen, before being identified as a fake news story . The article was circulating by people who believed it was a fake story .
 This particular article imitated the web layout of Le Soir but used a different address, lesoir.info instead of lesoir .
 The quality of the language can be a useful means of detecting distortion . manipulators usually rely on automatic translators like Google Translate .
 Electoral interference can target systems (electronic voting, voting lists), which affects the population’s confidence in the results, or the voters themselves .
 Canada's Communications Security Establishment studied dozens of cases of interference in cyber-democratic processes in nearly 40 countries on five continents in the past ten years . Three-quarters of the activities involved sophisticated methods (i.e. was probably orchestrated by States)
Only a quarter of these activities employed less sophisticated means for criminal 53 . Only a quarter used less sophisticated ways for criminals .
 The first component concerns elections, beginning with voter registration . The first part of the election is to be held in November .
 At the very least, this interference slows down the election process and leads voters to question the integrity of the election’s outcome .
 manual voting is also vulnerable if there are counting machines that could be modified before the vote to falsify or erase data . Even manual voting can be vulnerable if machines are modified to make sure data is accurate .
 In addition, dissemination of the election results online makes those results vulnerable to interception and modification by a third party . The election results are also vulnerable to third party modification .
 At any moment in the process, the aggressor may also target critical infrastructures that are needed for organizing elections, such as the power grid . Finally, at any moment, the aggressive aggressor could also targetcritical infrastructureures, like power grid.
 They are choice targets for commercial purposes as much as for strategic purposes . For this reason, they are choice target targets for business purposes .
 There is also the risk of collusion, that is to say, of foreign powers providing illegal financial or logistical support to certain candidates in order to try and influence the vote .
 Russian media tried to discredit the results, as they did not suit their liking . The 2014 referendum on Scottish independence showed a majority wanted to remain in the UK .
 So-called 'experts' who claimed that the vote did not respect international standards and supported a petition . They interviewed so-called “experts’ who said the vote didn’t respect International standards .
 Although ultimately in vain, it acquired over 100,000 signatures, it nonetheless acquired more than 100,00 signatures .
 2016 referenda on the approval of the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU in the Netherlands and on the United Kingdom EU membership. Other significant instances of information manipulation include the 2016 referendum on Ukraine and EU membership .
Ben Nimmo interviewed in Severin Carrell, “Russian cyber-activists ‘tried to discredit Scottish independence vote’’
 It is the spread of data, more than the theft itself, that has an effect on the population, says John Sutter . Sutter: "It is more than theft itself"
 Boris Toucas underlines the tertiary role played by whistleblowers . whistleblowers use their “critical credibility’ to pass information on to the mainstream media .
 WikiLeaks has been relatively discredited since the U.S. elections 58 . It remains popular among a certain demographic and retains a large number of followers .
 The interference in the American election, which served as a model for the author, passed through these five stages .
 The meddling in the French election did not exceed stage three because the traditional media did not succumb . While the interference in the German election didn't exceed stage two . The meddling was not as bad as traditional media didn't succumb .
Wikileaks disappointed many of its initial supporters . By edging in the direction of the American alt-right and becoming an ally of the Kremlin, Wikileaks disappointed many .
 The American presidential election of 2016 was marked by the hacking of Democrat servers and the dissemination of thousands of documents on Wikileaks . Other measures relating to the information manipulation campaign that was underway .
 The investigation led by Special Prosecutor Robert Mueller since May 2017 has highlighted the role of Russia in what appears to be interference .
 American authorities are particularly concerned with avoiding repetition of the same incident during the midterm elections which will be held on 6 November 2018 . The midterm elections are scheduled for November 2018.
 The reaction of the authorities is stunted by a lack of political unity, between Democrats and Republicans . A lack of coordination between numerous administrative structures dedicated to the fight against information manipulation . The reluctance to share information with the private sector is also stunted .
 The first meeting between federal agencies and digital platforms in preparation for the elections took place only six months before the elections . Facebook’s head office 61 and at the request of private companies, not the government.
 Several voices highlighted the importance of this public-private cooperation and the necessity for sharing information with digital platforms .
 Daniel R Coats, Worldwide Threat Assessment of the United States Intelligence Community, released the record for the record, 13 February 2018 .
 A Geltzer and Ghosh: How Washington Can Prevent Midterm Election Interference . They say Washington can prevent midterm elections .
 Catalonia is not and has never been a concern for Moscow . The vote was an opportunity for the Kremlin to divide, and thereby weaken the European States .
 During the Catalan crisis, these outlets effectively served as relays for Moscow .
 Venezuela is the second most common origin of these messages after Spain .
 Personalities from the digital world such as Julian Assange and Edward Snowden suddenly became passionate about the Catalan issue .
 WikiLeaks went so far as to ask El Pais to fire David Alandete, who was investigating Russian interference . Alandet was investigating Russia's interference, WikiLeaks says .
 The Integrity Initiative, Framing Russian meddling in the Catalan question, was published in October 2017 . It is the first time the group has been asked to answer questions about Russia's role in Catalonia .
 "Russian network used Venezuelan accounts to deepen Catalan crisis," says David Alandete . "Russian networks used Venezuelan account to deepen crisis," he says .
 Other areas of concern are emerging, especially in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America . The post-Soviet space, Europe and North America are among the areas affected .
 Democratic transitions and elections also provide fertile ground for information manipulation, as does the rapid growth in digital connectivity, particularly in rural zones .
 The organization is alleged to be responsible for several “false flags,’s purpose was to incriminate Damascus and provoke Western strikes . On the other hand, the organization is accused of several ‘false flags’
 The accusations have been made five times against the White Helmets since 2013 . These accusations were made against the Helmets in 2013 .
 Syria’s White Helmets became victims of an Online Propaganda Machine, says Olivia Solon .
 Other regions, notably Latin America through TeleSur and anti-imperialist networks, echo this disinformation . Other regions also echo the disinformation .
 The strategic alliance between these various actors in Syria doubles as a united and coordinated front on social media . Syria's social media is a key part of the Syrian government's effort to counter the opposition .
 Any initiative to counter impunity in Syria can be invalidated if it is based on the testimony of the White Helmets . The Syrian regime has been accused of staging fake chemical attacks .
 The Douma chemical attack of 7 April 2018 sparked outrage from the international community . It led to the publication of a wide variety of fake news stories in the Russian media .
Russian, Iranian and pro-Syrian regime networks in the propagation of a narrative which seeks to discredit all forms of opposition or action against impunity for the war crimes committed in Syria . This information manipulation campaign is a central element of the combined strategy of Russian, Iranian, pro- Syrian regime networks
 Sarah Oh and Travis L Adkins, Disinformation Toolkit, InterAction, June 2018 . Sarah Oh, Travis L. Adkins and Sarah Oh are the co-authors of the Dis Information Toolkit . They are also the authors of the InterAction.
 The Gulf Other States have been able to orchestrate foreign information manipulation operations, or in other words, information interferences . The Gulf other States can also orchestrate international information manipulation.
 The Qatar News Agency published a statement online by Emir Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani . The statement was directed at the Trump Administration .
 The Emir criticized the “negative ambitions’ of its Gulf neighbors . The Emir called Hamas “the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people’s people”
 The QNA's Twitter account posted three messages revealing the existence of a plot against Qatar . The tweets were attributed to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt .
 It further announced the recall of Qatari diplomats from these five countries . It also announced the dismissal of these countries’ ambassadors to Doha .
 Major media outlets in the region quickly spread these statements, which triggered a crisis . Saudi Arabia and the UAE are among the countries in the Middle East .
Qatari technicians took more than nine hours to regain control of them . Qatari technicians take more than 9 hours to restore control of the Qatari government .
 The FBI conducted an investigation and concluded that the QNA had indeed been hacked . The investigation was conducted by the FBI .
 The Qataris blame Yousef al-Otaiba, the UAE’s influential ambassador to Washington, for having orchestrated this virulent anti-Qatari media campaign .
 Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Egypt and Bahrain have worked to isolate Qatar . They have recalled ambassadors from Doha, imposing a trade embargo, refusing to allow Qatari planes to enter their airspace . Qatar has launched an offensive, international media campaign .
 The U.S. submitted an ultimatum to Qatar with a list of 13 conditions for lifting the sanctions . The list includes limiting relations with Iran, shutting down Al-Jazeera and other media, closing the Turkish military base under construction .
 Nabil Ennasri, ‘Reprise de la guerre froide du Golfe,’ is the author of Orient XXI, which runs from May to May .
 U.S. intelligence official: “UAE orchestrated hacking of Qatari government sites, sparking regional upheaval,’ The Washington Post reports .
 The conditions were immediately deemed unacceptable by the Qatari government . These conditions were deemed unacceptable.
 There are indications that Africa could be the next playground for Russian “information warfare,’s Russian ‘information warfare.’ There are several indications that African countries could be next playground.
 The work of a French research team revealed the growing spread of Russian content through the French-speaking African web .
 The African public often views Russia through the lens of its anti-colonial Soviet past .
 In some countries, such as the Cote d’Ivoire, this rhetoric fuels local political debates . The rhetoric fuels political debates.
Pro-Gbagbo movements find the information and narratives produced by Russian media to be quite opportune . Thus pro-G bagbo movements.
 The choice made by RT and Sputnik editors to strongly publicize certain issues of direct interest to the African public, such as those affecting the future of the CFA franc .
 Many of Sputnik's articles on Africa are picked up by seneweb.com, the fourth most visited site in Senegal . In Senegal, for example, many of the articles on the continent are pick up by Seneweb .
 Russian agencies on social networks are particularly well-suited to the African context . Many users rely on Facebook as a source of information .
 The conspiracy theories and other sensationalist news that the Russian media are fond of publishing allow them to increase their audience as tabloid-style media is very popular in Africa .
Until now, Russian platforms on the African continent were unstructured . Their popularity could be understood as a collateral effect of efforts directed towards French public opinion .
 Both RT and Sputnik plan to expand their network of correspondents in Africa . But now, both RT and sputnik are expanding their network in Africa.
 The vast majority of these new viewers are young men from the Maghreb and Sub-Saharan Africa .
 The anti-French campaign was launched in Goma on 2 January 2018 in the Democratic Republic of Congo . The digital campaign called #BoycottFrance was launched .
 Two caricatures published on Twitter and widely shared on social media accompanied this campaign . The campaign was created by a group of young men and women .
 The images were intended to denounce alleged French support for Joseph Kabila . Under the headings “The sponsors of barbarity in the DRC’s” and ‘The heirs of Leopold II in theDRC”
 French diplomatic actions are mixed with real facts, such as the presence of the Themiis training institute . These references are mixed.
 Key to the campaign was the reinterpretation or clustering of facts that have no causal link with one another . Key to this campaign is the re-interpretation of facts.
 This had the effect of both inspiring new rumors and feeding existing ones . It only took the circulation of some fake news to trigger the campaign .
 The attack was carried out by actors with whom the French Embassy is in contact . The paradox is that this attack was done by actors.
 The reflection on the ways to get rid of fake news and counter the viral nature of such caricatures .
 The relative neglect toward Latin America by many Western States has presented several geopolitical entrepreneurs with the opportunity to build new partnerships at little expense, under the banner of post-Western multipolarity .
 The channel now has offices in Argentina, Venezuela, Cuba, Nicaragua and Madrid as well as in North American urban centers where Latino communities are concentrated .
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 3 May 2018. Playing a Geopolitical Game in Latin America.
 Spanish-language channels have been investing in Spanish language channels . This investment has been accompanied by a strategy of creating partnerships and amplifying information on social networks .
 The broadcasting of RT programs has been facilitated by hundreds of specific agreements with national media . Some programs are being jointly produced with the Venezuelan channel TeleSur .
 Latin American public opinion. It should be emphasized that this worldview corresponds to important trends in Latin America public opinion . This editorial orientation does not preclude the production of good quality programs .
 Brazil is the third country after India and the U.S. in terms of Facebook users . Mexico is the second country after Mexico and India .
 Information MANIPULATION networks, and of the extreme polarization of exchanges, are among the topics of the discussion .
 McMaster, 78 then President Trump’s National Security Advisor, publicly denounced the implementation of a sophisticated strategy of Russian influence in favor of leftist candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador .
 The Kremlin would be interested in seeing an ally rise to power in Mexico and destabilize its large northern neighbor .
 At this point, there was indeed an editorial line from RT and Sputnik that openly supported Obrador . The editorial line was from RT.
 It then examines the responses employed by other States on the institutional, legislative, and educational levels . It then looks at the responses of other States .
 This section provides an overview of the responses prescribed by a variety of international organizations, civil society and private actors . This section includes the responses to the questions asked by international organizations .
 A common question is whether it is better to respond to an information manipulation attack or to simply ignore it . If the choice is to respond, if it is sufficient to correct it or if the opportunity should be used to promote an alternative message, or if it should be
 This answer is a combination of ignorance and both defensive and offensive measures . This is the answer to the question: ignorance and defensive measures .
 Jakub Janda, “Why the West is Failing to Counter Kremlin Disinformation Campaigns,’s, says Janda .
 The rhythm of the media is such that few events outlive the daily flow of information, and public opinion tends to forget quickly .
 This comes with the risk of allowing such false and potentially dangerous ideas to sink into the minds of the population .
 If not contradicted from the outset, these ideas may continue to grow with time . If they are not contradicted, they may still grow withTime .
Ignorance as a strategy should only be reserved for minor and inoffensive forms of information manipulation . Ignorance is a strategy that should only only be used for minor or inoffensive information manipulation.
 Reacting defensively by correcting false information has the advantage of not allowing the ideas to spread and be left unchallenged, by quickly cutting them short . Reacting to false information can be a good way to cut it short .
 The task requires time and human resources to monitor social networks, detect manipulation attempts, formulate a response, disseminate a response .
 There is also a risk that it will have the opposite effect, as the response could spark a debate, and even involuntarily give new wind to the trolls .
 The most efficient solution would therefore combine a defensive strategy with an offensive one . New information will help to take back control over the discussion .
French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron's actions are of particular interest to our study . These targeted actions against Emmanuel Macron neither succeeded in interfering with the election nor in antagonizing French society .
 9 gigabytes of data were hacked from Emmanuel Macron’s campaign team . The data was released on Friday, May 5, 2017 .
We refer more generally to the orchestrated campaign against him that started several months earlier, through numerous information manipulation operations . We refer more Generally to the campaign that began several months ago .
 This section will provide an analysis of the “Macron Leaks,” the actors who orchestrated the attacks, how it was successfully countered and, finally, the lessons that can be learned . This section includes a section on how the attacks were successfully countered .
 Jean-Baptiste Jeangene Vilmer, The Macron Teaks: A PostMortem Analysis^ CSIS Europe Program, Washington D.C.
 The leak itself was only the culmination of a long-running campaign orchestrated against the presidential candidate .
 It began with the diffusion of rumors and insinuations that grew in January and February 2017 . It started with the spread of rumors, which began in January 2017 .
 Some attacks came from Marine Le Pen’s ‘foreign legion’ of American alt-right trolls . The Marine's “ foreign legion” of alt- right trolls are known as the ‘Foreign Legion’
 2 hours before the final televised debate between Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen, 5 a user with a Latvian IP address posted two fake documents on the US-based forum 4Chan . It suggests that Macron had a secret offshore account .
 It was quickly retweeted by some 7,000 Twitter accounts, mostly pro-Trump . The #MacronGate and # MacronCacheCash hashtags were among the most popular hashtags .
 During the debate, Le Pen herself mentioned the existence of a hidden account .
 The rumor was quickly debunked as several investigative journal pieces proved that these documents were fake . The rumor is quickly debunked.
 The same people who posted the fake documents on 4Chan on Wednesday announced on Friday morning that more was coming. Curiously, they also announced that more were coming .
 Those responsible for the ‘MacronGate’ inadvertently provided evidence that they were the same people responsible for “Macrongate’s” that came out later that day .
 The operation started with a series of phishing attacks several months earlier . The operation was launched by a group of people who had been phishing for months .
 Macron's team confirmed that their party had been targeted since January 2017 . Macron’s team confirmed the party was targeted by the French government .
 At least five of Macron's close collaborators were hacked, including his speechwriter, his campaign treasurer and two MPs . In total, the professional and personal email accounts of at least five people were hacked .
 Josh Harkinson, “Inside Marine Le Pen’s ‘Foreign Legion’ of American Alt-Right Trolls,’ is a new book by the Marine Marine Marine .
Macron campaign confirms phishing attempts, says no data stolen .
 The files were initially posted on Archive.org, then on PasteBin and 4Chan . The files are now on the Internet .
 Pro-Trump accounts were the first to share the link on Twitter, using the hashtag #MacronLeaks . The hashtag was soon after picked up by WikiLeaks .
Third, it is spread through political communities, notably the U.S. alt-right and French far-right with catalyst accounts or ‘gurus’ The content is retweeted by both real people * 11 and bots .
 Sputnik and RT at the head played a non-negligible role in the diffusion of this information. It is indeed easy to see the connection between the information component and Russian interests, writes Peter Bergen .
 Alt-right attacks Macron in last ditch effort to sway French election, DFRLab Medium.com, 6 May 2017 .
 At the time of the attack, France still has not publicly attributed the attacks to any particular perpetrator .
Evidence suggests Russia behind hack of French president-elect, says Sean Gallagher .
 Feike Hacquebord, “Pawn Storm Targets German Christian Democratic Union,’s ‘PawnStorm Targets Germany’
 Sean Gallagher: "Evidence suggests Russia behind hack of French president-elect" He says evidence suggests Russia was behind the attack .
 23 of 23 hypotheses are not incompatible with the alliance that exists between Russia and the American far-right movements .
 Guillaume Poupard, the head of the French National Cybersecurity Agency, declared that “the attack was so generic and simple that 18 years later, it was so simple, he said . The attack was “so generic andsimple that 18.
 The fake news on Emmanuel Macron's offshore account looks too professional,’s fake news.” 5 May 2017 .
 Konstantin Rykov in a mediametrics.ru interview, in the Paul Moreira’s documentary, “Guerre de l’info,’t. Arte thema, 2018. The interview is part of a documentary by Paul More
 Russia used Facebook to try to spy on Macron campaignsources,’ Reuters,” Reuters, 27 July 2017 .
Casey Michel: "America’s neo-Nazis don’t look to Germany for inspiration" Michel: “America's neo-Nazi don”
 The leak did not influence French voters, despite the efforts of the actors .
 French success resulted from a combination of structural factors, luck, and luck, as well as the effective anticipation and reaction of the Macron campaign staff, the government and civil society, especially the mainstream media .
 France presents a less vulnerable political and media environment for a number of reasons . Compared with other countries, especially the United States and the UK, France is less vulnerable than other countries .
 The election of the president is direct, malting any attempt at interference in the election more obvious . First, the election of President Obama is direct and direct .
 The French election has two rounds, which creates additional difficulty for meddlers . The election has also two rounds and two rounds .
 This also permits the population to shift their support to another candidate and correct an unexpected result after the first round . This also allows people to change their support for another candidate . The population can also shift support to a candidate.
 They overestimated their ability to shock and mobilize online communities . They overestimate their ability of shock and mobilized online communities, they say .
Macron Leaks could be ‘isolated individual’, says Andrew Rettman . ‘Macron’s could be 'isolatedindividual’
 The leak revealed nothing. They overestimated the interest of the population in a leak that ultimately revealed nothing .
 They assumed that the creation of confusion would be enough and that the content of the leaks would somehow be secondary . They assumed. That's what they thought .
 Thousands of emails and other data were, at best, boring and, at worst, totally ludicrous, the public lost interest . But, as it became obvious, the thousands of emails were at best and boring .
 The idea to launch the offensive just hours before the purdah period was a double-edged sword . Then, the idea of launching the offensive in the early hours of the Purdah Period was the idea .
 The goal was certainly to render Macron unable to defend himself and to mute the mainstream media . The goal of the goal was definitely to render him unable to defending himself .
 The content of the leaks did not contain anything interesting, according to the hackers . The hackers were expected to attract attention with the announcement of the leak .
 The timing of the release did not leave provocateurs long enough to spread the information, and it made the leaks appear suspicious .
Most of the catalyst accounts were in English because the leaks were first spread by the American alt-right community . Most of the catalysts are in English .
 The French population is known for not having the best foreign language skills . This was not an effective means of penetrating the French population, which was not a good way of penetrating .
 The National Commission for the Control of the Electoral Campaign for the Presidential Election 25. First, there is the National Commission.
 Jean-Yves Le Drian interviewed in he Journal du Dimanche, 8 January 2017 .
 U.S. warned France about Russian hacks before Macron leak .
 A special body was set up in the months preceding every French presidential election to serve as a campaign watchdog .
 ANSSI and CNCCEP alerted the media, political parties and the public to the risk of cyberattacks and disinformation during the presidential campaign .
 ANSSI was proactive, offering to meet with and educate all campaign staff at very early stages of the election .
 The French government signaled publicly and through more discrete, diplomatic channels, its determination to prevent, detect and, if necessary, respond to foreign interference . From the start of the electoral campaign, the government signaled both publicly and via more discrete and diplomatic channels .
 It is possible that the remarks helped to contain the operations, which could have otherwise posed a bigger threat . This was evidently not enough to stop the attack, which is why it would be an exaggeration to call it deterrence .
 ANSSI heightened security at every step of the electoral process in order to ensure the integrity of the vote .
 The Foreign Minister announced at the beginning of March 2017, the end of electronic voting for citizens abroad because of the extremely high risk of cyberattacks .
 Facebook announced it had deleted 30,000 suspicious accounts in France 10 days before the vote .
 Jean-Yves Le Drian interviewed in Le Journal du Dimanche, 8 January 2017 .
 Russia used Facebook to try to spy on Macron campaignsources,’ op. cit. cit says . Russia used the social networking site to try and spy on the French president .
 At 11:56 pm on Friday, 5 May, only hours after the documents were dumped online and 4 minutes before the purdah went into effect, the Macron campaign issued a press release .
 This diversionary tactic is called cyber or digital blurring . It involves the creation of fake documents to confuse attackers with irrelevant and even deliberately ludicrous information .
 Macron campaign staff did not have to justify potentially compromising information contained in the Macron Leaks . Instead, the hackers had to justify why they stole and leaked information which seemed, at best, useless and, at worst, false or misleading .
 The forceful presence of the Macron campaign staff on social media enabled them to respond quickly to the spread of information . The French president's campaign staff were seen to be a strong presence on Twitter .
 The campaign’s injection of humor and irony into their responses to the hackings increased the visibility, popularity, and diffusion of those responses across different platforms .
 Macron’s campaign confirmed that it had denied RT and Sputnik accreditations to cover the rest of the campaign .
 Even after the election, both outlets have been denied access to the Elysee Presidential Palace and Foreign Ministry .
 Macron's campaign staff was aware that everything they wrote in their emails could one day be made public . If there is nothing scandalous to be found in the leaked emails, it is because Macron’s campaign staff were aware .
 Some have even gone one step further by denouncing an electoral interference attempt . Some have called upon their readers to not let themselves be manipulated .
 Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Poutine held a joint press conference in Versailles on May 29 .
 Marc de Boni: “Devant Poutine, Macron denonce la ‘propagande’ des medias pro-russes’’
 There was a disinformation campaign, data hacking, large scale leaking, but no laundering or mainstreaming . There was no mainstreaming, but there was no disinformation campaign .
 structural factors as well as an effective, responsive strategy allowed the French to successfully mitigate the damage of the Macron Leaks .
 More countries are coming to grips with the problem and have come to realize that the most dangerous activities are not the most visible ones . The dayto-day undermining of trust in institutions and liberal, democratic values is a problem .
 The peril of foreign interference lies less in targeted operations than in the long-term alteration of the political environment .
 States have taken a number of corrective actions, or are in the process of doing so . The U.S. has taken a few corrective actions.
DemocraticElections Against Cyber-Enabled Autocratic Meddling, op. cit. cit: Safeguarding DemocraticElections against Cyber-enabled AutocraticMeddling .
 It is an informal network in that it was not officially appointed, however it was approved by the Security Committee . It was created in December 2014, but was not formally appointed .
 Its mission is to identify, analyze, analyze and respond to hostile foreign interference attempts . It is to respond to foreign interference.
 This network comprises about thirty government experts holding key positions within their respective Ministries . ICRC and other NGO representatives all meet once a month .
 The Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs also has its own internal task force that involves three departments . Public Diplomacy, Security Policy and European Neighborhood & Russia also have their own task force .
Cross-disciplinary team of about a dozen members is placed under the direct authority of the political director . The team speeds up the decision-making process, which is overseen by political director.
 The purpose of this unit is to ward off information manipulation narratives through the identification of their source and the examination of their effects . The unit will also build up the resilience capacity of those third States that are particularly exposed to information manipulation .
 The unit also develops partnerships with the media, technological actors and civil society so as to establish a network of fact-checkers .
 Initially established to counter ISIS propaganda, the Center’s mission was broadened the following year to include threats from foreign States, primarily those from Russia .
 The GEC mostly comprises Pentagon staff, who are more numerous and better trained on these issues than Department of State personnel . GEC is sometimes described as coordinating the work of a variety of agencies .
 There are also numerous task forces dedicated to the fight against disinformation and/or foreign influence in other departments .
 Democratic Senators have urged the President to set up a high-level inter-agency ‘fusion cell’ to coordinate all elements of U.S. policy in response to Russian influence operations .
 The RESPONSES information manipulation does not produce counter-narratives but merely issues refutations of false information . The RESPonses information manipulation.
 This new authority could absorb the counter-influence section of the MSB . The MSB is one of the most well-organized and innovative structures that we have visited . The new authority would be a new authority for the organization .
 The efficacy of these structures depends on the means devoted to them, that is, on human and financial resources, which are themselves dependent on political will . The effectiveness of the structures is dependent on human, financial resources .
 The United States and the United Kingdom have undertaken in-depth parliamentary inquiries to establish responsibility for the interference operations of which they were victims . The involvement of Parliaments The U.S. and the UK has been described as 'in-depth'
 The public nature of those inquiries has the advantage of increasing public awareness, according to the author . The information has a deterrent effect, says author .
Certain committees have produced authoritative reports, which greatly contribute to our knowledge of the problem . Certain committees have produce authoritative reports.
 The Singaporean parliament has created a Select Committee on Deliberate Online Falsehoods . It has conducted a great number of hearings, including with international experts .
 The MSB has already trained 11,000 civil servants, journalists and companies . From 2018 onwards, all primary schools in Sweden will teach the basics of programming and develop pupils’ capacity to distinguish between reliable and unreliable information . Latvia 39.5 per cent of the
 Parliament of Singapore, Select Committee on Deliberate Online Falsehoods—Causes, Consequences and Countermeasures . The committee is on the issue of falsehoods.
 To qualify as disinformation, an informational activity must contain deceptive elements . 2) have the intention to harm, 3) be disruptive, and 4) constitute an interference .
 Such a diagnostic offer the possibility for both its users as well as public opinion to differentiate information manipulation from more sincere operations of influence .
 The four main state measures relating to the media consist of registration, prohibition, regulation and denunciation . Media Outreach includes registration and prohibition and regulation .
 The U.S. uses the Foreign Agent Registration Act to counter Nazi propaganda . The law requires that any entity engaging in political information and receiving foreign funds openly identify as such .
 Christopher Livesay, “Italy Takes Aim At Fake News With New Curriculum For High School Students’s” NPR, 31 October 2017 .
 The FARA legislation is useful in that no ruling needs to be made on the content of the messages put forward by these “foreign agents’s’ sponsors . It seeks to increase transparency regarding these actors' sponsors, leaving it to citizens to form their own conclusions as to
 hybrid actors are neither companies nor registered lobbyists, and their financial links with foreign powers are not easily demonstrable . However, this system is less effective when faced with hybrid actors, who are not registered lobbyists .
 The difference is that the American legislation aims at transparency and does not undermine the freedom of the media to conduct their work . The difference, however, is that it aims to be transparent, not to undermine the media .
 Russia is feared to exercise enough pressure on some media as to force them to shut down . In Russia, by contrast, it is feared that the law, under the guise of transparency, will exercise more pressure on media .
 Ukrainian-language content quotas were also imposed for radio and television . Ukrainian- language content quotas also imposed.
 The Ukrainian government also created a Ministry of Information Policy . Kiev was widely criticized, not just by Moscow but by the 42-year-old .
Russia’s RT America registers as ‘foreign agent’ in U.S.
 Regulation is the middle-of-the-road option and the preference of most liberal democracies . It is the most liberal democracy in the world .
 Numerous states have or are currently trying to introduce such legislation . Numerous States have or have tried to introduced such legislation.
German law known as ‘NetzDG’ (Netgn’erkdurchdurchgungsgeset) in effect since January 2018 . It obliges digital platforms of more than two million members to delete “blatantly illegal’ content within
 Defining the object also poses certain challenges, especially if it is placed under a category as vague as “fake news’s’ as is often the case .
 In democratic countries, civil society, namely NGOs and associations of journalists, are often skeptical of the need and effectiveness of introducing new legislation .
 Daniel Funke, “A Guide to anti-misinformation actions around the world,’ The Poynter Institute, 2 July 2018 .
In Italy, there is a portal that allows anyone with an e-mail and a link to the incriminated information to get the attention of the Polizia Postale, the police unit in charge of cybercrime .
 The Thai government launched a mobile application that allows anyone to report fake news . The application was developed by the Fund for Development of Safe and Creative Media for Mental Health .
 The U.S. institutional system developed a very sophisticated architecture with which to respond to Soviet information manipulation . The American institutional system responded to Soviet data manipulation .
Countering disinformation and the Kremlin’s ‘active measures’ became a priority for U.S. national security at the beginning of the 1980s .
 This architecture was dismantled after the fall of the Berlin Wall . It was militarized after 9/11, in the context of the long War on Terror .
 Since the attacks of September 2001, American counter-propaganda capabilities have largely centered around IOs and military counter- Propaganda . In the absence of any public diplomacy arsenal comparable to that of the Cold War years with which to approach the ideological war waged against the United States.
Public affairs officers are the main agents in the field of public diplomacy . The actions are deemed all the more necessary in light of shrinking resources and the “bunkerization’s or disappearance, in some operational theatres .
 Directive 77 gave public diplomacy a key place in the foreign policy decision making process . It affirmed a multidirectional strategy aimed at weakening Soviet influence by supporting dissidents across Eastern Europe .
 Project Truth was designed in 1981 by President Reagan and his advisors to counter Soviet propaganda . The sole goal of this significant reorganization of foreign affairs was to complete Project Truth .
 Both national and regional commandment levels can appear redundant or even counter-productive . The U.S. military and civilian “public diplomacy’s’ activities can be costly, or redundant .
 The U.S. media have voiced deep concerns about what the political world perceives to be new strategies of Russian influence . Russian state media Sputnik and RT in the United States have voiced concerns about Russian interference in the American electoral process .
 U.S. officials say they have a deficiency in preparedness and coordination to respond to this new threat . Such concerns reflect a deeper anxiety, widely shared across political, diplomatic and military circles in the U. S.
 The atmosphere in Washington is redolent of McCarthyism and the official responses of the new “warriors of disinformation’s” seem to draw on the Cold War experience .
 James Clapper, the former National Intelligence Director, is among others who have supported James Clapper . Clapper has been in charge of the National Intelligence Department since 2007 .
 Clapper’s call for a USIA “on steroids’ only reinforced the confusion between influence diplomacy and counter-propaganda . The call for the USIA "on steroids" only reinforces the confusion.
 The failure of the various congressional endeavors initiated as of 2017 49 to articulate a coherent doctrine for American counter-propaganda results from the sheer diversity of actors engaged in the counter-offensive, 47 .
 Carlo Muno 2, “Clapper calls for United States Information Agency ‘on steroids’ to counter Russian propaganda,’ The Washington Times, 5 January 2017.
 Coordination is rendered all the more difficult, for both internal organization and external policy, by the competing, and even sometimes conflicting, agencies .
 The Department of Homeland Security created an anti-disinformation task force in January 2018 . Its mission is to better coordinate the various actions undertaken by different agencies, as well as to build capacity .
 One of its roles is to coordinate actions with other agencies, including the DHS, the Department of State, the NSA and the CIA . Another is establishing relationships with the federal and local authorities, the private sector and digital platforms .
 The NSA and Cyber Command will work together to fight against Russian interference in November elections . In July 2018, the NSA and the Cyber Command announced they would begin working together .
 Paul Nakasone, commander of Cyber Command and director of the NSA, says he is doing everything he could . He says he's doing everything in the absence of an “overall approach directed by the president’s or the White House .
 Studies conducted by several American think tanks and by the London School of Economics have drawn lessons from the Cold War legacy and apply those lessons to contemporary challenges .
 The need to re-establish a para-governmental agency modeled on the USIA or an inter-agency coordination committee had become obvious long before suspicions arose of Russian interference in the 2016 American elections .
In particular, the need for greater efficiency was already sensed in the struggle against jihadist propaganda . In particular, there is a need for more efficiency in the fight against jihadists .
 The U.S. Attorney General's Cyber-Digital Task Force is the latest report by the Department of Justice . The report will be released in 2018 .
 The Washington Post reports that the White House will not provide guidance to Russian election interference in 2018 . The White House has not issued a statement .
 The RESPONSES currently being floated in Washington, supported by the new “warriors of disinformation,” tend to rely too heavily on the Cold War experience of the 1980s in their interpretation .
 They seem to disregard some of the more worrying aspects that underpinned the Cold War era, notably in times of high tension, when it was deemed acceptable to use the weapons of the enemy .
 Congress authorized the replacement of the Center for Strategic Counter-Terrorism Communications with the Global Engagement Center within the Department of State .
 The purpose was mainly to counter ISIS propaganda and to endorse a strategy commensurate with the new information environment . The purpose is to counter propaganda and support a new information system .
 The driving idea was to foster cooperation between public and private actors at both the national and international level . The driving concept was to Foster cooperation between a greater number of public andprivate actors .
 The new Center's most enthusiastic supporters wanted to quickly turn it into the main organ responsible for combatting the Kremlin’s subversive activities . The Center's supporters wanted it to be the mainOrgan responsible for fighting the Kremlin's subversive activities.
 The U.S. government has come up against the complexity of the American bureaucratic system . However, they quickly came up against it.
 The 2017 National Defense Authorization Act was designed to extend the prerogatives and mission of the GEC so as to include activities aimed at offsetting state propaganda, be it from Russia, China, Iran or North Korea .
 The inter-agency entity represents but one layer of the inherently multi-dimensional response to those challenges . Yet this inter- agency entity represents. Yet it represents but a layer of a multi-dimension response to the challenges .
 Contemporary debates on American influence and counterpropaganda capacities sometimes present an overly compartmentalized vision of public diplomacy programs, on the one hand .
 Public diplomacy and IOs are only two distinct facets of the overall U.S. strategic communication apparatus .
 The Active Measure Working Group is the latest instance of an effective coordination on the part of the U.S. The ActiveMeasure Working Group.
Based on this model, civil and military public diplomacy professionals have made the 52. Based on the model, they have made a total of 52 .
 The National Defense Authorization Act was intended to expand the GEC’s mission by making it an organization fighting against “state propaganda,” whether Russian, Chinese, Iranian or North Korean .
 The digital turn announced by the Department of State at the end of Georges W Bush’s second term was not successfully completed . The public-private partnerships initiated in those years and then substantially developed through the many initiatives undertaken under Hillary Clinton .
 diplomatic and military operational actors recommend turning the GEC into an equivalent of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, so as to coordinate inter-agency work and synchronize operations .
 In order to organize countermeasures in information warfare 3.0, they also deem it necessary to foster a global approach bringing together the whole range of institutional actors .
 The recommendations drawn up during congressional hearings as well as those found in think tank reports emphasize the crucial role assumed by the chairperson of this interagency entity in the National Security Council's decision-making process .
 This chairperson could be granted a role at the highest federal level as Deputy-Secretary General or Special Advisor . It could also be given a role as Special Advisor.
 The President and the chief of this entity responsible for the elaboration of public diplomacy strategies. Without such close cooperation, responses to the Kremlin’s ongoing ‘active measures’ risk remaining incoherent and ineffective .
 Michael Lumpkin, former Deputy Secretary of State for Special Operations, was appointed by Barack Obama in 2016 . Lumpkin is the coordinator of the Special Operations Department .
 Former CIA Director Mike Pompeo will become Secretary of State . The appointment could provide a good opportunity to reinforce interagency cooperation and the sharing of information .
 Information Access Fund is a support fund for citizen, entrepreneurial or paragovernmental initiatives . This has allowed the creation of the information Access Fund .
 The European Union At the European level, the rise of information manipulation has triggered a progressive response, which was dispersed at first between various institutions .
 The issue was initially apprehended through the prism of external relations and the need to protect the EU’s image in the Eastern neighborhood .
 European Council, Cover note from the General Secretariat of the Council Delegations on the subject of the European Council meeting .
 By 2017, they had already identified over 2,500 instances of disinformation in 18 languages . By 2017 they had identified over 1,500 cases of disinformation.
 This task force is under-resourced in terms of both staff and funding . Despite its good results, this task force has not been fully funded .
Comprising only eleven personnel, it exists and survives thanks to the good will of a handful of Member States .
 The EEAS has sometimes been criticized for not taking the Russian disinformation threat seriously . Until recently, European institutions did not appear to be very involved with Russia .
 The difficulties betray an absence of European unity on the issue, it is said .
National approaches to disinformation remain quite varied across Europe, due to diverging perceptions of the threat .
 Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, and Spain are followed by Czech Republic and Denmark . Spain is followed by Spain, France and the Netherlands .
 For reasons that are both diverse and sometimes recent, these countries are most aware of this 56 countries .
 Philippe Regnier, “Tacler la desinfo russe,’ Le Soir, 24 November 2016, 12 November 2016 .
 Cyprus and Greece have not only taken no action to fight against the threat, but even block any effort to deal with the issue at the EU level . Greece and Cyprus are the only two countries to take no action .
 The Commissioner established a high-level expert group which released its report on 12 March 2018 . It called for increased transparency for online content, enhanced media literacy and a closer partnership with civil society .
 A multi-dimensional approach to disinformation, Report of the independent High-Revel Group on fake news and online disinformation .
 The Forum’s advisory committee will hand in a first draft at the beginning of September 2018 . The Forum will adopt a final version at the end of the same month .
 The Commission intends to assess the Code’s implementation at the end of 2018 . It makes provisions for possible additional measures .
 The Commission also states its commitment to safeguarding electoral processes, notably in anticipation of the 2019 European parliamentary elections .
 The Commission is unlikely to put forward any legislative proposal before the end of the current term of office . Up to the present day, no regulatory action has been announced .
 Horizon Europe program will be channeled into research on artificial intelligence and algorithms . Part of the funding will be used to help fight against disinformation .
 The EU Intelligence and Situation Centre handles disinformation, perceived primarily as a threat coming from Russia . Finally, the EU intelligence centre handles disinformation .
 Broader issues of influence within European agencies arise as well, for the positions of number 2 and 3 in these agencies . British officials often sought and held by British officials .
 In the eyes of INTCEN agents, the efficacy of malicious foreign influence actions is but one dimension . In a strategy of ‘trial balloons/wide targeting’ which, by definition, can never lose as it is essentially cost-free .
 INTCEN’s strategy consists first and foremost of exchanges of information, awareness-raising and removal of barriers between relevant agents .
 INTCEN established an information exchange network which enables it to raise awareness and refine the interpretative framework used by implicated actors so that they can better detect influence attempts . InTCEN has also set up a network to help raise awareness of actors' actions .
 The Hybrid Threat Fusion Cell emphasizes the need to anticipate with as few preconceptions as possible . The Hybrid threat Fusion Cell is based in New York City .
 Its priority is to protect the vital infrastructures of Member States, hence the importance of having national correspondents . The priority of the Member States is to have national correspondants .
 INTCEN’s Hybrid Threat Fusion Cell comprises seven members and its approach is chiefly political .
 The European Parliament is against hostile propaganda . The European parliament is against the hostile propaganda of the EU .
 The Alliance continues to view this phenomenon through the lens of the Russian threat . Even today, the alliance continues to look at this phenomenon.
 Other attempts to spread rumors about alleged crimes by German soldiers in Lithuania under NATO command have been detected .
 Within the NATO structure, there is the NATO Strategic Communication Excellence Centre . The centre was created in 2014 in Riga .
 Their work centers on doctrines, operations and training, and they publish a large number of analyses .
 A team of around a dozen people in PDD monitors disinformation operations with specialized tools . They use specialized tools to monitor disinformation operations .
 Fault lines nevertheless arise between allies on the question of what sort of response is most appropriate .
 Russian-speaking communities disagree over whether or not to try to “beat Russia at its own game’s own game. They also disagree on whether to ‘beat Russia’ by spreading doubt about Moscow.
 Such an approach is highly contentious within NATO, where there are diverging views on the severity of the threat . There are different perspectives on Russia's role and the adequate NATO response to Moscow .
 The OSCE must take into account the positions of all participating States, including Russia, along with the very different situations of countries within the OSCE zone . TheOSCE must also consider the position of all countries in the zone in terms of respect for the rule of law, fundamental rights
 At the OSCE level, there have been no specific actions taken against propaganda within the framework of the commitment to freedom of expression . The OSCE has not taken specific actions against propaganda .
 The OSCE Representative for Media Freedom, Harlem Desir, approaches these questions from the angle of freedom of speech . Desir: The transparency of sources, media pluralism and media literacy are key issues .
 He has rejected the penalization of disinformation, which can be used as a means of repressing the freedom of expression in authoritarian regimes .
 In March 2017, the OSCE representative for media freedom, the UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of expression and access to information for the African Commission for Human and People’s Rights published a joint declaration on freedom.
 The objective of this text was to remind States that the fight against disinformation must not be used as a pretext to limit 64 . The objective was to warn States that they must not use disinformation to limit the number of people in the United States .
 Joint Declaration on Freedom of Expression and ‘Fake News, ’ Disinformation and Propaganda’ 3 March 2017 .
 The RESPONSES civil liberties, in particular freedom of expression, above the level of that which is permitted by international law .
 Civil society Civil society is at the front line with information manipulation, says CNN . Civil society civil society Civil Society has been accused of manipulating information .
 Whatever measures States may implement, the resilience of any society depends primarily on the mobilization of its citizens .
 Responses by civil society were initially sporadic and reactive, mostly through factchecking . The civil society's response to civil society was largely through fact checking .
Civil society has developed complementary initiatives involving either a longer time frame, a normative dimension or research .
 Fact-checking the veracity of facts is the most natural response to fake news . The most common one is to check the facts on the internet .
 Among the oldest ones is the American site Snopes, which was launched in 1994 and has since become a reference .
 The proliferation of fact-checking mechanisms is on the rise all over the world, says CNN's John Sutter . "The proliferation offact-checking mechanism is on a rise," he says .
 The efficacy of government-led verification is debatable as people who are prone to believing or disseminating fake news are often the very same ones who distrust public institutions . The effectiveness of government verification is still debatable .
 There is a widely held belief that the State should refrain from directly engaging in fact-checking activities . The State should not engage in such activities, says author .
The one obvious exception is when crises that threaten public order occur. The one obvious exceptions are when crises occur .
 It is in civil society that a proliferation of initiatives can be found. It is therefore, within civil society, that a proliferative of initiatives could be found . It is, therefore, in the civil society.
 The Poynter Insistute’s international network for factchecking also adopted a “code” of common principles for guaranteeing transparent and unbiased verification .
 Civil society also demonstrated its resilience in Ireland during the referendum on the 8 th amendment and for the purposes of responding to automated anti-abortion accounts .
 The tool was used by more than 4,500 users during the referendum campaign . The tool has been used more than four,500 times during the campaign .
 The power of fact-checking lies principally in its potential to embarrass those who disseminate false information . That is, in reputation-related reasons, rather than in ideological reasons, for example .
 These people like to be the first to disclose new information . They would be embarrassed in their communities if the disclosed piece of news turns out to be false .
 Fact-checking works better on novel topics, to which we attach no preconceptions, we say .
Rachel Lavin and Roland Adorjani: "L’lrlande a deja trouve la parade aux fake news (mais on ne pourra pas la reproduire)’s op. cit.
 The act of fact-checking may challenge the falsity, partiality or forgery of a piece of information . It does not erase the significant psychological impact associated with the consumption of fake news .
 The results of the fact-check do not always, or even often, hit the target audience . The correction is seldom read by those who need to be convinced that a given story was untrue .
 commercial objectives and// or the desire to appear virtuous can sometimes take precedence over the search for truth .
 All these limitations do not invalidate the importance of fact-checking, says CNN.com .
 It is a palliative measure, which must be complemented by other measures . It must be completed by other Measures .
 Normative initiatives. We consume information the same way we consume food as we consume information .
 The fight against information manipulation can draw inspiration from nutrition labelling, says the author .
 This is what some have called the “Michelin model:’s 72 labels, indexes and rankings can help distinguish reliable media from untrustworthy sources .
 RSF Secretary General Christophe Deloire says the initiative aims to give an actual advantage to all those who produce reliable information, notwithstanding their status .
 The idea is to grant a quality label to those media who deserve it . Media should respect a certain number of criteria, such as editorial independence and transparency .
 The media would thus be encouraged to meet these criteria so as to reassure advertisers who seek stable and non-contentious environments .
 Digital platforms could decide to highlight quality content by putting forward certified media in their algorithms .
 The Czech think tank European Values has been convening an annual StratCom Summit in Prague since 2016 . The event has become one of the sector's most important gatherings .
 The Atlantic Council has set up a dedicated structure for the “Digital Forensic Research Lab’s’ digital forensic research lab . The lab has quickly become a benchmark in the field .
 The Bellingcat lab performs an important role in detecting and investigating major 73 major crimes .
 Francois Bougon, “Un label pour redonner confiance dans le journalisme,’s Ue Monde, 3 April 2018 .
 Alliance for Securing Democracy is a bi-partisan transatlantic organization . Its goal is to respond to Russian interference attempts in democratic processes in the U.S. and Europe .
 The ASD was created in July 2017 by former senior officials in the U.S. intelligence services and the State Department . The ASD is part of the German Marshall Fund .
 It is possible to collect a great volume of verifiable information in open source and then use this information in order to deconstruct distorted news .
 This was demonstrated in a report by the CSIS, using the example of Syria . The report was published by CSIS .
 The White Helmets published photos of incendiary cluster bomb fragments which Moscow denies using . The Kremlin denies using them .
 GMF Alliance for Security Democracy, Hamilton 68, Tracking Russian Influence Operations on Twitter . Hamilton, 68, tracking Russian influence operations on Twitter.
 This section of the video was cut out and is now missing from the version now available on YouTube . The video is now available online for free .
 Lithuanian writer and TV presenter Andrius Tapinas launched the #KpeMA£HaniyHCTopmoHeiiepemimemb #Kremlin you will not falsify our history.
 Journalists are of course on the frontline of the struggle against information manipulation . Journalists often participate, or even initiate, some of the aforementioned actions .
 Jessikka Aro, a Finn who studied troll factories, and Julian Ropcke, a German who investigates Russian influence in Germany .
 The Baltic Center for Media Excellence and Toneboard start-up received a grant from Google to create a platform for verifying fake news . Journalists also act collectively, through the creation of groups such as the Baltic Center of Media Excellence .
 Large digital platforms have long shown a lack of interest in the struggle against information manipulation . They presented as irrelevant in light of their “non-editorial status” and obligation to guarantee freedom of expression and trade freedom .
 The issue of the platforms’ responsibility for the nature of the content disseminated through them first became a matter of serious consideration in the context of the fight against terrorism . From a non-subject to a serious concern, the issue is now a serious consideration .
 Digital platforms were accused of permitting communication among terrorists .
 It is of course necessary to distinguish terrorist content from information manipulation . It's of course needed to distinguish terrorists from information manipulations .
 The terms of the debate are not as clear cut when it comes to information manipulation . The principle of freedom of expression does not take precedence over the security imperatives .
Digital platforms are in a position to monitor the information circulated and exchanged through them . In both cases, in both cases it is important to recognize that digital platforms are.
 They are equally capable of taking action to ensure that certain content is less visible or even eliminated completely . They are also capable of removing certain content from the internet .
 The 2016 American presidential campaign can be viewed as a double catalyst. In this regard, the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign is seen as the double catalyst .
Spent on political advertisement aimed at damaging Hillary Clinton’s campaign sparked a wave of increased awareness .
 The U.S. political representatives were disconcerted by the small interest in the matter displayed by digital actors .
 Many of the adverts were seen by many to be unacceptable and a blatant lack of responsibility . Their unwillingness to enforce any control or verification mechanisms for advertisements, despite being in a position to implement precise targeted advertising, was seen as unacceptable .
 A few months later, the Cambridge Analytica scandal strengthened this perception . The scandal strengthened that perception .
 The issue at stake was no longer the sale of advertisements but the handling of personal data collected through Facebook without the users’ prior consent .
 The company was able to implement particularly sophisticated micro-targeted advertising, aimed at shifting election results in favor of Republican candidate Donald Trump .
 Facebook is now criticized for failing to protect its users’ personal data . Facebook has been criticized for not protecting its users' data .
 The European model has been explicitly commended for its attention to this issue .
 The roots of that realization do not just stem from the American Presidential election . It does not just start with the presidential election .
 European States have often been criticized for being defensive actors with a preference for regulating innovation . European States see a majority of Senators and the public agree with their cautious position .
 digital platforms were cast in a less flattering light. On the other hand, digital platforms are cast in less flattering lights .
 They were seen as indifferent towards privacy concerns and the operation of democratic institutions, as well as reliant on a questionable economic model . They were also indifferent to privacy concerns .
 The Cambridge Analytica Affair reveals tomorrow’s persuasion tactics could be nothing like the old strategies of spreading rumors, and more like the targeting of each individual voter .
 New method consists of ‘using data to change behavior,’ or in other words, acquiring such a deep understanding of each citizen by combining a multitude of information on his behavior, personal ties, habits, desires, fears, etc.
 I believe A, therefore I receive a message telling me that candidate Y thinks so as well as well . I believe a, therefore, A, however, I get a message from a candidate. I believe that A, Therefore I receive an message telling him that I receive
 Mark Zuckerberg's hearing in April 2018 is without a doubt the acme of this collective realization . It was the first time that the CEO of a major digital corporation found himself obliged to publicly answer for the functioning and responsibility of his firm .
 Zuckerberg's hearing has not resulted in a significant number of users or a decline in the market value of these digital platforms . Many commentators continue to debate the long-term consequences of this recent wave of protest .
 platforms have hyped up publicity around their efforts to counter information manipulation . It must be noted that platforms have been hyping up publicity about their efforts.
 The response of large online platforms to information manipulation Online platforms have developed a significant array of mechanisms against information manipulation . The response is in accordance with the criticisms they face .
 The intensification of these critiques has compelled platforms to put forward a great number of measures within a very short time span . The intensifying of these criticisms has forced platforms to take action .
 For each of these examples, the stated goal is to give internet users “the tools’ that will enable them to identify and respond to information manipulation themselves . The stated goal of each of the examples is to provide users with the tools that will help them identify and
 Facebook has reached out direcdy to candidates in the presidential election so as to make them aware of the risks and encourage them to develop good internet practices .
Online platforms have also strengthened the protection of data privacy . Information manipulation campaigns are often based on the exploitation of personal data, according to experts .
 Large online platforms contribute to raising public awareness of the need for increased vigilance against information manipulation . Through public hearings, large online platforms help raise public awareness about information manipulation.
 Improve the detection of information manipulation campaigns . Improve detection of automated accounts and anonymous accounts . improve the detection.
 platforms used to be reluctant to identify and deactivate the latter . Platforms have recently shifted their approach .
Users' accounts were suspended after they were found to be fake, automated, and/or suspected of participation in an information manipulation campaign .
 Twitter has suspended over 50,000 accounts “connected to Russian interference,’s spokesperson said . Twitter announced the suspension to quote the company's spokesperson .
 It is difficult to assess the effectiveness of these account suspension campaigns. However it is difficult.
 Facebook had launched a large hunt against fake "likes" in 2012 . Facebook had adopted a similar approach in 2012, but with only limited success .
 The fight against "the fake" has become the object of a war of figures . Since 2016, the fight against “the fake’s’ effectiveness is difficult to assess . The fight is now being fought against the fake .
 Facebook, Twitter and Google have also set up an initiative aimed at creating a common database listing fake accounts and strategies developed by trolls to escape identification .
 The goal is to optimize information manipulation detection by exchanging information on the models and actors behind it . The aim is to improve the detection of information manipulation by exchanging data on models, actors and models .
 Other measures, relying on artificial intelligence, have been implemented to detect and suspend accounts . Some accounts are suspended before they are activated by artificial intelligence .
 Facebook has developed a tool enabling them to detect serial publication of similar messages and comments . Facebook also announced that they had developed the tool .
 Online platforms have developed several measures to speed up the removal of malicious content . Contain the dissemination and impact of information manipulation campaigns Online platforms .
 platforms continue to rely on human involvement to monitor and sometimes erase content and dubious advertising .
 Facebook has increased teams dedicated to verifying dubious content by over 60% . Total staff of 8,000 people globally. Facebook has also increased the number of people working on verifying content .
 The monitoring of content deemed illegal and/or related to terrorism is a concern . While this reinforcement of human involvement is significant, it must be noted that it is also concerns the monitoring of material deemed illegal .
 Facebook announced a new policy of deleting content susceptible of causing violence in July 2018 . In July 2018, Facebook announced the implementation of a “new policy’s” policy of removing content susceptible to violence . In Sri Lanka, messages claiming that Muslims were poisoning Buddhist food were erased
 Twitter also sped up the cleaning process, through the introduction in May-June 2018 of new mesures to combat trolling and hateful and extremist comments, 79 and the suspension of at least 70 million accounts in only two months . The suspension rate was as high as the suspension rate in October 2017
 Google has recently introduced tools enabling its users to report “misleading and false’s’ content . Google has also introduced tools to report misleading and false content .
 Facebook grants greater attention to the feedback and comments of web users who have identified fake information . Facebook now grants more attention to those who identify fake information.
 Yoel Roth and Del Harvey: "How Twitter is fighting spam and malicious automation" Roth and Harvey: Twitter is "fighting spam and malware"
 This framework is to objectify response thresholds (when and how to respond) and coordinate the work of various teams and enforce a standard response procedure . The RESPONSES this framework will be used in the future .
 The latter includes notifying the number of users who deemed the information to be false or misleading . An alert that the user is likely to relay false information.
 YouTube chose to display a link to a Wikipedia article directly challenging the conspiracy narrative . In the same vein, some conspiracy videos were also displayed next to some videos .
Online platforms also developed tools to detect the “deep fake,’ i.e. fake news that can very convincingly reproduce the effects of reality .
 Google has created a tool capable of detecting such videos and of removing such content before it is posted online . Google has announced that it has created the tool .
Online platforms are wary of regulation. Regulate and cooperate . For a number of reasons, online platforms are worried about regulation .
 They tend to favor informal cooperation with public authorities and the media . They also tend to prefer informal cooperation.
 Google reported having done the same during the American and French presidential campaigns .
 Facebook declared that it had collaborated directly with the German government during the most recent general elections . Facebook also declared it had worked directly with German government .
 Other countries are also considering implementing legislative mechanisms that would oblige platforms to act more decisively against contentious content . Other countries may also consider implementing mechanisms to act on contentious content.
 Platforms very often choose to promote constructive approaches to counter information manipulation . Promote good practices and institutional actors .
 A policy favored by many of them consists in reinforcing the visibility of reliable content and/or those produced by trustworthy media sources .
 These various elements of information, which appear as tabs, seek to highlight the ethical standards and trustworthiness of these various media sources .
 Twitter has developed indicators that make it possible to monitor the diversity of exchanged opinion . Twitter has undertaken to develop indicators to monitor diversity of opinion, receptivity of users and media awareness .
 The platforms have emphasized their need to better understand the phenomenon . Analyze the mechanisms of information manipulation campaigns .
 To achieve this, they have put in place various partnerships and exchange policies with the world of research . They have also set up partnerships and exchanged policies.
 platforms contribute to the funding of initiatives aimed at developing a better awareness of ethical issues linked to platform usage . Platforms also contribute to funding of projects aimed at improving awareness ofethical issues .
 Social media platforms have come to grips with the fight against information manipulation . There remains a lot of work to be done, but there is still a lot to do, says CNN.com .
 Twitter CEO himself, Jack Dorsey, shared at least 17 tweets from a Russian troll between late 2016 and mid-2017 . Dorsey's tweets were shared between 2016 and 2017 .
 The field of advertising is often presented as a stronghold of disinformation, in that it seeks to manipulate the mind for profit and commercial purposes .
 Such questions are at the root of not only information manipulation techniques, but also effective responses to this manipulation .
 The tools developed by advertising and marketing research arguably present at least two advantages as regards the study of information manipulation .
 Analysts analyze the response of target groups to particular campaigns . These tools enable us to better grasp the impact of any given message on a particular audience .
 These tools inform us on the manner in which conventional media, that are perceived as reliable, can better their appeal and capture the attention of audiences who bypass them .
 Georgia Wells, Rob Barry and Shelby Holliday, “Russian Trolls Weigh In on Roseanne Barr and Donald Trump Jr.’ The Wall Street Journal, 19 June 2018.
 Studies aim to predict the effectiveness of an advert by analyzing the audience’s attention levels . The entertainment generated by the ad for the user drops in attention levels as well as the emotions produced .
 These tools make it possible to identify the weak points of a given campaign . These tools also make it Possible to identify weak points.
 Studies are conducted ex-post so as to monitor the evolution of preferences among various populations . Studies are also conducted to monitor preferences among younger generations .
 Such tools include interviews with sample groups as well as the monitoring of the user’s perceptions of an advertising campaign .
 These various techniques would arguably provide a strong explanatory dimension . Were they to be applied to information manipulation, these various techniques could be applied .
 A study could compare the trajectories of a conventional article and a “distorted’ one . One could imagine conducting a similar study to compare the respective trajectories .
 An analysis of the attractive power of the false information might allow us to strengthen the influence of reliable media on a variety of audiences . The power of false information could be used to strengthen our influence on reliable media .
 Devices such as “eye tracking,’s eye tracking, also enable us to better grasp users’ responses to fake news in order to better implement counter-measures .
 Marketing studies, for their part, focus on analyzing market availability to particular products . Marketing studies focus on analyze market availability and product availability .
 Those who manipulate information already use a technique called the “A/B test,’ which consists in comparing the impact of two variables, in this case two messages . Those who use this technique already use the ‘A-B test’
 actors would start by circulating two messages stating that “black people are terrorists’ and “ black people are criminals’ They would then bank on this second message and refine it so as to improve its potential to go 83 .
 Paurav Shukla, Essentials of Marketing Research, Ventus Publishing ApS, 2008 . Shukala: "I'm not a marketing expert. I'm a business expert" Shuklla: "It's a great way to get people to
 advertising and marketing research can offer interesting perspectives in the fight against information manipulation . Despite the bad press often associated with it, advertising and research can provide interesting perspectives .
 The fight against manipulation also requires us to strengthen reliable conventional media sources, says John Sutter .
 For all of these reasons, we should expect information manipulation to expand and involve an ever-increasing number of actors . For all the reasons, it should be expected to expand, according to experts .
 Instagram is a massive information problem threatening our democratic life, says John Sutter . Sutter: It would have been ten years ago that the recently created social networks would play such a tremendous role in the lives of billions of people .
 It is difficult to imagine what it is that will, ten years from now, shape our social interactions and pose the most serious challenges . It is, therefore, difficult to Imagine what it will be that will-shape our social interaction.
 The use of currently open networks will decrease and the use of closed networks will increase . For instance, it is possible to imagine that the use. of currently closed networks would decrease .
 This scenario would pose different types of challenges to public authorities, particularly in terms of encryption . This scenario could pose different kinds of challenges, including encryption . The scenario would be similar to that of encryption.
 Artificial intelligence will make bots more human and harder to detect, according to experts . It will also make bots easier to detect and easier to spot .
 translation software will also erode linguistic and cultural barriers . It will also be a shield against foreign influence attempts for some countries .
 Photo, audio and video editing software, for example, will render it possible in the near future to make anyone say anything . Some of them already do so today .
 The United States Department of Defense also identified these altered videos as an issue in the midterm elections of 2018 . The U.S. Defense Department also identified the altered videos.
 The U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has provided funding for the Media Forensics Project . The goal is to develop technologies capable of automatically identifying and targeting Deepfake videos .
 A fake video has been created using only a slight alteration of only a part of an audio or video clip, such as a recording of a speech . A video clip is more subtle than a fake video .
 The circulation of twenty different versions of a single speech can hide the authentic version in the confusion . Another peril lies in the possible creation of a great number of variations of that speech .
 Artificial intelligence will enhance the sophistication of fictional personalities . It will make them less readily detectable, say experts .
 These personalities will be able to give interviews and write columns in the press before they are uncovered . The personalities will have to be interviewed and written columns before they're uncovered .
Ben Collins, Joseph Cox, ‘Jenna Abrams, Russia’s Clown Troll Princess, Duped the Mainstream Media and the World,’ The Daily Beast, 11 February 2017 .
 Even progress in social psychology research can be “arsenalized’s” allowing us to carry out micro-targeting in a more precise and efficient manner .
 The strength of these three combined ingredients can be used to create a weapon of mass division . Social psychology, big data and artificial intelligence are among the ingredients .
 Future trends in Russia's "information warfare" are difficult to anticipate . It is difficult to predict the next move by actors with a distinctive capacity to tailor-make their actions and learn from their mistakes .
 Russian actors are interested in the communications infrastructure, says the Russian government .
 Moscow intervened directly in the information flow received by the population of the peninsula by cutting some internet and phone cables .
 The Crimean case remains a unique case study, due to the peculiar geography of the region and Russian intelligence services’ prior knowledge of the territory .
In the long-run, the two physical layers that are of greatest interest to Moscow are the submarine . In the long run, the submarine is the submarine, for the cables which, as we have known for years, can be pirated .
 We can expect a greater overlap between the kinetic and non-kinetic dimensions of Russian operations . We can, therefore, expect the greater overlap. We can also expect a larger overlap.
 Personalization is a trend towards the personalization of attacks . There is a growing trend towards personalization.
 The technique is not new, as is evidenced by the Soviet and Russian services’ use of the “kompromaf method,e.e. This technique is also used by the Russian and Soviet services. It is used to compromise a target who can thus be controlled and
 In the field of information, this trend could take the following guises in the years to come . The focus of this report is the focus of the report .
 Families receive a message announcing the death of their son, brother or father, at the hands of the enemy . Then, several minutes later, their families receive the message announcing their son's death . The message allows through the concentration of signals to detect their location and bomb them, 3 in
 Russian activity aimed at Western soldiers in external operations has also been observed . A resurgence of Russian activity is also observed .
Military forces deployed in Baltic States in the context of NATO’s Enhanced Forward Presence have been targeted .
 This activity involves traditional methods (using a physical approach) but also some more innovative approaches . The activity involves using physical methods and using a physical method .
 The latter rely on the exploitation of soldiers’ personal data via social networks .
 Such personalized attacks could also target civilians, be they politicians, senior officials or prominent public figures .
 Massive leaks, all too obvious in the wake of the ‘DNC Leaks’ and the “Macron Leaks, are less of a risk, according to CNN’s John Sutter .
 The range of media which spread the Kremlin's doctrine, sometimes inadvertenly, continues to expand .
 Russian media sources which appear closely tied to the Russian government and/or who too obviously defend its positions are now clearly identified as propaganda organs .
 Liam Collins, “Russia Gives Lessons in Electronic Warfare,’s Association of the United States Army, 26 July 2018 .
 FUTURE CHALLENGES audiences are widening, they could face greater competition by other forms of information dissemination .
 The Kremlin is likely to invest more intensely in “converting’s personalities who are not known to be proRussian . The Kremlin may also be investing in ‘converting personalities’ who have not been proRussian.
 The Kremlin may also try to work some of its messages into the larger, more traditional media outlets . The Kremlin is also trying to make its messages more accessible .
 This would result in a Russia’s information warfare going mainstream, which will be more difficult to counter . This would be a result of a Russia's information warfare go mainstream, according to experts .
 Europe and North America becoming obvious targets as well as spaces saturated with counter-measures . The battlefield will expand to include new fronts as previously identified, particularly in Africa and Latin America .
 Ethnic and religious tensions as well as resentment towards old colonial powers are also ripe with passions that are easily exploited .
 Russia may use these populations as proxies in its effort to weaken Europe . As such, it may use them as proxies for weakening Europe .
 Russian investments are already at play in the Maghreb, where there are massive Russian investments . This phenomenon is already at plays in the energy sector .
Populations in the Maghreb are largely exposed to propaganda from Russia media in Arabic . Russia media conveys anti-European messages .
 These populations serve only as an indirect target, or a vector, says the author . The real objective is for these populations, who interact on a daily basis with family and friends living in Europe .
 The anti-immigration propaganda in Europe today is only one facet of the operation, says the anti-immigrant propaganda .
To create division and pit communities against each other, it is also necessary to convince immigrant populations that they are mistreated . To create division, it's also necessary.
 These tendencies, which are only likely to increase in coming years, are of serious concern . These tendencies are likely to rise in the coming years .
 ‘Citizen consultations’ on Europe began last April and will end in October 2018 . The “citizen consultations on Europe’s Europe, which began in April, began last year, will end next October .
 The content of the European Economic and Social Committee reports could also become the target of an information manipulation and/or a denigration campaign . The automated propagation of the most subversive posts could also be used in a second phase .
Email hacking would reveal contact details of political representatives and officials in charge of the negotiations . The emails would also reveal confidential correspondences .
 If successful, these attacks could result in the selective dissemination of—potentially falsified—content so as to discredit the negotiation process and/or spread the seeds of discord between European partners and the EU .
 One-off information manipulation campaigns are also likely to target specific points of the negotiations .
 The European Union is the largest body of the European Union in the world . The EU is the second largest body in the EU, with more than 1,000 members .
 Several information manipulation campaigns are launched in order to exacerbate tensions between EU Member States .
 Visegrad group meetings are targeted at the content of the meetings, according to the group . One of these is aimed at the Central European States with intentions they do not actually have . It is also reinforcing mistrust between Eastern and Western European States ahead of the 2019 European elections .
 Another campaign could target the EU leadership and reform ambitions borne by the Franco-German partnership . Campaign could reinvigorate intra-European divisions generated by the Eurozone crisis .
 Attacks specifically targeted at France take place in order to undermine the government by creating one or several political scandals .
 Define and clearly distinguish the terms, as we sought to do in the introduction of the new term .
 This should help counter widespread relativism, in other words, the claim that “everything is propaganda” and that all the media spreads disinformation . This should also help counter worldwide relativism .
 Russian media have a legitimate right to defend Russian viewpoints, says CNN's John Sutter . We must not condemn the defense of national interests, he says .
 Do not underestimate the threat, even though it may not be perceptible on an everyday basis . Do not underestimated the threat.
 The Finnish Security Strategy for Society insists that a good preparation against information manipulation depends on an accurate evaluation of the threat .
 INFORMATION MANIPULATION threatening scenarios and planning for the potential risks and conflicts that they would involve .
 The short-term goals relate to specific events, often an election, an armed conflict, a social protest, a natural disaster, an assassination or an attempted assassination .
 Fake internet accounts and hoaxes are more conspicuous, more aggressive, and less subtle because they have an inherently limited lifespan . They are bound to be exposed or suppressed once the goal has been achieved .
 Long-term operations, on the other hand, are aimed at undermining certain ideas and opinions, or at exacerbating tensions and divisions .
 The effects of subtle actors are more difficult to assess . They have insidious, incremental subversive effects, steered by more subtle and discreet actors .
 It is important to go beyond short-term approaches, often through the prism of electoral cycles, to tackle only those informational threats that arise during elections .
 Information manipulation feeds off of divisions and tensions that run through the fabric of our societies, says the author .
We cannot fight back effectively, or durably, against these forms of manipulation without the political will to increase resilience within our societies, says the author .
 Finland has made resilience against so-called “hybrid threats into a national concept. From this point of view, we have much to learn from certain States, in particular Finland, who have made resilience.
 Conspiracy theories prosper all the more easily if they are not contradicted .
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 8 February 2018, will be held in Finland .
Every correction indirectly increases the circulation of the false information, says the author . Every correction indirectly increase the circulation.
 This propagation effect cannot be avoided and it is therefore important to focus on counteracting those instances of information manipulation that are most dangerous .
 Civil society must remain the first shield against information manipulation in liberal, democratic societies .
 The most important recommendation for governments is that they should make sure they retain as light a footprint as possible . It's not just in keeping with our values, but also out of a concern for effectiveness .
 As one of the roots of the problem is distrust of elites, any “top down’s approach is inherently limited . The root of the issue is distrust.
 It is preferable to champion horizontal, collaborative approaches, relying on the participation of civil society . It's preferable to champions horizontal and collaborative approaches .
 Those that have not should establish a national entity responsible for the detection and countering of information manipulation. Those that don't should be responsible for detecting and countering information manipulation .
 A dedicated center endowed with its own staff. This entity can take various forms, from the network of competent people to the creation of a dedicated center . The center can take different forms.
 As it may involve bureaucratic rivalries, one crucial aspect relates to the issue of institutional affiliation .
 In the present international landscape, some entities are supervised by an inter or supra-ministerial body . Others are hosted within a particular ministry .
 The nature of the link (executive powers or merely a secretariat role) also varies . The role of the secretariat is unclear but it can be used in executive roles .
 Extracts from a lecture on counter-propaganda given by the Head of Information Research Department in a secret series of lectures .
 PR 89/45 G, TNA FCO 141/7460, September 1952, on psywar.org, 30 April 2012 .
 When the group is too large or too heterogeneous, discussions tend to diminish in quality and efficiency . The group of people is too big or too hierarchically heterogeneous.
 The interdisciplinary team should also include information system experts who tend to be confined to crisis resolution while they should in fact take part in strategic thinking .
 In Eastern and Central Europe, the role of security and military forces is emphasized . The role of the military forces in the Baltic States is emphasized. In those countries that are most exposed to foreign pressure, in Eastern and central Europe and in Baltic States .
 Using Lessons Learned from Countering Kremlin ’r Hostile Subversive Operations in Central and Eastern Europe, European Values, Kremlin Watch Report, 30 April 2018, 3 and 28.
In Canada, the brunt of responsibility in the fight against disinformation falls unto the Ministry of Democratic Institutions . In Canada, information manipulation threatens elections, and thus the integrity of democratic processes .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs has an important role to play in monitoring and providing early warning, especially in instances of malign campaigns .
 The goal is to do so as early as possible. Nevertheless, they can be detected and they can't be detected .
 These probes can be passive accounts, which only listen, or active ones, which take part in discussions . They can be active or passive accounts .
 Clandestine operations are risky because they can jeopardize the credibility of the source and invigorate conspiratorial actors . If exposed (and it is becoming increasingly difficult to prevent this in the long-run), they can endanger the source .
 Such painstaking work is essential in order to understand the channels of propagation, but also to enable anticipation and adequate action . Such painstaking works are essential to understand channels of propagating, and also to allow anticipation and action .
In order to win this war, it is not only necessary to ensure a continuous presence on the web, to have a communication strategy, disseminate targeted messages, and be able to refute false information .
 It is equally important to be proactive by drawing the adversary out of their comfort zone . It is also important to draw them out of the comfort zone.
Whenever government services detect trolls or dormant bots, they should be exposed publicly before they are even used . For example, whenever government services find trolls or bots, it should be public .
 It's possible to condemn an attack without revealing its source and then leave it to the media to do their work . It is possible to condemning an attack.
 This was also the approach the Germans adopted during their pre-electoral period . This was the approach they adopted during the German pre-election period .
 Proactive communication is now widely recognized as the strategy to follow . Proactive communications is now considered a strategy for the future .
 For States who do not have English as their official language, it is also important to communicate information in English about their doctrine and national strategy .
 The traceability of information must be a measure of its quality. The public has a right to know who speaks, similar to the logic that prevails in food safety .
Developing our legal system to protect democratic life from fake news, he says . “I have decided that we would make changes to the legal system so as to protectdemocratic life fromfake news.’
 platforms will be required to meet obligations of increased transparency regarding all sponsored content . Platforms must make public the identity of advertisers and those who control them .
 The regulating powers, which will be thoroughly reshaped in 2018, will be increased to manage attempts at destabilization by television services controlled or influenced by foreign States .
 CSA will refuse to conclude agreements with such services by assessing content published by said services, including on the internet . This will allow the reworked CSA [French media regulatory authority]
 It will also enable the regulator, in the event of an act likely to affect the outcome of the ballot, to suspend or cancel an agreement . The regulator will also be able to cancel or suspend an agreement.
In other words, we must preserve the equilibrium between protecting the population and respecting civil liberties, which are the foundations of our liberal democracies, says John Sutter .
 We must be mindful of the risk of our actions having such unintended effects. We must also be aware of the risks of unintended effects, says the author .
 The American and British examples show that public inquiries offer many benefits in terms of raising citizens’ awareness, accumulating knowledge and providing deterrence .
The role of social networks in information manipulation is now widely recognized . The role of information manipulation has been widely recognized.
 They have become the principal source of information, and hence of disinformation, for a majority of the population . They have also become the main source of Information, and therefore of disinformation .
 It is unclear whether digital platforms actually want to curb these practices . Information manipulation is costly for their reputation, according to experts .
 It is up to legislators to strike the right balance between freedom of expression and accountability . It is a fight against digital platforms in the fight against information manipulation. It's up to Legislators to strike right balance.
 We cannot, on the one hand, wait for digital platforms to do more in the fight against information manipulation while, not providing them with information that is sometimes necessary for them to move forward . We can't wait to wait to fight against digital platforms.
 Public-private cooperation is of capital importance and demands knowledge-sharing in both directions . Public- private cooperation is a key part of the world's future .
 Two former senior officials of the Obama administration made recommendations to the Trump administration . This is one of the recommendations made in the context of the midterm elections of 2018 .
 Central, Eastern, and Northern European States alongside the U.K. and U.S. Central and Eastern states alongside the United States .
 France and Spain are in the process of stepping up their international presence because they too have been the target of attacks . France, Spain and Spain have been targeted by attacks in recent years .
 Other States should not wait to be attacked; they should become more active now . Other states should not be attacked, they should be active now, they say .
 The Ministry of Defense will soon be sending a resident expert to the NATO Excellence Center in Riga . So too has civil society been actively involved, according to the parliamentary hearings .
 The Centre of Excellence for National Security at the S Rajaratnam School of International Studies organizes an annual seminar on disinformation . It is one of the very rare meeting points between research and practitioner communities from Europe, North America, Asia and Africa .
 This diversity is quite refreshing for those accustomed to the Euro-Atlantic scene, which tends to only view the subject through the Russian lens . It's quite refreshing.
 China presents itself as an ever-increasing threat in the region, such as the Australian case illustrates . There are interesting parallels with Russia to be explored, including to find out what these countries are learning from each other .
 An international early warning mechanism could be established, connecting all of the networks, centers and agencies of the EU and NATO Member States .
 Some groups, mostly in the U.S. have suggested the creation of an international coalition .
 Democratic U.S. Senators recommended the creation of “an international coalition against hybrid threats,” which would be spearheaded by the United States .
 50 RECOMMENDATIONS have been held annually since 2015 . They urged the American President to convene an annual world summit on hybrid threats .
 Representatives from civil society and private actors would be invited to take part in the show . The show would be held in the UK .
 A transatlantic alliance already exists and would require an explanation to Moscow . However, it appears problematic, not just because it excludes Canada, but because it already exists .
 The coalition would run the risk of looking like an anti-Russian, rather than anAnti-Russian anti-disinformation-alliance .
 Existing structures, within the EU or NATO, are less susceptible to criticism of such criticism . The EU and NATO are less vulnerable to such criticism.
 This Commission is a new actor worth watching, even though it is too soon to assess the role it will play .
 The G7 offers an obvious platform from which to share best practices and formulate common approaches to countering information manipulation . G7 is a great way to share the best practices of the G7.
 Canada made the issue one of its priorities of its Presidency of the G7 in 2018 . Canada proposed various mechanisms for exchanges and joint action .
 France will take over the G7 Presidency in 2019 . The joint efforts are predicated on the preservation and defense of democracy .
 The promotion of media literacy in schools stands as one of the most widely agreed-upon recommendations, despite its unequal application by governments . The Open Society 14.
 If we strictly limit ourselves to media-literacy obtained through schooling, it is a long term measure . The effects will only be visible once the children reach adulthood .
 It is important to consider media literacy and, more broadly, the development of critical thinking, for the whole population, at all stages of life . It's important to think about media literacy, and more broadly.
 The education of teenagers and students is particularly important because they tend to be the most vulnerable to information manipulation for a variety of reasons .
 Offering a core curriculum first-year course in university would be useful and easy to implement .
 This is a public hygiene measure. This is just as people in the 19* century learned to wash their hands . This is the first time people have used this measure .
 One possibility would be to follow the Swedish model and publish a “digital hygiene guide’ for use by politicians and political parties .
 It is crucial to educate the general public from a very early age, but also at different stages of life, says the author .
 Courses in critical thinking and rational argumentation are widely available in some countries . Courses are considered an indispensable prerequisite in university .
 These courses teach students how to recognize a paralogism or a sophism and to detect fallacious reasoning .
 In school, children should be taught how to construct as well as deconstruct false information and conspiracy theories .
 Resilience to Post-Truth’ and its Predictors in the New Media Literacy Index 2018, March 2018 .
Normand Baillargeon, Petit Cours d'autodefense intellectuelle, Montreal, 2005. Normand Bailargeon: "I'm a great writer, I'm a good writer, and I'm not a good person"
 Children should also learn to use Google image so as to verify the source of any given image .
 There could be awareness-raising messages played before YouTube videos or sent by digital platforms as private messages . It is possible to reach out to adults through public campaigns around particular events or through training programs .
 The Baltic Centre for Media Excellence trains journalists and teachers across the region . It is an interesting example of the activities of the organisation .
 In public service and in the Ministries and services most concerned, it is crucial to train staff members so as to reinforce overall ‘digital hygiene’ and develop internal expertise .
 civil servants to acquire new skills from innovative companies . This involves new recruitment criteria as well as new training programs, public-private partnerships and mobility programs .
 Institutions similar to the French Institute for Higher National Defence Studies could offer training sessions dedicated to informational threats .
Games can be quite effective at garnering the interest of young and old alike .
Russia's immune system against information infection is grounded in a capacity to monitor and analyze the information space . Russia's ability to comprehend those who manipulate information and, above all, Russia, is also a key part of the immune system .
 It is necessary to support research on Russia and the post-Soviet sphere at large, it is said .
 This does not mean reviving “sovietology, but acknowledging that it is possible to respond adequately only to that which we understand well . This doesn't mean revives “ovietology’s” but acknowledges that it can be responded adequately.
 States must increase research funding and introduce calls for tenders aimed at studies on predetermined topics or even fund PhDs and/or postdoctoral research projects . In concrete terms, this means that states must increase funding .
 Russia Today and Sputnik have been organs of influence during this campaign, he says . "It is a matter of serious concern that we have foreign news organizations under whatever influence," he says.
 Emmanuel Macron during a joint press conference with President Vladimir Putin at Versailles, 29 May 2017 .
 Counter-measures are often criticized for not being entertaining and for this reason, missing their target audience .Counter-measures often miss the target audience.
 false information stories involving false information are usually amusing . On the other hand, stories involvingfalse information are often amusing .
 RT and Sputnik practice “infotainment,’ a combination of information and entertainment, compared to which corrective measures can appear very stern . RT and sputnik Practice “Infotainment’s’a combination of Information and entertainment.
 humor, satire, jokes and mockery work remarkably well against information manipulation. Yet experience in Europe and North America tells us that humor, satirism, satire and jokes work very well against manipulation .
 Information manipulation exploits the vulnerabilities of our democratic societies . Information manipulation is used to exploit vulnerabilities of democratic societies, says author .
 It is necessary to map out, locate and understand these vulnerabilities in order to anticipate and try to prevent hostile actions . For this reason, it is needed to find and locate these vulnerabilities .
 The ability to put ourselves in the shoes of the adversary is essential in order to better predict their next moves . It is essential to put yourself in the shoe of the adversaries, says the author .
 "red teams" try to identify and manipulate our weaknesses, says John Sutter . Sutter: We must not only study then by research and intelligence but also test our procedures through “red teams,”e.e.
 Information manipulation tries to systematically instill doubt in the values and principles of the communities it targets .
 The best way to combat manipulation attempts are to have a clear idea of what we wish to protect . We need to be aware of the manipulation attempts and have an idea what we want to protect.
 Acknowledge the unavoidable reversal and diversion of our counter-measures . Acknowledges the unavoidable reverses and diversion.
 It is important to recognize that our countermeasures will, in turn, be manipulated by the enemy . It's important torecognize that ourcountermeasures will be manipulated.
 It is necessary to encourage positive approaches that promote free circulation of high quality information, in contrast to the fragmentation that currently dominates the internet .
 Establishing a regular and open dialogue between journalists and policymakers can help to fight against information manipulation .
 Sweden's Media Council meets on a regular basis, bringing together media leaders and politicians to identify challenges they face .
 Information manipulation is but one element in a complex system; it feeds off of other forms of influence . Information manipulation can be seen as a form of influence, but it can also be used to influence others .
 In the case of Russia, targeted States should reduce their energy dependence on Russia . The United States should target corruption and the Russian financial circuits that contribute to the funding of influence operations .
 In external operations, nurture relationships with the local population . In external operation, nurture relationship with local residents .
 It is important to never forget that “every action projects an image, generates a perception for the adversary, for local populations 20. It is also important to remember that ‘every action project an image’
 Europe’s Counter to Fake News and Cyber Attacks, May 23 2018 . The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a project that aims to combat fake news .
 Information manipulation is both a cause and a symptom of the crisis of confidence in the digital arena . Information manipulation can be seen as a sign of the digital crisis, says the author .
 Effectively fighting against manipulations will have the end result of increasing confidence, says the author .
 At the same time, this first requires having an understanding of the psychological mechanisms that underpin trust, by placing oneself in the users’ position, and promoting good practices .
 It would be useful to seek enhanced cooperation which would allow the establishment of reliability indices for online content . In this way, it would be helpful to seek increased cooperation .
 The correction must entail an explanation of why and how disinformation was spread . Second, the correction must also explain how disinformation is spread .
Develop normative initiatives while recognizing that a proliferation of competing norms and standards will only weaken the overall effort. Develop normative initiatives. Developing normative initiatives will only strengthen the overall efforts .
 The objective should be to put forward a small number of tools of reference, possibly in connection with reputable NGOs .
 The Reporters Without Borders initiative is, in this respect, very promising . It's a very promising initiative, says the group .
 The majority of major media platforms have charters of good editorial practices and ethics . The majority have good journalistic practices, ethics .
 The 1971 Munich Charter can provide a useful foundation, but it needs to be adapted to the contemporary media landscape . The 1971 Charter can be used to help develop the modern media landscape, says author .
 Train journalists to better understand the risks of information manipulation, in journalism schools and throughout their careers .
 There are 26 questions that may serve as a basis for teaching material . There are concrete answers to these questions .
 Thetrustproject.org 50 RECOMMENDATIONS the profiles of journalists, proof of their expertise on the subject matter .
 Readers want to know how journalists work, and how they know what they know . The idea is that readers want to be able to understand what they do .
 This transparency in terms of practices, methods, and journalistic procedures can help build trust . This transparency can help to build trust. This transparency could help to help to building trust .
 Perspective by Jigsaw uses machine-learning and self-learning to identify toxic messages that can then be isolated, stopped before publication .
 Another method consists of the publication of lists of accounts identified as trolls . Another method is the release of lists that identify trolls as trolls.
 Use artificial intelligence and automatic language processing tools in the detection of manipulation attempts and fact-checking . Use the tools to detect manipulation attempts.
 Detection software, such as Storyzy, are continuously multiplying and being perfected .
Certain software can automatically compare the suspicious news story with all others that were already “debunked’s” so as to avoid repeating the work for nothing .
 This assumes that there is shared access to databases, hence the need for verification networks . This assumes there is share access to database databases .
 Automated verification saves time, but still requires a human at the end of the process to validate its results . The process is done with the help of a human on the ground .
 Polls aimed at assessing public sensitivity to information manipulation. Develop surveys and polls aimed to assess public sensitivity.
 Collecting precise data on a regular basis would improve the effectiveness of counter-measures . The data would improve counter- Measures .
 Rethink the economic model behind journalism, so as to reconcile the preservation of freedom of expression, free market competition and the fight against information manipulation . The economic model of journalism is to be reconciled.
Higher education institutions must also organize media training courses to teach specific skills needed to best interact with the media . In line with this exercise of disseminating research, higher education institutions need to organize training courses .
 The dissemination of research must be increasingly valorized in the career, as well as a major criterion for evaluation, says the author . In order to incite academics to practice, the author says .
 The possibility of an anti-trust regulation proposed by the European Commission expert group also deserves consideration .
 Demand the establishment of a new contract with users that is founded on new digital rights . Demand the creation of new contracts that are founded on digital rights.
 The terms of reference must be reassessed so as to make them intelligible to all and more explicit as regards issues of access to and management of personal data . It must be more explicit to make it more explicit.
Wishing for more transparency is no longer good enough after Cambridge Analytica scandal, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Internet users must be informed of the campaigns that can affect them and the reasons for such targeting . Internet users need to be informed about the campaigns and why they are targeted .
 Political advertising connected to the exploitation of big data must be subjected to specific regulation . Political advertising must be subject to specific regulations .
 The possibility has been raised of establishing a public mediator who would be granted access to algorithms .
 Increase the cost of information manipulation while ensuring the protection of vulnerable individuals and movements . Increase the price of information manipulations while ensuring that vulnerable people and movements are protected .
 More systematic action must be undertaken against the agents of manipulation, drawing on the concept of “threat actor’s” a term that comes from the field of cybersecurity .
 platforms could conduct inquiries that lead to the identification of a hostile actor and then suppress all of those actor’s online outlets . Rather than censoring contentious content one by one [a ‘whack-a-mole approach’], platforms could use the
 Whistle-blowers and organizations that are targeted by an information manipulation campaign must be warned in advance through a special detection system . Whistleblowers must also be warned by a special detect system .
 They must benefit from protective procedures that will enable them to defend themselves . They must also benefit from protection procedures that allow them to protect themselves .
 Digital platforms have appropriated the bulk of the advertising revenue used to be allocated to the funding of traditional media .
 These platforms have also capitalized on these media’s primary content without remunerating them . These platforms are also capitalizing on the media's primary content .
 It is important to think about new methods of redistribution of information from digital platforms to quality media . It is also important to consider new ways of redistributing information.
 Require platforms to contribute to the funding of quality journalism, by requiring them to provide funding for fact-checking, for example . For example, fact-check platforms must also provide funding.
 It is necessary to devise new forums in which platforms’ intellectual property rights would be guaranteed, in exchange for easier access to data, software and algorithms .
 A preliminary framework for ethical research based on the model by which doctors access their patients’ medical files . This entails, particularly in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, the establishment of a preliminary framework . This includes the creation of a Preliminary framework for
 Explore redirection methods so as to ensure those who seek fake news also come across debunking .
 The idea is to apply such methods to other cases of information manipulation . It is not the first time the idea has been applied to such cases .
 In many countries, responses to information manipulation raise concerns . Responding to objections raise concerns, sometimes sincere and other times feigned and calculated .
 In all cases, these responses are legitimate objects of democratic debate . But, they are not the only ones to respond to questions .
 In the following pages, we list the principal criticisms and provide some answers to these objections . We also offer some answers.
 The role of disinformation in recent crises (Brexit, American electionsj) has been overstated, according to CNN .
 There is no conclusive research demonstrating that fake news has a direct and tangible impact on internet users .
 Recent experience has demonstrated, on the contrary, that it is important to not underestimate the seriousness of information manipulation . By responding to disinformation in a conspicuous manner, we risk granting the stories undue importance, says author .
 The Lisa Case has had very real consequences on the rise of anti-migrant sentiment in Germany . Such effects are often irreversible, despite later efforts to restore the truth .
 The Obama Administration chose not to alert the public to the information manipulation campaign targeting the country . The move eased the course of an ongoing democratic destabilization effort .
 The German Chancellor referred to manipulation threats in the wake of the 2015 attack on the Bundestag .
 Digitalplatforms are the ideal scapegoats to blame for the evils of society . Digital platforms are the perfect scapegoats for society .
 This very neutrality requires strong principles and clear rules to prevent it from being diverted towards malicious goals or from serving projects that are hostile to our democracies and our citizens’ welfare .
 It is high time that platforms take responsibility and that governments draw all the lessons from this type of scandals. It's high time for platforms to take responsibility.
 Contemporary information manipulation campaigns succeed in sowing seeds of doubt in a variety of audiences . The proposed solutions will only impact those who are already convinced .
 Measures that support media literacy, fact-checking and quality journalism reinforce the resilience and immunity of the wider public to manipulation threats . Measures that back media literacy and fact-check and journalism reinforce resilience of wider public.
 The most radical or pro-conspiracy theory segments of public opinion will not be convinced, but they are a minority and must remain so . We are conscious of the fact that the most radical and pro-Conspiracy theories are not convinced .
 Initiatives led by non-governmental and independent organizations such as RSF seek to create consensus 50 RECOMMENDATIONS within the profession .
 In order to avoid counterproductive effects, ranking and labeling schemes must offer guarantees of transparency of the process, the quality of the criteria, and demonstrate the inclusivity and diversity of those assessing these criteria .
 The French President referenced the issue of conflicts of interest between shareholders and editorial boards . He suggested some possible courses of action by which to guarantee full editorial independence of the media .
 MadaMisr, an independent, progressive newspaper who had voiced opposition to the current regime, was censored . Among these censored sites was Mada Misr, a progressive newspaper that voiced opposition towards the regime .
 France's parliamentary bill against information manipulation currently under consideration . The cure is therefore worse than the disease .
 The bill relies on a reinforcement of the powers of the ordinary judge, the guardian of liberty, and the CSA . The CSA is responsible for ensuring freedom of audiovisual expression .
 The fundamental goal of this legislative proposal is simply to protect the honesty and integrity of the ballot, so that it faithfully reflects the popular will . The goal of the proposal is to ensure that the ballot reflects the public will .
 The fake news anathema has become a convenient tool with which dictators and illiberal regimes justify censorship . This is a real risk and one that we take very seriously, says Peter Bergen .
 We made a conscious decision to respond to information manipulation in a transparent and democratic manner . We made the decision to cooperate with civil society and the media, according to the government .
 Our response is by nature more difficult to flip around in an authoritarian setting, says the author .
 The CSA is an independent regulation authority whose mission is to protect freedom of audiovisual expression .
 France will remain vigilant, at every stage of the response, to ensure that civil liberties in an illiberal/ authoritarian context are duly taken into account . France will be vigilant, and will be careful to ensure civil liberties are taken in account .
 The various initiatives mentioned in this report aim at fostering quality content, not at censoring biased or false content . The initiatives aim to foster quality content and not to censor biased content .
 RT and Sputnik do not resort to the methods frequently used by RT and sputnik, such as the fabrication of facts and the falsification of documents and translations .
 It is these instances of information manipulation, and these alone, that we denounce, not the fact that these outlets have a particular point of view . "It is these cases of information manipulations, and this alone, we denounce," he says .
 The scapegoat argument: You blame Moscow for all of the Western world’s evils . Those actors who are behind information manipulation campaigns are not the source of our societies’ evils .
 The fight against information manipulation must also take into account other actors, potential or known, who are likely to undertake information manipulation campaigns . They deliberately identify fault-lines intrinsic to each society (religious and linguistic minorities, historical issues, inequality, separatist tendencies, racial tensions, etc
 Your response proves that you take your citizens forfools who are unable to “think correctly’s’.
 Our duty is to protect our democratic institutions and our national interests from hostile information manipulation, says David Frum .
 Western nations did not hesitate to resort to state propaganda in the colonial context . Western nations, and Trance in particular, did not hesitation to use state propaganda .
 This is a remit of historians who study and shall continue to study all the chapters of our national history . This is the INFORMATION MANIPULATION remit from historians .
Today, we are faced with a new, specific challenge, which we must tackle not only by drawing upon the lessons of the past, but also by looking towards the future . Today, we're faced with the new challenge.
 The International Council of the European Union is holding a summit on international relations . The European Union will host a summit in Paris next week on the continent .
 Propaganda and Trolling as Warfare Tools,’s European Vieiv, 10 May 2016 .
 The new book is published by CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2016 . The book will be published by the company's publishing platform .
 The Decouverte, 2007, was La Fabrication de I'information, La Decouvert, 2007 . It was the first time the two men have been together since 2007 .
 Security Implications of False Information Online, NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, November 2017 .
 Ideas, Domestic Politics and External Relations, Palgrave Mcmillan, 2015, is Palgrave.
 Information Warfare in the Internet is known as Information Warfare . The Internet is a form of information warfare .
Russian military officials have been working together to maintain Russia's military security . They have worked together on a series of "Asymmetrical Actions"
 The Political Economy of the Mass Media is the political economy of the mass media .
 Cyber Threats to Canada’s Democratic Processes, Government of Canada, 2017 .
 "Russia’s Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps," says Mary Ellen .
Stanford study examines fake news and the 2016 presidential election . Stanford Neu’s, 2017.
Damarad Volha and YELISEYEU Andrei, Disinformation Resilience in Central and Eastern Europe, 2018 . They are the two authors of the DisinformationResilience Index .
Seben, Total Bullshit l An caur de lapost-verite, PUF, 2018 .
 Riga NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016 . Thomas is the Social Media's Role in “Hybrid Strategies’,’ RigaNATO Strategic Communications Center of Excellence .
 EL-OIFI Mohammed, “Disinformation a 1’israelienne,” Le Monde diplomatique, 2005. Mohammed, "disinformation a1’sraelienne"
 The Independent High Level Group on Fake Neu’s and Online Disinformation has published a report on fake Neu.
 Kremlin Watch Report, 30 April 2018. How to tailor national strategy using lessons learned from countering Kremlin’s hostile subversive operations .
 "Countering Russian Meddling in U.S. Political Processes," says James R. James R . He says the United States is fighting Russia's "Meddling"
 A Catalog of Modi Operandi, FOI Totalforsvarets forskningsinstitut, March 2013 . The Catalog was published by FOI.
Daniel Alina and POLYAKOVA Alina are co-authors of the Democratic Defense Against Disinformation . Alina is also a member of the Atlantic Council, Eurasia Center .
 GAGLIANO Giuseppe: Disinformation, desobeissance civile etguerre cognitive, VA Press, 2016 . GAGliano Giuseppi: Dis Information, Disinformation and desobe Renaissance civile and cognitive .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine and Russian Non Linear War are published in Moscow's Shadows, July 2014 .
 GARRIGOU Alain, “Ce que nous apprennent les ‘fake news’, says Alain .
 GASTINEAU Pierre and VASSET Philippe, Amies de destabilisation massive. GASTineAU Pierre, VASSet Philippe, are the two men responsible for the destabilisation of France .
 The Next Phase of Russian Information Warfare, NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016. GILES Keir, Handbook of Raissian Information warfare, Fellowship Monograph 9, NATO Defense College Research Division .
 LUCAS Didier, La Guerre cognitive, Lavauzelle, 2002. Ecole de guerre economique, 2015, is the first time the two have been named .
 Understanding Russian Propaganda in Eastern Europe, RAND Corporation.
 The Department of the Taoiseach released its first report in June 2018 . The report was prepared by the Interdepartmental Group on Security of Ireland.
 JANDA Jakub: Why the West is Failing to Counter Kremlin Disinformation Campaigns .
 "L’art de la desinformation" includes 13 articles, May 1987 .
 Kremlin’s traditional agenda and export of values to Central Europe, Political Capital Institute, 4 August 2016 .
NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016-2017. LANGE-IONATAMISVILI Elina, Rjtssia’s Footprint in the Nordic-Baltic Information Environment .
 Techniques and Counter-strategies to Rjtssian Propaganda in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Emmanuel Macron is the President of the French Republic . He is the first French president to be in charge of the country's government .
 European Council on Foreign Relations, March 2018, is on the European Council of Foreign Relations .
 "Countering Russian Disinformation" by Timothy P. Timothy P., “Countering Russia Disinformation,” he says . P. P. is the author of the book, ‘CounteringRussian Disinformation’
 MEGRET Maurice, Ea Guerrepsychologique, PUF, “Que sais-je,’s ‘Que sa is-je’ — E’Actionpsychologistique, Artheme Fayard, 1953 . �
 The Tolly of Technological Solutionism, PublicAffairs, 2014. “Les vrais responsables des fausses nouvelles He Monde diplomatique, 2017.’
 Alt-right attacks Macron in last ditch effort to sway French election, says Atlantic Council's Digital Torensic Research Tab .
 The Ramses 2018. NOCETTI Julien, “Comment l’information recompose les relations internationales,’s in MONTBRIAL Thierry de and DAVID Dominique .
 The Minister of Culture is a member of the French National Council of Culture . He is also the head of the European Union's European Commission .
 "How information overload helps spread fake news," says O'CARROLL Eoin . The Christian Science Monitor, 27 June 2017.
 Sarah and ADKINS Travis L. Travis L., Disinformation Toolkit, InterAction, June 2018 .
 How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Demo crazy, Crown, 2016 .
 A Review of Relevant Psychological Research, Center for Asymmetric Threat Studies . Swedish National Defence College,d. The Swedish National Defense College.
 Miriam, The Russian ‘Firehose of Falsehood’ Propaganda Model, is published in 2016 . Christopher Christopher and MATTHEWS Miriam are the authors of the book .
 Russia, The West, and the Coming Age of Global Digital Competition, Brookings, March 2018 .
 The Interpreter is a project of the Institute of Modern Russia, 2014 . It is the first time the Russian government has published a book on Russian culture .
Trolling, 19 July 2018, is the latest in a series of state-sponsored trolling events in the United States .
 The author of the book, O'Reilly, will be on CNN.com's new book, "O'Reilly" The book is based in New York City, New York, and will be published in 2015 . The book will be based in the United States.
 Adrien: "Le Decodex, un premier pas vers la verification de masse de l’information" He Monde, 2017, is the author of a new book, "LeDecodex"
 NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence. SZWED Robert, Framing of the Ukraine-Russia Conflict in Online and Social Media, May 2016 . Robert is the director of the NATO Strategic Communication Centre of excellence .
 The Solution to Russian Propaganda is not EU or NATO Propaganda, but Advanced Social Science to Understand and Mitigate Its Effects in Targeted Populations .
 TENENBAUM Elie, Ee Pi'ege de la guerre hybride, Focus strategique 63, IFRI, October 2015 .
 Rjissian meddling in the Catalan question, October 2017, is the subject of a new book . The book will be published in October 2017 .
 The HAGUE CENTRE for STRATEGIC STUDIES, Inside the Kremlin House of Mirrors, is the HAGue CENTRE.
 Horn Liberal Democracies can Counter Ratssian Disinformation and Societal Interference, 2017 .
 TUFEKCI Zeynep, 'YouTube, the Great Radicalizer, ‘YouTube,’ TheNeiv York Times, 10 March 2018 .
 "Responsible Reporting in an Age of Irresponsible Information," says Heidi.
 US DEPARTMENT of Justice, Report of the Attorney General's Cyber Digital Task Force, July 2018 .
 The French president of France has been in office for more than a decade . He was elected to the presidency of France in 2008 . He is currently in office in Paris, France, with the French President Nicolas Sark Sarkozy .
 The election was held in the French capital, Paris .
 How to Tailor National Strategy using Lessons Learned from Countering Kremlin’s Hostile Subversive Operations in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Vladimir, Desinformation, flagrant delit, Ed. du Rocher, 1999. Vladimir: "La Desinformation vue de I’Est, Ed., Ed. Du Rocher" Vladimir: “La Des Information vue. I'Est
 The spread of true and false news online, says Science, 359:6380, 9 March 2018 .
 The Weaponigation of Information-The Need for Cognitive Security, RAND Corporation, 2017 . Rand: "The Weaponigate of Information—The Need For Cognitive Security"
 Toimrd an interdisciplinary framework for research andpolicy making, European Council, 2017 . Toimnd an interciplinary framework for Research and Policy making .
 Ed. du Seuil, “Points,’s 1978. Confusion, desinformation, communication, and communication, he says . “ points,” he writes .
 Mensonge on verite, comment reperer les “fake newi ’ ?, Xenius, Arte, 2017. Mensonge. Mensong onverite: “Fake newi’s’?’ ? .
 Runet, la bataille de I'lnternet russe, Arte, is a web serie with 10 episodes, 2018 . Runet is the first of 10 episodes of Arte's 10-episode web series .
 Marine Guillaume is a Policy officer on ‘Cybersecurity and Digital Affairs’ at the Policy Planning Staff of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs . He is a lecturer at the Ecole Polytechnique .
 A graduate from Sciences Po and alumnus from Ecole Nationale d’Administration . She founded an independent think tank in Beirut dedicated to research on the Arab Spring .
 Acknowledgment: We would like to warmly thank all of our interlocutors, in France and abroad, as well as our colleagues who were eager to help us with the report .
This phenomenon has manifested itself in recent years through various electoral interferences which threaten national security . This phenomenon has been manifested itself through various election interferences . This has been seen as a threat to national security by the government .
 The Policy Planning Staff and the Institute for Strategic Research have joined forces to study this issue . The policy planning staff have also joined forces.
 The report is the product of field research in order to develop a better understanding of the nature of the problem and identify good practices put in place by States and civil society . The report was published by the University of Cambridge in the UK .
 Our research is equally based on the abundant scientific literature on the subject . Our research has been based on a range of scientific literature .
 This report uses the term “information manipulation’ to describe the intentional mass dissemination of false or biased news for hostile political ends . The term is often too narrow or too broad to apply to this specific issue .
 We then identify the beneficiaries of these activities,e.e. The actors carrying out information manipulation. We then proceed to identify the beneficiary of these Activities .
 We focus specifically on States that manipulate information outside their territory or in other words, who interfere in the domestic affairs of other States .
 This report explores the consequences of information manipulation campaigns . It also explores the distinctive features of recent information manipulations .
 The latest French presidential election was the latest attempt to interfere with the presidential election . The election was held in May 2012 . The French president was elected in the second round of the election .
 The report attempts to anticipate future challenges, including future trends in Russian "information warfare" and possible future scenarios . The report also attempts to predict future challenges.
 We propose 50 recommendations, operating on the assumption that information manipulation will remain a problem in the future . It will constitute a long-term challenge for our democracies, they say .
 The Policy Planning Staff is the Center for analysis, prevision and strategy of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs . The Policy planning staff is the center for analysis.
 The IRSEM is the Institute for Strategic Research of the Ministry for the Armed Forces . It is also the Institute of Strategic Research for the Ministry.