 This morning the committee once again welcomes Secretary of State John Kerry to consider the department’s budget request .
 Secretary Kerry last appeared before us. He was presenting the Obama administration's nuclear agreement with Iran .
 The Middle East has been transformed, and not for the better, since the administration got its agreement . In the 7 months since the agreement, the Middle East is transformed .
 Iran has instantly become the dominant country in the region . Now, with access to $100 billion in unfrozen assets and sanctions wiped away, Iran has quickly become a dominant country .
 The Revolutionary Guards, already Iran’s “most powerful economic actor, will only grow more powerful with international investment .
 The committee has deep concerns about the way the Obama administration has chosen to ignore portions of a new bipartisan law ending visa waiver travel for those who have visited Iran . The committee is concerned about how the administration has ignored portions of the new law .
 The committee still awaits a detailed response to its many questions about a surprise $1. billion payment to Iran .
 Syria for the horrible consequences of an emboldened Iran. Look no further than Syria for an emboldening Iran, says Iran .
 Russia, Iran, and Assad are calling the shots on the ground. The slaughter continues, while the Secretary does his best to broker some sort of ceasefire .
 The administration says there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria . As far as Putin and Assad see it, there very much is not a solution .
 Russia's backing of Assad means that ISIS only grows elsewhere. Of course, Russia’s backing of Syria's Assad means ISIS only grow elsewhere .
 ISIS "JV team" has gone global, capable of striking in Europe, in Asia, in Africa, and here at home . The ISIS “JV team’s” have gone global. The ISIS team has been able to strike in Europe and Africa .
 Some 50 ISISlinked groups have carried out attacks in over 20 countries, some 50 ISIS linked groups have been involved .
 Every day that ISIS advances, it draws recruits to plot new attacks abroad . Every day, ISIS advances draws recruits.
 The committee met yesterday with the Chinese Foreign Minister and reminded him that the South China Sea must remain open to international shipping and that any disputes should be resolved peacefully .
 Chinese pressure on the regime in North Korea is weak. Even after the latest North Korean nuclear test, Chinese pressure is weak .
 The President just signed into law this committee’s North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act .
 It is now up to the President to enforce this law aggressively to cut off the funds now flowing to the Kim regime in North Korea .
 The budget does acknowledge the need to respond to Russia’s ‘weaponization of information’ and to ISIS propaganda . The budget also acknowledges the need for response to Russia's “weaponization” of information .
 The Broadcasting Board of Governors is in desperate need of an overhaul . The agency was once called “defunct’s”
 The new diplomatic security training facility helped save the taxpayers over $500 million . The committee's scrutiny of the new facility helped to save the taxpayer $500m .
 Mr Chairman, and Mr Secretary, as always, welcome to our committee. Thank you, Mr Chairman and Mr secretary .
 We work very hard on this committee to make and keep it the most bipartisan committee in Congress . When it comes to foreign policy, our differences really should stop at the water’s edge .
 Congress has an important role in foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter . "We’re grateful for everything you do," he says .
 I'll get into a few specifics, but even if we all listed our top ten foreign policy priorities, we would just be scratching the surface . I will get into the few specifics.
 I can never remember a time when so much was happening, all at the same time . I can't remember when so many things were happening, and all at once .
 If you threw a dart at a map of the world, you’d find an American foreign policy interest .
 It might not be a top priority today because we focus mostly on the fires already burning out of control . The fires are still burning.
 The issues we ignore today will be the fires burning out of control tomorrow, and one thing is certain . The fires will be out ofcontrol tomorrow, says the author .
 Stopping an ongoing crisis is a much costlier business than preventing one, says CNN's John Sutter . Stopping a crisis is more costlier than preventing it, he says .
We need to invest in diplomacy, development, and foreign assistance in order to tackle all of these challenges . We need to spend more money on diplomacy and development, we say .
 We need to show that American leadership is always a sure thing, says John Sutter . "If we’re not doing this work around the world, no one else will," he says .
 Iran must adhere to the letter of the law, says Secretary of Secretary of State .
 I'm glad the administration imposed new sanctions following Iran’s ballistic missile test . I’m glad the new sanctions were imposed following Iran's ballistic Missile test .
 We need to continue making sure Iran, again, is following its nuclear deal obligations to the letter . The letter was signed by the Iranian government on Monday .
 Iran continues stirring up trouble throughout the region, sending IRGC commanders to Syria, supporting the Houthis in Yemen, spreading instability in Lebanon, and being the main supporter of Hezbollah .
 Iran poses an existential threat to Israel, especially the state of Israel . We need to do what it takes to curb Iran’s ongoing mischief and support our allies and partners in the region .
 Russia has provided Assad another lifeline, writes CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he doesn't foresee a quick end to the crisis in Syria .
 The millions of refugees and displaced families desperately need humanitarian assistance . We should support the administration’s $4. billion request, says the White House .
 We need to push for a political resolution to get Assad out of power and help the Syrian people start rebuilding, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We need a politicalresolution to getAssad out of powers and help people rebuild .
 We also need a new AUMF giving the President what he needs to defeat ISIS, says President Obama . We need to stop another large-scale open ended commitment of American troops on the ground .
 Ukraine is fighting again in Ukraine, as fighting again intensifies. Turning to Ukraine, we cannot take our eye off the ball .
 Ukraine’s top priority should be rooting out corruption and pushing reform, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine's top priority is to root out corruption, and we need to support these efforts, he says .
 A stronger, more prosperous Ukraine stands a better chance of turning Putin back . A stronger Ukraine is a better chances of turning the Putin back, says the author .
We need to let Putin know that we will never acquiesce to his illegal occupation of Crimea, and his aggression in Ukraine will not be tolerated. And speaking of Putin, we need to tell him we will not acquiesce.
 NATO is bolstering NATO in Eastern Europe to deter further Russian aggression . I'm glad we're doing the right thing by bolstering the alliance to deter Russian aggression.
 Any talk of sanctions relief for Russia is premature so long as Ukraine doesn't control its own eastern border . Ukraine doesn’t control its Own eastern border.
 The chairman and I feel very strongly about the fact that people who speak Russian sometimes only hear what Putin wants them to hear . The chairman says he feels very strongly.
 We need to make sure that they get a balanced view, we say . They get a very unbalanced view, and we need to be balanced .
 We should support the President’s billion-dollar request for Central America, says President Obama .
 El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras are among the countries where children are migrating . The root causes of child migration are not known, but many children are at risk .
 Colombia's people and government are building a peaceful future. Just as we have supported Colombia throughout this conflict, we should continue standing with Colombia’s people, government .
 Argentina's desire to work more closely with the U.S. is a good sign, says the new government . Argentina's new government is seeking to work with the United States .
 Chairman Royce and I have urged the President to prioritize this relationship, he says . The President is traveling there next month .
 The connection between the birth defect microcephaly and the virus may soon touch nearly every country in the hemisphere .
 We should prioritize awareness efforts, including the risk of sexual transmission, and meet the needs for contraception . We should also focus on the need for contraception, according to the author .
 Women need the right tools and information to choose whether and when to have children, particularly with this virus running wild .
More generally, we continue to see the importance of investing in global health . More generally, more generally, I think, we need to invest in health .
 The President’s budget request is strong, but we should focus on the right priorities, he says . The President's budget requests are strong.
 The funding request from last year hasn't gone up. So, I don't understand why the funding request hasn’t gone up, he says . It's not clear why it's not up .
 Mr Secretary, I could go on and on, but I look forward to hearing from you on these and other concerns . Mr Secretary says he could go to and on but he could also discuss other concerns.
 John Kerry is the 68th Secretary of State of State . John Kerry has been in charge of the U.S. since 2004 .
 The Secretary served as a Senator from Massachusetts for 28 years . He chaired the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for the last 4 years .
Without objection, the witness’ full prepared statement will be made part of the record . Without objection, it will be part of a record-breaking witness's statement .
 Members will have 5 calendar days to submit any statements or questions or any other material for the record . Members will be able to submit their statements and questions for five calendar days .
 "We want as many members as possible to have a chance to question the Secretary, and to accomplish that I would just ask every member and the witness, let’s try to stick to the time limit," he says .
 Secretary of State to answer your questions. That means leaving an adequate amount of time for the Secretary to answer questions .
 Mr Secretary, your testimony, is a summary of your testimony . We will begin with a brief summary of, Mr Secretary.
 The request for resources this year of $50 billion is equal to about 1 percent of the entire Federal budget, Ranking Member Engel says .
 One penny on the dollar is everything we do with respect to diplomatic security, development security, relationship security, and all of the things we do.
 I would suggest very respectfully to members of this committee it is a minimum price for the leadership that we offer to the world, that we are currently engaged. And I would suggesting very respectfully it is the minimum price.
 The chairman said he can’t remember a time where there are as many hot spots, as many difficult challenges . "We are engaged in more places simultaneously than at any time that I can remember," he said .
 The scope of that engagement is essential to protect the interests of our country, says U.S. President Obama .
 We’re confronted today by perils that are as old as nationalist aggression, state actions and as new as cyber warfare, and nonstate actors who are the principal protagonists .
Despite the dangers, I come to you unabashedly ready to say that we Americans, I think, have many and profound reasons for confidence. And despite the dangers. I think that we have many of the reasons forconfidence.
 In recent years, our economy has added more jobs than all of the rest of the industrial world combined . The economy is adding more jobs.
 Our alliances in Europe and Asia are vigilant and strong and growing stronger with the TPP . Our citizens are unmatched with any country in their generosity and their commitment to humanitarian causes to civil society and to freedom .
 The Foreign Minister says he wouldn't switch places with one Foreign Minister in the world .
 The U.S. needs to project our values and protect our interests and build the security of our nation, President Obama says .
 I think that here and now we have enormous opportunities that we are seizing. So I, frankly, think that there are enormous opportunities, I say .
 In the past year, with great debate here, we reached an historic multilateral accord, P5+1, and Iran that has cut off that country's pathways to a nuclear weapon . It has made the world safer because they no longer have the fissile material or the capacity
California spent $8 billion in response to the intensity of storms over the course of the last year alone . The Global Green Climate Fund is asking you to provide for the Global Green climate Fund .
 It will reassert U.S. leadership in the region that is vital to our interests. It will also reassert United States leadership.
 In northern and eastern Europe we are quadrupling support for our security reassurance initiative . Russia has a very clear choice between continued sanctions and meeting its obligations to Ukraine .
 In our hemisphere, we are helping Colombia to end the globe’s longest running civil conflict . We are helping to end Colombia's longest-running civil conflict.
 We’re aiding our partners in Central America to implement reforms that will reduce pressure for illegal migration . We're aiding our partner in Central American to implement reform, says the agency .
 In Asia, we're standing with our allies in opposition to the threats posed by a belligerent North Korea . We're helping Afghanistan and Pakistan to counter violent extremism and we are encouraging resolution of competing maritime claims.
 We have embarked on specific initiatives to combat hunger, to promote health, to fight back against terrorist groups such as al-Shabaab and Boko Haram . We are also working to empower women in Africa.
 The administration recognizes that the threat posed by violent extremism extends far beyond any one region . It will not be addressed simply by military means .
 The approach we have adopted is a comprehensive and a long-term one. So the approach is a complete and a comprehensive one .
 66-nation coalition to counter Daesh and we will defeat Daesh . Diplomatically, we are striving to end conflicts that fuel extremism such as Libya and Yemen .
 Iraqi military has liberated 40 percent of the territory that was held by Daesh .
We're assisting the government in Baghdad as it seeks to professionalize its security forces . We have helped design a plan that has resulted in a possible cessation of hostilities to take place on Saturday .
 The Russian co-chairs are trying to encourage the process to take hold . They have a team that will work in Geneva and another team working in the next couple days directly with the co-chair .
My hope is that we can work out a modality in the next few days that will see this actually take hold . And my hope is, though I know it’s very difficult — no illusions about it — my hopes are that it's very difficult .
 We’re calling on every eligible party to join in this effort. We can talk more, obviously, in the course of the morning about our vision for the political settlement itself. We're calling on everyone to join.
 The last budget of the Obama administration will be submitted to the committee on behalf of American foreign policy and national security .
 There is nothing that I, as Secretary, or personally as a citizen, take more seriously than protecting the security of our country, he says . He says .
 I ask for the fair consideration, for your counsel, your advice, your support and backing for this budget and our initiatives, says author . "I ask for a fair consideration," he says. "For your counsel and your support, for you to back this budget"
 I just want to say thank you to all of you for the extraordinary privilege of being able to work with you in support of an agenda that reflects the best hopes and values of our country. But above all, I just wants to say thanks to you for being able
 America’s leadership is all about. But I am convinced when you analyse the challenges of the world today, I believe this budget also reflects the best hopes of the World .
 Our request this year is roughly level with last year’s right around fifty billion dollars . Our request is about 50 billion dollars.
 That amount, though substantial, is equal to only about one percent of the federal budget . That amount is about one per cent of the budget .
 We seek these resources to sustain America’s international engagement, which is deeper and more wideranging today than ever before in our history .
 The unprecedented scope of our leadership is warranted by the mix of opportunities and challenges we face, says the head of the organisation .
 The United States and its citizens remain committed to the pursuit of international peace, prosperity, and the rule of law . U.S. is confronted by dangers as old as excessive nationalism and as new as cyber warfare, says author .
 The administration's Fiscal Year 2017 budget request embodies every aspect of that commitment . The administration’s fiscal year 2017 request embodies that commitment.
 It is a reflection of our country’s wide-ranging interests, of what we are against and most important what we're for . It is the reflection of the country's wide- ranging interests, it says .
 Most people in most places still turn to the U.S. when important work needs to be done .
 It’s not because anyone expects or wants us to shoulder the full burden but because we can be counted on to lead in the right direction and toward the right goals. It's not because we’re not expected or wants to shoulder it, but because of
 Americans also have ample grounds for confidence, author says . Make no mistake, we live at a moment filled with peril and complexity .
 In recent years, our economy has added more jobs than the rest of the industrialized world combined . The economy has been adding more jobs in recent years .
 Iran has reached multilateral accords on Iran’s nuclear program, climate change, and trans-Pacific trade . Iran's nuclear program and climate change are among the topics discussed .
 We have witnessed important democratic gains in, among other places, including Sri Lanka, Nigeria, and Burma .
We helped facilitate what we hope will be a landmark peace agreement in Colombia . We helped facilitate the peace deal in Colombia, Colombia .
 We have enhanced our position throughout the hemisphere by resuming diplomatic relations with Cuba . We have increased our position in the hemisphere. We have also increased our presence in the Caribbean .
 We 9 marshalled a global campaign to save lives by containing the Ebola virus . We are the leader in championing the empowennent of women and respect for the full range of internationally recognized human rights .
 W e have also taken the lead in mobilizing international solidarity in the fight against such terrorist groups as Daesh, al-Qa’ida, Boko Haram, and al-Shabab groups that have nothing to offer anyone except death .
President Obama's 2016 agenda is focused on key priorities but understanding the potential for emergencies to arise at any moment .
 We think it is essential to make full use of every available foreign policy tool from carrots to coercion . But with an emphasis on persuading governments overseas not just to do what we want, but to want what they want .
 We will act alone when we must, but with allies, partners, partners and friends when possible on every continent . The U.S. will act in every situation where our interests are at risk .
 We will respond to immediate needs, but with long term requirements in mind . We will response to immediate need, but will respond with long-term needs in mind.
 The State Department's principal responsibility is to defend and advance America's well-being in a fast-changing world . 1 will turn now to the specifics of the administration’s budget request for the coming fiscal year .
 The funding we seek is in two parts, the first consists of a base amount of $35. billion . The first part of the funding is in the first part, the second part is the second .
 These resources will deepen cooperation with our allies and regional partners . They will bolster American leadership at the UN and other multilateral organizations .
U.S. diplomatic personnel, platforms, and information will protect U.S.-based personnel and platforms . They will help us to mitigate the harmful consequences of climate change, promote human rights, combat trafficking in persons, and continue valuable educational exchanges .
 Worldwide, they will furnish life-saving humanitarian assistance, foster growth, reduce poverty, increase access to education, combat disease and promote democratic governance and the rule of law .
 The Overseas Contingency Operations portion of our budget is $14. billion . It will improve our ability to prevent, respond to, and recover from crises abroad .
 The number one goal of U.S. foreign policy is to keep Americans safe, says the president .
 This year's budget seeks resources to enhance our nation’s leadership of the 65-member global coalition to degrade and destroy Daesh .
 Our strategy is to combine our power and the 2 10 power of our partners to degrade Daesh’s command structure, shrink the territory under its control, curb its financing, hammer its economic assets, and slow its recruitment .
 President Obama has made clear that Daesh is trying to foment must be opposed with unity and strength .
 Syria has agreed to end hostilities on February 1, 2013, to allow access to humanitarian supplies for all Syrians in need . To that end, we announced a plan to ensure access to aid and humanitarian supplies . We hope that this will evolve into a durable and nationwide ceasefire .
 The full and good faith implementation of these measures to ensure humanitarian access and end violence against civilians in Syria is a top foreign policy priority of the U.S. The United States has a high priority of this policy priority .
 Congressional approval of a new and more specific authorization to use military force against that terrorist organization would be welcomed by the administration .
 Counter-Daesh coalition has launched more than 10,000 air strikes in 17 months since it was formed .
 The combination of air support and ground assaults by local partners has reversed Daesh’s s momentum . The terrorists from Kobani, Tikrit, and Ramadi have weakened their position on the Syria-Turkish border .
 The threat posed by violent extremism extends far beyond the Middle East and the particular dangers spawned by Daesh .
 Those threats cannot effectively be addressed solely or even primarily by military means . Those threats can be addressed only by the military.
 Our approach, therefore, is comprehensive, long term, and designed to enhance the capacity of countries and communities to defeat terrorist groups and prevent new ones from arising . Our approach is comprehensive and long term.
 New Center for Global Engagement is helping partner nations to promote better governance, strengthen democratic institutions, expand access to a quality education, and foster development .
On the diplomatic side, we are striving with the UN and our allies to solidify a new Government of National Accord in Libya . Yemen has been plagued by violence and political unrest that has plagued Yemen .
 The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action cut off each of Iran's potential pathways to a nuclear weapons capability . It required it to take thousands of centrifuges offline, pour concrete into the core of its heavy water reactor, and ship abroad 98 percent of its stockpile of enriched uranium .
 The threat of a nucleararmed Iran has receded, says Iran's foreign minister . Iran has also agreed to rigorous inspection and verification measures, he says . "Our allies are safer, and so are we," he adds .
 In months to come, we will continue our close consultations with Congress as we monitor Iran’s compliance with the Joint Plan . We stand with our allies and friends against Iran's destabilizing policies.
 Israel continues to engage in a record level of military, intelligence, and security cooperation with Israel . In part because of the challenges posed by Iran and other threats, we continue to engage.
We remain committed to helping our ally confront its complex security environment and to ensure its qualitative military edge . We remain committed. We will continue to help our allies confront their complex security environments .
 Each day, we work with Israel to enforce sanctions and prevent terrorist organizations such as Hamas and Hizballah from obtaining the financing and weapons they seek .
 Since 2009, we have provided more than $23 billion in foreign military financing to Israel . Israel constitutes the majority of what we have given to nations worldwide .
 Diplomatically, our support for Israel also remains rock solid . We continue to oppose efforts to delegitimize the Jewish state or pass biased resolutions against it in international bodies .
 The Transatlantic partnership remains a cornerstone of U.S. security and prosperity . The Trans Atlantic partnership remains the cornerstone of American security .
 We are in constant communication with our NATO and EU Allies and partners about a vast array of issues . We are backing for a democratic Ukraine, full implementation by every side of the Minsk protocols .
 This year’s budget includes $953 million to enhance stability, prosperity, energy independence, and good governance in Ukraine . Ukraine and other partner countries facing direct pressure from Russia .
 The Fiscal Year 2017 budget will continue our investment in Central America to fight corruption and crime . The budget will also attack the root economic causes of illegal migration to the United States .
 Our Strategy for Engagement in Central America, with its whole-of-govemment approach, will malce it easier for our regional neighbors to live securely .
 We are supporting Colombia as it seeks to finalize an agreement that will end the world’s longest ongoing civil conflict . In addition, we are also supporting Colombia.
 President Obama announced his intention to seek support for “Peace Colombia,’ a successor to Plan Colombia . Plan Colombia will spur recovery in communities ravaged by the many years of fighting .
 This project will highlight assistance to victims of conflict, and aid in reinforcing security gains, clearing mines, demobilizing rebel fighters, and curbing trade in illegal narcotics .
 President Santos attributed many of his country’s advances to the fact that 1 5 years ago, the Colombians received a friendly hand .
 That friendly hand came from both sides of the aisle . The friendly hand comes from Washington .
 The Cuban government has sharp differences with the government in Havana regarding human rights, political prisoners, and other issues . We remain determined to support the aspirations of the Cuban people to plug into the global economy and live in greater freedom .
 We call on Cuban authorities to remove obstacles to participation by their citizens online and in commercial enterprises . We urge Congress to lift the economic embargo, which has for decades been used as anKCuse by the Castro regime to dodge blame .
 The U.S. is an indispensable contributor to stability, prosperity, and peace in the Asia Pacific . President Obama hosted the ASEAN Summit at Sunnylands in California .
 Dangers in that region include North Korea’s provocative nuclear and ballistic missile programs and tensions stemming from contested maritime claims in the South China Sea .
 United States policy is to encourage security cooperation and dialogue aimed at building confidence and ensuring disputes are settled in keeping with international obligations .
 Our modernizing alliances with Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia, and the Philippines provide a firm foundation for our strategy, as does our multi-dimensional relationship with China . Our partnership with New Zealand and close ties with ASEAN also provide a Firm foundation for the strategy .
 A freely-elected parliament has been seated for the first time in Burma . We have called for an end to discrimination and violence directed at the Rohingya Muslim minority . Our diplomatic priorities include support for human rights .
 Our FY 2017 budget includes $1.25 billion in assistance to the national unity government of Afghanistan to strengthen its institutions .
 We are requesting $742 million in aid to Pakistan to support its citizens as they seek security . Pakistan continues to suffer from terrorist attacks .
 Last October, I traveled to every state in Central Asia to reaffimi America’s friendship with the people in that part of the world .
 Sri Lanka has seen a five-fold increase in bilateral trade over the last decade . In 2015, we strongly endorsed democratic progress in Sri Lanka, while elevating our important strategic dialogue with India .
In Africa, our budget request reflects our emphasis on partnership with civil society, with private sector and with key allies . In Africa, we are focusing on partnership.
 Diplomatically, the United States continues to work closely with regional leaders to prevent crises . The threat of famine, or political controversy, has recently been the cause of urgent concern in Burundi .
 The United States last year assumed chainnanship of the Arctic Council . The U.S. is using the platform to forge united action on the environment, fisheries conservation, and economic opportunity for local populations .
 The U.S. is at the forefront of efforts to address global challenges and uphold universal ideals . The United States is in the midst of a host of efforts.
 The men and women in our embassies and consulates work closely with representatives of the American private sector to identify new markets for our goods and services .
 This budget will advance U.S. engagement on global information and communications technology policy, encourage innovation and protect the interests of our citizens in Internet freedom and digital privacy .
 The World Bank helps to lift the economies of low-income countries and expand the global middle class . The bank's contributions to international financial institutions like the World Bank help to lift economies of lower-income nations .
 The TPP is a landmark twelve nation pact that will lower trade barriers and advance American leadership in the Asia Pacific region . The U.S. and partners are writing the rules of the road for trade in this critical region .
 President Obama has expressed his interest in working closely with Congress to get the agreement approved as soon as possible . Obama has pointed out that the TPP will cut 18,000 taxes on products that are made in America .
 This historic pact represents the first time the world has declared that all countries have a responsibility to join in what must truly be a global commitment . The pact represents a historic pact, says the UN .
 The Green Climate Fund will help low income countries leverage public and private financing to reduce carbon pollution and bolster resilience to climate change . Our budget request is $983 million for the Global Climate Change Initiative .
 Our request for Fiscal Year 2017 allocates $4. billion for assessed dues and voluntary contributions to international organizations and peacekeeping efforts .
 The request includes contingency funding for new or expanded peace operations that may emerge outside the regular budget cycle . The request also includes funding for additional peace operations .
 The demand for peacekeeping assistance remains at an all-time high . The U.S. neither can, nor should, take the lead in most cases .
 7 15 shield civilians from harm, promote reconciliation among rival groups, and ensure that women are fairly represented in all aspects of peacemaking and recovery projects . It serves both our interests and our values when UN agencies and regional organizations are able to quell violence .
 In FY 2017, we are requesting $8. billion for bilateral and multilateral health programs . In FY 2016, we will request $7.5 billion for health programs.
 The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, & Malaria, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance and other critical maternal and child health programs . The Global Health Security Agenda, the Global Health security Agenda, and an intensified campaign, launched by the White House, to end the scourge of
 We have also sought emergency funding to aid in an international effort to minimize the public health threat posed by the virus . We have sought emergency funds to help in the fight against the virus.
 This year, we are asking for $6. billion to address humanitarian imperatives, including support for internally displaced persons, refugees, those affected by conflict or natural hazards .
 To date, the United States has provided over $4. billion in humanitarian assistance to victims of the civil war in Syria . The U.S. has provided more than any other country to assist victims than any others .
 In London earlier this month, 1 announced a further pledge of $600 million in humanitarian aid as well as $325 million in development funds . The pledge includes support for the education of 300,000 refugee youth in Jordan and Lebanon .
 In September, at the UN, President Obama will host a summit on the global refugee crisis .
 This will be the culmination of a vigorous diplomatic effort to rally the world community to increase the global response to humanitarian funding appeals by at least 30 percent . The number of countries that donate regularly to these appeals or that are willing to accept refugees for admission within their borders.
 Our budget request allocates $2. billion for Democracy, Human Rights and Governance . It's a modest amount compared to the steep costs of the civil strife and political extremism .
Programs carried out by the State Department and USAID can play a pivotal role in enabling countries to make governance more accountable, electoral systems more professional .
 By supporting civil society and the rule of law, these programs contribute to a range of important goals, including freedom of speech, religion and the press .
 The administration will soon launch a strategy to advance the empowerment of adolescent girls, says President Obama .
 This strategy will address key issues facing adolescent girls today, including equal access to secondary education and cultural practices that deny girls a fair chance to participate in the economic and political life of their societies .
Public diplomacy is essential to convey the truth about U.S. policies and actions, authors say . "Some including terrorist organizations lie continually about what Americans believe and do"
 To achieve our country’s international ohjectives, we must give State Department and USAID employees the tools and resources they need to do their jobs well . We must give state Department, USAID workers the tools they need.
 The request includes a $ 69 million net increase for Diplomatic and Consular Programs . It reflects heightened requirements in such areas as Freedom of Information Act processing, cyber security, counterterrorism, intelligence, and research .
 This proposal will support increased diversity through expanded recruitment and fellowship opportunities . It will provide more competitive wages for the locally employed personnel who make up the majority of our overseas workforce .
 I also ask you to support the restoration of full Overseas Comparability Pay for State Department personnel who are deployed abroad .
 This reform is essential to our effort to retain highly-skilled individuals in a competitive international jobs market, says the U.S. government .
 The Budget also includes a $122 million increase for USAID’s Operating Expense account . The budget also includes an increase to maintain the Agency's workforce and sustain global operations .
We are asking $3. billion to ensure the security of our diplomatic platfomis, protect our IT network and infrastructure, meet special medical needs at select posts, and carry out emergency planning and preparedness .
 Our $2. billion request for diplomatic facility construction and maintenance will be used for repairs at our overseas assets . We will continue implementing the security recommendations of the Benghazi Accountability Review Board .
 A quarter century ago, when the Berlin ’Wall fell, there were those who suggested that we could now relax .
 We have long learned that although our responsibilities may vary from one decade to the next, our overall responsibilities neither vanish nor diminish . But we have long since learned that we have a lot to do with our leadership .
 The challenge for today’s generation is to forge a new security framework that will keep our country strong and our people safe .
We face detennined adversaries and many governments whose priorities do not match our own . We face detenined adversaries, many governments who don't match their own .
 The old plagues of excessive nationalism and tribalism retain their grip in many regions . The old Plagues of nationalism and Tribalism are still in effect .
 Technology is a two-edged sword, simultaneously bringing the world closer and driving it apart . Technology is also bringing the globe closer and bringing it closer . The world is moving closer and closer to each other .
 We are guided by the same values and supported by the the same democratic institutions that enabled our predecessors to succeed . But we are also guided by same values as our predecessors, they say .
 We are bolstered by a citizenry that is earning respect for our country every day through its contributions to technological innovation and global prosperity . We are also proud of its activism on behalf of humanitarian causes and civil society, and through its brave service on the battlefield .
 We are sustained, as well, by one of the tme touchstones of America’s greatness, by the willingness to work together .
 We’re going to move as quickly as possible, keeping all members to 5 minutes so we can get to as many members as we possibly can . All members will be kept in the same time as possible .
 Iran has invested $20 billion on the part of Airbus, $V 2 billion to modernize a car factory from Peugeot .
 French and Italian energy companies investing billions to revive the oil and gas infrastructure . We see French and Italians investing billions in oil and energy infrastructure .
 Many of the companies are government backed, many of them are Chinese . We have Russian investment, and we have Chinese investment .
 Mr Chairman says Iran will do what they are permitted to do under the agreement . But in the meantime, Mr Chairman is going to do what he is allowed to do .
 I sat next to the chairman of General Motors the other day in Davos, Switzerland . The other day, he was at the top of the General Motors board .
 Iran still has a sanctions regime against Iran on our embargo because of our other issues. Because we still have an embargo against Iran, we are still having sanctions against Iran .
 Because of ballistic missiles and because of their support for terrorism, they support terrorism . Because of Ballistic missiles andBecause of their supporting for terrorism. Because of missile support, terrorism is a major concern .
 We can’t sit here and complain about other people doing what they’re allowed to do when we ourselves prevent ourselves from doing certain things. But we can't sit here, complain about others doing what we’ve allowed them to do .
 The IRGC is the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps, and we see them on the march. But the major economic actor from the standpoint of members of this committee or many of us is the IRGC .
 We see them in violation of another U.N. sanction, not only working on their ICBM programs but also carrying out terrorist activity . We see the ICBM program as a violation of a United Nations sanction .
 I'm not saying, you know, not to do it but I wouldn’t advise that right now for a number of reasons . I’m not saying. I�’s not saying not to doing it, but I would not advise that. I would say
 Iran Sanctions Act should be done in the light of what we know is happening or not happening in the context of implementation and Iran’s behavior going forward, he says . "Whatever we do with respect to the IranSanctions Act, my colleagues, friends, should he really
 Iran's behavior in 10 minutes in each house — in the Senate and in the House — is the reason for the Iran Sanctions Act .
 The President has all the power in the world through the Emergency Economic Powers Act to be able to implement .
 Many of the sanctions we've put in place have been implemented. That’s what we did to implement many of the penalties we’ve put into place . That's what we do to implement some of the punishments we've implemented .
 There is a rush toward the mass production of an ICBM program, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There was a rush into Syria with Quds Forces and with proxies from Iran, says CNN's John Sutter . There was also a rush in Syria with the Quds forces and with Iran's proxies .
 The administration is giving relief on missiles, basically. So if the administration isn’t supportive of this renewal not only are we preventing the possibility of the snap back but from the standpoint of myself and many of the members of this committee we’re also giving relief.
 Quds Forces are giving relief on actions which we would consider terrorist activity, you know . We’re giving relief, especially the attacks by the Quds forces, says the spokesman .
We are not in fact giving them a freebie on anything, which is precisely why we left the missile sanctions in place . We are not giving them freebies on anything. We are in factGiving them afreebie on any of anything.
 JCPOA negotiations were purposefully separated in the context of these negotiations to protect our ability to push Iran if they engage in those activities . They are separate from the JCPoa and they are separate. They are purposefully separated.
 Iran sanctioned three entities and eight individuals for their support for the missile activities . If Iran chooses to engage in those activities going forward there will be further activity, says Iran .
 Chairman says he hasn't lost the ability to put the sanctions in place or snap back .
 Mr Eliot Engel is the ranking member of the committee . Engel's time is expired so he's going to go to Mr Engel . Engel is a member of this committee .
 Russia is challenging our NATO allies across the continent . With Ukraine, Russia is challenges our NATO partners across the world .
 I'm encouraged by the President’s commitment of significant additional resources to the defense of Europe. I’m encouraged by his commitment to the Defense of Europe, he says .
 NATO needs to permanently station a brigade in Poland, and the Baltic States need to get above the 2 percent requirement for their defense spending . The Baltic States and every ally needs to get higher than 2 percent for defense spending.
President Obama has pledged to commit more troops to the defense of Europe . President Obama has said he wants to push allies to more adequately share the burden of their defense .
 I'd like to ask you what the administration thinks will happen next and what we’re doing vis-a-vis North Korea. I’d like to see what the Obama administration thinks next .
 Pakistan continues to play a double game, fighting terrorism that has a direct impact inside Pakistan . Pakistan believes such a policy furthers its national interests in places like India and Afghanistan .
Mr Ranking Member. Well, Mr Ranking Member, let me try to address those as quickly as possible .
 IRGC has actually pulled its troops back from Syria, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "On Iran, let me just inform everybody here that the IRGC have actually pulled their troops back"
 The Syrian government says it's still engaged and active in the flow of weapons from Syria to Lebanon .
 The other thing is that this money — I keep hearing this figure of $100 billion, $150 billion — is the other thing. The other things is that the money is $150billion .
 Iran is not going to get a $100 billion or $150 billion, certainly not in the near term, and that figure is not accurate . Iran has not been able to get that figure in the past .
 It's somewhere in the vicinity of $50 billion to $55 billion at some point in time, but it's way below that right now . In fact, they are complaining about the slowness with which there has been a process of repatriation .
 I urge you to go to the intel piece, get the intel briefing on what has happened with the IRGC and what is happening with the flow of money . The IRGC has been involved in the financial crisis for years .
 Iran's behavior in the region has been criticized by the U.S. for its behavior in Iran . Iran has been deeply engaged with its GCC friends since last summer, he says .
 We’ve engaged in a major plus up of our military exercise, military cooperation, military support, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 We are joining with them in an active effort to push back against other activities . We are joined by others in an effort to fight back against others .
 We’re part of the coalition that has been sup21 porting the Saudis and the Emiratis and others who pushed into Yemen to protect Saudi Arabia against the Houthis . We're part of a coalition that's been sup 21 porting Saudi Arabia and the UAE.
Political process may find a ripeness in a political process that might be able to help resolve that. And I believe we may even now as a result of those efforts .
 Iran has come to the table together with Russia to agree to two communiques in Vienna and a U.N. Security Council resolution outlining a framework for the political resolution of Syria . Iran and Russia have agreed to a two-day meeting in Vienna .
 Iran and Russia have agreed to hold talks in Geneva in the next week . There is at least a framework on paper which we are following with hopes of getting back to the discussion in Geneva .
 If there’s going to be a political settlement the only way to get there is with the agreement and consent of all the parties. But if there's going to a political Settlement the only thing is to get it.
 We're hopeful that we can press that forward and at least come to you with a notion in a matter of months, weeks, they're either serious or they’re not .
 If they are not serious, then we are going to have to be talking with you about whatever Plan B is going to be .
 Syria must pursue some kind of a political process. But if there’s a prayer of holding Syria together unified as a whole country without further refugee challenges to Europe and Lebanon .
 "We have engaged in a significant plus up, as I just mentioned," he says . "With respect to Europe, we have been engaged in an important plus up," he adds .
 The budget goes from about $700 million to about $3. billion . The budget is in support for both troops rotating support structure and assistance to Europe .
 There is a very robust effort going on on the front line state support and support for Ukraine. But I just want to say to you that there is avery robust effort to support Ukraine, our pushing on Minsk .
 President Obama has had three or four conversations with President Putin the course of the last months from the U.N. meeting on Monday .
 In every one of them, he spends probably 50 percent of the time on Ukraine and full implementation of Minsk and responsibility for protecting the integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 I think our support is welcome and very important. So we’re deeply engaged on those fronts and I think we're deeply engaged in those fronts . We’s deeply engaged. So I think that we're very important, I think it's welcome,
 I hope we are both opposed to Abu Mazen’s schemes at the United Nations to achieve unilateral statehood recognition outside of the peace process . I hope that we are also opposed to the schemes at U.N.
 I will continue to fight every effort by the administration to get a waiver to that law . So I'll continue to fighting every effort to get the waiver. So I will keep fighting the administration's efforts.
 The Secretary of State will ask you to definitively answer this morning, Mr Secretary .
 We have always opposed any one-sided resolution, something that is unfair to Israel or that Ms. Israel is unfair. Well, we have always been opposed to any one side resolution, we say .
 Yesterday was the 20th anniversary of the shoot down of the Brothers to the Rescue planes . The planes were ordered by Raul Castro, resulting in the murder of innocent Americans .
 Madam Chair: We are engaged more directly in human rights than we ever have been or capable of being . We now have negotiated additional diplomatic presence in Cuba .
 We now have negotiated the right for our diplomats to be able to travel Ms. Ms. A.
 Secretary Kerry has been arrested over 8,000 people in the past year . Mr Secretary, are you aware of the arrests?
 Since the December 17th announcement of President Obama Secretary Kerry, President Obama has been in charge of his secretary of state .
 Whatever you would like to call people who are being held outside of their will. It's not what you want to call .
We are very much aware of that and we have objected to that. And we are in conversations with Ms. Ms. Obeidallah . We are in talks with her about that and she is in conversations.
 We have succeeded in getting people released who previously had not been Ms. Ms.
 Some had been released were actually put on the list and rearrested so that they could be released again . Yes, some of them were actually released .
 Castro plays a number of freed people that Castro plays . Castro is one of the most famous people in the world to be freed .
 U.S. property illegally confiscated in Havana, Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Intercontinental Hotel Corporation still has a United States -certified claim for its majority interest in the hotel . The American owner, the Inter Continental Hotel Corporation, still has the majority interest .
 We believe we have created more opportunities for intervention, more opportunities to make progress, we say . In fact, we have actually created more opportunity for intervention .
 One in four people in Cuba are now beginning to work for private enterprise . One in three people in the country are now working for private enterprises .
Cubans have left the island since Secretary Kerry's Secretary Kerry left . The exodus has seen 80 percent increase in Cubans leaving the island .
 Secretary Kerry would like to go to optometrist for small business owners, he said .
 There have been massive arrests, massive exodus and massive exodus in Cuba . Still we talk about this nonexistent entrepreneurial class in Cuba.
 More visits taking place with various groups, NGOs and others who are going to Cuba than ever before in the last 50 years of our policy . We have more visits taking places with various group, NGOs, and others .
 This has a greater chance of changing Cuba than anything that has happened in the last 50 years . This has been the most significant change in Cuba in 50 years. This is the first time the country has seen a change in more than a decade .
 Mr Secretary says he wants to ask three quick questions in the spirit of what the chair has asked us to do .
 The situation in Turkey is moving towards a tipping point, says CNN's John Sutter . Turkey's president has been in the country for more than a decade .
 Turkey and the Kurdish community have been involved in conflict in recent years . Turkey's Kurdish community has a history of conflict between Turkey and Turkey .
 The rising tensions between the Kurds and Turkey have deepened since the tragic events in Ankara .
 Turkey's tension with the Kurds is affecting the ongoing fight against Daesh and the end of the humanitarian tragedy there . U.S. has a role in helping with the Kurdish question, says CNN's John Sutter .
President Santos says he is delighted to share the fifteenth anniversary of Plan Colombia with President Santos . He says Peace Colombia is "tremendous important" as we hopefully get to an end of that situation there .
 Africans, Colombians and indigenous are included in the $450 million that’s there. So but I’m concerned about how we make sure that Africans, Colombiaians and Colombians are included .
 Turkey has a border with Syria and Turkey has enormous interest in what is happening there . Turkey has an interest in Syria and has a huge interest in the situation there .
 We are very sensitive to this challenge of their concern about the PKK. We’ve been talking with them considerably about it, and we’re very sensitive about it. We're very sensitive. We are also concerned about the links to the PKK, YPG and so forth,
Going forward, it is very important that there not be a different problem created by the short-term solution of working with the Kurds, says the author . "There not a different solution created by a short- term solution," he says .
 Daesh has been fighting in Iraq and Syria since the beginning of the year . The group has been in the Middle East for more than two years .
 Peshmerga have been particularly helpful and engaged in the fight against Kobani . We were able to hold Kobani and drive Daesh out of Kobani as a result of Kurd support and the Peshmerga particularly with respect to the northwest component of Iraq .
 The Turks will not cross important lines for them, according to the Turkish government . The Turkish government is confident they will be able to do that, says the Turkish president .
 Peace Colombia has committed to a de-mining initiative in the budget . The initiative could take place in the aftermath of an agreement .
 There are still some difficult issues to resolve in the context of the agreement . We're encouraging that process and we’re encouraging it to be done .
 President Obama has appointed Bernie Aronson as a special envoy to those talks . Aronson has been named as the special envoy for the talks .
 President Santos has the respect and confidence of President Santos and the other participants . He has the confidence and respect of Santos and other participants.
 I may well be meeting with some of them shortly in the next days, depending on how events flow . I may also be meeting some of the world's most famous people .
 The victims issues are two of the most critical ones outstanding at the moment . There are many countries that are supportive of this effort, says the author .
 I was there when NAFTA passed and we went through some enormous transitions . I was in the middle of the transition when NAFTA was passed .
 This agreement is different from any trade agreement that I saw at any of the time that I was here . This is essential, frankly, to raising the business standards of the region. This is not the first time that this agreement has been made, he says .
18,000 taxes on American goods can be exported into the region . It eliminates 18,000 tax on U.S. goods that can be export to the region.
 It will create jobs here in America. It will profoundly impact the standards going forward for the protection of intellectual property . It will also impact the protection under cyber, and for our ability to raise the transparency and accountability by which people do business .
 If this doesn't pass then we are rejecting the most important economic initiative and unifying moment of, he says . We would be turning our back on U.S. leadership in that endeavor, he adds .
 Important reforms are contained in this TPP and I simply urge you look at it, analyze it and I believe in the end you will agree this is not like any prior trade agreement . I believe this takes us to a much better place and reinforces American leadership in the region.
 The administration was contemplating designating massive crimes against the Yazidis as genocide, which it is, but not Christians, he says .
 The Trafficking in Persons Office experts in 14 instances were rejected further up the chain of command at State . Oman was given a clean bill of health for other political purposes .
 I asked a lot of pointed questions about who made these decisions, were there other political factors involved . I asked many pointed questions on who made the decisions .
 She was very tight lipped — very good person but did not convey information . She was a good person, but didn't convey any information .
 You have the credibility of the TIP Report in speaking truth to power and defending victims against these heinous crimes of sex and labor trafficking, as you know . You were a very strong supporter of it as a Senator and of course, as Secretary of State .
 The administration has been criticized for penalties and sanctions. What you do with that is all up to the administration in terms of penalties.
 I made the decision about Malaysia and I made it strictly on the merits and in fact Malaysia has made improvements. I made a decision on Malaysia and made it purely on the merit . I made this decision on the basis of the merits.
 It has passed amendments on providing better law enforcement protection . It has also passed amendments to provide better law Enforcement protection .
 It has increased law enforcement efforts to prosecute and convict and it had additional convictions . It has issued regulations in consultation with NGOs and it has increased efforts to prosecution and convict .
 Sometimes you are better off working with, encouraging and getting people to do something than just slamming them in a report . Sometimes you're better off work with and encouraging people to get them to do things .
 Malaysia and other countries have been able to make progress in Malaysia and some other countries . Malaysia has made progress in the case of Malaysia, some of the countries .
 The report will demote somebody who deserves to be demoted and we will call it as we see it. But I can assure you this report would demote someone who deserves a demoted . We will call the report as we seen it.
 China has become the ultimate magnet for pimps who are turning women into commodities and selling them across borders into China .
 It is, I believe, the worst violator in the entire world in terms of the massive numbers . It is the worst Violator in all the world, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Christian genocide designation is the name of Christian genocide . It's a Christian genocide, but it's not a genocide, it's a genocide .
 Each of these are real judgments that we make, ultimately. But let me just say to you, you know, each of these is real judgments, I say .
 Cuba was upgraded to a Tier 2 watch list from Tier 3 because it did make significant efforts to address and prosecute sex trafficking . Cuba also provided more services to sex trafficking victims and it provided more help to victims .
 The government provided training to Cuban officials to address sex trafficking . The government also provided training for Cuban officials.
 Ministry of Tourism reached out to address sex tourism and reduced the demand for commercial sex . They have committed to reform their laws in accordance with the United Nations Palermo protocol .
 If that doesn’t happen then there’s a measurement to try to go backwards. Now, if that doesn't happen, there's a measurement.
 The Government of Cuba has not recognized forced labor as a problem, or reported efforts to prevent it. Now, I would put on the record here today we are concerned that the government of Cuba hasn't recognized it as a issue .
 There are things that we need to do going forward and that’s what we’ll measure. And so there are things to do go forward, says the president .
 I will make it, and any reports that we have made a decision to the contrary, are incorrect . I'll make it. Any reports that I have made it are incorrect, he says . I will made it, he adds .
 This has to be done of the basis of a legal standard with respect to genocide and the legal standard for crimes against humanity . This has been done of a Legal standard withrespect to genocide . This is the basis for a legalstandard with respect. to genocide. This has
 There seems to be more repression in the last 10 years, this year, than in the past 10 years . This year, this past year, is the year of the year that has seen more repression .
We are discussing all of the outstanding human rights issues. We are entering into the period now we’re going to begin to be discussing the confiscated property and that’s a very critical component of this as well as extradition or release of various people .
 There seems to be more repression now than in the last 10 years after we made all these contacts with Cuba. And there seems to have been more repression than in 10 years.
 The Cubans say they were particularly incensed by the arrest of several of the people who had been part of the release effort . They say the Cubans are angry about the arrest .
 The Cubans say well, they went out and broke the law again and we object entirely . We object entirely to what they had allegedly broken .
 One of them had hung a sign in a window saying that I will only vote in an election in which I can vote to choose my President and so forth — and 4 year sentence .
 It's obscene, and we believe it’s obscene and we told them that is wrong. It”s obscene, we believe, we tell them that it is wrong, we say . We believe it's obscene. We told them it is obscene .
 Cuban people have more ability to interact with the Cuban people. But we do have more able to be able to communicate with them than they do .
 Cubans massed behind the Marines who lowered the flag, to have the Marines raise the flag .
 The President's speech was broadcast for the entire country and some of it was broadcast in Spanish .
 More Americans are traveling to Cuba and interacting Mr. Sires . We have more ability to interact with the Cuban people, more Americans are travelling there and interacting him .
 Even diplomats are restricted from moving around throughout the island . Even our diplomats are banned from moving.
 Our diplomats negotiated an ability for our diplomats, a specific number, as we test the expansion of this relationship .
 More diplomats can travel unannounced and without people following them or engaged in any activities . More diplomats are able to travel around unannounced.
Colombia. If they do come to an understanding, I hope that we do not walk away from helping Colombia . If they come to a better understanding, we will continue to help Colombia .
 President Obama celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the first anniversary of his presidency . President Obama was part of the celebration .
Plan Colombia's upper dais invested significantly in the late 1990s in Plan Colombia . It’s made all the difference. We invested — we, you, everybody, everybody here, everybody in the upper daiis, everybody . We invested .
 Plan Paz, Plan Peace, is a new name for Plan Zaz . It is the name of a new group of people who want to invest in the region . The group is based in the city of San Francisco .
 If we do reach peace, I hope that we still continue to assist Colombia, I say . I hope we still will continue to help Colombia.
 Russia gave Afghanistan all its arms to Afghanistan, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This morning in the news I saw that Russia gives Afghanistan all these arms"
 "We are discussing with the Russians these issues of security for the ongoing challenges of Afghanistan," he says . "So they are engaged," he adds .
 Secretary Kerry gave 10,000 rifles or whatever, whatever, you know, arms to Secretary Kerry . Yes, they gave them .
 The Secretary of State has been praised for his service to the U.S.
You work very hard for us and while we have some policy disagreements you have our respect and our gratitude . You work veryhard for us, but you work veryHard for us . We have our gratitude and respect for each other, we say .
 Some of the issues that we may have disagreements on may be disagreements on. So, first of all, let me mention then some of these issues .
 The decision will be made very soon to act on the idea of whether Christians and Yazidis are targets of genocide . We have been seeing this now for well over a year — roughly, several years now of the slaughter of Christians in the Middle East .
 The decision hasn’t been made yet is unacceptable, says CNN’s John Sutter . ‘For us to not have made a decision and that we’re making a decision, that we're making the decision,’ he says .
 We're talking about the lives of tens of thousands of people who are being brutally slaughtered, targeted for genocide .
 The President has commented that it would just be giving preference to Christians . I have a bill, H.R. 4017, and the President has said it would be given preference to Christian people .
 Well, this decision has to be made strictly on — and has been made quickly, I understand that . I understand this, and I understand it, and this is a very important decision. Well, it's a very difficult decision to make .
 I think I only had the first discussion come to my desk on this in terms of the legal interpretations a couple of weeks ago and that’s when I immediately initiated some reevaluation which I’m looking at . I can tell you I want to do this as quickly
 Secretary Kerry has come to your attention only weeks ago, I suggest . Well, let me just suggest, having this come to you attention only Weeks ago .
Congress has to go through a lot of fact gathering, says a congressman .
 Mr Rohrabacher says he has to get the facts from the ground more than just anecdotal. I mean, you have to get to the ground, he says .
 The whole world knows that Christians are being slaughtered in the Middle East, says Mr Secretary .
 It's time for America to act and the excuse that we’ve got to study it, we got to ask the lawyers what the wording is, is this really preference or not, is unacceptable . I would hope that your word that it’s going to be acted on
I don't want to get into a sort of either/or here because I don’t think it’s necessary. I think — ^you know, I don't think it's necessary, I think . I think, ^ you know, he
 The Defense Department and others have been saying that Russia has engaged in activities that present challenges . I think that what the Defense Department is saying is that they see activities that Russia is engaged in which present challenges. I think what the defense department and others are saying are that they
 The long process of back and forth on Minsk implementation is interpreted by the front line states as a threat . Russia is engaged by Russia through its propaganda, through operatives in some of these other countries, says Peter Bergen .
 Mr Rohrabacher is the top threat to the U.S. today in terms of day to day life and the stability of the world, he says . He says if you wanted him to put on the table, it is violent extremism, radical religious extremism and the violence of Mr
 A representative of our Government can’t say radical Islamic terrorism and at the same time can't make a decision whether Christians are being targeted for genocide .
 Russia could be taken as hostile act by Russia as well, says David Cameron . Russia is the greatest threat over radical Islamic terrorism, he says .
 It’s time for us to get out of this cycle of well, we’re going to find things that they can, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has every reason to work with Russia to combat radical Islamic terrorism, Mr Secretary says .
 Congressman: "I have no hesitation in saying that and I’ve said that in many parts of the world," he says .
 That’s not the issue and yes, we are trying to cooperate with Russia with respect to this issue in Syria right now, he says . That's not the problem, he adds .
 Russia is co-chair with us of the international Syria support group and of the cessation of hostilities task force . Russia is the co- chair of the Syrian opposition group . Russia also co-chairs of the cease-fire task force in Syria .
 President Obama has led in the U.N. and elsewhere in convening people to work against violent extremism on a global basis .
There are hundreds of millions of young people in many countries where you have 60 to 70 percent of the nation under the age of 35 . If they don’t have jobs, there is not opportunity or we don't keep radical religious extremists of any kind from reaching them .
 The number-one threat is Islamic terrorism, says a colleague . "The number- one threat is ISIS," he says .
Every country in the world is joining in an effort to deal with the distortion of one of the world’s principal religions . They are indeed our very significant allies in this effort .
 Mr Secretary should put it in context because it’s not that my friend would do that, he says . I think that's a very important point, Mr Secretary, to put that in context .
 Many of the countries allied with us in the fight against terrorists are in fact Muslim countries . But we have heard some Presidential candidates taint an entire faith with something I think grossly unfairly .
 But not subject to some simplification or oversimplification of who are villains and who are the good guys . But not the villains or who are good guys, say some .
 The Iran nuclear agreement got implemented. I think it’s one of the most successful things U.S. foreign diplomacy has done in a long time, he says .
 If you’re looking at removing an existential threat to Israel, we did it. And if you're looking at removal of the threat, we do it, says Israel .
 If you want to disagree that — about compliance please feel free. And I just want to congratulate you and if you want a disagreement about compliance, feel free . But if you don't feel free, please feel happy, I say .
 In every metric we set so far we have not seen cheating. But it’s my observation that in every metric, we haven’t seen cheating .
 Iran has complied. We have been able to observe and validate and in factIran has complied .
 Iran were able to deliver an enforceable agreement and improve everybody’s security . That doesn’t make Iran a good guy in the international stage but it does mean we in fact were ableto deliver an enforcingable agreement. That doesn't make them a good man in the
 Congressman, very, very much and that is in fact what we concur with, that they have complied with, says the congressman . "We concur that they've complied," he says .
 One of the concerns I’ve got is with respect to Soviet expansionism, Soviet imperialism, hegemony, whatever word we want to use for it, it all starts with Crimea .
 That it is illegal and we’re not ceding Crimea with respect to anything. That is illegal. That it’s illegal. We’ve not ceded Crimea withrespect to anything, it's illegal, it is not illegal .
 The primary focus for the moment is on the Donbass and the Minsk agreements implementation . But the primary focus is clearly on the donbass.
 The President has been criticized for the issuance of executive orders, but presumably not these .
 Crimea is physically isolated from international transport links now, from the global financial system . We believe that Russia continues to pay a real price for the annexation of Crimea and Crimea .
 Russia remains unable to provide full significant electricity to its population . inflation has completely erased any potential of a better standard of living for the people .
 Crimea's human rights situation has deteriorated since Crimea's annexation . There has been a mounting repression of minorities, particularly the Tartars .
 The Russian government has been criticized for its actions on the issue . Russia has been accused of a lack of transparency in recent years .
 Mr Secretary. Let me thank you, Mr Secretary, and thank you for your long service to our country .
 This is the 20th year that I’ve had the honor to serve on the Foreign Affairs Committee . It's the first time I've served on the foreign Affairs Committee.
 A number of Secretaries of State from Warren Christopher to Madeleine Albright to Colin Powell to Condoleeza Rice to Hillary Clinton, to yourself in the past and again today .
 I've got limited time and I have several questions. So what I'd like to do is to ask you to address some of the things which many would argue haven't gone so well and what we can learn from these things .
 I would try to avoid to interrupt you. So I would ask that you keep your answers reasonably succinct .
 Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State and not yourself, says Hillary Clinton . "I’m not blaming you. I’d like to go back before the deal and ask this, and I realize, of course, that Hillary Clinton is not yourself"
 President Obama spoke out in support of Iran, says Obama . "We suffered a lot of criticism from Iran," he says .
 This is one of the hurdles we had to get over in our negotiation. In fact, this was one of our negotiation hurdles .
 They believed that we were not only supportive but even responsible for it, they believed we were responsible for the incident .
 Young pro-democracy folks pleaded for our help, and they got nothing from this administration . You know, these young pro- democracy folks pleaded. They got exactly nothing from the Obama administration .
 President Obama essentially, if you go back and look at what he said at the time, he took the side, I would argue, of the repressive mullahs of Iran over its freedom-seeking people .
 Most people who were looking at it at the time would say it was shameful what happened . I think most people would have said it was 'shameful' what happened.
 I believe that this has been badly misinterpreted because there was no contemplation . First of all, the agreement itself was made by President Bush to draw the troops out .
 President Obama tried to negotiate with Prime Minister Maliki that the remainder that would stay would stay and they were noncombat troops . What President Obama trying to do was negotiate with Maliki.
 Prime Minister Maliki was turning the army into his own personal private sectarian enterprise . Mr Chabot is the principal reason for the army to stay in the army .
 Putin famously looked into Putin’s eyes, believing that he’d got a sense of his soul . He famously looked at Putin's eyes.
 Putin has been undermining U.S. policy at every turn, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin's been undermining the United States policy, he says .
 I don’t think anybody could predict what an unpredictable set of choices might produce. Well, I don't think that anybody can predict what a set of decisions might produce .
 The bottom line is that at the time a number of other things happened which had an impact on Putin’s perception of what was going on . Putin's perception of the situation was affected by the events in Russia .
 From Hillary’s famous pressing of the reset button, that we’ve been played like chumps by Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . It seems to be that from the start of this administration, from Hillary's famous press of thereset button, we have been
 This administration scrapped the missile defense program with our allies, Poland and the Czech Republic . The move was to placate Putin .
 NATO 35 alliance, props up Assad in Syria, harbors the treasonous Edward Snowden, and on and on . You know, he invaded and annexed Crimea, started a war in Eastern Ukraine, which is ongoing .
 I'd argue that this administration’s policy with respect to Russia has been feckless . I’m out of time, unfortunately, I'm out of the time. I'm not sure what to do with Russia, but I'm sure it's a good thing .
 There was an agreement which Yanukovych was supposed to honor and we don’t believe he honored it . We don't believe Yanukovych honored it. There was a deal which Yanukovych had to honor.
 Putin had an attitude that there was a deal and the deal was broken, he thought and perceived certain things . But Putin, from his perspective, had a view of the deal, and he thought it was broken .
 The European Association agreement and the way that had been maneuvered had a lot to do with perceptions . I don’t believe that, and also the European Association Agreement and the ways that had to be maneuvered. I don't believe that. I think the way
 The administration came to a conclusion they could do a more effective one and that is currently being deployed . The administration is now being deployed to Afghanistan .
 Russia's ability to move and maneuver in the region has been affected by sanctions . The Minsk agreement is expected to be implemented fully . Russia's economy has been negatively impacted by the sanctions .
 Russia will not have taken over all of Ukraine, not even the eastern part where the separatists will then still be part of Ukraine and in an arrangement with the government in Kiev . If it is implemented fully, our policy will have in fact been successful .
 Russia’s cooperated with the United States on the Iran agreement, he says . "I just don’t agree with your conclusion there," he says. "I also think that if you look, Russia's cooperated"
 Russia cooperated with the U.S. in getting the chemical weapons that were declared out of Syria . Russia cooperates with the United States.
 It’s not just one judgment, it doesn’t lend itself to one judgment. It's just not, you know, the point I’m trying to make is it doesn't lend herself to just one judgement .
 This is more complicated and for better or worse more nuanced than some of these conclusions allow for for some of the conclusions . This is for better and for worse, more nuanced, than the conclusions allowed for many of this conclusions .
 Amir Hekmati and the Abedini families have been given a visit by Mr Secretary Bob Levinson . Mr Secretary has urged Mr Levinson to press with the utmost to bring Bob home to his family .
 This is a 15-year term, 5 months since it was signed. Without making judgements about whether it's the greatest achievement ever or the 36 worst thing that's ever been done, I think it’s — this is a15-yearterm, 5 month since it
 A lot of us, whatever side we were on before, want to see this succeed . We want this to be a success, we want it to succeed, we say .
Both the international snap back of international sanctions and thesnap back of domestic sanctions had come up earlier . So I want to focus just specifically on the snap back provisions .
 On the international, the tests of the ballistic missiles by Iran clearly violate the Security Council resolution . Iran's missile tests violate the resolution, the U.S. says .
 The Security Council has kicked it to the sanctions committee, as I understand it, and the question is if what is in this case a clear violation can’t be sanctioned at the international level . I commend you and the administration for taking action as the United States against these three entities
 The Security Council cannot act when there's a clear violation like this over the term of this agreement . But at the international level if the Security Council can't, why shouldn't we have concerns or how do we address the concerns?
 Iran Sanctions Act is reauthorization of the IranSanctions Act . The act was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 A senior official told Politico, and I quote, “We absolutely support renewal of the Iran Sanctions Act.’s a senior official said .
 The ISA doesn’t expire until next year, because we are focused on implementation. Now is not the time as the ISA does not expire until 2015 .
Congressman Bob Levinson is a former Congressman . Levinson was a member of the House of Representatives. Levinson has been a congressman for more than 20 years .
 I just met with the family recently and I completely understand the tension, the feelings, and the disappointment that they feel . I completely understands the tension and the feelings of the family, he says .
 Bob is not among them and they don’t have answers yet. They see people come back and Bob isn't among them, says CNN's Tom Charity .
We have put a process in place as part of the actual agreement that we reached whereby he is very much front and center in terms of our following through to trace every lead there is and to be personally engaged. But we have put an actual agreement in place in place.
 I won’t get into greater detail but I shared with the family some of the things that we plan to do and we will . We will — in fact, we are doing them. I won't get into more detail.
 The UNSCR says the missiles are not meant to be used to launch missiles . The missiles have the meaning that they're not going to be fired, says U.S. President Obama .
 The arms are a separate track and we purposefully did not want to confuse the implementation and accountability for the implementation with these other things . We purposefully didn't want the arms to be confused with the other things, we said .
 The missile launch on three entities and eight individuals is the reason for the sanctions . The sanctions come after the launch of the missile on Wednesday night .
We should be informed in whatever we choose to do on the ISA by how well the implementation goes, says David Cameron .
I think it’s on its face exactly what I just described to you. I think — I think it's on its faces exactly what you just described. I'm not surprised, I think I think that's on the face, I'm sure it's not
 We know we can pass whatever we would need to very quickly, number one. We can pass what we would have to do very quickly . We can do what we want to do, we can do whatever we need to do .
We want to be advised by the efficiency and effectiveness of the way this has been implemented . As you yourself just said, we're only a few months into it, we’re only a couple months into the process .
 Let's get into it — there’s plenty of time here — and see where we are. Let’'s got into it, and see what we are .
 Speaker Paul Davis Ryan has provided shocking admissions of how Iran will use sanctions relief to fund terrorism . I believe the U.S. people need to know puts families at risk .
 Iran is widely recognized as the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, supporting groups like Hamas and Hezbollah . Iran is considered the world's leading state sponsors of terrorism .
 At least 38 of the $100 billion in sanctions relief granted under the nuclear agreement will be used to finance terrorists . It should come as no surprise that at least some of the money will be spent on terrorists .
 President Barack Obama may have more resources, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think that is a likelihood that they’ve got some additional resources"
 Some of the money would go to Iranian military, Susan Rice says . Rice: "We should expect that some of the portion of money would be used for the kinds of bad behavior we’ve seen in the region up to now"
 The agreement was never based on expectations that it would transform the Iranian regime or cause Tehran to cease contributing to sectarian violence and terrorism in the Middle East .
Bipartisan majority of House voted to reject nuclear deal . This is exactly why a bipartisan majority of the House voted against the deal .
 Sanctions should be lifted when Iran ceases its litany of illicit activities and ends its support for terrorism . Iran should be only lifted when it stops its illicit activities .
Until that day comes, we should not be complicit in fueling a regime that has a long history of hostility toward the U.S. and its allies . The regime has long been hostile to the United States and its ally .
 Secretary Kerry says the administration wants to let the Iran Sanctions Act expire . Secretary Kerry's comments come from Chairman Royce's questions about Iran .
 The administration has extended the International Emergency Economic Powers Act . The administration is simply a power grab, says the White House .
 Congressman: "I just don’t share or agree with. Well, Congressman, you raise a lot of questions"
 This goes back to the sort of argument about the Iran deal itself . Second argument is about the Iranian deal itself, and the deal itself.
 You say we shouldn’t lift sanctions until they have given up their sponsorship for terror . You say you shouldn't lift sanctions for terror until terror sponsors give up sponsorship .
 The problem is would they judge, they just have a different interpretation about some of those things that would have lasted a lifetime .
 Iran with a nuclear weapon would have been far more dangerous than an Iran without one . Iran has a nuclear weapons. Iran has no nuclear weapon .
 If you're worried about terror, the first objective is make sure they don’t have a nuclear weapon .
 Some of the money might not find its way to one of those groups . I'm not going to sit here and suggest that some portion of the cash might not be found in one of the groups .
 If we hadn’t gotten rid of the nuclear weapon they were still supporting the Houthis, they would still support them . The Houthis are still supporting Houthis .
 Mr Chairman, and Mr Secretary, for your extraordinary service to our country, thank you, Mr Secretary . Thank you, Chairman, for his extraordinary service.
 I have four questions that I'm going to run through quickly to give you as much time as possible to answer . I'm not sure how much time I will be able to answer these questions .
 The first is I’m very concerned about the deteriorating state of the rule of law and adherence to human rights in Egypt . The second is the deterioration of the law and the adherence to the human rights of Egypt .
Egypt's judiciary has long been rife with corruption and political agendas . The Egyptian judiciary is rife with political agendas and corruption .
 The Egyptian judiciary and security apparatus care for the rule of law. This is incredibly outrageous and really does exemplify how little the Egyptian judiciary cares for therule of law . This is very shocking and does not exemplify the Egyptian judicial system .
 Egypt’s partial aide conditions accompanying national security waiver and the reporting requirement entirely . Confess asked Confess to remove Egypt's partial aides conditions .
 The language related to partial aid conditions, the national security waiver and the reporting requirement . The language is related to the National Security waiver .
 The second question is you — you know, there are tremendous challenges, you know . There are enormous challenges, says the author . "There are huge challenges," he says .
 The international affairs budget which funds programs designed to confront these challenges continues to shrink . You’ve outlined them in your testimony and the budget .
 The U.S. -Israeli memorandum of understanding is going to expire in 2018, he says . And third and third and finally, the United States, he adds .
 The sentences are of enormous concern to all of us, says CNN's John Sutter . "Egypt itself itself and look, obviously, is of huge concern," he says .
 The arrests of journalists and arrests of some civil society personalities are a fair way to say it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Egypt is going through a very difficult challenge right now, says CNN. We understand that Egypt isgoing through a difficult challenge, says the country's president .
 extremism has played out in bombings in Cairo and in Sharm el-Sheikh, elsewhere . There are terrorists in the Sinai, there are challenges of extremism that have been seen in Cairo .
 countries that protect freedom of speech and assembly and encourage civil society will ultimately do better and be stronger in their ability to defeat extremism . But we believe deeply that countries that protection freedom ofspeech and assembly will eventually do better .
 I have a good working relationship with my counterpart. We work very closely. We have a very close working relationship, he says .
 We've succeeded in getting some progress on a number of human rights issues . We’ve succeeded in get some progress, but we’re still working on some issues .
 Their judicial system, which operates separately, makes some moves that sometimes find difficult to deal with, says CNN's John Sutter .
Over the course of these next weeks and months we can make some progress in moving back on these issues . And our hope is that over the next week and months, we can made some progress. And we hope to do this next month .
 Egypt said something about the 3-year-old, if I recall, but I don’t want to dwell on it right now . I do — I think Egypt saidsomething about the3- year-old. I do, I do. I think
 On the resources, we are cannibalizing a lot of programs within the budget, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The fight is no secret to any of you because these are the fights that you’ve all been engaged in on the floor . I mean, everybody is dealing with difficulties in governance today as a result of our budget challenges .
 The United States is not responding in ways that we ought to be to our global responsi41 bility as reflected in the budget overall . I think that we can and should be doing more. I think we’re making a mistake, I try not to get into the politics
 I think we’re behaving to some degree, for the richest nation on the face of the planet . We’s choosing to behave more like, you know, a country that actually doesn’t have resources available to it .
 It's a question of which choices we make, where we want to make the overall trades in the budget and we are where we are. It’s a questions of which choice we make and where we make.
 The most powerful nation on the planet has had to cannibalize considerably to make things work . "It really, in my judgement, diminishes the ability of the most powerful country to be able to actually affect things more," he says .
 We see a frustration on the part of our people that the world is in turmoil or we’re not responding adequately here or there. And so we see a frustrated on the parts of ourPeople that the World was in turmoil .
 Sometimes it’s a reflection of policy judgments — I understand that — but a lot of it is driven by the resource allocation. Sometimes it's a reflection on policy judgments, says John Sutter . He says it's not a reflection.
 Israel has never put any of Israel’s security needs or challenges on the table with respect to other issues between us . Israel's security needs and challenges have never been put on thetable .
 President Obama has "unprecedentedly addressed" concerns with Iron Dome, says U.S. President Obama . "We will continue to do what is necessary to provide Israel with all the assistance necessary," he says .
 I am confident we will get an MOU at some point in time, the sooner the better, because it allows everybody to plan appropriately . I'm confident we'll get a Mou at some time in time. I'm also confident we can get anMOU at a point in
 I’m suffering from a major head cold so I may have — go a little easy on you today. I'm suffering from an illness that I may be suffering from .
Last December we passed the visa waiver program bill out of my committee. Last December we pass the visa waivers program bill.
 The program was designed to keep foreign fighters from exploiting the visa waiver program from certain countries like Iraq, Syria, Sudan, and Iran .
National security chairman was involved with correspondence between Homeland, State Department, and White House . He was in the middle of those as were the national security chairman .
Homeland Security chief: "I was in the room with the majority leader. In the exchange between the Department of Homeland Security they mentioned when we considered humanitarian, business purposes"
 DHS came back again and the final email from the White House was that the administration supports this legislation . "My thanks to all," said DHS .
 The White House says they did not request any additional edits from the State Department . The State Department says they didn't request any more edits .
 The law could be waived to accommodate Iranian business interests . But the day after it passed, you read a letter to the Iranian Foreign Minister stating that parts of this law may be waived .
 In his judgment, it was in direct contradiction with the intent and the clear definition of the law, he says .
 It seems to me you’re putting the interest of Iran over the security interests of the U.S. The law that we passed overwhelmingly by the Congress was passed overwhelmingly .
I appreciate the work we’ve done to try to work through this. Thank you very much and I appreciate it very much, I say . It's been a difficult time to find a way to get through this .
 "We respect, obviously, the congressional intent and we respect the purpose of this. Look, we respect,Obviously, the Congressional intent," he says .
 K visa situation could be done conceivably to analyze and dig into background . We have to have adequate control over who’s coming in to the country, he says .
 The letter that I wrote to the Iranian Foreign Minister was not an excuse for anything, he said . The letter he wrote to Iran's Foreign Minister is not an excuses for anything.
 It explained and defended the law and it made clear to them that we were going to keep our JCPOA commitments . It made clear that it was to keep its JCPO commitments .
 The letter of the law is being followed by the law, according to the law . It's not just following the letter, it's following a letter, says the law.
 French, Germans, British, others are deeply concerned about the impact of this law on their citizens . But you have to understand that our friends, our allies, our colleagues, are deeply worried about this law .
 If one of those dual nationals just travels to Iran all of a sudden and they're in a visa waiver program and they’re a very legitimate business person, Mr McCaul says .
 The time to have changed that was prior to the President signing it into law. That was rejected by the leadership and the Congress, and the time to change that was before the President signed it into Law .
 Once the President signed it into law you can’t just go back and either violate or rewrite it . But once the President signs it, you can't just goback and either violates or rewrite the law .
 I knocked it up out of my committee and you’re talking to the author of the bill, says the author . I knocked the bill up out. I knock it up from my committee, and you're talking to its author, he says .
 The French and the Iranians in all this stuff. That was not the intent of Congress to carve out a business exemption and I understand, I understand .
 It’s a case by case basis, very carefully and narrowly tailored, number one . It's a cases by case based, very tightly tailored, according to the author .
 Waived the travel, can waive the travel or dual nationality restrictions if he deems that it is in the law enforcement or national security interests of the country to do so . Waived travel can also be waived if it's in law enforcement, national security interest to do that .
 The full and fair implementation of the law is in fact in our national security interest, we say . Now, we believe the full andFair implementation is in the country's national security interests .
 I guess my time — I guess it depends on how you define national security interests. I guess I guess that's my time . I'm not sure if I'll be able to do so again .
Jeh Johnson called me to add Libya, Somalia, and Yemen to this list . I will commend — Jeh Johnson. I am Secretary Kerry .
 ISIS fighters go into Turkey where perhaps their passports are stamped and then they sneak into ISIS-controlIed areas where ISIS has a shoddy record of stamping passports . We may have to look at every European passport stamped in Turkey that would obviously be an issue .
 Daesh’s ability to produce phony passports is now an issue, according to the group .
 A committee voted to spend $11/2 million broadcasting in the Sindhi language to reach a huge part of Pakistan — southern Pakistan — in Sindhilanguage .
 Your budget requests an additional $35 million for broadcasting efforts . Now your budget requests another $35million for broadcast efforts .
 The first additional dollars will be to be to broadcast in the language of southern Pakistan . The first extra dollars to be broadcast in southern Pakistan.
 The rest is for whatever else you choose to spend the money on, and I want to compliment your general counsel in Karachi for looking into the assassination of Anwar Leghari .
 During World War II we had homhing rules of engagement that led to the deaths of 70,000 French civilians because we were serious .
 General DeGaulle never urged us not to bomb an electric facility because it would inconvenience French civilians . He said it was an inconvenience to French civilians.
 Dwight Eisenhower never asked Dwight Eisenhower not to hit a tanker truck because a civilian might be driving it . He never asked him not to do it because he was a civilian .
In bombing ISIS we will not hit a moving truck and we won't hit electric power lines . We don't want to inconvenience those living under ISIS, and it is a major inconvenience not to have electricity, he says .
 North Korea provided the nuclear technology that was used at al-Kibar, which the Israelis destroyed in Syria a few years ago .
 I spoke to the Chinese Foreign Minister yesterday and I will urge you to urge him as I did that China prevent any nonstop flight over its territory from North Korea to Tehran . I spoke with the Chinese foreign minister yesterday .
 Such a nonstop flight could easily export one or several nuclear weapons . Such a flight could be easily exported one or many nuclear weapons.
 The Chinese will take a look at what's on the plane, says CNN's John Sutter . If China requires fuel, it should stop for fuel, he says .
 The administration now is just in a role of defending Iran as if any comment about Iran is an attack on the deal. But I’m concerned that the administration now has a role in defending Iran .
During Rouhani’s tenure we’ve seen a lot more executions in Iran, he says . He hopes Rouhani would personally issue a statement condemning Iran's violation of human rights, particularly when they kill people.
 As to the missile sanctions, you indicate we sanctioned a few companies. As to a few firms, you indicated we sanctioned some companies .
 The Iranian Government is under sanctions that actually affect the Iranian economy . Those individuals do not want to visit Disneyland, and I hope that you would sanction them .
 Some individuals who have no intention of coming to the U.S. will not be allowed in the United States . Otherwise, to say certain individuals who are not allowed in U. S. will be allowed .
 Russia can’t sell fighter planes to Iran unless the Security Council specifically approves that . Under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 Russia can't sell fighter aircraft to Iran .
 I think it's a matter of a committee — there’s a committee and it's in approval in the committee. I think the matter of the committee is in approval, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In principle, we are very concerned about the transfer of weapons and so, you know, we would approach it with great skepticism . We would approach this with great skeptical, we say .
 A committee will analyze this thoroughly before anything happens and the committee signs off on it . We have a committee that will analyze it thoroughly .
 The Iranian regime has been accused of murdering the people in Iran that had been murdered by the regime . "I just want to say amen to what my friend from California has said," says a friend .
 Two thousand three hundred have been executed, mostly for political reasons or religious reasons . The executions are mostly for religious reasons or political reasons .
 They occupy Crimea and they occupy parts of Ukraine’s eastern territory . They also occupy part of Ukraine's eastern territory.
 In one case not holding but engaged in intrusions which are assisting in the holding . In another case, the holding is not being held .
 If you have time this year it’d be great for our relationship if you could go to Georgia . Also, your predecessor has listed Georgia .
 The Foreign Aid Transparency Accountability Act has passed the House unanimously . It was authored by Mr Connolly from Virginia .
 It basically requires that there be accountability for foreign assistance . There is also accountability for transparency and evaluations of our aid to other countries .
 The American public needs to know how their money is being spent and if it’s being spent well then maybe keep it up .
 The State Department has resisted this legislation even though it’s passed the House . The House has passed the bill, but the State Department hasn’t passed it .
 Raj Shah testified in this committee he supported it when he was USAID director . It's passed your former committee unanimously over in the Senate .
 We share the goal completely and yes, we support transparency and accountability . We have huge transparency, accountability and we have huge Transparency and accountability. We share our goal completely, we share it completely .
 The person hours and numbers of people assigned just to provide the transparency and accountability to all of you and to others is staggering . I mean, I think — I don’t — I’m trying to get the numbers pinned down. I think, I don't
 We lose an enormous amount of our implementing productivity to simply providing transparency and accountability . We lose a huge amount of productivity to just provide transparency and the accountability .
 We have 51 investigations going on with an unprecedented number of hundreds of thousands of pages of FOIA that we’re responding to . We’ve responded to more than 100,000 FOIA requests for information .
 "We’re overburdened. I’ve had to cannibalize bureaus to ask, you know, young capable lawyers, professionals to come out of one bureau to go sit and work on this so that we're able to meet the demands, and we
 Janice Jacobs has been appointed to be a transparency accountability coordinator . Jacobs is a senior Ambassador for the United States .
 We're worried that doing this in a way that is smart, efficient, efficient for us. So our concern is, you know, doing this is smart and efficient for you. So we're concerned, we're worried about it .
 The U.S. people have a right to absolute accountability and transparency. The American people have the right to accountability, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The legislation would allow people to transfer people away from what they're supposed to do . The legislation is being debated by the House of Representatives .
 State Department does transparency and evaluations, says State Department official .
 The State Department has pushed back from the State Department on the legislation . But we're getting push back from State Department.
 Congressman: "We want to make sure it works for us in terms of our process" Congressman: We want to ensure the process works for our process .
 We want it to work for the U.S. people because as you know, reclaiming my time . We want to work with the American people, we say .
 The legislation tells people in the community that it’s working and we can have transparency evaluation for it .
 President Obama has instructed all of us to try to make sure we’re streamlining and being as transparent as we can be .
 Secretary Kerry will ask you a question that is susceptible to a yes or no answer or if you prefer yes and no .
 Iran's money would be used to increase terrorism in the region after the deal was entered into . Now, there is concern that Iran’s money will be used for terrorism .
 Iran would become a nuclear threshold state in 8 or 10 or 12 years. It would push the limits of the agreement and get as close as it could to developing a nuclear weapon during the term of the deal .
 Iran was a threshold nation when we began this discussion, says CNN's John Sutter . Iran is a threshold country, he says, but it's not a nation that has a history of being a threshold.
 It was one step away from being able to produce highly enriched uranium for bomb manufacturing . It is one step from producing uranium for bombs .
 Iran has accepted increased transparency and accountability beyond anything that anybody else is engaged in on the planet. That’s one of the reasons why we felt such urgency to try to close off these paths for actual movement to that and Iran has accept increased transparency .
 They’ve accepted higher standards for 25 years of tracking of all uranium manufacturing . They have been tracking of uranium manufacturing since 1992 .
 They’ve accepted 20 years of television intrusion on their centrifuge production and limited levels of enriched uranium in the stockpile . 3.67 percent for 15 years has been allowed to be enriched by the government .
 The team are confident of their ability to know what they’re doing, according to the manager . They don’t have the ability to be able to make one today, just don't have it physically .
 We didn’t know exactly what was on it but we thought it was headed to Yemen . We made sure that it went back to Iran. We didn't know exactly how it was going.
 I believe it is imperative for us to try to terminate this threat as rapidly as we can . I am for trying to get rid of Daesh as fast as is feasible without a major American ‘invasion’ but by enabling by using our special forces, by using
 We're engaged in discussions with them regarding their offers to do so at this time . We are engaged in talks with them about their offers.
 President Obama is trying to explore ways to have an impact on ending the scourge of Daesh, he says .
 There have been broad discussions with various mil-to-mil discussions and intel discussions . There have also been discussions about possible provision of people under certain circumstances .
 Mr Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that the letter dated December 13, 2012 addressed to then Secretary Hillary Clinton be placed in the record .
 State Department response dated March 27th, 2013 to then Chairman Darrell Issa is in the record . Issa was chairman of the State Department from 2013 to 2013 .
 The Daily Caller dated January 30, 2016, and the Hill, dated 2/2/2016, were placed in the record . I would ask that the news articles from the Daily Caller and Hill be placed in a record .
 Ambassador Jacobs has been named as the Secretary of the State Department's czar . Jacobs will be asked for FOIA requests by the Department of State Department .
 The U.S. people’s desire to know things has outpaced the automation and the process for FOIA from the State Department . I share with you the sympathy that the American people's desire to known things has been outpaced.
 Former businessman says State Department should turn it over to someone who is better at getting data out rather than evaluating the details of communication .
Jonathan Silver was using personal emails to circumvent FOIA and the scrutiny of the Solyndra scandal . Silver was a political appointee at Department of Energy .
Secretary Clinton wrote to Secretary Clinton: ‘Don’t ever send an email to DOE email with a personal email address.’ He went so far as to say, and this is in the letter to Clinton, “Don”
 The letter went on to ask then Secretary Clinton whether or not she had an email . It specifically asked if or not any senior agency officials ever used a personal email account .
 The letter went on, and I know by now you must have been made familiar with this letter . It went on. And it went on .
 Secretary of State's office responded by not responding to a letter from the White House .
 Your agency sent a response that basically said here’s the title and the rules . Your agency responded with a response. It basically said that it was the title.
 I didn't know if she had an account or what the department gave her at that point in time or what she was operating with . I didn’t know if her account had been given by the department .
 You didn't know you were sending to her personal email from your personal email. No, I appreciate that’s a responsive answer that you didn’t know you sent .
 The letter which did not respond to the specific questions occurred on your watch . The letter did not answer specific questions about your watch.
 Let me just say to you my direction from day one to the entire department has been clear, I say . Let me tell you your direction from Day one to day one, I've been clear. Let me say to me my direction is clear .
 It is amazing that we're still waiting for many of them. And I appreciate that, although it is amazing, that we’re still waiting to see some of them . And I thank that, though, it’s amazing that it is still waiting.
 Let me ask you just a couple more quick questions and then you can have the remaining time . Let me answer a couple of quick questions .
 In the case of the use of personal email, we’ve discovered that additionally many individuals appear to be using text as a method of communication .
I appreciate that you hired one and that your predecessor never had one . I appreciate that that you hire one, and that you have never had a one .
 There's a pending question, Mr Secretary Kerry, in 51 Secretary Kerry. I appreciate that but there’s a pending issue, Mr Kerry, says Kerry .
 Mr Secretary, this committee is entitled to know the communication and Secretary Kerry, says Mr Secretary . Mr Secretary. Mr Secretary has a right to know this committee, says Secretary Kerry .
Our communications process is thoroughly being analyzed by the inspector general . And our communications process will be analyzed, says the Inspector general .
 "I don’t text anything regarding policy. That is precisely what we are working on within our process today to make sure that everything, and by the way, I don't text anything about policy," he said .
 I only text my logistical administering staff with respect to whether I’m arriving at somewhere or going something . I only texts my logistical administer staff withrespect to whether he’s arriving at something or goingsomething .
 I would certainly assume that your private email to Hillary’s private email also was intended to be Secretary Kerry .
 All emails are on the server that is the State Department and it’s all preserved . The State Department is the only server that has all the emails .
 Hillary Clinton’s personal email was not when a secret exchange occurred . But Hillary Clinton's personal email wasn’t and your personal email is not when it occurred .
 There are an awful lot of important discussions, policies, and other things and that’s what I’m here to discuss .
 Mr Engel. It absolutely is more about whether the American people can get what they’re entitled to under a law that you, quite frankly, Mr Engel .
 I have taken unprecedented steps including with the inspector general to make certain that that is fully adhered to and I stand by the steps we’ve taken. I’m taking unprecedented steps to make sure that that’s fully adored to. I have
 Inspector General Linick noted that Secretary Powell and Secretary Rice's staff used private emails as well .
 I really think we should be consistent and not just have a political attack on Hillary Clinton . I really believe we should not just attack Hillary Clinton. I think we need to be consistent.
 Secretary Powell said that they were not classified . The former Secretaries made their accompanying statements .
 Secretary of State says she objects to Hillary Clinton's 2016 presidential bid . Clinton's emails are more important to discuss than Hillary's emails, she says .
 I would like to talk about what’s happening in Syria, I would first ask you if you could very specifically detail the type of suffering that is going on and how many people are involved. Specifically, I’d like to discuss what's happening in
 There are 12 V 2 million people or so who are displaced or refugees, about 4 V 2 refugees, more than 2 million in Jordan, 2 million something in Lebanon and 2 million or so in Turkey .
 Almost a million people have entered into Europe, sometimes 5,000, 10,000 a day trying to move across the border . Nearly a million have already entered Europe, almost a million already .
 The innocent people being killed, the bombs that have dropped on hospitals and on schools, is why we have pushed so hard to try to get a cessation of hostilities . "The innocent people are being killed," he says .
 People who haven’t seen food supplies, medical supplies in years now have been laid under siege . The combination of torture and starvation is part of the torture, says the author .
 This is a sad tragic moment for a world that hoped that we were moving to a new order of rule of law . This is horrendous beyond description, the beheadings, the death by fire, and the elimination of certain people by virtue of who they are .
 The Geneva communique requires a transitional government which is precisely what we are trying to do . It will be when Russia, Iran and Iran, the parties at the table of the International Syria Support Group will come to the table .
 That is the moment where things could begin to turn conceivably for the better. That's the moment when things could start to start to turn for better .
 We’re going after Daesh now as powerfully as possible, given the difficult circumstances of the country, says CNN's John Sutter . "We’s going after ISIS now as strongly as possible," he says .
 It would be much better if we were able to get a transition government in place, according to Geneva structure . The U.S. and Russia and all of the parties focus on Daesh and Nusra and be able to join together .
 The difficulty with that is with Assad there and the suspicion about intent by some countries simply to shore up Assad . It’s impossible to be able to do that sufficiently until you have resolved this process or at least sufficiently engaged in that process .
 Daesh is a group of people from the air and the ground can quickly deal with the problem of Daesh . If you have an ability to bring people to54 gether around a transition government you have plenty of people on the ground who can then join together .
 People aren’t sitting around caught up in this notion that Assad has to go that’s why we’re sticking with the policy. People aren't sitting around catching up in the notion that just because people said Assad hasto go that is why we
 As long as Assad is there, the people supporting the opposition are going to continue to support those people . The countries that are defending their right not to live under a dictator are still supporting those people.
First question deals with U.N. Relief and Work Agency in regard to support of Palestinians . First question is about support for Palestinians .
 The U.S. taxpayer spends about $277 million per year between the Fiscal Year 2009 and 2015 to support these programs .
 UNRWA staff unions, including the teachers union, are frequently controlled by members affiliated with Hamas .
 The curriculum of UNRWA schools has long contained materials that are anti-Israel, anti-Semitic, and supportive of violent extremism .
UNRWA continues to receive United States contributions including $408 million in 2014 . UNRWA’s contravention of the United States law and activities that compromise its strictly humanitarian mandate .
 Your department is using this funding and your budget to discourage these activities. Just wondering if you could quickly sum up for us how your department uses it .
 Taxpayers are loathe for paying for terrorism, terrorist activities, and support of terrorism . I know you know this, and I know this. Taxpayer is loathe.
 There is now a strict policy and procedure in place in order to prevent this kind of activity to prevent any terrorist activity .
 The American taxpayer continues to fund this organization. You say we have policies in place but yet they continue to do it, says U.S. taxpayer .
 Mr Perry says people who have done it need to be fired and/or, you know Mr Perry .
 UNRWA has promised to take action against staff for misconduct . The agency has been accused of racism and misconduct .
 The problem is we don’t get back. Well, the problem is — ^yes, it’s been considered and in a couple of cases it's been mandated, says the author .
 Palestinians lost their vote at UNESCO because of activities beyond their control . Palestinians engaged in activities beyond our control by going to the United Nations and seeking membership .
 Israel has lost its ability to protect Israel to stand up and fight within the mechanisms . But we have now lost our ability to be able to protect the country .
 We’re being successful right now in being able to hold people accountable and I think that’s the best way to proceed, he says . We're being successful in holding people accountable, he adds .
 I don’t think anybody is being held accountable. I would just beseech you that the Federal Government’s $19 trillion in debt. I don't think anyone is beingheld accountable, he says .
 The taxpayers are under siege and we don’t have money to waste on organizations that support terrorism, he says .
Last year, the U.N. High Commission for Refugees and associated programs spent about $300 million . The U.S. taxpayer is rightly doing its part in Syria, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "We don’t want to see anything," he says . "We want to do our part to be good neighbors and good stewards in the world"
School districts and hospitals and taxpayers pay doubly. That having been said, these folks are coming to our shores and then school districts and hospital districts . That has been said .
 I sent a letter to the administration asking why we haven’t pursued a safe zone in Syria and Turkey as some kind of a program or a strategy to make sure that they’re not refugees far from their country .
 Can you enlighten us at all whether that’s — ^because I haven’t gotten a response whatsoever? I haven't gotten a reply whatsoever. Can you tell us whether that's — or if you've got a response?
 Congressman: "It’s a lot more complicated than it sounds. Congressman, and it’'s more complicated"
 Between 15,000 to 30,000 troops have to be on the ground in order to make it safe . That means somewhere between 15,00-30,000 soldiers must be on ground to make the situation safe .
 About 15,000 people are trying to get into Jordan and try to get to Turkey or Lebanon . Right now safety is found by going to Jordan or getting to that berm .
 What we’re trying to do is make it safe by getting a cessation of hostilities in place, getting humanitarian assistance delivered and getting a political process that could actually end the violence .
 Thousands of troops on the ground to be able to provide a safe zone. And it doesn't require, we hope, it doesn’t require, it does . We hope, thousands of troops will be able.
 I’m going to shift to south Asia where we certainly have some opportunities but also some challenges. But I'm going to move to South Asia, where we have some opportunity but also challenges, I'm sure .
 The U.S. and India have increased their relationship in recent years . It is a time of unprecedented increasing relationships between the two countries .
 Pakistan has continued support of terrorism throughout the region . Recent terrorist attacks in India in January at the Air Force Base in India .
 U.S. and India have vested interests in helping Pakistan fight terrorists, says John Sutter . Sutter: We're seeing progress in India relationships, understanding the complexity of the region .
 Pakistan is doing enough to fight terrorist threats, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Pakistan has interest in Afghanistan and Afghanistan as well . He says it's not just threatening to destabilize India but also in Afghanistan .
 India and Pakistan are trying to advance even the rapprochement between the two countries . India has been working hard building the relationship .
 I think it’s required courage by both leaders to engage in the dialogue that they’ve engaged in, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: I think both leaders should be courageous for their actions .
 Pakistan has about 150,000 to 180,000 troops out in the western part of their country . But we do believe that Pakistan is engaged legitimately in a very tough fight against identifiable terrorists .
 North Waziristan has been in a long struggle to clear the area and move people out . They’ve made some progress in that, but they've been engaged in that struggle .
 The Haqqani network is a prime example of that. We’re particularly concerned about the sanctuary components of Pakistan . We are concerned about some individual entities in Pakistan that have been supportive of relationships with some of the people that we consider extremely dangerous to our interests in Afghanistan and elsewhere
 F-16s have been a critical part of the Pakistani fight against terrorists in the western part of their country . Pakistan has lost some 50,000 people in the last years including troops to the terrorists that are threatening Pakistan itself .
 Pakistan's F-16s are an important part of Pakistan’s ability to do that, says the captain . Pakistan are sensitive to the balance, obviously, with respect to India, but we think the F- 16s are important .
 As one of the few physicians in Congress I do have a real interest in global health and looking at the current threat of Zika virus . I do not think that any of the doctors in Congress have any interest in the global health .
President Obama has requested $1.1 billion from the U.S. President Barack Obama . President Obama has asked for more than $1 billion, according to the White House .
 A physician advises pregnant women to take all precautions if they're of reproductive age . Doctor: "You know we know and very much so are recommending"
 USAID is making access to full family planning services available in areas where we know there’s endemic Zika virus . Women of childbearing age are empowered to have family planning support services, USAID says .
 I would want to make sure that we are providing the full resources in these endemic countries . So I’d be curious and I would be curious. So I'd be curious, I would like to see if we were providing full resources .
 Congressman: "I really appreciate the expertise you bring as a physician and your concern about this"
 The White House National Security Council is coordinating the all of government response on this and together . The World Health Organization is working with relevant international organizations and others .
 We do not want this, obviously, to become as challenging as ebola was, as you know . We mounted a response to that and the same kind of effort is being put into this. We don't want this to become a challenge as ebolas was, we say .
 Congress recently passed a trade authority bill that, among other provisions, instructed trade negotiators to oppose any boycotts of Israel .
 The State Department rejects that provision and does not believe that Congress can conflate Israel with disputed territories .
 The administration won't honor Congress' enactment, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Why won’t the administration honor Congress’s enactment?
CNN's John Sutter says he's not sure exactly what he's referring to or what happened with respect to that . Sutter: "I’m not sure what statement you’re referring to. Well, I’s not sure how much you're referring to
 Secretary Kerry would say his negotiators if a European country was saying that they wanted to boycott people or businesses that are Secretary Kerry .
 The U.S. doesn't oppose labeling of Israeli products from disputed territories, spokesman says .
 The labeling is a precondition for countries to be able to boycott Israel, he says . "Once you go down the road of doing the labeling that’s really a precONDition," he adds .
 The State Department is not opposed to European efforts to require Israel to label goods that are outside of the green line, he says .
 "We require labeling of where people send goods from," she says . "We don't do that kind of labeling," she adds .
 It would be fine to force them to say that that was produced in the West Bank . But if someone sends it from a Jewish community outside of the green line and they say made in Israel, the State Department’s position for him would he like it.
 Labeling is equivalent of knowledge to people so that they can, you know, have the information about where products come from which we require also .
 But I think it sets the — ^but these are disputed territories and you have Jewish communities there where they’re producing goods .
 We are opposed to any boycotts or any efforts to isolate Israel based on where, we’re opposed to that. I understand that, which is why we are opposed, he says . We’s opposed to a boycott, he adds .
 State Department says it's getting mixed signals from the State Department . "I think you — I mean, I appreciate you saying that forthrightly," he says .
 There's a movement to boycott Israel on a lot of college campuses throughout the U.S. There’s a movement.
 It's a time honored tradition in the United States of America that we don’t punish positions people take Mr DeSantis . It’s a time honoured tradition in U.S.
Government says it does not believe boycotting is helpful to be boycotting . Government says it is not helpful to boycott .
 People have the right to be able to make their own decisions, says Mr DeSantis . But we as a government do not punish students for the Mr. deSantis.
 I think it would be if the university adopted an official position that they were going to boycott Israel would then — we would want to subsidize that with taxpayer dollars. I think the university would like to subsidies Israel with taxpayers dollars .
 I would not advocate or support any challenge to the freedom of the university to make its own decisions . But I think punishing them would be in appropriate, he says .
Money goes to the Palestinian Authority directly under Federal law . The State Department has not made that certification for several years .
 I wasn't aware we hadn't certified the last couple of years but we are following constantly the incitement issue . I wasn’t aware we haven't certified for the last two years .
 I just met with President Abbas and raised the issue with him a couple weeks ago . We are working through our relationships and constant engagement on the West Bank to make sure that the incitement is not taking place in any official ways .
 The certification has not been made so that would prohibit funds directly. I think the worry is that the certification is not being made . I think it would be a mistake to make such a decision .
 The State Department has been directing funds to the Israelis to pay down the Palestinian debts . But the Israelis have been told to pay back the debts .
 No, it’s trying to sustain the one entity in the West Bank that is committed to peaceful resolution and to nonviolence and to two-state solution .
 Many difficulties financially in the West Bank's ability to meet its needs for education, for health and for health . The fact is that there are many, many difficulties financially.
 Violence has been particularly difficult last year and a half or so, as you know, with violence that has risen .
 Iran has agreed to pay the families of people who’ve engaged in violence and people who have been “martyrs’ of the violence that’s taken place. I might add, I might say, I was extremely disturbed to read today.
 Iran is accused of incitement of any kind and that even in its own way can be an incitement . That is completely inappropriate and seems to lend some sort of credibility to that violence and to those choices .
 You’re going to have eternal support, the families will be fine and this is okay behavior. You're going to be fine, this is OK behavior, says the author .
 He has condemned violence as a means of trying to achieve the Two States . He is the one leader in the West Bank who has consistently condemned violence in Gaza .
 We believe that trying to build the Palestinian Authority and give them greater capacity to be able to control their own security is the way to solve the problem of the violence itself .
 Judge Poe and I recently sent you a letter expressing our grave concerns about this potential sale . Judge Poe is asking you to consider stopping it .
 Congresswoman says she can't go into classified setting . She says she would like to talk to Congresswoman about classified matters .
 President Obama says he is deeply concerned about the Haqqani network’s freedom to be able to have operated .
 I will follow up with you in a way that we can discuss this. And I think in fairness, because of the nature of those conversations, I'll follow up. I will definitely follow up to you, and I'll definitely followup with you, he says .
 The last time that I met with you in my district in Hawaii we met at the East-West Center .
 Asia Pacific nations are facing potential Destabilization within the South China Sea, North Korea and island nations in the Pacific . It's a place that you know has been instrumental in creating dialogues between leaders amongst many of these nations .
 The funding was moved from its own line item into education and cultural exchanges . The center's ability to continue to play this important role in the Asia Pacific region is important .
 There's no policy shift whatsoever in reducing the importance of or the commitment to the East-West Center, Congresswoman says .
 ECA funding was going to be requested under the ECA appropriation rather than as a separate East-West . But beginning in 2017 the funding was being requested under ECA.
 It's below the actual level of 2015 and appropriated level. It reflects just touch choices that we have with the budget that we've had, he says .
 The East-West Center will maintain its consistent support for the East- West Center going forward . It reflects the difficulties of the current budget choice and, you know, we will maintain our consistent support, the center says .
 The budget request within your budget goes toward train and equip programs within both Syria and Iraq . There is concern about how those funds are being used . State and the DoD program and other agencies are using this funding .
 The Syrian Government of Assad has been fighting against al-Qaeda, al-Nusra and other extremist groups in Syria . The Syrian government has been accused of using funds to overthrow the government .
 State Department's budget for the State Department will be examined as we look at the budget. We don't have time for this now but this is something I think is important that we want to examine .
 Coptic Christians have experienced some of the worst attacks in their modern history . We sent a petition to the White House urging that they designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization .
 The administration said we have not seen credible evidence that the Muslim Brotherhood has renounced its decades-long commitment to nonviolence . In a response to that, the administration said it had not seen evidence .
 As a whole, it’s very hard, obviously, to wrap everybody into the same pot, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There are, clearly, Muslim Brotherhood members who are engaging in violence, according to reports . There are also Muslim Brotherhood Members who are engaged in violence .
Administration does not recognize them as a terrorist organization . So the administration does notrecognize them as terrorist organizations .
 There was a member or two who were part of the delegation that was that attended and nobody knew, you know, what membership anybody had with respect to that . No, that — there was a members of that delegation that attended, and no, that was part of that
 Two days after their visit they released a statement calling for a long uncompromising jihad in Egypt . 2 days later there was a major attack on the Sinai peninsula .
 There's no country doing as much to fight against violent extremism as the United States, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think you can tell them that there’s no country do as much" to fight violent extremism .
 We are the ones who have put together the global initiative on countering violent extremism . We are one of the world's most successful anti-extremist groups .
All violent extremists are brought into the purview of these efforts as a result of that initiative . We’ve had major conferences and meetings on this issue. We've had major conference and meetings, and all violent extremists have been brought in .
 The Muslim Brotherhood is a terrorist organization with designation requirements . The group has been accused of being a terrorist group in the United States .
There are individual members that have engaged in violence and individual branches that have not expressed a commitment to that kind of activity . That’s — you know, you know. That's — while there are individual member members, there is not that commitment . That's
 Let's switch to the President’s plan to close Guantanamo and we haven’t received many detailed about that .
Cost estimate is $300 million to $500 million to move detainees and hold them here . We’ve heard the cost estimates are between $300m and $500m .
 No explanation has been forthcoming in how you resolve the conflict between that plan and the ban to move the detainees under the National Defense Authorization Act .
 Two days ago, one of the former detainees was arrested in Spain for apparently plotting to carry out an ISIS attack .
 I'm convinced it makes us safer because I think it’s been an incredible recruiting tool . I don’t think it adheres to the values of our country to have people held in a military prison 14 years after they were “apprehended”
 If we move detainees out of there is there going to Secretary Kerry, Secretary Kerry will be there. If we do it, there will be no more detainees in the United States .
 There’s no discussion that I’m aware of No, that is not what is at stake here. There's no discussion of No. No. That's not what's at stake, he says .
 We can just correct the mistakes that were made and make sure they don’t happen again. We can only make sure that they don't happen again, we can do so .
 I think Guantanamo now has such a imprint in the world, I said, as I said . I think those jumpsuits didn’t come out to the imagination of Daesh .
 The continent of Africa is in 55 countries, a population of 1 billion people .
South Sudan is the newest country in the world, with a population of some 11 million people . Boko Haram has been blamed for Boko Haram in Nigeria .
 The United Nations reports that in South Sudan soldiers with government uniforms were entering U.N. mission . Many civilians were killed and many of them were killed, the United Nations says .
 ISIS and Boko Haram are now moving toward territorial control, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The continent of Africa poses great, great challenges to the United States .
 I would say just about everything that we’re doing with respect to our development policy, our aid policy and our military to military assistance policy is all directed at this, he says . He says the military is doing everything to counter violent extremism policy .
 We're working on Power Africa because we are trying to get electricity into communities that don't have electricity so they can begin to develop and provide health capacity, provide education and fill the void that exists for a lot of young people .
 When I was in Ethiopia, I met with the Foreign Minister there, he told him how they managed their sort of 30, 35 percent population that is Muslim .
 extremist cell will go out and target young poor kids and pay them initially and then bring them in, proselytize, fill their heads with this distortion . Then they don't need to pay them anymore because they're ready to operate based on what’s been washed into them
 The President is trying to embrace his countering violent extremism strategy, he says . "We've got to recognize that failed or failing states that have no revenue, that can’t build a school," he says. "We have to think about this, we have to
After World War II we had a thing called the Marshall Plan where we rebuilt countries that had fallen into absolute economic despair as a consequence of the war . Now, after World War Two, we had to rebuild our former enemies — Japan and Germany .
 That is the greatest success story statement about why investment and why this engagement is critical. That is a great success story story statement. That's why investment is critical .
 The security of the United States of America is at stake in the choices we make in order to fill — help fill these voids . This is a long-term constant struggle and I believe that the security of U.S. is absolutely at stake .
 The work through these global institutions in order to push back against this potential vacuum that invites failure and violence and extremism to fill the void .
 The President started a program for young African leaders in order to bring them here and help them to train and learn . There are so many different things, what we’re doing on AIDS and what we do in terms of our broad based entrepreneurial encouragement .
 All of these things are good solid investments for the long-term future and security of our country. All of the things we need are good investments for our country's future .
 Mr Chairman, and Mr Secretary, thank you for coming back in front of the committee . Well, thankyou, Mr Chairman.
 President has stated that the nuclear agreement is not based on trust but is based on verification . The President has said that the agreement is based upon verification .
 This past Monday I received a letter from your talented Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs . The letter was from your assistant secretary for legislative affairs .
 I didn't read the entire thing but I was briefed full on what the contents are . I didn’t read the whole thing but was briefed on the contents of the book .
 If you visit the IAEA Web site they have a link to access the Iran safeguards agreement . There’s actually — if you visit it they have an access link to the agreement .
 When you click the link it goes to the next page and it says sorry, it's some type of a broken link . It says sorry.
 There’s a — the safeguards component we were briefed on and we were satisfied with. Yeah, that's the part — there’�s the part . There's a — there was a — a — — safeguards component, and we are satisfied with that.
 It is always traditionally between every country including us, we have an agreement . But it is part of — it’s a confidential — it is always traditional between all countries including us .
 Other countries can’t go read our agreement with the IAEA and that’s the way the I AEA works . Other countries cannot go read the agreement and that's the way it works .
 What needed to be included was satisfied because it was critical in the context of this. But we, as I say, were briefed on it so that we had a sense of what was included .
 I was in Vienna and I was there on the last day, on the final day of the year . I was at the end of the day. I was the last, obviously, on a last day . The last day is the last in Vienna .
 I believe then Under Secretary Wendy Sherman and others went over and met with the IAEA . Then they came back and briefed me out on it. I believe they went over to meet with them and then briefed me.
 Secretary Kerry says there's unprecedented IAEA monitoring and surveillance and verification measures .
 There is unprecedented allowance for that full measure of intrusive oversight and access . There is an unprecedented allowance. There is also a full measure for that.
 The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to be inaugurated next week . Obama has said that he will not be surprised if he is elected to the presidency .
 I just want to signal that that is an imperative component of this. But I just wants to signal. That's an imperative part of this, he says .
 Reports say Iranians collect their own soil samples, that the Iranians inspect some of their own nuclear sites . The Secretary of State will be in front of the committee on the issue .
 I would love to be able to get confirmation as to whether or not you’ve read that in there . I would like to see if you've read it in there.
 The additional protocol you can read is a public document. We have the right under the agreement, under the assumption of the additional protocol, the extra protocol . We have a right to read that, according to the agreement .
 The additional protocol was negotiated by the IAEA . It was put in place as a consequence of what failed in the framework agreement with North Korea .
 There has to be the ability to follow up and have access in order to investigate any suspected or suspicious sites .
 The IAEA has a right of access for any suspicious site not to be collected by the others, not by the other, not that they themselves have the right to access . The U.S. government has no right to collect information from any suspicious sites .
 Secretary Kerry says Secretary Kerry's comments are "a matter of fact" Secretary Kerry has been criticized for his comments on Twitter .
 The Vice President of Iran, Ali Saleh, went over to the IAEA and signed the agreement . Saleh is Iran's vice president . He is also the president of Iran .
 He signed the morning before the implementation before the agreement was announced . He signed it the morning.
 The reason why I was asking is it says that JCPOA is not a treaty or an executive agreement . The reason is that it is not an agreement or a treaty .
 The actual agreement between the IAEA and Iran is signed and that is a legal obligation . But the actual agreement is not signed .
 The Iran nuclear agreement, the JCPOA, the P5 h1, is not signed by Secretary Kerry . But the Iran nuclear deal is not a deal that Secretary Kerry has signed .
International law has been embraced in and fully adopted by the United Nations and the U.N. Security Council . Because it is a political agreement with force of law behind it, it has been fully adopted .
 The snap back is a particularly forceful provision in the context of the law . So that is why it has force of law and that's why it is a particular forceful provision .
 As ranking member on the Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade Subcommittee, I want to focus on terrorism for the purpose of this questioning . "I want tofocus on terrorism," he says .
 King Abdullah identified 17 fronts, which we generally agreed upon in the world, where ISIL and other groups are a great threat. Number one, we had King Abdullah here talking to some of the members of the committee .
 If you could, I just want to comment on some of the areas where it's ripe for incubation or incubation in the world, what those geographic areas would be, whether it’s Indonesia, Somalia, Bangladesh .
 The most effective things we can do in those areas before things incubate is to look at what our resources to intervene, says President Obama .
Some of the economic areas that we could do it, he says . Now, I think, clearly, you touched upon some of theEconomic areas that could be done, he adds .
Human rights. I also think in terms of human rights, if you could comment on how we're utilizing an increased role for women and mothers in trying to deal with this issue .
 "We're getting beaten on a little bit now globally in some areas," he says . "The counter extremists’ narrative that we really want to pursue with its broadcast social media," he adds .
 These are the kind of things that we get the most bang for the buck. So these are the things that are the mostbang for the Buck .
 These are the things that keep us the safest and are the most effective . They are the best things to keep us safe and are most effective.
There are some areas of concentration in the UK that we may not think of first off the top of our heads . But we can deal with it economically from a human rights perspective and from a counter extremist narrative .
 Congressman: "I really appreciate the question and I want to try to answer it carefully. I don't want the speculation or statement to become the father to the fact"
Some people may not have thought about a potential incubator location yet. So I don’t want to run through a whole bunch of potential incubators .
 I think generically I would simply say to you that where you have a poor population, where you've a bad governance, where they have corruption, and you have corruption . But I would just say that there is a distorted narrative you have potential, obviously, obviously .
 There are plenty of places where, unfortunately, what I just described is the fact today. And there are many places where there is no such thing, unfortunately .
 The narrative left unattended can be very attractive, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the narrative is very attractive .
 Rick Stengel has been deeply involved in this, working with other countries . He has been working with our best young talented communicators in America .
 The Sawab Center is a center that is opened in the Emirates, in Abu Dhabi . It has a bunch of young folks in there who are able to communicate the counter narrative .
 Many of those who are disaffected from Daesh have been executed when they try to leave . We’ve actually taken people from Daesh and put them on social media who have told the story .
 The communications effort is as critical as anything in preventing future recruits from being created . There are lots of places where the communications efforts are as critical.
 Secretary Kerry seems to have an affinity for Iran that I don't share . Secretary Kerry, you seem to have a affinity for the country, he says .
 They regularly chant death to America and recently tried to humiliate U.S. sailors . They have been known to try and humiliate sailors .
 The United States is the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism . They could possibly use the money to continue to export terrorism around the globe .
 I just hope that the cost of U.S. lives through an act of terror backed by Iran will be cost of American lives . I hope that that lesson, that incumbent, that is incumbent, is cost of America's lives .
 H.R. 158, the Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel Prevention Act. I'd love to go back to something Chairman McCaul was touching on earlier and that’s H. R. 158 .
 Military service, government travel, and national security and law enforcement were exceptions for the visa waiver issue .
 The State Department asked for other exemptions during negotiations . They were explicitly denied in the law signed by the President .
 There are national security and law enforcement waivers, according to Mr Secretary .
 I just want to make it clear I don’t have an affinity for any country that is engaged in activities that are counter to our values . Let me just, if I can, with your indulgence, withyour indulgence I just wants to make the clear
 The Secretary of State is to try to find solutions to problems that don't involve, if at possible and we can achieve our goals, he says .
 Iran may have the nuclear weapon, which would be bad for everybody in the world, particularly our friends closest to them . We looked at Iran and saw them about to be putting us in a situation where they might have the weapon .
 Secretary Kerry sent a letter after the visa waiver program was passed . But I also understand you sent a note after the law was passed.
National security and law enforcement define national security, if you don't mind, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If you don’t mind, I’m going to explain to me"
 Iran may be able to move to a different posture over a period of time, says U.S. State Department . Iran has an interest, obviously, in being able to guarantee that Iran, or any other country, can change .
 We look at what's happening in Vietnam today, or in Burma, other countries . We also look at other countries, including Burma and Vietnam .
 Transformation takes place in the national security interests of our country . Some of it comes from entrepreneurial activity being able to take place .
 Let me reference Secretary Kerry. That’s a good answer, sir, but let me — let me reference a Secretary Kerry, he said .
 The State Department put out a white paper that says as discussed in the legal paper, which we’ve asked for a copy of the paper referencing this white paper . We have not seen that yet .
 National security and law enforcement is a lesser standard, the department’s words, not mine . Other statutes require a waiver is vital to or essential to the national security interests of the United States .
 There are no findings of fact or other determinations required to be made before an exercise of the waiver authority . No findings are required to make such determinations .
 The national security waiver can be exercised by individuals, not just individuals, as discussed in the legal paper yet to be seen . The waiver can also be used by individuals.
 Congressman: "We’ve adhered to the discussions that we had because we’re not doing a blanket waiver. What we're doing, Congressman, we're not," he says .
 We're not doing some blanket waiver, but it's in our interest. So we’re not doing a blanket waiver and I think that’s, frankly, not only adhering to the standard but it’'s in the interest .
 The principal threat that we are concerned about of terror from Daesh is not coming out of Iran. I mean, we have people — you know, you know. We have people, we know, the principal threat, is from Daesh, says the Iranian government . I
 It’s coming out of other places, and if some European business person or an NGO that happens to be advocating human rights travels to Iran and they have a visa waiver with us . We don’t lose any — in fact, we have greater insight on somebody with that
White paper looks like a copy of the legal paper. It looks like you all were trying to find wiggle room to work around the intent of Congress and the actual wording of the law .
 My time has expired and you can keep talking if the chairman will let you. My time is expired and I can't keep talking to the chairman if he lets you .
 Please provide a copy of the legal paper and maybe this will be a nonissue . Please provide us a copy.
Even good programs may not be able to get the level of support we’d all wish, given our deficit . But as I said in my statement, even good programs might not be can't get the levels of support .
 Embassy security is a priority for the country's embassy in the developing world . Embassy security will be a priority, says the ambassador .
 I'm afraid the dam has been broken with foreign investment rushing in and in the real world it will not be reversible if and when Iran cheats. I’m afraid it will be reversible when and when Iranian cheats, he says .
 Mr Rohrabacher had a question for the record, which will be submitted without objection .
 The committee looks forward to its continued work with you to strengthen our nation’s security. Mr Secretary, for being with us today, says Secretary .
 The Committee on Foreign Ajfairs seeks to make its facilities (xcessible) to persons mth disabilities . The Honorable John F Kerry is the Secretary of State United States Department of State .
 If you are in need of special accommodations, please call 20Z'225-5021 at least four business days in ativ<vice of the event, wlkinawr practicable .
 Questions with regard to special accommodations in general (including arvctilahility of Committee materials in alternative formats andtsi.stive listening device.sj may he directed to the Committee.sJ may he direct to the committee .
 Rep. Darrell Issa QFR Chairman Edward Royce QFR Ranking Member Eliot Engel is a member of the House of Representatives . Issa is the chairman of the QFR Committee .
 Jean Marter, Director of Committee Operations, is on the House Committee on Foreign Affairs . David Trott time SCHEDULED to RECONVENE or TIME ADJOURNED Jean Marters . DavidTrott TIME SCHEDuled to REConvene or TIME
 Christopher H Smith, NJ X Ileana Ros-Lehlinen, FL X Dana Rohrabacher, CA X Steve Chabot, OH X Joe Wilson, SC X Michael T McCaul, TX X Ted Poe .
 TX Matt Salmon, AZ X Darrell Issa, CA Tom Marino, PA X Jeff Duncan, SC X Mo Brooks, SC Mo Brooks.
 OIG searched iupclassifietf af'chives arid, discovered records suggesting instances in which potentially sensitive rhateriaTmay have been transmitted .
 The substance of the material and "NODIS" references in the body or subject lines of some of the documents suggested that the documents couid be potentially sensitive .
 The date rahgeon the documents is from February 2003 through June 2008 . The date is from 2003 to 2008 .
 The ICIG advised OIG that none of the documents contain or contained . On December .15, 20livthe ICig advised that, according to information management officials in the' Intelligence' Community (IQ elements)
 On December 29, 2015, the Department advised OIG that 12 of the 19 documents contairi national, security information classified at the Secret or Confidential levels . The review by 9 Department bureaus and offices.
 On January 15, 201S, the Department provided a second response that discusses OIG’s query . OIG asked whether material contained in each classified document should have been regarded as classified .
 State Department watered down human trafficking report. State Department says trafficking conditions haven't improved in Malaysia and Cuba .
 The State Department’s senior political staff saw it differently — and they prevailed .
 A Reuters examination shows that the government office set up to independently grade global efforts to fight human trafficking was repeatedly overruled by senior American diplomats and pressured into inflating assessments .
 Analysts disagreed with U.S. diplomatic bureaus on ratings for 17 countries, the sources said . The analysts won only three of those disputes, the worst ratio in the 15-year history of the unit .
 Malaysia, Cuba and China wound up with better grades than the State Department’s human-rights experts wanted to give them . India, Uzbekistan and Mexico had better grades, sources said .
 Thailand has faced scrutiny over forced labor at sea and the trafficking of Rohingya Muslims through its southern jungles . Of the three disputes J/TlP won, Thailand's most prominent was Thailand, which has been criticized for its human rights abuses .
 Diplomats had sought to upgrade it to so-called “Tier 2 Watch List’s’ status . Diplomats wanted it to be ‘Tier 2’
 It remains on “Tier 3’s rating for countries with the worst human-trafficking records . The rating is still on ‘Tier 3.’ The rating remains on the list of the world's worst countries .
 The number of rejected recommendations suggests a degree of intervention not previously known by diplomats . It is the basis for many countries’ anti-trafficking policies, according to the report .
 This year, local embassies and other constituencies were able to block some of the toughest grades . This year's grades were the toughest of the year for embassies and constituencies .
 The upgrade could smooth the way for an ambitious U.S.-led free-trade deal with the Southeast Asian nation and 1 1 other countries . The upgrade was highly criticized by human rights groups .
 Cuba's 12 years on the blacklist came as the two nations reopened embassies on each other’s soil following their historic detente over the past eight months .
Experts' recommendation to downgrade China's ranking to the worst ranking. China has been ranked the world's worst for years .
 Tier 3 was overruled despite the report’s conclusion that Beijing did not undertake increased anti-trafficking efforts .
 China is regarded by the United Nations as among the world's worst human right abusers . That would have put China alongside the likes of Syria and North Korea, regarded as the worst human rights abusers .
 Typically, J/TIP wins more than half of what officials call “disputes’ with diplomatic sections of the State Department .
 Tier 1 for nations that meet minimum U.S. standards; Tier 2 for those making significant efforts to meet those standards . Tier 3 for countries that fail to comply with the minimum United States standards and are not makingsignificant efforts . Tier 2 "Watch List" for those that deserve special
 A Tier 3 ranking can trigger sanctions limiting access to aid from the United States, the International Monetary Fund or the World Bank . Such action is frequently waived .
 Many countries aggressively lobby U.S. embassies to try to avoid sliding into the Tier 3 category .
 Four straight years on the Tier 2 Watch List triggers an automatic downgrade to Tier 3 unless a country earns a waiver or an upgrade . A waiver or upgrade is required for a country to earn a waiver.
 The leverage has brought some success, including pressuring Switzerland to close loopholes that allowed the prostitution of minors . The Dominican Republic has convicted more child trafficking offenders .
 The rejection of so many recommendations could strengthen calls by some lawmakers to investigate how the report is compiled . Some lawmakers have called for the report to be compiled .
 Senator Robert Menendez has threatened to call for a Senate hearing and an inspector general to investigate if top State Department officials removed Malaysia from the lowest tier for political reasons .
 The final decision on disputed rankings this year was made in meetings attended by some of the State Department's most powerful diplomats .
 Sarah Sewall oversees J/TIP as Undersecretary of State for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human Rights . She presented the experts’ recommendations, sources said .
 The State Department declined to make any of those officials available for comment . The State Dept. declined to comment .
 Malaysian authorities discovered dozens of suspected mass migrant graves and human rights groups reported continued forced labor in the nation’s lucrative palm oil, construction and electronics industries . The improved ranking came in a year in which authorities discovered suspected mass graves .
 As recently as April, the U.S. ambassador to Malaysia, Joseph Yun, urged the country to take human trafficking violations more seriously .
 U.S. officials have denied political considerations influenced Malaysia’s rankings .
 She said the decision was based on how Malaysia was dealing with trafficking . She said it was a decision to make the decision .
 Representative Chris Smith, a New Jersey Republican who authored a 2000 law that led to the creation of J/TlP, said in an interview that the office's authority is being undermined .
 Congress approved legislation in June giving Obama expanded trade negotiating powers . But it also prohibited deals with Tier 3 countries such as Malaysia and Malaysia .
 Sources say Malaysia's efforts to end forced I abor amounted to promises rather than action . They said some of Malaysia’s efforts to stop me from doing so were promises, not action .
 Analysts clashed over Cuba's record with the State Department’s Western Hemisphere Affairs Bureau, whose view took precedence in the final report .
 Human rights groups and people with knowledge of the negotiations over the rankings said an unearned upgrade for Cuba could undermine the integrity of the report .
 Cuba had been on the ‘border line’ for an upgrade in recent years, a former State Department official says .
 Cuba has been criticized for alleged forced labor in medical missions that Havana sends to developing countries . The final report remained highly critical, citing concerns about Cuba's failure to deal with a degree of forced labor .
 J/TIP's analysts called for downgrading China, the world's second-biggest economy, to Tier 3 . They criticized Beijing for failing to follow through on a promise to abolish its “re-education through labor’s system”
 J/TIP can run afoul of other important diplomatic priorities, particularly in countries beset by instability or corruption . U.S. diplomats are trying to build relationships.
 The U.S. State Department ranks the world's most important diplomatic centers of gravity . The State Department has been criticized for its lack of diplomatic presence in the region .
 If the office is losing more disputes over rankings than it is winning, it would be “an unfortunate thing,’ he says .
 Most U.S. diplomats are reluctant to openly strike back at critics inside and outside of the administration . Critics accuse them of letting politics trump human rights .
 Some diplomats say J/TIP staffers should avoid acting like “purists’ and keep sight of broader U.S. interests . They say maintaining open channels with authoritarian governments to push for reform and forging trade deals .
 It is based in a building a few blocks away from State Department . It adds to the sense of two separate identities and cultures .
 The heads of regional bureaus, representing the business and political interests of U.S. embassies, would join the J/TIP team around a table . They would have almost an equal say in deciding country rankings .
 Diplomats who objected could appeal to then deputy secretary of state Richard Armitage . Diplomats could also appeal to the then Deputy Secretary of State of State.
 Annitage, who is no longer in a government job, did not respond to a request for comment from his office .
 Officials who worked in the olfice over the past 15 years acknowledge that countries with sensitive diplomatic or trade relationships with the U.S. sometimes received special treatment .
 Mexico is a key trading partner whose cooperation is also needed against drug trafficking and illegal Immigration . Mexico is also a key partner in the fight against illegal immigration and drug trafficking .
 It was kept at Tier 2 despite the anti-traffi eking unit’s call for a worse grade .
 The controversy over this year’s report comes at a time when J/TP lacks a congressionally confirmed leader .
 The prior chief, ambassador-at-Large Luis CdeBaca, left in November of last year . The previous chief, Ambassador- at-Large, left last year.
 Alison Friedman resigned to join a non-profit anti-slavery organization . Friedman's deputy, Alison Friedman, then resigned from the organization .
 Obama nominated Georgia prosecutor Susan Coppedge as next ambassador-at-large . It took until mid-July for Obama to nominate Susan Coppingge as the next ambassador to Georgia .
 The lack of a director can increase the unit’s exposure to political influence, says Lederer .
 Some say the perceived hit to the integrity of the 2015 report could do lasting damage . The 2015 report was published by the World Health Organisation .
 Tlic issue of ilie use of personal e-mail acoounts to conduct official business arose on numerous occ-asions . In conjunction with the Committee’s oversiglit into improprieties associated with the Depurtment oJrEnerg>’'s 17
 In doing so, they circumvented laws and regulations governing recordkeeping requirements . They attempted to insulate their communications from scrutiny from scrutiny .
 Jim Jordan, Chsinuan, Subcouun, and R-ichard Kaufinann are all on the panel . The panel includes a senior advisor to the Sec’y .
 SpeciRcaliy used his personal account to engage hi discussion regarding policy matters under his review with his former employer . He used his account to talk about policy matters with former employers .
 The hearingxamined the enhanced transparency technology offers, particularly to irapi-ove citizens’ ability to inienict with rhe federal government .
 It also highUghted the challenge of preventing federal officiais from hiding their actions from phblic scrutiny in spite of these technological advancements . It was also high Ughted by preventing federal officials from hiding actions.
 Administration has straggled to ensure tliat official actions are appropriately captured and documented .
 Former Googler To Resigtifrom Wki (it1oUse,^lXtYZQ, Dec., 2010, hnOAl6740.htmt' See.g., Lecter from Rep. Rep. Wki .
 The agency's policies regarding the use of nou-official e-mail accounts have been reviewed .
UHng nonofficial e-mail accounts to conduct official business since Januart' 20. Have any agency employees subject to disciplinar>' proceedings for uHng e-mails since Jan Stuart's 20.
 If so, please provide a list of names, dates of proceedings, and fiiml outcomes .
Employees may use personal e-mail on personal time for matters not directly related to official business . Chapter 5 of the FAM outlines Department policies for the use of social media by Department personnel .
 The Department offers training opportunities on its records management program . The Foreign Service Institute offers specialized training for individual offices and overseas posts .
 Please do not hesitate to contact us if we can be of further assistance . We are looking for help in the UK and the UK .
 It is intended for the use of officers, supervisors, or other personnel who are directly or indirectly responsible for records operations or management . It's intended for use of officer, supervisors and other personnel . It is not intended to use the physical location of records .
 Records management procedures pertain to both Department offices and posts overseas . Unless specifically stated, these records management procedures are not required .
 ADS is an automated central database that contains texts of telegrams and written documents about Department policies dating back to 1973 . ADS is a central database.
 The new email is the first from Kerry that the State Department has determined contains sensitive information . Clinton's emails have shown she and her staff communicated directly with Kerry when he was a senator .
 Kerry has been silent throughout the Clinton email controversy . Kerry has largely been silent during the email controversy.
 Clinton has not publicly criticized Clinton for exclusively using a personal email account and a homebrew email server . He has sent letters asking the State Department's inspector general to review the agency's records keeping practices .
 In the heavily-redacted email, dated May 19, 2011, Kerry appears to be discussing negotiations between India and Pakistan .
 The email was sent to Tom Donilon, who then served as President Obama's National Security Advisor .
 Clinton forwarded the email to an aide, instructing her to “Pis print” the document . The email was sent to a staffer .
 The redactions are listed under the Freedom of Information Act exemptions 1 . and 1 .4, which are reserved for information gleaned from foreign government sources .
 Kerry sent Clinton the information from his iPad, a communications device that would have been more vulnerable to hackers than an encrypted communications system . Kerry sent the information to Clinton .
 That's more than double the number of emails that contained similarly classified information released in all of the previous releases combined . That’s more than twice the number that contained similar classified information .
 A comprehensive effort to defeat ISIL in Syria will require the participation of the predominately Sunni moderate Syrian opposition forces .
 U.S. support for these groups is incoherent and inconsistent . Yet, United States support for them is inconsistent and incoherent .
 To make matters worse, these moderate Sunni groups — not ISIL — are bearing the full brunt of Russian airpower .
 Please provide a detailed outline of efforts to engage Sunni partners in Syria . This includes efforts in northern and southern Syria as well as cross border efforts . Please provide an outline of the efforts .
 Special Envoy for Syria Michael Ratney works closely with many groups in Syria, including moderate Sunni opposition groups .
 SE Ratney is in regular contact with the leadership of armed and unanned opposition groups . The majority of the opposition groups are Sunni .
 The United States provides more than $500 million in transition and non-lethal support to the Syrian opposition . The U.S. also provides support to moderate armed opposition units .
 This support is designed to enable key local institutions to respond to community needs, preserve the moderate ideals of the revolution, and lay the foundation for inclusive governance . This support was designed to help local institutions respond to local needs, and preserve moderate ideals.
 By empowering moderates to meet the needs of their communities, this support serves as a direct safeguard against extremists who would seek to buy the allegiance of the Syrian people .
 This support also prepares moderates to play a role in a future Syria that is inclusive and respects human rights . This support is also preparing moderates to be more inclusive and respect human rights.
 The Department of State is prepared to support the Syrian opposition's High Negotiation Committee's participation in the UN -facilitated Geneva negotiations later this month by funding flights and accommodations for vetted members of the negotiation team through a multi-donor mechanism .
 The Department also has ongoing funding that provides negotiations training to the Syrian Opposition Council . It will be funding independent Syrian journalists to cover the negotiations .
 We continue to provide non-lethal support to vetted units of the armed opposition . We also provide food, medical equipment, and winterization supplies, among other items .
 This assistance is designed to enhance the operational capabilities of vetted units of the armed opposition to better protect the Syrian people from regime and counter extremists .
 The Administration's efforts to train, equip, and cooperate with Kurdish Protection Units or forces are under way .
 Russian support for the YPG and other Kurdish forces operating in Syria . U.S. engagement with these groups is also discussed .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has pledged to address the conflict between two groups being supported by the United States .
 The U.S. maintains contact with all segments of Syrian society to encourage a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Syria . The United States maintains contact.
 Syrian Kurds, along with other Syrian communities that have come under attack from Da’esh, play an important role in confronting and ultimately defeating Da'esh .
 The U.S. engages in communication with PYD and YPG representatives. It is in this context that the United States engages in contact with the PYD .
 Enabling indigenous anti-Da’esh forces on the ground has been a key component in our approach to defeat Da’sh .
 The Syrian Democratic Forces is a multi-ethnic, multi-sect umbrella group that has cleared Da’esh off the Turkey-Syrla border east of the Euphrates . The group is isolating Raqqa, and most recently seized Shaddadi, a critical Da'esh node
 The ongoing post-Shaddadi operation has seized thousands of square kilometers from Da’esh . It further isolates Raqqa from Mosul and Syria from Iraq .
Recent moves by the YPG north of Aleppo are counterproductive and undermine our collective, cooperative efforts in northern Syria. As we have said before, recent moves have heightened tensions with Turkey .
 We have not and will not recognize any P'YTD ""self-rule’s autonomous zone. We will notrecognize any P’YTD ‘self- rule’ zone .
 We are focused on advancing a genuine, negotiated political transition towards an inclusive government that is capable of serving the interests of all the Syrian people .
 We continue to express publicly and privately to the P'YD and the ’YPG’s concerns and issues with the actions laid out above . We are concerned about the actions of the P’YD.
High level communication with PYD co-chair, Saleh IVfuslim . This includes high level communication. This also includes high-level communication with co-chairs .
 We continue to urge the PYD to administer inclusively, protect local populations and property, and promote and protect human rights .
 This is critical to hold and stabilize territory recaptured from Da’esh. This is important to hold, stabilize territory captured from Da'esh .
 FY 2017 budget request includes significant increases in non-lethal assistance to armed Syrian opposition groups . Nevertheless, the FY 2017 Budget request includessignificant increases innon-lethal aid .
 State Department non-lethal assistance to vetted armed Syrian opposition groups is distinct from Department of Defense activities and support to the armed opposition .
 State funding requested in FY 2017 will continue to support the provision of non-lethal equipment and goods to vetted units of the moderate opposition to protect themselves and their communities .
Jordan and Lebanon are supporting their partners in the region through security assistance . Jordan and Lebanon also maintain significant economic assistance programs in both countries .
 The Administration is committed to supporting the enhancement of civil societies that are capable of holding governments, including security institutions, accountable .
 This balance is critical to ensuring our partners in the region remain stable in the longer term . This balance has been critical to ensure our partners remain stable. This balance will be important for the region to remain stable for longer term.
 In Jordan, our assistance supports and expands Jordan’s contribution to bilateral and coalition efforts to counter ISIL and other regional threats .
 Our assistance also supports the capacity of the Jordan Armed Forces to counter threats in the region, and bolster professionalization of its military .
 In Lebanon, we have undertaken critical efforts to help shield the country from the spillover of the Syria crisis . In turn, this helps bolster regional stability, which in turn helps bolster stability .
 The Lebanese Armed Forces are a reliable and committed partner, says Hizballah . They say their support enhances their capacity to defend the country’s border with Syria .
 U.S. assistance to Lebanon's Internal Security Forces also helps strengthen the country’s civilian security and respond to internal terrorist threats .
 The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action legitimized Iran’s formerly clandestine nuclear program . Most analysts agree that the goal has long been to develop a nuclear weapons capability .
 This deeply troubling concession has created a precedent that will have a profoundly negative impact on U S nonproliferation policy around the world, especially in the Middle East .
 The UAE agreed to forgo the acquisition of an “ENR’ capability as long as the United States did not in effect accord that status to any other country in the region . The first casualty is the effective demise of the provision in the U.S.-UAE nuclear
 The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is not a nuclear cooperation agreement . It is not an agreement on nuclear cooperation .
 The United States has a longstanding policy of limiting the spread of ENR technologies to the greatest extent possible . The U.S. has a full range of measures to this end .
 The JCPOA furthers this objective by placing rigorous constraints on Iran’s enrichment capacity and enrichment research and development activities for 10 years . It also provides for unprecedented verification, monitoring and transparency measures on Iran's nuclear program .
 The Department of State takes deliberate steps to support women’s leadership and participation in conflict prevention, mitigation, resolution, and reconciliation .
 In Syria, the Department has pursued focused activities to strengthen the active participation of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding . The Department has been pursuing focused activities in Syria .
 These women have been agents of peace and the promotion of human rights . They have been advocating for and negotiating local ceasefires and access to free movement .
 These courageous women have also petitioned for the reopening of schools in TSIL-controlled villages . They have negotiated prisoner releases .
 Since 2012, the Department’s Syria engagement has integrated women through amulti-track approach . U.S. diplomatic leadership pairs programming initiatives with U. S diplomatic leadership .
For the third year in a row, DRL and USATD have helped ensure that Syrian women representing civil society organizations have access to senior decision makers . The efforts incorporate diplomatic outreach, public affairs programming, and foreign assistance initiatives .
 Tn women have been instrumental in providing diverse perspectives on the impact of the conflict, human rights abuses within Syria . Tn such settings, women have provided diverse perspectives.
 Tn concert with initiatives led by other partners has brought together a vocal and talented coalition of women .
 The United States and like-minded partners have routinely raised the importance of women's inclusion in any peace process . UNSC resolution 2254 explicitly encourages women’s inclusion in the Syrian peace process. Toward this end.
 The Department is committed to enhancing its data analytics capacity . The Department remains committed to improving its data Analytics capacity .
 We recognize the importance that data and its analysis should play in policy and decision-making as well as in operations, planning, monitoring, and evaluation .
 A senior Foreign Service Officer has been assigned as the Director of Data Analytics . A small group of qualified data science officers have been assigned .
 This group is currently performing limited data analytics functions for the Department and supporting and working with other offices that have data Analytics functions specific to those Bureaus or offices . The group is performing limitedData analytics functions.
 The Department’s countering violent extremism communications efforts and interagency coordination is led by the Global Engagement Center .
 The Office of Data Analytics has offered technical analytics support to the Center . The Center will provide support whenever needed, whenever needed .
Countering Violent Extremism (CVEh) The State Department is restructuring its eflbrts to counter violent extremism . C VE is added to the name of the Bureau of Counterterrorism .
 There is a growing recognition amongst the international community that it's not enough to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups on the battlefield . We also need to address the ideology and tactics these groups employ to attract new recruits .
 The U.S. State Department is working to combat violent extremism in the Middle East . It is working with the U.N. to combat the growing threat of terrorism in the region . The United States has been involved in the fight against violent extremism .
 Encourage and assist partner governments to adopt more effective policies and approaches to prevent and counter the spread of violent extremism .
 Employ foreign assistance tools and approaches to reduce specific political or social factors that contribute to violent extremism in identifiable areas .
 Empower and amplify locally credible voices that can change the perception of violent extremist groups and their ideology among key demographic segments . Empower can also change the perceptions of violent extremists and their ideologies among key segments .
 Strengthen the capabilities of government and non-governmental actors to isolate, intervene with, and promote the rehabilitation and reintegration of individuals caught in the cycle of radicalization to violence .
 The Secretary has directed the Bureau of Counterterrorism to play the lead role in coordinating and overseeing the Department’s CVE engagement and assistance .
 The Department is seeking to change the name of the Bureau to reflect this expanded role . The Bureau’s expanded mandate will help the Department widen its engagement with a broader set of actors .
 The name of the bureau reflects that CVE is an integral part of a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism . To be clear, this change is intended as an expansion of the Bureau’s work .
 It will not take away from the Bureau’s critical ongoing work on a range of important counterterrorism topics, in areas like aviation and border security .
 The Department is seeking increased foreign assistance resources to advance CVE partnerships and programs around the world . The Department also seeking increased Foreign assistance resources .
 The Department has requested $1 86 million for CVE programs as part of the FY 2017 request . The request is a 33 percent increase from our FY 2016 request .
 The Department is committed to enhancing its monitoring and evaluation of CVE programs . The Bureau of Conflict and Stabilization Operations is at the forefront of this work .
 We will measure progress toward achieving this strategy’s objectives and developing a results framework for measuring progress . We will also measure progress to achieve this strategy's objectives .
 CVE programs will be measured against clearly stated objectives that are linked to the strategic objectives described above and 98 accompanied by clear, well-developed and resourced monitoring and evaluation plans .
 CVE programming will evaluate the longer-term effects of CVE programming . To the extent possible, we will develop a set of common indicators to measure outputs and outcomes .
 We will continue to learn from these efforts and ensure that future efforts are guided by both qualitative and quantitative monitoring information, evidence of results and effects, and where appropriate, innovation, is needed .
 The new Global Engagement Center is charged with leading the coordination, integration, and synchronization of government-wide communications activities . The new center aims to diminish the influence of international terrorist organizations with foreign audiences abroad .
 The Department has requested $21 . million for FY201 7 while increasing the Center’s FY2016 budget to $1 5. million from the $5. million provided to the Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications in FY2015 .
 A primary goal of the GEC is to better understand target audiences through advanced data analytics . The GEC's main goal is to improve target audiences by better understanding target audiences .
 During FY2016, it will devote nearly $1. million to baseline research that will inform our content development . The research will be used to inform content development.
 We must have a comprehensive understanding of the audiences we seek to influence in order to be successful . We must also have a complete understanding of what we want to influence .
 The Center will devote another $1.1 million to enhance our capabilities to analyze dynamically data derived from social media .
 This data analysis will help us better understand the foreign audiences abroad that are most susceptible to influence from violent extremist groups . It will allow us to more specifically tailor our messaging and narrative development .
 The Center will devote approximately $1. million of FY2016 finding to support counter-lSlL campaigns . Some foreign partners, including some managed by foreign partners.
 The Center will engage top talent from content development sources within the United Stales and abroad in order to make its operations swifter and more agile and adaptive . The Center also will engageTop talent from U.S. and abroad .
 The Center will fund original content created both internally and by third parties for use by members of the Counter-TSIL Coalition . This content will be hosted on the Global Coalition Website .
 The Center will provide targeted resources enhancement to selected partner organizations across the globe to enable them to create and disseminate counter-TSTL content that draws upon relevant history and culture .
 Arewa24 is a major project sponsored by the Bureaus of Counterterrorism and African Affairs . It embeds messaging against violent extremist narratives in general entertainment programming . For example, the Center will provide modest additional funding for the project .
 Arewa24’s award-winning content will be delivered to audiences of concern in several more countries . Modest additional funding from the Center will deliver the content .
 CSCC will devote approximately $600,000 to enhancing the efficiency of this line of effort . The new Center will strengthen and deepen CSCC’s critical interagency coordination function, as well as the direct digital engagement in Arabic, Urdu and Somali .
 The Department’s work on Countering Violent Extremism seeks to reduce the ability of violent extremists to radicalize, recruit, and mobilize followers to violence .
 USAID to 99 build specific alternatives, capabilities, and resiliencies in targeted communities and populations to reduce radicalization and recruitment . This includes working with USAid to build specific alternative alternatives and capabilities .
 To achieve these goals, the Department and USAID will use and integrate the U.S. government's various diplomatic, strategic communications, rule of law, and development resources and tools .
 State and USAID will focus and expand diplomatic efforts with governmental, multilateral, and non-governmental actors to promote CVE cooperation and advance this strategy . The agency will focus on diplomatic efforts.
 State will work through its public affairs networks, functional bureaus and engagement abroad . State will promote CVE communications and U.S. strategic counterterrorism narratives . State's public affairs network will be used to promote CVE communication .
 State and USAID will expand and target rule of law and development programs to address specific drivers of violent extremism and enhance CVE partnerships . The agency will also focus on CVE partnerships with international partners .
 Resources will be focused on areas where they will have the greatest sustained impact, and programming will be guided by rigorous analysis of violent extremism drivers .
 State and USAID will increase support for efforts to understand overall trends of violent extremism and to identify the local geography, demography, and drivers of recruitment and radicalization to violent extremism .
 The answer is classified and will be passed under separate cover . The answer to this question is classified .
 The Bureau of Diplomatic Security revised the Department of State’s Foreign Affairs Manual section 12 FAM 263, “Counterintelligence Awareness Program,’ in 2012 . These revisions modify and clarify language on counterintelligence programs for critical HUMINT counterintelligence posts .
 The Overseas Security Policy Board is chaired by Diplomatic Security . The board has robust Intelligence Community membership .
 Once a post is deemed critical, assignments to that post are reviewed against 1 3 factors to identify and minimize risks to the employee, his or her family members, and/or members of household .
 If you are appealing a decision of the panel to assign you to a position, you must identify specific reasons that show service in such a position would impose undue hardship on you .
 You may also appeal a decision of a panel not to assign you to a position for which the panel considered you . You may be able to appeal a panel's decision to consider you .
 Bureau appeals must delineate why the assignment of the employee would run counter to the efficient operation of the office or post . The assignment of an employee would be counter to an office's efficient operation .
 Your failure to accept the decision by the DG will make you subject to disciplinary action outlined in 3 FAM 4300 . You may not appeal a directed assignment . You can not appeal the decision .
 Tn August 2014, anti-trafficking advocates and U.S. government officials first reported to the Department of State that Indian officials had begun to implement a policy prohibiting the travel of T and T-derivative visa holders between the United States and India .
 The Indian government has revised the policy that previously authorized the confiscation of Indian citizens’ passports bearing United States -issued T visas . T visa holders can travel if they receive additional certification from the Indian government .
 T visa holders must provide Indian officials with sensitive information, such as U.S. court documents . Some have characterized these requirements as burdensome and invasive .
 The Department engages regularly with the Indian government on combating trafficking in persons and protecting trafficking victims, including on T visa issues .
 Two-year budget deal reached late last year increased the International Affairs Overseas Contingency Operations budget by approximately 60% compared to FY 2015 .
 This increase was critical and allowed the U.S. to maintain its engagement overseas . This increase allowed the United States to maintain their engagement overseas. This increase is critical and allows the United State to maintain it.
 The International Affairs Budget was originally intended only to cover temporary, generally war-related programs . However, the growth in OCO has also made the budget dangerously dependent on the funding mechanism .
 The OCO portion of the FY 2017 Request for the Department and USAID is $14. billion . It's consistent with the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 .
 The OCO request will support Department of State and USAID efforts to prevent, address, and recover from man-made crises and natural disasters .
 The U.S. is currently engaged in more places, all at the same time, with more issues of consequence than in recent history . The United States is currently engaging in more people than ever before .
 The FY 20 1 7 Request includes OCO increases for several maj or programs . In support of this increased engagement and assistance the FY20 1 7 request includes increased engagement.
 Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance will be relying more heavily on OCO to construct safer and more secure diplomatic facilities in India, Kenya, Uganda, and Afghanistan . It will also enable us to contribute to peacekeeping missions and shield allies and partners from potential threats .
 The Department is concerned about the shift in balance between base and OCO funding . The OCO increase was instrumental to securing an overall increase in funding for FY 2016 and FY 2017 above levels .
Programs supported with base funding serve as the foundation of core, ongoing Department operations and assistance programs .
 Base funds support vital development and diplomacy programs, including health, democracy, and diplomatic security . Base funds are used to support health, diplomacy and security programs .
 The President's Budget anticipates this by planning for the restoration of $8. billion to the International Affairs base budget in FY 2018 . The Department looks forward to working with Congress to restore funding levels for long-tenn programs .
 The World Health Organization recently announced that tuberculosis had surpassed HIV to become the world’s number one infectious killer .
 480,000 people developed multi-drug resistant TB double the number of cases diagnosed in 2000 . That same year, roughly 480,00 people developed the disease .
 Less than half of TB patients survive, but less than half survive, experts say .
 In December, the Administration unveiled a comprehensive plan to address multi-drug resistant TB worldwide .
 The FY 17 budget proposed $191 million for TB for FY 16 and $45 million less than the amount ultimately appropriated by Congress . Less than two months later, the budget proposed the same amount for TB .
 The FY 2017 request for tuberculosis of $191 million is a reduction of $45 million from the FY 2016 appropriated level . The FY 2016 request for TB was $191m, a reduction from $190m to $191M .
 The Fiscal Year 2017 request does not represent the totality of the U.S. government’s response to this disease .
 The United States government is the world’s leading donor to TB worldwide . USAID is the leading global TB technical assistance provider, even at the current request level .
 Middle-income countries have higher burdens of TB and multidrug-resistant TB . They are increasingly bearing a larger share of the costs, according to experts .
 USAID is working with countries on domestic resource mobilization, which seeks to increase their share of resources . USAID has been working with these countries on resource mobilization .
 TB is now the leading infectious disease killer of adults, according to the CDC . TB is the most common disease in the world .
 Since 2000, TB treatment has saved the lives of more than 43 million people . More than 40 million people have been treated with TB treatment .
 USAID has contributed to curing over 10 million TB patients and initiating treatment for more than 220,000 MDR-TB patients . Over the last five years, USAID have cured more than 10 million patients .
 The MDR-TB Plan is a "call to action" to address the threat of drug-resistant TB strains . The plan will mobilize political will and additional funding commitments from all affected countries .
 USAID will introduce new point of care diagnostics, new MDR-TB drugs and regimens, and new approaches to improve adherence .
 USAID is partnering with Ministries of Health to prevent, find and cure TB and drug-resistant TB around the world .
 CDC was a founding member of WHO’s ‘Green Light Committee’ initiative to scale-up MDR-TB treatment availability . CDC also works closely with domestic and international partners through the TB Trials Consortium .
 During the last several weeks, we have all been alarmed and heartbroken by stories of those impacted by the virus .
 The President has asked for more than $1. billion in emergency funding to address the outbreak . $335 million for USAID and $41 million for the State Department are among the requests .
1 think we would be remiss if we failed to also recognize the wider issues this crisis underscores . T certainly recognize the importance of emergency funding to help those impacted by the crisis .
 Scientists hypothesize that higher-than-average temperatures in the southern hemisphere have made it easier for mosquitos such as the Aedes aegypti [AY-diss Egypt-EYE\ mosquito, which transmits the virus to breed, and have allowed the viruses to flourish
 The President’s budget for the Department of State and USAID in FY 2017 does not include a foreign assistance request specifically for a response to Zika . It does include funding in the Global Health Programs account for Global Health Security .
 Global Health Security Agenda aims to achieve a world that is secure from infectious disease threats by building capacity to prevent, detect, and rapidly respond .
 We are working in synergy across agencies, including the Departments of Health and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Agriculture, and Defense .
 The CDC recently concluded that the virus is a cause of microcephaly and other severe fetal brain defects . Every day we learn more about the virus.
 There is still much that we do not yet know about Zika and its relationship to neurological disorders and other poor health outcomes .
 We will work aggressively to investigate these outbreaks, and mitigate, to the best extent possible, the spread of the virus . We will be working aggressively to address these outbreaks .
 Climate change programs produce important benefits that reinforce ongoing work in various sectors, including health . The benefits include health, climate change and climate change programs .
 climate events such as extreme hydrological variability and drought can encourage water storage inside the home and provide breeding grounds for the mosquito vector .
 Adaptation programs and ensuring 24/7 access to clean water and sanitation in the Caribbean and Latin America will help poor and especially vulnerable countries and communities to build resilience to climate change . They will also protect hard-won development gains.
 These efforts could require more costly, reactive interventions . By enabling these countries to build resilience and adapt to extreme events, these efforts will help them cope with threats .
 A key aspect of these programs involves building capacity to use climate information to better inform decisions on the ground in key sectors, including health .
 Work to make better use of “climate services for health is already underway across the United States, in the United Nations system .
 The F Y 2017 request for Department of State and USAID climate change programs, including the Green Climate Fund, is $983.3 million .
 contraception can be difficult to access and pregnancy is often not a choice . Throughout many of the areas hardest hit by Zika, contraception is difficult to find and access .
 900,000 infections are expected among women of reproductive age . Almost 19 million women in the affected areas have an unmet need for family planning services .
Women have the tools they need to make the best decisions for their families, says CNN.com.com . Women need to be able to make their best decisions.
 We have an opportunity to expand access to family planning and maternal health care for women in the region . We have a opportunity right now to expand family planning for women.
 USAID is committed to ensuring that women and couples in developing countries have access to voluntary family planning information and services .
 Family planning is included in a comprehensive maternal and child health response to the virus . It is included within the Administration’s emergency request for responding to Zika virus .
 Women considering becoming pregnant should be advised of the risks, and provided with family planning information, services, and methods .
 USAK is working with its missions throughout Latin America and the Caribbean to understand their needs . USATD currently supports family planning activities in Haiti and Guatemala .
 USAID takes very seriously the legal and policy requirements that guide its health programs . USAID also works with Missions and partners to ensure compliance .
 Most countries in the Latin America region have graduated from USAID family planning assistance . Most countries have benefited from family planning help .
 USAID will work closely with UNFPA to ensure women and couples in the region have family planning information, services, and methods .
 USAID currently has maternal and child health and family planning programs in Guatemala and Haiti .
Most health programs in the region graduated over the past five to ten years . Most health programs have graduated over five to 10 years .
 The U.S. AID has graduated from assistance in several countries in the region .
 Several U.S. private voluntary organizations maintain an ongoing health program presence in the region .
 As we plan for increased implementation of programs, we are looking at using existing relationships to assess what is needed .
 USAID will seek to build on gains made prior to graduation of these countries from USAID health sector assistance .
We will look for opportunities to restart partnerships with United States PVOs that have ongoing efforts within the region . We will rely on multilateral partners active in the region, including the Pan American Health Organization and UNICEF .
 Some efforts will first require an assessment of needs and a determination of where our support can be most beneficial within the existing country systems .
 Uganda’s recent electoral process did not meet international standards of free and fair elections . The elections effectively shut down the capital and ensured the continued detention of the president's main rival .
 Uganda is the largest recipient of U.S. security assistance in sub-Saharan Africa . Uganda is now the largest recipients of United States security assistance .
 The U.S. and Uganda have a long-standing and strong partnership that has contributed to the stability and prosperity of the region .
 The State Department reiterated its concerns about Uganda's post-election environment . The government and its security forces have persistently violated the rights and freedoms of Ugandan citizens and the media .
 The Ugandan government’s recent actions could endanger the economic and political progress that has enabled our relationship to grow . We are concerned that the Ugandan Government’'s recent actions may endanger the economy .
We have urged the government to take prompt action to reverse this troubling trend . We have urged government to do more to reverse the trend .
 We are committed to supporting Uganda’s constructive role contributing to regional peace and security . We are also urging Uganda to improve its internal governance and human rights record .
 We consistently emphasize that countering violent extremism over the long term involves building trust with populations and good governance matters . Poor governance is not only bad for democracy and development, but also feed the grievances that terrorists exploit for radicalization .
As w e have stated on numerous occasions, freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly are fundamental human rights and a critical component of democracy . As w e has stated on many occasions, this is a critical part of democracy.
 U.S. government security assistance programs for Uganda are designed to increase professionalism and respect for human rights . The programs are aimed at increasing professionalism and respecting human rights.
Security assistance programming is lessening, rather than promoting violence between security forces and civilians, says author . "In this way, we see our security assistance programming as lessening," he says .
 The Leahy Amendment prevents U.S. assistance from going to those who have committed human rights violations . All recipients of this support are vetted for any history of gross violations of human rights .
 In recent years, we have witnessed a narrowing of political space in countries like Rwanda, Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, and Republic of the Congo . Many of these leaders are trying to extend their tenures in power .
 The Administration has had strong rhetoric on the need for strong institutions, and on the importance of term limits .
 President Obama's speech in Addis Ababa in July 2015 to numerous speeches by Secretary Kerry and Assistant Secretary for African Affairs Linda Thomas-Greenfield among other top administration officials .
Strengthening of democratic institutions is the first pillar of President Obama’s Presidential Policy Directive on Sub-Saharan Africa .
 The FY 20 1 7 request for Democracy, Human Rights and Governance is $2. billion . It responds to the following policy and development priorities .
 DRC assistance seeks to improve the capacity and governance of core national -level institutions . DRG assistance will focus on strengthening the capacity of civil society and media .
 DRG assistance in Uganda is aimed at enabling democratic institutions to function elfectively and foster more sustainable and equitable national development . DRG Assistance in Uganda aims to enable democratic institutions.
 The Republic of Congo is eligible to receive regional and centrally managed resources for Governing Justly and Democratically programming . It has benefited from these types of programs in the past .
 We would like to highlight significant democratic gains in Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Nigeria and Senegal . We would also like to name a few of the countries that have made democratic gains .
 Instability in Libya in recent years has led to an increase in terrorist activity in Sahelian countries to the south .
 Traditional security -based responses to the spread of violent extremism may be inadequate or even counter-productive under certain conditions . By themselves, traditional security responses to violent extremism might be inadequate, or counter- productive .
 The U.S. complements support for military or intelligence-based engagements with support for the broader priorities of promoting good governance, building civilian security capacity, and creating economic opportunity in the region .
 "Violent extremists seek out individuals and groups embittered by the Jack of governmental accountability," says the U.S. government . "The lack of opportunities for political, economic and social participation" is a problem, says the government .
 The U.S. has emphasized the urgency of following up military gains in conflict areas with civil administration and services .
 Activities include promoting educational and vocational opportunities for economically vulnerable populations, particularly young men and women . Activities also include promoting education and vocational opportunity for young people .
 TSCTP also focuses on building accountability at all levels of government and improving responsiveness to community needs .
 TSCTP programs improve effectiveness, responsiveness, and accountability of law enforcement, justice, and prison systems . TSCTp supports partner countries as efforts to amplify the voices of credible messengers and community leaders .
 These etforts help build trust between citizens and government, thereby making citizens less vulnerable to the appeal of extremist groups . The etforts helped build trust.
In Niger and Mali, TSCTP promotes prison reform including reintegration programs and prison security . In Mali and Senegal programs improve police responsiveness to community security concerns .
 The United States has invested substantial time and energy to stemming the expansion of al-Shabaab and supporting the establishment of a permanent government.
 The FY 2017 budget request provides continued funding to foster security and to help Somalia build the political, economic, and security institutions . Somalia needs to stabilize the country and develop foundations for development and growth .
 Somalia’s continued progress requires long-term initiatives that will address underlying human development, governance, security, and economic challenges . Somalia has emerged from more than two decades of conflict .
 U.S. development resources will focus on community stabilization and recovery to help build resilience in areas recovered from al-Shabaab .
 The African Union Mission to Somalia is the most capable stabilizing force presently in Somalia . resources will continue to support the African Union mission .
 This includes assistance to build the capacity of the Ministry of Defense to provide civilian oversight and direction over the Somali National Army . The creation of professional, mobile, multi-clan military units and support for integration regional military forces under the command and control of the SNA .
 South Sudan: South Sudan’s peace agreement is a vital step in the right direction . South Sudan's Transitional Government of National Unity delivers on the promise of this peace deal .
 South Sudan continues to face grave security and governance challenges, as evidenced by the recent attack on IDPs in a UN compound and the expansion of conflict into the Equatoria region .
 The U.S. is the single largest donor of humanitarian assistance to South Sudan . The United States provided nearly $1,5 billion in emergency assistance since the start of the conflict in December 2013 .
 The FY 20 1 7 request for South Sudan of $225. million reflects this Administration’s continuing commitment to securing peace in South Sudan .
 The $30 million Peacekeeping Operations piece of the funding request reflects the need for robust ceasefire monitoring . More specifically, the $30m request reflects a need for strong ceasefire monitoring.
 Ongoing violence continues to impede implementation of the peace agreement . Even after the formation of a transitional government, ceasefire monitoring will be critical .
 South Sudan's political leaders need space to form a transitional government. Violence has displaced communities and killed innocent civilians, we are committed to ensuring an end to such violence .
 The conflict that began in December 2013 was driven by the political ambitions of a handful of elite actors . South Sudan was forced to shift the focus of our assistance away from the government to support the people of South Sudan .
 Building up South Sudanese civil society is crucial to strengthening the social fabric of South Sudan . Building up the civil society, as well as the ability of average S Sudanese to pursue their livelihoods, is crucial .
 The United States will maintain its commitment to help the most vulnerable people in South Sudan through emergency humanitarian assistance . South Sudanese need more than anything is a lasting peace, U.S. says .
 The F Y 20 1 1 7 funding request for South Sudan is a key part of the campaign . The South Sudanese government is seeking funding for the country .
 PKO-funded assistance has focused narrowly on support for ceasefire monitoring and the implementation of the agreement's security arrangements .
 There will be no reengagement of direct security assistance to the South Sudanese military absent a transitional government, as provided by the peace agreement .
 Tn accordance with the Leahy law, no assistance will be provided to security forces responsible for human rights violations . Tn. No assistance will not be provided.
 There have long been criticisms that the Nigerian government’s approach to Boko Haram is too military-centric and has not addressed the governance-based grievances of the populations in the northeast .
 The Government of Nigeria and the governments of the other Lake Chad Basin countries are working to address the governance-based grievances in the Boko Haram-atTected regions, especially northeast Nigeria .
 The FY 2017 bilateral foreign assistance budget request for Nigeria totals $606. million . The request is for $606 million .
 Of these amounts, a portion is being channeled specifically to Counter Boko Haram activities in the Northeast . Of this amount, some of these amounts are being used to counter Boko Haram .
 Bomo is one of six northern states in which it works . Bomo supports education for IDPs in the Northeast through one of its 16 civil society cluster organizations .
 Nigeria is advising the Government on the development and implementation of a reconstruction and long term development plan for the northeast .
 Nigeria is one of six African partners in the Security Governance Initiative . It is exploring ways to enhance the management of security and justice systems to more efficiently and effectively provide security and Justice services .
 The Administration remains dedicated to providing strong support for humanitarian programs in Africa and worldwide .
 The President's FY 2017 request reflects the Administration’s s ongoing commitment to these programs .
 The FY 2017 request includes $6, 1 56 billion for humanitarian assistance . $1.957 billion for the International Disaster Assistance Account . $2,799 billion for Migration and Refugee Assistance Account and $50 million for the Emergency Refugee and Migration Fund .
 The request will enable the U.S. government to respond to the dire humanitarian situation resulting from conflicts around the world, including in Africa, and in Africa .
 The U.S. government is the largest humanitarian donor in the world . The United States is the world's largest donor to humanitarian aid .
 Weplan to continue our robust support in FY 2016andFY 2017 while urging other donors to contribute to these ongoing emergencies . Weplan. to continue their robust support for FY 2016 andFY 2017 .
 We will continue to ensure that we are using funds as efficiently as possible in order to meet current and unforeseen needs . We will also continue to use funds to meet the needs of the country .
 Congress conditioned assistance for the U.S. Strategy for Central America . Congress conditioned help for Central American strategy .
 funding for Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador was conditioned . Funding for the central governments of Honduras and Guatemala was conditioned, according to the report .
 The FY 2016 appropriations bill directs diatup to $750 million may be made available for assistance for countries in Central America to implement the U.S. Strategy for Engagement in Central American .
 The Department and USAID estimate that $279 million of a total possible allocation of $750 million for Central America will benefit the central governments of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras .
 The figure will continue to adjust as FY 2016 allocations move forward, and funds are obligated . This figure will be adjusted as funds move forward .
 Many programs that include central government assistance are regional and not bilateral . Specific country-by-country estimates are not available at this time .
 We expect that levels of central government assistance will not be the same for each of the three countries . We expect program variation across countries, as we expect program variations .
 In many instances, programs include both central government and non-central government beneficiaries, such as municipal-level governments, civil society, and private sector .
 withholding funds from central governments may impact other participants in integrated programming as well . withholding funds may impact others in integrated programs as well.
 The Department and USAID completed the 25 percent certification and reported it March 14 . The Department of and USA ID completed the certification .
 The remaining 50 percent level of withholding, coupled with other pre-obligation requirements, will compromise and lead to closure of on-going successful programs, says the authors .
 The FY 2017 Treasury International Programs request includes $14,6 million in funding to support the President's Strategy for Central America .
 Donor support will also increase the financial management capacity of participating finance ministries . The President’s Central America strategy is a pillar of his Central America Strategy .
 The remaining $2. 1 million in funding for Central America was an estimate for technical assistance to Central America based upon FY 2015 TIATA funding usage . The remaining £2.1 million was a total of $1.2 million for the region .
 APHIS’s work in Guatemala relates to controlling Medflies and Mexflies with preventative releases of sterile insects .
 The APHIS work is related to preventing screwworm from moving North by working with Colombia, Panama, Mexico, and Central American countries to maintain a screWWorm-free barrier zone .
 Central American countries are providing technical assistance for sanitary and phytosanitary issues . All of this work helps foster trade, in addition to smaller amounts in other Central American nations .
 Approximately $8 million of the funding requested in FY 2017 for the Department of Homeland Security’s U S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations . The funding will support law enforcement activities and investigations into human smuggling .
 These funds will support vetted units in Central America, as well as international human smuggling investigations and intelligence support and investigative case hours .
 Approximately $2 million in Immigration Examinations Fee Account funding for FY 2017 will be used to cover the costs associated the Central American Minors Refugee/Parole Program .
 The funding will be used for an estimated 16 Refugee Circuit Ride Teams to travel to El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala to conduct refugee interviews .
 This funding will also cover personnel costs, a contract with International Organization for Migration, and expenses related to Department of State International Cooperative Administrative Support Services costs .
 Guatemalan, Honduran, and Salvadoran military and police units receiving $50,000 or more in assistance in FY 2016 . This should include local police units in municipalities receiving community policing support .
 For both FY 2016 and 2017, both USAID and the Department will implement assistance that supports vulnerable groups, including LGBTI persons, through an integrated approach .
 USAID expects to increase support for vulnerable groups, including LGBTI persons, subject to appropriations . The FY 20 16 funding allocations have not been finalized .
 USAID plans to launch a regional human rights program in Central America to strengthen the effectiveness of national human rights protection systems .
 Components of the program include support for prevention of human rights violations and promotion of early warning and protection systems . LGBTI individuals and women are included in the program .
 DRL programming supports responding to human rights violations and abuses . Separate from, but complementary to,, the Strategy, DRL programs support responding to rights violations .
 Please provide a list of programs eliminated as a result of new policy objectives in the Northern Triangle . The Northern Triangle is the region's most populous region .
 The U.S. Strategy for Engagement in Central America focuses on prosperity, governance, and security .
 migration is only a symptom of the problems Central America faces that directly affect U.S. interests .
 The Department and USATD, in cooperation with Northern Triangle governments of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, work directly in communities that generate outbound migration .
 El Salvador is home to 70 percent of homicides nation-wide, as identified by the Government of El Salvador . For example, the Department and USATD work in the ten most-violent municipalities .
 Tn Guatemala is expanding the Model Police Precinct program into the Western Highlands communities . The program aims to improve law enforcement, develop community policing, and conduct crime prevention programs .
 Honduras has some of Honduras’ highest homicide rates and is a primary source of migration . The Central America Regional Security Initiative is supporting the place based strategy in San Pedro Sula .
 Central America faces challenges, including weak governance, lack of economic opportunity, and insecurity . Central America is facing less violence, but also faces weak governance and lack of opportunity .
 Department and USAID have not entirely eliminated Central America programs under the Strategy . Some programs and activities have been redirected to better align with the Strategy.
 The Department suspended its corrections reform program in 2014 . Guatemala has since been able to reengage with the new administration .
 USATD no longer capitalizes microfinance institutions as its main approach to developing the medium-, small-, and micro-enterprise sector . The U.S.ATD is now focusing on developing the small-business sector .
 USATD focuses on developing partnership and risk mitigation tools to incentivize local banks to expand productive loans and other financing directly to small businesses . The bank is based on expert research from the InterAmerican Development Bank .
 We need to expand successful security programming as well as make new and deeper investments in prosperity and governance to achieve national-level impact .
 The $750 million FY 2017 request is needed in Central America to address the economic, governance, and security drivers of migration from the region .
 Most United States assistance to Central America supports the Strategy . Most U.S. assistance to the region supports the strategy .
 The Administration continues to allocate funding for the Global Health Initiative in Central America . This is a priority separate from the Strategy .
 USAID provided the International Organization for Migration a $7. million grant to help El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras improve their capacity to receive and reintegrate unaccompanied children .
 The USAID project supports the Northern Triangle governments to improve conditions at shelters for returning families and unaccompanied children . It provides medical and psychosocial assistance for returnees and potential migrants .
 From September 2014 to December 2015, the project assisted more than 35,000 children and family units . The project helped more than 30,000 people from September to December .
 Merida Initiative aims to strengthen security at southern and northern border crossings, points of entry, and internal checkpoints throughout the country . The State Department’s Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement works with the Government of Mexico .
 The FY 2017 budget request includes $18 million in International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement funding to continue current border security programs, which includes strengthening Mexico’s southern border .
 Funding will support Mexico’s efforts to create an interagency biometrics system, technical assistance for the National Migration Institute .
 INL has delivered approximately $20 million in training, equipment, and advisory support to strengthen Mexico’s southern border with Guatemala and Belize . In addition to the broad support INL have provided for ongoing programs that strengthen border crossings with the United States .
 Of the $20 million, approximately $2 million has been provided to Mexico’s National Migration Institute for training and equipment . Another $13,4 million was used to purchase Non-Intrusive Inspection Equipment for use throughout the southern border zone .
 The Caribbean Basin Security Initiative has been crucial in helping our partners in the Caribbean improve their capacity to combat crime and violence . The initiative has also been crucial to enhancing our own security .
 The State Department has carefully balanced prevention and enforcement efforts . In carrying out CBSI, the State Department is focusing on prevention .
 The President requested $48. million for CBSI in FY 2017 even though the subregion received $57. million in CBSI assistance from Congress in FY 2016 . The President asked for $48 million for the CBSI. In FY 2017, CBSI received $48
 CBST investments focused on acquiring high-cost equipment and interdiction capabilities . Prior year CBST investment focused on acquisition of high- cost equipment and Interdiction capability .
 The present and FY 2017 CBSl investments focus on maintenance and sustainment of prior year capital investments . Capacity building, and training, which are lower cost, are lower.
 The FY 2017 $48,4 million request will allow the U.S. government to build upon progress made in previous years . The request will focus on regional information sharing and cooperation .
 The FY 2017 decrease is in Economic Support Fund and International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement accounts . The FY 2016 decrease was in Economic support Fund and international Narcotics control and Law enforcement accounts .
CESl is working with Caribbean nations to put in place the legal, regulatory, and policy frameworks necessary to modernize and rationalize small island energy systems . CESl: We are working with the Caribbean nations.
 Argentina seeking U.S. support as it looks to improve its economy and reduce crime and violence . Argentina is seeking support from the United States as it tries to reduce crime, violence .
 Argentina’s new government has indicated it seeks robust cooperation with the U.S. on political, economic, security, and environmental issues .
 Current U.S. assistance is limited to security cooperation programs . The previous government placed substantial constraints on cooperation over several years .
 We are working with Argentina to increase commercial dialogue, promote small business development, provide citizen security and drug reduction assistance, and collaborate on trade and investment issues . We are also working to increaseCommercial dialogue and promote small businesses .
 The Department does not at this time intend to reprogram security assistance to Argentina because of limited funding and competing priorities in the region .
 The Department does intend to support defense reforms and professionalization in the military . The Department will consider reprogramming in the future based on needs in this area .
 The Foreign Military Financing request for Colombia increases from $25 million in 2016 to $38,525 million in FY 2017 . The request is for $38.525 million.
 The additional Foreign Military Financing requested will be used to train, expand, and enhance the Colombian military’s engineering capabilities . The Colombian government can project the state's presence into previously inaccessible areas, enabling it to deliver security and justice .
Establishing a state presence in these areas will also facilitate demining efforts, a critical post-accord priority . Establishing state presence will also help demining effort .
 Colombian military engineers will be needed to construct new bases, police stations, and related infrastructure . The Government of Colombia will need to quickly fill the security vacuum created by the FARC’s demobilization .
 The Colombian authorities will undertake these construction projects with Colombian funding . But U.S. assistance will catalyze Colombia’s efforts by strengthening their military engineering capacity .
 The FY 2017 TNCLE request for the manual eradication program is $16 million . The FY 2016 TNCle request is $15 million .
 The F Y 2017 target will be subject to a variety of factors, including progress toward the FY 2016 goal, the ongoing peace negotiations and the resulting provisions of an anticipated peace accord relating to coca eradication .
 In light of ongoing negotiations, INL has developed a flexible budget plan . It will allow us to respond to unforeseen developments while still prioritizing programs that will continue independently of a peace agreement .
 The FY 2017 request level was determined by estimating the amount of United States assistance that would be appropriate if or when the Government of Colombia chooses to utilize manual eradication as a major element of its nationwide peace implementation plan .
Military units in Mexico and Guyana were frozen under the Leahy Law last year . They are now receiving aid again, after it was determined that effective steps were taken to hold abusers accountable .
 There have been five successful remediation cases in Mexico, one in Guyana, and one in Georgia . Two in Afghanistan have also been successful in Mexico .
 We are in the process of remediating another case in Mexico, which will be notified to Congress in near future .
 There are currently no other remediation cases under review, but we anticipate that others will arise on a periodic basis .
 The ultimate purpose of both the State and DoD Leahy law is to promote accountability for human rights violations . The ultimate goal is to be accountable for human Rights violations .
 The DoD and State Leahy laws allow the resumption of U.S. assistance to ineligible units if their government is talcing appropriate remediation measures . To that end, both laws contain provisions that allow resumption.
 These may include impartial and thorough investigations, as appropriate and thorough prosecutions or administrative actions . They may also include appropriate and proportional sentencing or comparable administrative actions. These may be appropriate, impartial or thorough investigations .
 The Minsk Agreement remains a ceasefire on paper only as fighting continues along the line of contact . steps needed to bring peace and restore Ukraine’s territorial integrity are further delayed .
 We continue to believe that the Minsk agreements are the best and only way to achieve peace in eastern Ukraine . We also believe the agreement is the best way to achieved peace in the region .
 Normandy has intensified its diplomacy to support efforts to support discussions in the Normandy format to resolve the conflict .
 President Obama, Secretary Kerry, and other senior U.S. officials continue to reinforce to Russia that Moscow must fully implement its Minsk commitments . The Minsk agreement includes a durable ceasefire and full access to the OSCE's Special Monitoring Mission .
 We continually discuss with Normandy powers how we can best support their efforts . We also discuss with the Normandy powers on how to best support them .
We are prepared to increase costs on Russia if it takes new aggressive actions in Ukraine . We have also been very clear with Moscow that sanctions will remain in place until Russia fully implements Minsk and returns Crimea to Ukraine .
 The U.S. and its NATO allies continue to abide by the political statements contained in the NATO-Russia Founding Act .
 Russia, by contrast, has both violated international law and contravened the commitments it made in the Founding Act . Russia's actions against its neighbor Ukraine have also violated the law, according to the law .
 The Founding Act states that the Alliance will carry out its collective defense and other missions . The Alliance will ensure the necessary interoperability, integration, and capability for reinforcement rather than permanent stationing of combat forces .
 It will have to rely on adequate infrastructure commensurate with the above tasks . It will also need to rely upon adequate infrastructure .
 The Founding Act does not constrain any current or foreseen U.S. plans to support NATO Allies . It would include prepositioning of equipment in Europe and rotational force deployments .
 The State Department appreciates Congress’ ongoing support for the European Reassurance initiative . The initiative continues to fund the United States’ ability to enhance our support to NATO Allies .
 The situation in Yemen is dire, both politically and from a humanitarian perspective . The situation is dire and politically, both political and humanitarian .
 Since the conflict began, over 80% of the Yemeni population requires some form of humanitarian assistance .
 Yemen will face significant challenges once it emerges from the current conflict and returns to a political transition process . Yemen will be faced with significant challenges when it emerges.
 Our priority will be to work with partners in the international and NGO communities to restore the right political, security, and economic conditions to set Yemen back on the path towards recovery .
 FY 2017 funds will permit us to help the Yemeni people to stabilize their economy, restore their health and education systems, and renew a peaceful political transition process .
 The State Department and USAID will rapidly resume and sustain non-humanitarian assistance and programming, adapting activities to postconflict realities and priorities .
 Y emen Affairs Unit stationed in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, continues its engagement with the Yemeni government .
 We also coordinate closely with other donors regarding assistance needs and priorities . We also continue to coordinate closely.
 Most non-humanitarian programs remain suspended due to the conflict . At present, most non- humanitarian programs are suspended . The conflict continues to affect many programs .
 Yemen’s return to a political transition will be a critical time to prevent further deterioration and destabilization . We need to be fully prepared and appropriately resourced to resume assistance activities as soon as opportunities emerge .
USAID uses a third party monitoring and evaluation contractor to monitor and evaluate activities . USAID uses third party monitors and evaluation contractors to monitor activities .
 These monitoring and evaluation specialists provide an objective, independent assessment of program performance . They measure assistance activities against defined performance targets and development objectives .
 We will only restart suspended activities when we assess that the security environment is permissive enough for our partners and third party monitoring partners to mobilize and perform their responsibilities .
 The collapse of Yemen’s security forces has strengthened A1 Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula . The security situation will doubtless be a challenge for a nascent transitional government .
 Only once Yemen returns to a peaceful political transition can it begin to fully confront the expanded threat posed by extremist groups .
 We are working diligently to support the UN Special Envoy in his efforts to secure a cessation of hostilities and to resume negotiations as soon as possible .
 The recentiy announced cessation of hostilities along the Saudi/Yemeni border is encouraging . We continue to press the parties to broaden the ceasefire ahead of the next round of talks .
 North Waziristan, the traditional stronghold of the Flaqqani Network, has disrupted its activities to a limited extent . These operations have been targeted by the network's operations .
 Tn October 20 1 5, Pakistan banned media coverage of Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and affiliated charities .
 Pakistani leadership has pledged to target all terrorist groups without discrimination . Pakistan has also pledged to take additional steps to target terrorists without discrimination.
 U.S. press Pakistan to take direct, specific, and lasting steps to constrain the Taliban . The Haqqani Network and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba are among the Taliban groups .
 The Administration asked the Government of Paldstan to talce a few specific actions, including at the United Nations 1267 Committee .
 Pakistan's government is trying to find an effective resolution for the country's political crisis . Pakistan's prime minister has called on the government to resolve the issue .
 Zaki-ur Rehman Lakhvi, accused of conspiracy and abetting of Lashkar-eTayyiba’s November 2008 Mumbai attacks, is on trial . The trial of seven individuals is progressing slowly .
 Pakistani court has filed a request with the Indian government to interview all 24 Indian witnesses as the next step in the case . The Pakistani court is seeking to interview the 24 witnesses .
 Pakistani judiciary has filed a filing to delay proceedings . The filing could serve to further delay proceedings. We acknowledge the independence of the Pakistani judiciary .
 Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and its affiliates are designated according to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 . The group's affiliates, Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e -lnsaniyat Foundation, are designated .
 China is maintaining a hold on three U.S. nominations of LeT members in the 1267 Committee . China is still holding a hold.
 Under Pakistan’s National Action Plan, we have seen evidence of increased efforts to address terror finance vulnerabilities in their banking system .
 Pakistan recently co-sponsored with the United States the designation of an individual connected to Al-Qa’ida at the United Nations 1267 Committee . Pakistan has also co- sponsored with the U.S. the designation.
 Sri Lanka: We are pleased by the tremendous change in tone and tenor of the current government in Sri Lanka .
 Sri Lanka pursues its long-term path to peace, stability, and prosperity . We welcome and support the reforms implemented by the current government .
 The government has begun a national consultation process to hear from the Sri Lankan people about their needs and interests injustice . The process will provide closure and redress to victims of war .
 It has consulted with international justice experts from Japan and the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . It has also consulted with global justice experts.
 The government welcomed a visit by the UN Human Rights Chief and two visits by the Special Rapporteur for Transitional Justice . The UN Human rights Chief also visited the UN Special Rapportseur for transitional Justice.
 Sri Lanka has encouraged an inclusive consultation process to ensure any justice mechanisms are credible, transparent, independent, and enjoy support from Sri Lanka’s diverse communities .
 The last military checkpoint to the northern former conflict zone was closed in August 2015 . The government has informed us that military personnel have largely returned to their barracks .
 In October, a High Court convicted four members of the Army for sexually assaulting two women in the North . It was the first ever conviction of security sector personnel for post-war abuses .
 The U.S. will use future engagements to press for progress on transitional justice, security sector reform, and land return . The Sri Lankan government tackles these challenging issues .
 The United Nations makes the final decision on what capacities are needed for specific peacekeeping missions . The U.N. has standards for training, equipment, and human rights .
 Sri Lanka made a substantial pledge at the September 20 1 5 Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping . The pledge includes up to four rapidly-deployable battalions, special forces companies, a combat engineering company, a counter-improvised explosive device company, and two combat transportation companies
 Sri Lanka has also proposed creating an internal peacekeeping command that would integrate the various armed services . The command would be the focal point for training, equipping and strategic planning for peacekeeping deployments .
 The UN recently completed an initial advisory and assessment visit to Sri Lanka to review the company . The UN has been in Sri Lanka for more than two years .
 The next step will be the drafting and signing of a memorandum of understanding between the UN and the Sri Lankan government . The next steps will be a pre-deployment inventory of contingent-owned equipment .
 The Kremlin is rapidly disseminating disinformation, part of a concerted effort to undermine trust in Western institutions and erode freedom of the press . Less than a third of Europeans polled outside of Russia are confident that Putin will do the right thing in world affairs .
 69% of European views of the U.S. are much more positive than in the United States . In the same European countries, 69% are more positive, according to the European Union .
 The State Department is leading a coordinated effort to support the free flow of information, expand independent media, root out corruption and refute Russian government disinformation .
 Our efforts extend across a range of diplomatic tools as we proactively amplify key U.S. government messages, correct disinformation, engage opinion leaders, and forge and maintain people-to-people ties .
 The Department employs a combination of short-term messaging strategies with medium and long-term programs to boost resilience and build capacity to recognize and reject Russian government disinformation .
 The Department supports our overseas posts in times of heightened Kremlin messaging .
 Our missions abroad are able to adapt the content and materials we supply to their own audiences and rapidly amplify the truth . We're able to adapt the content we supply and amplify it to our own audiences .
 Russian-language, policyoriented Twitter handle. We have increased our capacity to proactively deliver our messages in Russian by forming a cadre of Russian-speaking officers to engage with the media .
We augment this messaging activity by providing foreign audiences with opportunities to engage directly with experts, opinion leaders, and third party groups . We augment this activity by giving foreign audiences a chance to engage with experts and experts .
 We have developedvchanges to encourage independent media voices, including workshops on digital skills and investigative journalism, and support for a Digital Communicators Network of more than 1,000 members .
 At the same time, we are supporting efforts to engage ethnic Russian populations by expanding our English language training programs and professional exchanges .
 English language is a barrier for thought leaders to understand U.S. policy and culture . Costeffective programs create lasting educational and professional linkages and increase English proficiency of students .
 United States public diplomacy also includes NATO and U.S. military outreach and media engagement . The United States is also involved in NATO and United States military outreach .
 These high visibility engagements help dispel the Russian government's antiNATO messages and serve as opportunities to explain our security partnerships .
 Last year the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs provided a new fund to support embassy public affairs teams in developing new, innovative public outreach projects pegged to military exercises in Europe .
 These interactions between people are the cornerstone of our strategy. They are essential in refuting disinformation, says John Sutter .
 We continue to use our public diplomacy tools to deepen people-to-people ties in an admittedly challenging political environment . We are using public diplomacy to deepen our ties in a challenging political atmosphere .
 In the past year, the State Department has designed and implemented a range of programs in the region that build relationships based on common interests and perceptions .
 Based on participant feedback, we know these programs are having a positive net effect . Based on participants' feedback, these programs have a positivenet effect .
 In addition to anecdotal evidence, we also conduct evaluations of our programs to ensure impact .
 The BBG receives steady input from Undersecretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs to assist with their strategic and tactical planning .
 The BBG is an active participant in a number of ongoing working groups at State . It apprises the Department of its efforts and provides analysis of current media trends .
 BBG maintains a robust response to Russian disinformation through the combined work of Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . The BBG employs flexible, innovative, and cross-platform programming to counter the Kremlin's strident anti-American messaging .
 Public Diplomacy efforts to counter propaganda are supported by State’s International Information Programs bureau, the Bureau of Public Affairs, and other activities .
 This work is reflected in our budget in the funding requested to support operations. This work was reflected in the budget requested to help support operations .
 The Department works to ensure that our resources are directed in the most effective way, says the Department .
 Such evaluations demonstrate whether past and current strategies are effective and indicate when changes are needed . Such evaluations show whether past, current strategies were effective or are effective .
 Obama Administration approved the sale and transfer of eight F-16s to Pakistan earlier this month .
 The Administration's decision to support the sale of eight F-1 6s to Pakistan was based on our assessment that the transfer would support U.S. national security interests .
 F16s enable the Pakistani military to more effectively conduct operations against militants in its tribal regions, while minimizing collateral damage . The Pakistani military can also conduct operations in the region at all hours .
 These operations reduce the ability of militants to use Pakistani territory as a safe haven for terrorism . They are in the interest of the U.S. and Pakistan, Pakistan, and our partners in the region .
Dr. Afridi has been unjustly imprisoned and we have clearly communicated our position on Dr. Afidi . We have clearly stated our position. Dr.Afridi is unjustly jailed, we have communicated our positions on him .
 Pakistan's leadership continues to raise the issue at the highest levels with Pakistan’s leadership . We continue to raise this issue at high levels with the country's leadership .
 The State Department has withheld $99 million in assistance from Pakistan over the past three years . The Government of Pakistan has not released Dr. Dr. Pakistan .
 Pakistan uses its weapons to slaughter Baloch and other people, including Baloch . Pakistan uses the weapons to kill Baloch, other people .
 Pakistan also aided in the creation of the Taliban and continues to destabilize Afghanistan . Pakistan also helped create the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Sustained civilian and security assistance is critical to achieving U.S. strategic goals in Pakistan and in the region .
 U.S. security assistance has helped Paldstan increase its counterinsurgency and counterterrorism capabilities . Pakistan's clearing operations have also helped extend the reach of the Government of Pakistan in North Waziristan and other tribal areas .
 Transitioning tribal areas to Government of Pakistan control will prevent the area from re-emerging as a terrorist safe haven . The area serves the interests of U.S., coalition and Afghan forces on the other side of the border . The region will be controlled by the
 When providing equipment or training to Pakistan, we thoroughly vet all units under consideration .
 We require full compliance with U.S. laws by ensuring that no security assistance goes to any units or individuals that have committed gross violations of human rights . We need full compliance by ensuring no security help goes to anyone who commits gross violations .
 I believe we misunderstood each other, as you referenced in response to a committee that would examine such transfers . "I believe we misunderstanding each other," he said .
 The JCPOA procurement channel will examine Iranian orders for items Tehran believes it needs for its permitted nuclear program .
 Among the types of arms to which this provision applies are combat aircraft, and Su-30 fighters . Among those to which it applies is combat aircraft .
 The announcement of a path toward a ceasefire remains the case following the announcement of the ceasefire . That remains a case following a path to a ceasefire .
 Moscow has said that its mission in Syria is limited and it has committed to a political transition . Moscow says that it is seeing some positive actions .
As a cessation of hostilities is implemented, parties on the ground will have an opportunity to distance themselves from groups excluded from the cessation .
 We have been clear that indiscriminate attacks and attacks targeting civilians in Syria by both the Asad regime and Russia must stop, we say .
 All International Syria Support Group members, including Russia, unanimously committed to immediately facilitate the full implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 2254 . Russia reaffirmed their readiness to carry out all commitments set forth in the resolution .
 Russia and Russia still have profound differences with Russia on a number of issues in Syria . We still have significant differences on many issues.
 We owe it to the Syrian people to find ways to ease their suffering, we owe them to them . But we owe it.
 The U.S. and Russia announced the adoption of a broad cessation of hostilities in Syria on February 22 .
 The cessation requires the Asad Regime and Russia stop aerial bombardment of civilians, civilian infrastructure, and those opposition groups that have joined the cessation of hostilities .
 This cessation is part of the larger International Syria Support Group process that is working towards a political transition in Syria . This cessation was part of a larger international process working towards the political transition.
 The cessation is not dependent on Asad’s role in Syria, but a way to establish the conditions for a political transition away from Asad .
 Russia and Iran signed onto the Vienna Statement on November 14 . It reaffirms key Geneva Communique principles, most importantly, a commitment to a political transition . It includes agreeing to free and fair elections under UN supervision .
 The United States does not support a Syrian government in which Asad remains in power . The U.S. doesn't support a government that is in power.
 The regime is claiming the ceasefire will not apply to the besieged town of Daraya in the Damascus area on the grounds of a Jabhat al-Nusra presence there . In addition, the regime says the ceasefire won't apply to Daraya .
 Southern Fronta U S backed rebel coalition in southern Syriarejects a ceasefire if Daraya is not included . The Southern Front a U S. backed rebels in southern Syria .
 Special Envoy for Syria Michael Ratney is in contact with moderate armed groups in Syria to stress that Jabhat al-Nusra will not be part of the cessation . We expect that parties on the ground will have to distance themselves from groups excluded from cessation .
 The Russian Federation and United States will work together to delineate the territory held by "Daesh," "Jabhat al-Nusra" and other terrorist organizations designated by the UN Security Council . The United States and Russian Federation will also work together .
 moderate opposition groups and civilians in Darayya are protected under this definition of the cessation of hostilities . Moderate opposition groups, civilians and opposition groups are protected .
 The original strategy was to back rebel groups to push back IS from the northern border areas in Aleppo province . They have come under attack from the primarily Kurdish SDF coalition operating out of Afrin to the west of these rebels .
 The U.S. also has links with SDF in fighting IS further east in Syria on a rather successful basis .
 We are working with the Government of Turkey, the international C-Da'esh Coalition, and Syrian Arab partners to clear Da'esh out of northwest Syria . We will continue to work with Turkey and the Syrian opposition to ensure these gains are sustainable .
 Tn northeastern Syria, the Coalition-backed Syrian Democratic Forces have cleared Da’esh from the Turkey-Syria border east of the Euphrates .
 SDF seized the Tishrin Dam from Da’esh in December 2015 . The Dam is a critical bottleneck on the Da'esh supply route to the Turkish border .
 Most recently, the SDF seized Shaddadi, east of Raqqa, in February, further constricting Da’esh maneuverability between Raqqa and Mosul .
 We have not and will not recognize any PYD ""self-rule"" autonomous zone . We have no idea what PYD will do .
 Our commitment to Israel’s security is steadfast, and our close cooperation with the Israeli government on military and security issues continues . Israel's commitment to Israeli security is " steadfast"
 The President and Prime Minister Netanyahu agreed to resume formal talks on a new MOU to succeed the current one . Several rounds of talks with the Israelis have been held since then .
 Israel and the U.S. hope to reach a new MOU that will build on the United States' historic and enduring commitment to Israel's security .
 The U.S. is prepared to sign an MOU with Israel that would constitute the largest single pledge of military assistance to any country in United States history . Israel's security is such that this Administration's commitment to Israel'sSecurity is such.
 The U.S. is committed to ensuring Israel maintains its Qualitative Military Edge . Israel's ability to counter and defeat credible military threats from any state, coalition of states or non-state actors .
 The United States works with Israel to ensure that it is equipped with highly advanced weapons systems in line with QME goals . The U.S. also works with the Israeli government to ensure the country has the best weapons systems .
 Through both our govemment-togovemment Foreign Military Sales program and Direct Commercial Sales, we are able to provide Israel with advanced products and systems .
 Israel has an open dialogue with its Israeli partners to discuss regional threats and the rapidly changing environment in the Middle East to ensure Israel's security is protected .
 The U.S. C-ISIL is monitoring the use of weapons and systems to ensure that these systems and weapons are being used in accordance with our values and intended use . We also continue to stress the importance of safeguarding United States -origin items to our
 Iran has continued its support for terrorism, as it has done for the past three decades . Iran has been supporting terrorism for decades .
 This includes continued support for Lebanese Hizballah, Palestinian terrorist groups in Gaza, Kata’ib Hizballsah in Iraq, and Shia militant groups in Syria . This includes continuing support for Lebanon, Palestine and Syria .
 Iran is and remains a designated State Sponsor of Terrorism. For that reason, Iran is a designated state sponsor of Terrorism .
 Iran's non-nuclear related sanctions on Iran remain in place. This is one reason why we will continue to work with our partners in the region to counter Iran’s malign activities, regardless of the source of funds .
 We have numerous domestic authorities including sanctions to counter Iran’s support for terrorism and other destabilizing activities .
 Iran's support for terrorism, ballistic missile activities, destabilizing activities in the region, and human rights abuses, Iran says . Iran will continue to enforce aggressively our sanctions related to Iran’s support for terror, ballistic missiles, human rights violations .
 The U.S. government has and will continue to use our authorities to expose and target Hizballah’s financial, commercial, and terrorist activities around the world .
 Hizballah International Financing Protection Act targets financial institutions that knowingly facilitate significant transactions or engage in money laundering activities on behalf of Hizballsah .
 The State Department, Treasury, and our partners in the Intelligence Community are constantly looking for evidence of such activity . The Intelligence Community is looking for solid evidence.
 We would be happy to discuss more details regarding Iran’s funding Hizballah in a classified setting . We would also be happy for more details about Iran's funding of the country .
 We rely on a broad set of multilateral and unilateral tools to impede and disrupt Iran’s missile development efforts .
 Proliferation Security Initiative aims to interdict shipments related to weapons of mass destruction . Iran’s prohibited missile-related imports or exports are among the items involved .
 The U.S. wants to prevent transfers to Iran’s missile program . It wants to promote thorough UNSCR implementation, and target Iranian missile proliferation activities .
Iranian authorities continue to impose sanctions on entities connected to Iran’s ballistic missile programs . In addition, we continue to use domestic authorities.
 All of our other sanctions not related to Iran’s nuclear program. All of the other sanctions remain in place and continue to be enforced .
 Iran's ballistic missiles program has been designated as a procurement network for Iran’s ballistic missile program . The most recent example is the January 17 designation of three entities and eight individuals .
 The designations effectively cut these persons off from the U.S. financial system . Secondary sanctions continue to attach to certain transactions involving these designated individuals and entities .
 The JCPOA was negotiated to address our concerns over Iran’s nuclear program . It did not impact our authority or ability to impose sanctions on Iran's non-nuclear activities.
 There is a long history of nuclear and missile cooperation between Iran and North Korea . There is also a history of cooperation between the two countries .
 North Korea has already demonstrated its capability to explode a nuclear device . The North Korean government has already shown its ability to explode .
 The United States closely monitors and reviews all available information on the DPRK’s dealings related to its WMD programs and its proliferation activities .
 We are committed to ensuring that Iran fulfills all of its nuclear-related commitments in a verifiable and complete manner .
 The JCPOA has a wide range of options to respond to Iran's noncompliance . Iran could snapback both national and multilateral nuclear-related sanctions .
 This provides us with significant leverage to deter Iranian noncompliance and allows us to respond appropriately and proportionately to any Iranian violations . This gives us a significant leverage. This provides we with significant leveraging to deter Iran noncompliance .
 Iran’s destabilizing activities in the region are a threat to us and our allies, the Administration says . Iran's destabilizing Activities are a top concern of the Administration .
 We work intensively with our partners in the region, including the Gulf Cooperation Council and Israel, to deter and disrupt Iranian threats . We are also working intensively to deter, disrupt and disrupt Iran's threats .
Mahan Air and Mahan Air have been in talks with the GCC following the Camp David summit . Israel's seizure of the Klos C vessel carrying weapons bound for Gaza in 2014, Israel’s seizure of an Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps naval flotilla in Yemen in April 2015
 We also have numerous domestic authorities including sanctions to counter Iran’s support for terrorism or other destabilizing activities .
 Iran's support for terrorism, destabilizing activities in the region, ballistic missile development, and human rights abuses. We will continue to aggressively enforce our sanctions against Iran’s support for terrorists, Iran says .
 We are committed to promoting the effective implementation of the JCPOA and ensuring that Iran complies with all of its commitments . We are also committed to promote the effectiveness of theJCPOA .
 We retain a wide range of options to deal with any failure by Iran to fulfill its nuclear-related commitments . Iran's nuclear program has been in place since 2009 .
 Iran’s incentives to stick to its JCPOA commitments are just as strong after Implementation Day as they were before . Iran's incentives are as strong as they are before, according to the Iranian government .
 Most recently, the United States designated three entities and eight individuals involved in supporting Iran’s missile program . The U.S. designated 3 entities and 8 individuals in support of Iran's missile program in January .
 We will continue to vigorously enforce sanctions as we see activities of concern, says the U.S. government .
 The U.S. government has serious concerns about the human rights situation in Cuba . Some activists say they feel more able to advocate for their rights since the policy change .
Independent civil society groups documented 8,899 short-term detentions and 8,616 for 2015 . For 2014, independent civil society group documented 8.8,899 detention. For 2015, the group recorded 8,900 short- term detentments and 8.616
 At least two independent organizations estimate the government holds 60 to 70 longer-term political prisoners .
 Cuban government is rebuilding relationship after more than 50 years of isolation . We regularly convey our concerns to the Cuban government .
 We consult with our allies in the region, and raise the human rights situation in Cuba in international fora . We also consult with allies and raise human rights issues in Cuba .
 Our policy change has brought more public discourse on human rights, both in Cuba and the U.S. The United States.
 We speak to many democracy and human rights activists on the island and with those who travel to the U.S. We also speak to those who visit the United States .
We call on Cuban government to stop its tactic of using detentions to quell peaceful protest . We call on the Cuban government.
 We urge the Cuban government to release political prisoners . We also urge the government to allow independent evaluation of conditions in Cuba by international observers .
 Both ISIL and al-Qaida pose to our homeland and to our partners around the globe . Today’s terrorism environment is complex, and we continue to focus on the threat both ISIL and Al-Qaeda pose .
 Through our comprehensive counterterrorism strategy, we pursue a range of tools to degrade, disrupt, and defeat ISIL and al-Qaida . The strategy includes strong counterterrorism partnerships, multilateral initiatives and military action .
 Tunisia recognizes the threat of ISIL and is taking steps to disrupt immediate threats and curb the flow of foreign fighters . Tunisia has been the direct target of ISIL-affiliated attacks .
 United States and Tunisian security forces benefit from a close, cooperative relationship . U.S. and Tunisia are working to build their counter terrorism capacity .
 We have provided Tunisia with more than $250 million in security assistance to counter internal and regional threats .
 ISIL has not established a branch or affiliate in Somalia . Al-Shabaab senior leaders reportedly view these overtures as a threat and continue to pursue, detain, detain and eliminate ISIL aspirants .
 Our efforts to counter and degrade al-Shabaab and ISIL continue to require a regional capacity building effort on a range of issues . The effort will continue to need a regional building effort.
 This includes securing porous East African air, land, and maritime borders that are vulnerable to terrorist movement . This includes providing civilian law enforcement with the capacity to deter and detect terrorist activity .
 U.S. assistance seeks to strengthen Bangladesh’s capacities in key areas including terrorism investigations .
 We also seek to help build Bangladesh’s capacity to expand information sharing with the U.S. and other international partners .
 countering violent extremism is a key programmatic focus, according to the U.S. Department of Justice . Counterterrorism is an important focus for U.N. officials, they say .
 The request for humanitarian assistance funding for FY2017 is $1 . billion below the FY2016 funding . The request is similar to similar funding for refugee programs .
 Research suggests deteriorating conditions for refugee populations such as weak security or inadequate shelter are factors that can contribute to radicalization .
 Syria, Iraq, South Sudan, Yemen, and Yemen are all suffering from humanitarian crises . We are currently trying to address incredible humanitarian crises as a result of the conflicts in Syria .
 The United States continues to be the largest bilateral contributor of humanitarian assistance funding . The U.S. is the world's largest bilateral contributions to humanitarian assistance .
Women's voices and participation are for shepherding violent and protracted conflicts to stable resolutions . Increasingly, we are recognizing, both, how absent women have been in conflict resolution strategies across the globe .
 The Department of State recognizes the influential role women can play in advancing international security . It is dedicated to supporting the U.S. commitment to protect and empower women in countries threatened and affected by war and conflict, violence, and insecurity .
 The President's FY 2017 budget request to advance women’s empowerment and gender equality is $1. billion . Programs spanning all sectors of U.S. foreign assistance are included in the budget .
 Roughly $134 million is targeted at supporting the protection of women and girls in crisis and conflictaffected environments . The money is aimed at supporting women’s participation as political leaders, and contributing to community-based conflict mitigation efforts .
 The Department's work to advance the NAP falls into several prominent areas, all of which can contribute to security and the ability of communities to withstand crisis and conflict .
 The goal of gender equality and advancing the status of women and girls is explicitly addressed in policy development, strategic and budget planning .
Women’s direct participation through bilateral, regional, and multilateral diplomacy to ensure better outcomes for governments and society . In addition, this work encourages and increases women's direct participation.
 The Department engages on these issues throughout interagency processes, including Principals, Deputies, and Interagency Policy Committee meetings . The Department also engages in these issues through interagency meetings .
 Economic stability is a critical component of assisting countries in emerging from conflict and becoming more resilient to future threats . Economic stability has been a critical part of helping countries emerging from conflicts and becoming resilient.
 Ambassadors and their economic teams at missions overseas routinely engage with their foreign government counterparts to encourage the introduction of or adjustment to legislation, regulations, and processes that strengthen the commercial laws .
 We work closely with other U.S. agencies to help foreign governments to strengthen commercial laws . In addition, we work with other countries to help other countries.
 The Department of Commerce's Commercial Law Development Program works with more than 50 countries to build transparent legal systems and fair regulations .
 Treasury's Office of Technical Assistance provides advice and training in areas that strengthen business environment . Treasury’s Office of technical Assistance also provides advice on how to fight corruption .
 It is abundantly clear that the severity and quantity of violent conflicts and threat of violent extremism throughout the world today demands our attention . It is clear that we need to be aware of the severity of the violent conflicts across the world .
The FY201 7 budget request seems to reflect that reality with increased funding for counterterrorism and similar programming . The FY2017 budget request appears to reflect the reality of counterterrorism funding .
 Human rights and rule of law programming are critical for stabilizing areas against the spread of terrorist groups and ideologies . However, human rights and law programming is critical for stability .
 Counterterrorism efforts do not draw resources away from this Administration’s strong, continuing support for the rule of law and human rights .
 Democratic governance that respects the rule of law and protects human rights is a core strategic goal of the U.S. It helps safeguard national security and foster prosperity, says Obama .
Robust democracy, human rights, and governance programming is critical to strengthening and expanding our efforts to prevent the next political crisis, violent episode or human rights violation or mass atrocity. Robust democracy and human rights are critical to strengthen and expand our efforts .
 The Department of State and USAID’s FY 2017 budget request for DRG programs is $2. billion . $765. million is requested specifically for rule of law and human rights programming, which is $106 million above FY 2015 .
DRG programs and counterterrorism, countering violent extremism, and security sector assistance are linked . DRG programs, counterterrorism and counterterrorism programs are linked to the security sector .
 The root causes of extremism are embedded in frustration with poor governance systems and restrictions on freedom of religion, assembly and expression . Extremist threats are often put into place in response to extremist threats .
 CVE seeks to reduce the ability of violent extremists to radicalize, recruit, and mobilize followers to violence . The FY 2017 Request includes $ 1 86. million for CVE .
 Some of the more crucial factors include human rights abuses by security forces and rule of law grievances .
 Many of our assistance efforts aimed at strengthening the security sector in developing countries also incorporate reforms of justice systems, including civilian oversight of the police .
Security sector assistance does not replace the need for core DRG funding . Some of it contributes to DRG objectives .
 A significant focus in the foreign affairs budget includes countering extremist narratives . The budget is aimed at countering extremism and countering extremism .
 CVE efforts aim to reduce the ability of violent extremists to radicalize, recruit, and mobilize followers to violence . CVE is aimed to address specific factors that feed violent extremist recruitment and radicalization .
 As we work to counter ISfL and other terrorist groups, it is not enough to defeat them militarily on the battlefield . We must also address the ideology and tactics these groups employ to attract new recruits and fuel radicalization to violence .
 The Counterterrorism Bureau will serve as the Department’s liaison with the new domestic CVE Task Force based at the Department of Flomeland Security . The Department will also be the liaison to the new CVE task force based at Flomland Security .
Through this coordination, we will promote sharing of good practices and expertise . Through this coordination we will also promote share of good practice across domestic and international efforts .
 State will work through its public affairs networks, functional bureaus and engagement abroad . State will promote CVE communications and U.S. strategic counterterrorism narratives .
 CT, the GEC and other State offices participate in a regular NSC working group on issues related to CT technology . The NSC is trying to engage public and private sector partners to address the threat post by violent extremist organizations .
 In coordination with CT and other bureaus, the GEC also engages with a network of global partners .
 The U.S. led the charge in 2012 at the Child Survival Call to Action in building the global momentum around the goal of ending preventable child and maternal deaths in a generation .
 45% of deaths in children under the age of 5 are undemutrition/malnutrition . We must drastically improve how we fight the problem, as it is the underlying cause .
When you have well-nourished children, other investments in every development sector improves outcomes . When you have a well- nourished child, investments in each sector improve outcomes .
 The health, education, and ultimately economic growth of a country rely on quality nutrition in a child’s first thousand days to improve the health of a child .
 The Brazilian government is hosting the second big global nutrition summit . World leaders will gather on the eve of the Olympics to announce commitments to end malnutrition in all its forms .
 The U.S. has a leadership opportunity to press forward the agenda for Ending Preventable Child and Maternal Deaths . The summit will focus on improving nutrition in women and children .
 Nutrition is a key priority for the State Department, particularly because of its positive impact on saving lives and improving economic growth . The State Department says it has a strong relationship with the United States .
 Nutrition for Growth will be a key moment for the global nutrition community . Nutrition for growth will be key moment in the world's nutrition community.
 The Summit will be a robust event that keeps the spotlight on nutrition and moves us closer to meeting the international goal we agreed to in the Sustainable Development Goals to end all forms of malnutrition . We are very involved in ensuring the summit will be robust .
 We are actively engaged with the host of Nutrition for Growth, the Government of Brazil, as well as other major stakeholders for the Summit . The UK government, the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation are also involved .
 We are also engaging bilaterally with countries with high burdens of malnutrition, including Feed the Future countries, to encourage high levels of participation and strong commitments .
 A Cairo military court handed down a mass life sentence to 1 1 1 6 defendants that mistakenly included a three year old boy . The Egyptian judiciary has long been rife with corruption and political agendas .
 This is outrageous and only exemplifies how little the Egyptian judiciary and security apparatus care for the rule of law. This is outrageous and only demonstrates how little they care for law, according to the government .
 Congress should remove Egypt's partial aid conditions, the accompanying national security waiver, and the reporting requirement entirely . Congress should also remove Egypt’s partial aid condition, and national security waivers .
Egypt's human rights situation in Egypt is deteriorating, says CNN.com . We share your concerns about the deterioration of the human rights Situation in Egypt .
 Egyptian officials have frank discussions with Egyptian officials about the use of mass trials . The use of military courts to try civilians, arbitrary arrests and prolonged pretrial detention is a key issue .
 We have also expressed concern about increased restrictions on the exercise of freedoms of expression, association, and peaceful assembly, as well as harassment of NGOs, we have said .
 We are increasing our public and private criticism of Egypt’s human rights situation . Egypt's human rights crisis has been described as a 'human rights crisis'
 We are engaging elements of the judiciary to provide training on human rights, including the use of physical evidence in criminal investigations . We will use physical evidence to help with human rights training .
 In FY 2014, we provided $9,190,000 to support democratic institutions including $4,698,000 on rule of law and human rights assistance . In FY 2013, we gave $9k to support democracy in the United States .
 The State Department has been clear about the need to maintain flexibility for our assistance to all countries around the world . It is working with Congress in that regard .
 The Department remains seized with human rights concerns in Egypt, which will continue to be a focus of our engagement with the Egyptian government .
 We appreciate Congressional interest and cooperation on matters relating to Egypt . We look forward to working with Congress. We appreciate Congress' interest in Egypt .
 The State Department has no system in place to keep track of dollars spent on evaluation of foreign aid . The Department of State Department does not have a system to track spending on foreign aid.
 As soon as it spends money on evaluations, it has no way of tracking where it went . It can tell how much it plans to spend in the (uture) But it can't tell how long it will spend .
 State Department can’t tell us how many evaluations were done last year . So the State Department cannot tell us.
 The Department will be piloting the system this year and expects it to be fully integrated by calendar year 2017 .
 The Department can report on the number of completed evaluations in a particular budget cycle or fiscal year . The department can also report on how many evaluations have been completed .
 The Evaluation Registry can currently provide yearly numbers of completed evaluations . We are formalizing our follow-up on evaluations from planning through completion .
 Of the evaluations that State Department has done, they are a mixed bag when it comes to their quality . State Department's evaluations are mixed bag, according to the report .
 Some are high quality evaluations and some are low quality evaluations . Some are not high quality. Some are poor evaluations .
 USAID recently completed a meta-evaluation or ‘an evaluation of evaluations’ looking at the quality of their evaluations . USAID is currently carrying out another metaevaluation looking at how much completed evaluations are used .
 The State Department wants to perform a meta-evaluation on the quality of evaluations and their use . The Congressional Budget Justification for FY 2016 is the State Department's request .
 The project will be contracted and performed with FY 2016 funds and completed in early 2017 . It will be completed in late 2017 .
 The Department will be happy to brief on the results and our intended actions and will posting the evaluation publicly when it is complete . The department will behappy to brief the results.
 The number of evaluations required was not changed in the 2015 policy update . The 2015 policy changes were not updated in the new year .
 Bureaus was not required to complete four evaluations per year . The policy required two evaluations of each bureau to he completed between 2012 and 2014, or two evaluations within two years .
We did this to counter the impression that the policy would not require that evaluations be done after 2014 . We did this in response to the impression it would not be done until 2014 .
 Bureaus are permanently expected to conduct evaluations. This strengthened the requirement by making it clear that bureaus will conduct evaluations . The requirement was made clear by the requirement that they are expected to perform evaluations .
 Department now has more than 30 evaluations posted on www. state. aov.Aov.T/evaluati on/ . and adds more on a rolling basis as they are compi eted. State. Aov.
 The Administration has taken a number of steps to make U.S. foreign assistance more transparent .
 ForeignAssistance.gov contains data from 10 of the 22 agencies with foreign assistance in their portfolios .
 These 10 agencies represent 98 percent of the U.S. foreign assistance portfolio . They represent 98% of the United States foreign aid portfolio .
 They include the Department of State, USAID, the Millennium Challenge Corporation, the African Development Foundation, the Inter-American Foundation, and the Peace Corps . They also include the United States, the U.S. State Department, the Treasury, and USAID .
 The Department is engaged with all agencies and working to improve the quantity and quality of data reported by agencies .
 All agencies are reporting their aid data annually in the U.S. Overseas Loans and Grants report . Despite some non-reporting to ForeignAssistance.gov, all agencies are still reporting aid data .
 Progress is being made incrementally to improve the granularity and increase the frequency of reporting to ForeignAssistance.gov . There are a number of challenges to reporting including that agencies are often compiling and reconciling data from multiple systems that were not designed to collect or report on the detailed level
 Most agencies cite the information required for ForeignAssistance.gov reporting is a manual, labor intensive effort requiring the collection of information .
 The Department has made great progress in publishing its foreign assistance financial records, performance data, evaluations, and budget planning data over the last few years .
 The results of this review will continue to drive the Department’s cycle of continuous improvement . The results will continue the Department's cycle of improvement .
 The Department of Defense and the Department of Agriculture are lagging. The quantity and quality of the data from two agencies seems to be lagging .
 The Department of State is actively working with DOD and USDA to improve the quantity and quality of data .
 These agencies compile and reconcile data from multiple systems that were not designed to collect or report on foreign assistance .
 All agencies face finite human and financial resources available to support this work . All agencies are facing finite human, financial resources .
 Domesticfocused agencies such as USDA also face challenges in parsing out foreign assistance records from domestic data . USDA also faces challenges.
 We have worked closely with USDA and DOD to improve their data submissions . We have also worked with DOD and USDA to improve the data submissions.
 Our team works hand-in-hand with both agencies to provide technical assistance and assist our POCs in motivating their peers .
 The data currently on the TATI registry for USDA and DOD is the most robust submission to date . We expect to see continued strides in the future .
 The Department of State has been reporting core data fields to the International Aid Transparency Initiative standard since 2012 . The State Department has reported core data field to the Initiative since 2012.
 The Department has made great progress in opening up and publishing its foreign assistance financial records, performance data, evaluations, and budget planning data .
 The first phase of the FADR produced a report that examines the current foreign assistance data environment and recommends improvements . The report also recommends improvements in the foreign aid data environment .
 The FADR group is continuing its work to carry out these recommendations . The group is still working on the recommendations .
 The size and scope of countries has increased significantly since the end of the Cold War . Supporting a small number of countries for much of that period, the size andscope of countries have increased significantly .
 The reasons why assistance may be provided to a country, and the expected outcomes of assistance, are varied and often complicated .
 PM hired a team of evaluation experts working on a number of issues that are central to making the evaluation of security assistance possible . PM hired the team in November 2014 .
First, they are developing an evaluation framework and logic model that will be used to trace the expected outcomes of security assistance . They are also developing a more directly measurable impact on partner country military capabilities .
 This work will set the stage for conducting test evaluations on several target country programs over the next year . The work will be carried out on several targets in the future .
 The countries for pilot testing have not yet been identified, but Congressional interest will likely be one of the selection criteria .
 The team is developing a set of indicator data that will look at the environment in each country where they are providing assistance .
 Department of State fully supports U.S. Policy on Security Sector Assistance . SSA directs all agencies engaged in SSA efforts to strengthen their own capacity to plan, synchronize, and implement security sector assistance .
 The White House Fact Sheet on the U.S. Security Sector Assistance Policy delineates a specific guideline for the USG to inform policy with rigorous analysis .
 The fact sheet states, “The USG will introduce common standards and expectations for assessing security sector assistance requirements, in addition to investing in monitoring and evaluation of security assistance programs .
 DoD, and all agencies engaged in SSA activities, are directed to adhere to strong reporting, monitoring, and evaluation standards . DoD and SSA agencies should be subject to similar standards, regardless of which Department is funding or carrying out them .
 Achieving the appropriate level of rigor in monitoring and evaluation will require time, effort, and resources, as well as a realistic trajectory for all security sector stakeholders and Agencies .
 The Department of Defense is monitoring and evaluation of security assistance . We are working closely with the Defense Department on their monitoring and evaluating security assistance.
 Mr Secretary approved the sale of 8 F-I6s and relevant equipment to Pakistan at an estimated cost of over $600 million .
Fonner U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan James Cunningham testified that there has been no major progress in dealing with the flow of fertilizers or other bomb-making materials from Pakistan to Afghanistan used by terrorist groups .
 The Administration supports the sale of eight F-I6s to Pakistan . The F-16 is a demonstrated, effective platform to support Pakistan’s counterterrorism and counterinsurgency operations .
 F-l 6s and other U.S. equipment has enabled the Pakistani military to more effectively conduct operations against militants in its tribal regions at all hours .
 These operations reduce the ability of militants to use Pakistani territory as a safe haven for terrorism and a base of support for the insurgency in Afghanistan .
 As part of Pakistan’s offensive, the Pakistan military has cleared Miram Shah and Mir Ali . They were known Haqqani Network safe havens .
 The Haqqani Network has remained unable to return to these areas . To date, the network has not returned to those areas .
 Haqqani Network, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, and other terrorist groups threaten Pakistan’s neighbors as well as our interests . The network has relocated to other areas of Pakistan, and it is clear that additional, specific, and deliberate action must be taken to
 Pakistan says it will not discriminate among terrorist groups as part of its counterterrorism operations . Pakistan: We continue to look to Pakistan to uphold this commitment .
 There has been progress over the past few years with regard to the flow of Improvised Explosive Devices and lED precursors from or through Pakistan into Afghanistan .
 The Joint Improvised-Threat Defeat Organization has a task force dedicated to assisting Pakistan in tracking and degrading the flow of lED material from Pakistan into Afghanistan .
There are indications the insurgency is struggling to obtain Calcium Ammonium Nitrate fertilizer and other lED precursors . More specifically, there are indications that the insurgency has struggled to obtain the fertilizer .
 CAN is likely linked to the voluntary ban of sales in Baluchistan and Khyber Palditunkhwa by Pakistan's sole producer, PakArab Fertilizer/Fatima Group .
 Pakistan's raids on suspected safe houses and cache sites in Chaman and Quetta have removed more than one million kilograms of bulk explosives and precursor material from the insurgent supply chain .
 Pakistan Customs also has made substantial seizures of fertilizer, using tools and techniques it has developed through Project Global Shield . Pakistan Customs has also made substantial seizure of fertilizer .
 Pakistan has expressed a consistent willingness to work with us and with the Government of Afghanistan on this shared challenge . We continue to work on strengthening counter-lED laws and institutions, says the government .
 In 2006, there was a similar sale of F1 6s to Pakistan by the United States . The transaction did not use taxpayer funding but rather Pakistan national funds .
 At the very least it does not seem right that U.S. taxpayers should be on the hook for hundreds of millions of dollars .
 The U.S. is committed to working with Congress to deliver security assistance to our partners and allies .
 Pakistan uses United States -funded equipment to significant effect in their ongoing counterterrorism efforts . Pakistan uses U.S. equipment to major effect in its ongoing counterterrorism effort .
 Since selling the F16s to Pakistan in 2006, we have seen tangible evidence of the important role they have played in COIN and CT operations . We have also seen tangible proof of the importance of the F 16s.
 Tn addition, previous mid-life upgrades of Pakistan’s existing F-16s, targeting pods and surveillance equipment . Pakistan has used this equipment to great effect in recent operations, operations that directly further U.S. strategic interests in the region .
 U.S. troops in Afghanistan and our interests in the region are better served when Pakistan is able to continually apply pressure to terrorist groups residing within its borders F-1 6s enable them to provide pressure through COfN and CT operations .
 The European Union reaffirmed its steadfast opposition to boycotts of Israel . The EU's labeling policy was questioned during a press briefing .
 We do not believe that labeling the origin of products is equivalent to a boycott . However, we don't believe that labels are equivalent to boycotts .
 The EU has made clear that this policy is not a boycott, and like us, they oppose boycotts against Israel . Like us, the EU has said that they oppose boycott of Israel .
In October, I strongly condemned terrorist attacks against Israelis . In October, he strongly condemned terror attacks against Israel .
 There is no justification for this hateful violence, and 1 have consistently called on the Palestinians to condemn the attacks .
 Any efforts to glorify these types of attacks or incite violence are absolutely unacceptable. talked about the challenges posed on both sides by the absence of progress towards a two-state solution .
 U.S. concern that current trends on the ground are dangerously imperiling the viability of a two state solution . I also highlighted the United States concern that continued acts of violence as well as ongoing settlement activity are dangerous .
 Those executed included among others political activists, ethnic and religious minorities . The Department of State has hardly condemned these crimes .
 Iran's human rights record, including a substantial uptick in executions without fair trials, has been criticized . Iran has a history of human rights abuses, including the death of children .
 We continue to speak out regarding Tran’s human rights violations as well as maintain sanctions relating to human rights abuses .
 Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hossein Mousavi were arrested in February . Mousavi's wife, women’s rights advocate Zahra Rahnavard, called for their release .
 We document abuses in the International Religious Freedom, Human Rights, and Trafficking in Persons reports . We document these and other human rights abuses .
 The Department has also highlighted over 70 cases of Iranian political prisoners through our Virtual Embassy Tehran platforms . The Department also highlights over 70 instances of political prisoners .
 Iran's human rights record is a critical method to bring pressure to bear on Iran to change its record . Iran has been accused of human rights abuses in international forums .
We continue to support the renewal of the Special Rapporteur’s mandate to continue his important work highlighting the human rights abuses committed in Iran . We continue to help renew the mandate.
 The UN General Assembly resolution on human rights in Iran stresses the international community’s serious concern about the “alarming high frequency” of Iran’'s use of the death penalty . We also strongly support the annual UN general Assembly resolution.
 The U.S. Congress will continue to work closely with Congress and the international community to address our concerns with Iran's human rights record .
 This April marks the centennial of the 1916 Easter Rising and the 1 8th anniversary of a great foreign policy achievement . The Good Friday Agreement was reached to overcome the various crises in Northern Ireland .
 1 was disappointed to see that “legacy issues’ were not addressed in the agreement . However, 1 was pleased that ‘legacy Issues’ was not addressed .
 Last year additional shocking revelations of British collusion were uncovered that cannot be ignored and must be investigated . British collusion can't be ignored.
 I do not believe Ireland or the UK can fully move forward until issues of the past are addressed . I don't believe Ireland and UK can move forward.
 Senator Gary Hart has worked with the UK, Ireland, and Northern Ireland leaders to bring comprehensive talks to fruition . The talks began in the December 2014 Stormont House Agreement .
 The Fresh Start Agreement not only resolved difficult budgetary i ssues and developed a framework for countering paramilitaries, but also helped strengthen Northern Ireland’s devolved government .
 UK, Ireland and Northern Ireland Executive to implement Fresh Start and Stormont House agreements as fully and swiftly as possible .
 UK, Ireland, Northern Ireland and Northern Ireland's political leaders to deal effectively with the past . The Stormont House Agreement created the institutions set out in the Stormont Agreement .
 Northern Ireland Victims Commissioner Judith Thompson is a strong advocate for swift establishment of the institutions . She believes it will be possible to secure a ‘workable deal’ after Northern Ireland’s May 5 Assembly elections .
 President Obama, Secretary Kerry, and other senior U.S. officials continue to reinforce to Russia that Moscow must fully implement its Minsk commitments .
 Moscow says sanctions will remain in place until Russia fully implements Minsk and returns Crimea to Ukraine . We have also been very clear with Moscow that sanctions will stay in place .
 We are prepared to increase costs on Russia if it takes new aggressive actions in Ukraine . We are also prepared to raise costs if it take new aggressive action in Ukraine.
 The United States Strategy for Engagement in Central America addresses the underlying conditions driving migration from the region . It focuses on prosperity, governance, and security .
 The Department and USAID, in cooperation with the Northern Triangle governments of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, work directly in communities that generate outbound migration .
 El Salvador is home to 70 percent of homicides nation-wide, as identified by the Government of El Salvador . For example, the Department and USAfD work in the ten most-violent municipalities .
 Guatemala is expanding the Model Police Precinct program into the Western Highlands communities . The program aims to improve law enforcement, develop community policing, and conduct crime prevention programs .
 Department and USAID have redirected funding for some programs and activities to better align with the Strategy . The Strategy for Engagement in Central America has not entirely eliminated Central America programs .
 USAID no longer capitalizes microfinance institutions as its main approach to developing the medium-, small-, and micro-enterprise sector .
 USAID provided the International Organization for Migration a $7. million grant to assist the Northern Triangle governments of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras . The grant is to help the governments improve their capacity to receive and reintegrate unaccompanied children .
 We consult closely with the Israeli government to determine how we may best support them in defending against emerging threats . We consult with the Israel government to decide how to best support the country .
 The U.S. also provides Israel with access to highly sophisticated equipment to ensure its security . Israel also has access to the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter .
 Israel will be the only country in the region with a fifth generation U.S. fighter aircraft . deliveries will start in late 2016 .
 We will continue to work with Israel to identify the best equipment to meet its security needs . We will be working with the country to identify best equipment .
 The U.S. has invested approximately $23 billion in FMF assistance in Israel, and over $3 billion in the Iron Dome, David’s Sling, and Arrow 3 missile defense systems .
 The United States has provided Israel with over $1. billion for the Iron Dome system alone . Since 2011, the U.S. has given Israel with more than $1 billion .
 In FY 2016 Israel will receive an additional $487 million in missile defense support, including $55 million for Iron Dome . Israel will also receive $50 million for Israel's Iron Dome, which is the largest missile defense project in Israel .
 The U.S. will fund coproduction and procurement of these systems for the first time . In FY16, the United States will further deepening our missile defense cooperation with Israel .
 On January 6, 2016, North Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test . It is the third nuclear test since President Obama took office .
 U.N. Security Council resolution 2270 imposes new, stricter sanctions on North Korea in response to Pyongyang's latest violations of previous resolutions . U.S. and China have successfully negotiated the resolution .
 The U.S. is actively engaged with countries around the world to enforce the new sanctions aimed at sending a strong message to North Korea to alter their strategic calculus . The United States is also engaged with China to effectively and vigorously enforce new sanctions .
 The United States and China agree on the fundamental importance of a denuclearized North Korea . The U.S. welcomes China's agreement on strongest sanctions the Security Council has imposed in a generation .
 The UhSlSCR has monitoring and transparency mechanisms that are unprecedented in the DPRK sanctions regime . The Uh SlSCR is the latest in a series of UN sanctions against the regime .
 President Xi will travel to Washington later this month for the Nuclear Security Summit . We will continue to urge China to do more including when President Xi travels .
 The S&CD exemplifies the deepening partnership between the U.S. and India . It demonstrates United States commitment to India’s success and leadership in Asia-Pacific region .
 India's trade industry and membership in important international organizations is one of the best ways we can assist India in assuming a leadership role in the region . India is a key part of the country's economic growth .
 India has substantial and growing economic linkages with the United States and other APEC member economies . India has significant and growing links with the U.S. and other nations .
 There is currently no consensus among APEC members on the parameters of membership\pansion . India as well as other countries in the Americas and South and Southeast Asia should be considered .
 The U.S. IndoPacific Economic Corridor initiative supports greater regional economic connectivity between South and Southeast Asia . The initiative aims to promote greater prosperity and security in the region .
 India is improving regional connectivity through the U.S. Japan Ministerial mechanism and the trilateral joint working group .
 China’s military deployments and attempts to advance its claims over disputed areas are inconsistent with the aspirations of the region for peace and stability, as well as the Sunnylands Declaration with ASEAN last month .
 The President has said we have a strong national interest in the peaceful resolution of disputes without use or threat of force, as well as in unimpeded lawful commerce .
 China’s actions undermine these principles, and we are responding with resolve . We are responding to China's actions with resolve, says China's leader .
 "On the diplomatic front, we remain active in the region, together with our treaty allies and regional partners, in building stronger regional institutions," says U.S. State Department .
 On the security front, we are strengthening the capacity of our partners to enhance maritime domain awareness . We are strengthening our partners' capacity to enhance Maritime domain awareness.
 We will continue to conduct freedom of Navigation Operations or FONOPs to challenge excessive maritime claims that are inconsistent with international law . We will also continue to carry out freedom of navigation operations and FONOs .
 We will continue to defend, in coordination with the region, the rules-based international order, which has for many years been the wellspring of the AsiaPacific’s peace and prosperity .
 confessions run counter to the standards of a society based on the rule of law. Such confessions runcounter to the standard of the society, such as those of the law .
 Two individuals holding foreign passports who disappeared from Hong Kong and Thailand raise serious questions about China's commitment to Hong Kong’s autonomy under the Basic Law .
 We have raised our concerns privately with Chinese authorities as well as publicly, and will continue to do so . We have also raised our detailed concerns privately. We have been contacted by the Chinese authorities .
 The United States and 11 likeminded countries joined together at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on March 10 . The joint statement criticizes disappearances and China's human rights situation .
 The Department invested over $25M to successfully blast-test and certify hardened modular structures to protect U.S. embassy and consulate personnel from violent attacks .
 The Department has not let a competitive solicitation for this security product since January 2014 . It is my understanding that after a brief period of procuring increased quantities of these certified life-saving shelters, the department has not.
 The Department needed a significant quantity of hardened alternative trailer systems to prepare for contingency operations . Some of which have yet to develop, some of which are still to develop .
 As these units are durable, reusable and non-expendable, a sufficient quantity remains within our current inventory to meet our near-term needs .
 The Department’s preferred method of providing ballistic and blast resistant protection for our missions overseas is through the construction of permanent, hardened structures .
Security conditions around the world are constantly evolving, according to security experts . We are committed to providing long-term safe and secure working environments .
 The Department will install permanent facilities and retain the use of hardened alternative trailer systems for developing contingencies .
 At some point, if our stock of HATS has been depleted and additional needs are anticipated, procurement for additional units would begin . HATS is one of the largest units in the country .
President's foreign affairs budget for fiscal year 2017 will advance political reconciliation among Iraq’s heavily divided ethnic and religious groups .
 The Department is focused on assisting the government of Iraq’s efforts to affect political reconciliation between Iraq's disparate groups .
 Reconciliation is the best means of ensuring a lasting defeat of Da’esh. Reconciliations are the best way to ensure a lasting victory, says David Cameron .
 The President's request includes resources for decentralization, stabilization, and programs centered on reconciliation at the local level .
 Decentralization led by Iraqi leaders and legislated by the Iraqi parliament is designed to shift responsibility and resources to provincial governments that are better able to identify and respond to local needs.
 This has the potential to empower Iraq’s ethnic and religious groups who are more influential with their provincial and local governments and will be better positioned to have their priorities fulfilled . This could empower Iraq's ethnic andreligious groups to empower them .
 United States resources for stabilization will continue to provide the United Nations Development Program with resources to assist the government of Iraq .
 Stabilization, with the goal of promoting reconciliation, is crucial to building trust with Sunnis and other communities . The goal is to promote reconciliation, earning the trust of disaffected Iraqis, and enabling the voluntary return of internally displaced persons .
 The U.S. will provide resources to continue critical reconciliation and stabilization efforts at the local level . The United States will also provide resources for critical reconciliation, stabilization efforts .
 Following the liberation of Daesh controlled areas, please describe initiatives that will be funded to advance an inclusive government on the local level .
 The Department of State and USAID are prepared to support a variety of local governance initiatives in liberated areas of Syria through regional assistance platforms .
We plan to help civil society provide small, targeted services to their communities . To meet their more immediate needs, we plan to meet their greater needs .
 We also plan to extend stabilization support that is targeted to specific areas liberated from Da’esh control when inclusive local councils take shape .
 Minority communities have often questioned the impact of aid disbursement on the ground based off of existing aid delivery mechanisms .
 The U.S. Department of State and USAID work closely with partners to ensure that our assistance is reaching the intended beneficiaries .
 We exercise considerable oversight over our programs, and our partners utilize a variety of multi-layered monitoring and tracking mechanisms to make sure that our assistance gets to those it is intended to reach .
 Flexibility in determining the right approach for the conditions on the ground is critical for funding to have the intended impact and take into account the needs and preferences of affected populations . Flexibility is crucial for funding for the situation in the UK .
 USAID works closely with all partners, including minority communities, to collect performance and situational data to monitor activities .
 USAID requires partners to monitor and report on their programs using a variety of approaches, depending on the appropriateness in specific circumstances .
 These approaches may include geo-tagged photos and videos of the distributions, multiple independent field monitors, and feedback through hotlines for beneficiaries .
 Both USAID field based and Washington staff monitor programs and field visits are a core part of USAID monitoring and program learning .
 USAID also utilizes a third-party monitoring system to verify and provide independent confirmation of a number of USAID programs .
Third party mechanisms supply USAID an added level of assurance especially in areas of conflict and crisis . USAID provides independent, field-based monitoring of activities and verification of outputs .
 An estimated 3,500 women and children are currently being held as slaves by Islamic militants . According to U.N. reports, an estimated 4,000 people are being held by the militants .
 The U.S. government, in coordination with Coalition partners, provides vital assistance to returned captives and other vulnerable internally displaced persons . The U S. government is providing vital assistance for returned captives .
 The U.S. is contributing to the global effort to protect, rehabilitate and empower women and girls as a bulwark in the fight against Da’esh .
 The Department of State’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor is working through its Transitional Justice Global Initiative to implement at $1 . million . The project enables Iraqi civil society to document human rights abuses committed by Da’esh and other actors .
 This program establishes protocols and a repository that collects, organizes, preserves, and analyzes evidence gathered to serve a wide range of future transitional justice purposes . This program is designed to collect, organize, preserve, and analyze evidence .
 The program connects local documentation efforts with the Iraqi judiciary and traditional justice practices .
 DRL has been implementing grants to civil society organizations, both Iraqi and international, to advocate for greater support for the families of missing persons . DRL is also implementing grants for civil society groups, both Iraq and international .
 USAID's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance and Department of State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration provide humanitarian relief to vulnerable Iraqis .