 Mattis also reiterated that the U.S. “won’t accept’s annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region . The United States will not accept Moscow's annexation of the Crimea region.
 Mattis made the comments in Kyiv on August 24, the 26th anniversary of Ukraine's declaration of independence from the Soviet Union .
 Mattis said sanctions against Moscow would remain in place until it stopped supporting separatists in eastern Ukraine and returns Crimea . The Black Sea peninsula seized by Russia in March 2014.
 fighting between Kyiv's forces and Russia-backed separatists has killed more than 10,000 people since April 2014 . He repeated Washington's commitment to diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict .
 The defense secretary also accused Russia of not abiding by the February 2015 Minsk agreement meant to put an end to the conflict .
 U.S. committed to ‘building the capacity’ of Ukraine’s armed forces, he said . He also said the United States was committed to building the capacity of Ukraine's armed forces .
 Poroshenko: Ukraine is ready to give a tough military response to the aggressor if he tries to go on the offensive . He warns Moscow and the separatists not to take more territory in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s “priority’ was a “peaceful, diplomatic, political, and law-based path to the return” of Crimea and separatist-held territory in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 He thanked defense ministers and troops from Britain, Georgia, Estonia, Canada, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, and the United States .
 Kurt Volker, the U.S. special envoy for efforts to end the conflict in Ukraine, was in the Ukrainian capital . Volker was also in the Ukraine capital .
 He told Current Time TV last month that the Trump administration was considering sending Kyiv weapons to help government forces defend themselves against separatists .
 Pentagon recommended sending a package of lethal defensive military aid to Ukraine worth about $50 million . U.S. media reported on August 6 that the Pentagon had recommended sending the package .
 The weapons package would reportedly include Javelin shoulder-launched antitank missiles . Kyiv has long sought to defend against the Russia-backed forces it has been fighting in its east for three years .
 Ukraine’s Independence Day celebrations come as the Kyiv government and separatists commit to a cease-fire before the start of the September 1 return to school .
 Martin Sajdik, the envoy for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe on the Ukraine crisis, said on August 23 that an “indefinite” cease-fire would commence at midnight on August 25 .
Several truce deals announced as part of the Minsk agreement have failed to hold . Several truce deals have also failed to take place .
 Chief monitor of OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, Ertugrul Apakan, calls truce "an encouraging joint, political signal" from all signatories of the Minsk agreement .
 The deal set out steps to end the war and resolve the status of the Donbas region held by Russia-backed separatists . Progress toward implementation has been very slow .
 Separatist leader Denis Pushilin was quoted on the separatists’ main news site late on August 23 as saying his fighters “supported a stable and universal cease-fire along the contact line’ in the Donbas .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron all voiced strong support for a lasting cease-fire . Children in eastern Ukraine will be able to attend school at the start of the new term, the Kremlin and Poroshenko's press service said .
 The U.S. and the European Union have imposed sanctions on Moscow for its annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea Peninsula and for its support of separatists in eastern Ukraine . The United States and the EU have imposed the sanctions on Russia .
 Supporting Ukrainian Jews and Nazis will backfire on America. Supporting the handful of Ukrainian Jews will back fire on America, says one analyst .