 Russia's Proxies in Eastern Ukraine and separatists it backs in Ukraine's east are no longer on the same page . The Kremlin abandoned ideas of annexing the breakaway republics or recognising their independence .
 The rift gives the new Ukrainian president an opportunity for outreach to the east’s embattled population, including by relaxing the trade embargo .
 Russia’s gradual retreat from any plans to annex parts of eastern Ukraine has opened schisms between Moscow and its separatist proxies in the region . Russia's gradual retreat has opened a schism between Moscow's and its separatists .
 For Kyiv, these divides could create opportunities to restart dialogue with the people of the east . Kyiv is a city in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 Such contacts could help lay the groundwork for Ukraine’s unification . Such contacts, in turn, could lay the ground for Ukraine's unification .
 The rift between Moscow and its proxies should inform new Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s policies .
 Kyiv should look to rebuild relations with the inhabitants of separatist-held areas . Kyiv has eased the economic blockade on the east and increasing outreach to the population there .
 The ensuing conflict has claimed over 13,000 lives, with neither the Ukrainian nor the Russian government willing to take decisive steps to end it . The conflict continues to fester.
 Russia has distanced itself from either annexing the de facto republics or recognising their independence . Many separatists have fallen out with the Kremlin .
 For its part, the wider population feels neglected by both Kyiv and Moscow . The wider population is also neglected by Kyiv.
 Kyiv has an opportunity to define a policy that is informed by this reality, says the new president . Kyiv is in line with the 2014 and 2015 Minsk agreements that lay out a roadmap to end the conflict, and also meets local security needs .
 This policy should prepare the ground for those areas’ reintegration into Ukraine and restore lines of communication to their inhabitants . This policy could help those areas reintegrate into Ukraine .
 Ukraine and its Western supporters typically have responded to Russia’s incursion into eastern Ukraine, or Donbas, through policies and rhetoric that treat the conflict as one between Kyiv and Moscow .
 Ukrainian leaders frequently adopt language that suggests eastern Ukraine’s fighters, political leaders and population are foreign .
 Neither Russia’s aggression nor its substantial control over the de facto republics’ leadership is in question . Russia's aggression and control of its leadership are in question.
 To view Donbas solely as Russian-occupied territory is to miss important developments on the ground. But to view Don Bas solely as Russia's occupied territory is not to view it as a Russian territory .
 Moscow's aims in Donbas aligned with those of the rebels it backed, as the Kremlin supported the separatist project . Since then, their respective aspirations have diverged .
 As Moscow lost its appetite for more Ukrainian territory, it shifted its calculus . The move was seen as a shift in Moscow's calculus .
 Russia is helping ensure the D/LPR’s hold on the territories they have gained, mainly to maintain leverage over Ukraine . Ukrainian forces and allied militias have entered separatist-held areas .
 Russia aims to make the east's reintegration into Ukraine less costly to the separatists . It wants a reintegrated Donbas with substantial autonomy or special status .
 Moscow's new approach is not what the de facto leaders sought, it was not what they sought . The new approach suited Moscow’s plans, but not what it wanted .
 Many of those who continue to fight against Ukrainian forces in Donbas still seek a Russian protectorate . Moscow is less than enthusiastic about the notion .
 Moscow's abandonment of plans to annex the territory or recognise its independence has left the separatist movement in the east splintered .
 D/LPR leadership has solidified Moscow’s control over those in charge, while removing from power some who had enjoyed a measure of grassroots support .
 With a new government in Kyiv, this evolution could present opportunities for new government . The new government could present opportunity for new governments .
 President Volodymyr Zelenskyy could start rebuilding Kyiv’s relations with the war-torn region . Informed by the reality that perspectives in the D/LPR are far from unified, President Zelensyy could begin rebuilding relations .
 The Ukrainian leader hopes to convince the people of these regions that Kyiv has their best interests at heart . Only with improved ties can the Ukrainian leader hope to convince them of their interests .
 The growing divides among Moscow, the original separatists and Donbas’s population mean that while a deal with the Kremlin is a prerequisite for peace in Donbas, in itself it may not be enough .
 Russia’s proxies in power in the D/LPR would probably have to agree to whatever Russia signed off on . But could face discontent from an already angry population, including from separatists .
 improved relations with the Donbas population could potentially strengthen Kyiv’s hand in negotiations with Moscow .
 Building such ties will be hard, given the distrust and anger that exists both in the D/LPR at Kyiv and in Kyiv .
 People in Donbas are frustrated with the status quo and are open to discussing the region's future . But there are people who command local respect, who are also frustrated.
 Others are community leaders who have emerged over the past five years . Others have emerged as community leaders .
 Some women in this otherwise male-dominated environment include some women . They include, importantly, some women in a male- dominated environment .
 Ukrainian President Zelenskyy can take steps to rebuild trust, make contacts across front lines easier and lay groundwork for future engagement .
 Easing the economic blockade would help, for example, as would facilitating social, economic and community contacts across the line of contact . Easing a blockade would be a good way for people to contact each other .
 Kyiv should also take steps to ensure local residents’ access to their pensions and to lift restrictions on local official use of the Russian language . Kyiv also should also be taking steps to help local residents' access to pensions .
 The Donbas conflict requires both Russia and Ukraine to carry out the Minsk agreements in full or to find another way forward . Resolving the Donbas Conflict requires both Russian and Ukrainian governments to do it in full .
 Russia wants Ukraine to offer autonomy to the Donbas . Ukraine wants Russia to cease its military involvement and ensure that the forces it backs disarm .
 Ukraine faces an additional challenge if Moscow and Kyiv concur on the initial moves . But even if they concur, Ukraine faces another challenge .
 separatist-held areas will require Kyiv to persuade the people who live there that their future is Ukrainian . Kyiv will need to persuade them that they are Ukrainian .
 outreach is unlikely to be rapid or smooth, but outreach is the place to start . This process is likely to be quick and smooth, and outreach is a good way to start.
 Ukraine's 2013-2014 Maidan revolution was a dramatic manifestation of a national debate over the country’s political and socio-economic future .
 Maidan activists succeeded in changing the government in the east . Soon after the Maidan government changed, protests began in the west .
 Moscow's move to annex Crimea emboldened a separatist movement in the eastern region known as Donbas . Donbas harboured hopes that Russia would take in eastern Ukraine as it had the Black Sea peninsula .
 Russia's support for that movement ensured that it survived when Kyiv pushed back . Then, Russia’s support for the movement ensured the movement survived .
 This report analyses the evolving relationship between Moscow and its proxies in eastern Ukraine since the early days of the crisis . The report also looks at the relationship between Russia and Ukraine's proxies in the east .
Drawing on interviews in Crimea, Donetsk and Moscow with rebels, Russian fighters, former and current Russian officials, and de facto republic officials . It explores how Moscow's objectives gradually have diverged from those of the separatists .
 It then offers recommendations for more effective Ukrainian engagement with the population in the east . It then recommends more effective Ukraine engagement with its population .
 The agreement would have facilitated free trade with Europe . It would have paved the way for eventual EU membership, many Ukrainians.
 Protesters gathered in Kyiv's Independence Square . First demanding the agreement's restoration and later Yanukovych’s ouster .
 Despite at first tolerating the demonstrations, the government responded with violence . The government responded to violence with violence.
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in late February, about to be rejected by his own government . New interim government headed by Arseniy Yatsenyuk took over .
 The demonstrations were led by local citizens claiming to represent the region’s Russian-speaking majority .
 The new Kyiv government was concerned about the political and economic ramifications of the new government . It was later aborted by that government to curtail the official use of Russian language throughout the country .
 Activists staged rallies that led to clashes with forces and supporters of the new government in Kyiv .
 When the “Russian spring’s first started, people in Luhansk didn’t want to join Russia .
 People were looking at their televisions – they had never been to Kyiv before and didn’t want it to come to them . People looked at their TVs and didn't want to see them .
 The takeover of the regional government building in Lviv was good but in Luhansk it was a crime . People didn't understand why the takeover was good.
 The Lviv reference is to events around the Maidan protests that toppled President Yanukovych in January 2014 . The Ukrainian president was ousted from office in the same month .
Pro-Maidan activists set up barricades and seized government buildings in western Ukraine . Then, pro-M Maidan activists seized government administration buildings in several oblasts .
 Others were inspired by Russia’s takeover of Crimea and saw eastern Ukraine's future in merger with Moscow .
 Widespread support in Russia for Crimea's "rejoining" Russia raised hopes that the same could happen in Donbas . Russia raised their hopes of the same happened in Crimea .
Crisis Group interview, Moscow, March 2018. But it gave the green light to prepare for the next crisis .
Several other sources corroborated this account, though versions differ on the precise levels of support and involvement Moscow offered . It is difficult to gather or confirm information on the exact amount of support, what its conditions were and what orders were given .
 Russian officials acting very much in personal capacity, says CNN's John Sutter . Some of this support evidently came from Russian officials, he says .
 Crisis Group interviews, former officials, policymakers and activists, March-April 2014 and March, April, August 2018 .
 Moscow saw an opportunity to co-opt the Donbas activists . If they are correct and Moscow truly authorised these preparations, it did so .
 The Kremlin had an interest in keeping Ukraine within its sphere of influence and establishing a protectorate over Russian-speaking people .
 It saw its objectives aligning with the pro-Russia Donbas groups, which it doubted could coexist with a new government in Kyiv .
 Support for the Donbas protesters within Russia was high, especially in the wake of the Crimea annexation .
Novorossiya was the term the Russian Empire gave to its new acquisitions, including Donbas, in 1764 .
 The term Malorossiya, or Little Russia, was used to denote Ukraine within the Russian Empire during the 19th century .
 At various times, nationalists in Russia have sought to revive both ideas . At various time, nationalists have tried to revive either idea .
 The Ukrainian government regards the terms Malorossiya and Novorossya as offensive . The terms are considered offensive by the government .
 The thinking found its way into the Kremlin, according to Donbas political activists and Russian policymakers .
 Vladimir Putin referred to Donbas regions as being historically separate from Ukraine .
Kharkov, Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson, Nikolayev and Odessa were not part of Ukraine during Tsarist times . Kharkov and Luhanshansk, Donetsk and Donetsk were not parts of Ukraine .
 These were all territories given to Ukraine in the 1920s by the Soviet government . The Soviet government gave Ukraine all of its territories to Ukraine .
 Putin’s call-in show aired on all state-run channels . Putin's show was broadcast on all the world's state- run channels .
 Putin did not go as far as to claim Russia should reabsorb these lands . Many have interpreted his comments as inspiration for the separatist cause .
 The Kremlin's policy toward eastern Ukraine proved neither coherent nor consistent . The Kremlin’s policy toward east Ukraine was neither coherent or consistent .
 Novorossiya proponents developed a scenario that in many ways mimicked Russia’s annexation of Crimea . But without the large-scale Russian military presence, the scenario was developed .
 Local militias in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv, Dniepropetrovsk, Odessa, Zaporozhye and other parts of Donbas would seize government buildings and then, supported by undercover Russian forces, hold a referendum to demonstrate popular backing for either independence
 In March and April 2014, Donbas activists moved from street protests to more direct action .
 Maidan activists seized government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv . They also tried to do the same in other eastern cities .
 They declared independence of ‘people’s republics’ They assumed Moscow would rapidly recognise them . They called referenda on joining Russia, which they scheduled for 11 May .
 The Kremlin's policy toward eastern Ukraine proved neither coherent nor consistent . But the Kremlin’s policy towards eastern Ukraine was neither coherent or consistent .
 An expert connected to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs described a split within government elites . ‘doves’ doubted that the Crimea scenario would work in Donbas and “hawks’ who believed that Russia could count on local mobilisation to help oust Ukrainian forces and then annex as
 Government advisers and businessmen appear to have acted on their own initiative without much effort .
 Konstantin Malofeyev allegedly financed the first leaders of the nascent ‘people’s republics’ in Donbas .
 EU authorities implicated Malofeyev in financing the de facto republics and destabilising Ukraine . EU authorities have accused him of financing de facto Republics.
 increasing numbers of Russian irregulars made their way to Ukraine . State propaganda and what they regarded as the government’s tacit approval.
 Sergey Glazyev is an outspoken champion of Novorossiya . The chief backer of annexation appears to have been Kremlin adviser .
 Crisis Group interviews, Kremlin-connected policymakers, Moscow, March 2018 .
 Former Kremlin official said Glazyev based his plan on the premise that pro-Russian sentiment was so strong and widespread in eastern Ukraine that it would deliver the area into Moscow’s hands .
 The Kremlin denies interfering in Ukraine and in general does not reveal its foreign policy plans or actions .
 At the time of the Crimea annexation, Putin refuted claims of such involvement, for instance .
 Once the annexation was complete, he described how Russia took over the peninsula . Later, he said that once it was completed, Russia took control of the peninsula.
 Putin reveals secrets of Russia’s Crimea takeover plot .
 Moscow has continued to maintain that it has not and does not support the separatists .
 The Russian government was attempting to do in the spring of 2014 is a challenge . Verifying what the Russian government is doing or attempting to doing in the summer is a task .
Crisis Group interviews, Kremlin-connected advisers, Moscow, March, August 2018 . But reports that Moscow was sending weapons and personnel to Donbas were plentiful .
 Russian volunteers rushed to Ukraine, whether under tacit orders, impelled by their own enthusiasm or both . Russian volunteers, many with military or security backgrounds and combat experience, rush to Ukraine .
 Most notorious was former Russian intelligence officer Igor Girkin, who went by the nom de guerre Strelkov . He was known for his work in Russia as an intelligence officer .
 Strelkov led irregular forces involved in the annexation of Crimea in February and March . World War II re-enactor and an avid proponent of Novorossiya .
On the importance of World War II re-enactments in contemporary Russian nationalism, see Crisis Group Europe Report N°251, Patriotic Mobilisation in Russia .
 In April, he brought a unit of 52 men from Russia to the Donetsk region . He helped take over law enforcement offices in Sloviansk .
 He called upon Russia to send troops to hold this city and Kramatorsk . He then called upon the Russian government to send soldiers to hold the city .
 Strelkov became the most powerful commander in Donetsk at the time . When Ukrainian fighters joined his ranks, he became a commander .
 With separatists losing steam, Kremlin began to distance itself from movement it had inspired .
 separatist movement did not pan out as Moscow hawks had expected . But the separatist movement didn't pan out.
 Some of the population were indeed nervous about the new government in Kyiv . But majority support for joining Russia simply was not there .
 Kyiv’s Interior Ministry troops suppressed the insurgency the following day, persuading the mayor to switch sides . In Kharkiv, where they proclaimed independence from Ukraine along with Luhansk and Donetsk on 7 April, the Interior Ministry forces suppressed the insurgents .
 In Odessa, clashes between separatists and Kyiv’s supporters culminated in a standoff on 2 May . Over 40 people, mostly separatists, were killed in the standoff .
 Many burned to death in a fire that engulfed the Trade Union Building they had tried to seize .
 The fire became a symbol of the ‘Russian spring’ The separatists’ failure in Odessa also demonstrated the absence of local support for secession .
Public opinion on the proposed referendums was uneven in Donetsk and Donetsk . Even in the two cities where the “peoples’ republics’s” survived, public opinion was uneven .
 One young rebel told a visiting journalist that the path forward lay in uniting with Russia with Putin's help .
Crisis Group analyst’s interviews in a previous capacity, residents, Donetsk, May 2014 . Many others spoke merely of greater autonomy from Kyiv, not of independence or merger with Russia .
 The U.S., along with EU countries, imposed sanctions on Russia . The sanctions were much tougher than those that had followed the annexation of Crimea .
 The Kremlin began to distance itself from the separatist movement it had inspired . With the separatists losing steam, the Kremlin started to distance themselves from them .
 A Ukrainian rebel in Strelkov’s regiment described a shift in the message from Moscow as early as late April .
 He began hearing calls for restraint in rebel efforts to take control of eastern Ukrainian towns and cities .
Crisis Group interviews, Moscow, March-September 2018 .
 Putin underwent a “sudden change in tune’ after meeting with Swiss President Didier Burkhalter on 7 May .
 separatist movement in Donbas is determined to move ahead, choosing to ignore or creatively interpret Putin's comments . The separatist movement was determined to ignore the comments .
 Denis Pushilin, one of the members of the emerging separatist government in Donetsk, was among those who pushed forward with the referendum in that city .
 On 8 May, three days before the scheduled ballot, he took part in a closed-door meeting with local lawmakers and other leaders . He also met with other leaders on 8 May .
 A Crisis Group witness was struck that participants appeared to take Putin’s words to imply the opposite of their literal meaning .
 Vladimir Vladimirovich’s comments. But a number of people seem to be in a state of confusion after the comments .
 Donetsk People's Republic will express its will, Vladimir Vladimirovich said . People from across the world will know that the Donetsk people will express their will .
 A meeting of deputies in Donetsk was witnessed by Crisis Group analyst in a previous capacity . It was a positioning of the Donetsk Republic as a people's republic .
 Meeting attendees voted unanimously to go ahead with the ballot . Meeting attendees vote unanimously to vote on the ballot.
 Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics declared independence from Ukraine . Neither Moscow nor Kyiv recognised the result .
 Moscow Abandons Novorossiya Moscow’s change of heart meant that it would not recognise the statelets .
 Moscow's clients and ordinary citizens feared that return to the Ukrainian fold would lead to violent reprisals, a potentially self-fulfilling prophecy .
 Moscow’s support, which remained unacknowledged, was aimed to help the statelets hang on to the territories they had gained in the near term .
 Moscow would not acknowledge backtracking on a policy it never admitted to supporting in the first place .
 mentions of Novorossiya by Putin or other state officials started to disappear in late 2014 . In late 2014, mentions of the Russian state officials began to disappear .
 Moscow reportedly eased out the leaders, Ukrainian and Russian, who had led the initial fight with figures it found more manageable .
 Donetsk People's Republic dismisses defence minister . Donetsk People’s Republic dismisss defence minister.
 Former Kremlin official suggested Moscow had grown frustrated with Strelkov’s activities .
 Crisis Group interview, Moscow-based policymaker, Moscow, April 2018 .
 A fellow Russian combatant told Crisis Group that the Kremlin pressured Strelkov to leave Donbas in exchange for a promise that Moscow would reinforce and resupply the DPR forces .
 The D/LPR leadership also changed hands as Moscow sought to establish more order . Moscow sought more order as Moscow seeks to establish new order .
 Aleksandr Zakharchenko took over the DPR and Igor Plotnitsky the LPR in early August . Reports suggest both were appointed on Moscow’s orders .
 See also. See also    “  убрала’s’   ‘МИИ’  -‘ ’ –  И-’-  
 Crimea-based blogger, Boris Rozhin, aka colonelcassad. See also the posts by the well-informed Crimea- based blogger, aka Colonelcassad .
 In discussions with Crisis Group, activists, policymakers and advisers said it was common knowledge that Moscow was behind such decisions .
 Moscow beefed up its military support to defend areas they controlled . D/LPR forces defend the areas they control .
 Moscow covertly sent troops to help the de facto leadership secure positions it had taken and prevent their recapture by Ukrainian forces . In the summer of 2014 and in early 2015, Moscow sent troops.
 The process of intensifying Moscow’s support for the DPR and LPR went in parallel, says a former Russian lawmaker .
Putin has repeatedly denied the presence of Russian armed forces in Ukraine . Moscow denies taking these steps .
 In December 2015, he admitted there may be some personnel but not regular troops . He admitted some personnel may not be regular troops, but some may be personnel .
 The BBC's new series, "RBC, 17 December 2015," airs at 8.30 p.m. ET. ET .
 Moscow’s change of heart meant that it would not recognise the statelets . Neither was Moscow ready to hand them back to Ukraine .
 The first agreement, the Minsk Protocol, was signed on 5 September 2014 .
 The Minsk Package of Measures, colloquially known as Minsk II, was signed in February 2015 . The package was signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The Protocol followed a battle for the city of Ilovaisk in Donetsk, but the attendant ceasefire failed to take hold . Fighting resumed at Donetsk airport by the end of the month .
 Minsk II was signed shortly after Russian-backed forces captured the airport and amid clashes around the strategic rail junction of Debaltseve .
 The second agreement, initially an addendum to the protocol, in effect replaced the initial package as the only internationally agreed-upon peace plan for Donbas .
 It stipulated a ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weaponry by all sides from a contact line demarcated in the first protocol . The first protocol also included amnesty for separatist fighters and implementation of a “special status’s’ for rebel-held areas .
 The four have not met since 2016, although both Ukraine and Russia have voiced hopes of restarting conversations and expanding the format . The four haven't met since 2014 .
 Minsk stipulation of special status for Donbas was a victory for Moscow . For Moscow, the decision to give Donbas special status is a victory .
 The status envisioned decentralisation or federalisation that would allow the areas in question more autonomy from Kyiv than any other region in Ukraine .
 It would increase the political weight of Russian speakers in eastern Ukraine in national debates . It would also increase the weight of Russia's speakers in the Ukraine .
 Moscow's influence remains high with this population, such arrangements would translate into leverage for Moscow over Kyiv's decision-making .
 Kyiv saw the inclusion of special status in Minsk as a loss . For these same reasons, Kyiv sees the exclusion of specialstatus as a Loss .
 Zakharchenko and his associates complained that Moscow was obliging them to agree to reintegration into Ukraine against their will . Even before the first Minsk meeting in September 2014, they complained .
 Zakharchenko lambasted the conditions on special status set out in the 5 September agreement . He rejected anything less than independence .
Marina Akhmedova threatened to resign in October . In October, he dismissed the contact line agreed to in Minsk as a betrayal because it precluded a wider Novorossiya .
 By February 2015, Zakharchenko had softened his public statements, but it seems that his concerns were not fully assuaged .
Both he and Plotnitsky initially refused to endorse the package of measures at the second round of negotiations . Both he and plotnitski initially refused.
At the talks’ end, the de facto republics rejected the agreement, leading to its near collapse . It reportedly took Putin’s personal intervention – two hours of private conversation – to convince both.
 Putin withdraws to discuss the matter over the phone with Zakharchenko and Plotnitsky . After two hours, the leaders agreed to a ceasefire .
 "Can Merkel’s diplomacy save Europe?" asks Spiegel Online . See “Can Merkel's diplomacysave Europe?’
 Kommersant, 11 February 2015, is the world's most popular event on the internet .
 Even long after Minsk II, Zakharchenko continued to espouse integration with Russia .
 The Integrational Committee of Russia-Donbas held a session on 12 May 2017 . See comments made at the session.
 Minsk II constituted a formal withdrawal of support for separatist aspirations . Moscow has been in talks with Russia's government for years .
 The Novorossiya cause had shed blood fighting for it in Donbas, without risking backlash at home . But even as it abandoned it, it would find it difficult to abandon that cause’s local and Russian standard.
 The Kremlin wound up beholden to the de facto governments, as well as their Russian supporters . D/LPR figures were beholden. They were entrenched in a conflict with no exit strategy .
 The Kremlin’s abandonment of the Novorossiya concept left in its wake a movement in Donbas whose interests no longer align with Moscow's .
 Moscow’s control over the de facto republics’ leadership has alienated the grassroots element that had given the separatist insurgency a modicum of popularity .
 The de facto D/LPR leadership is financially and politically beholden to Moscow . As of the spring of 2019, it has further solidified its control over the statelets .
During the war’s early years, Russia arguably struggled to retain control over de facto governments . During the war, Russia was riveted by murders, coups and financial rivalries .
 Over the past two years, the world has dealt with more pliant leaders than ever .
 Those who emerged from grassroots separatist movements in Donbas have effectively been sidelined . But if the movement's leaders are now firmly under Moscow’s influence, they are now under Moscow's influence .
 Leonid Pasechnik replaced LPR head Igor Plotnitsky in what was reported to have been a Russian security services-backed coup . "What in the world is going on in the Russian-backed separatist Luhansk ‘Republic’?"
 Why Armed Conflict Erupted in Russia’s Puppet Regime, 29 November 2017.
 Alexander Zakharchenko was killed by a bomb in Donetsk in August 2018 . Both Moscow and Kyiv exchanged blame over his murder .
 D/LPR held new elections following Zakharchenko’s assassination . On 11 November 2018, following the assassination, the party held new election .
 Moscow appears to have forced the exclusion of popular leaders and Novorossiya idealists like Aleksandr Khodakovsky and Pavel Gubarev .
 Moscow backed Denis Pushilin, a Donetsk politician who had urged moving ahead with the independence referendum . Putin expressed his reservations about the referendum .
 He ran against lesser-known candidates and won with 60 per cent of the vote . He won against lesser known candidates .
 In the LPR, the Kremlin continued to support Pasechnik, who prevailed with 68 per cent . In the U.S., the Kremlin remained in support with 68. per cent.
 In 2017, he described ‘integration with Russia’ as compatible with the Minsk agreements . He described “integration’ with Russia ascompatible with the Russian agreements .
 The D/LPR’s new leadership represents a gradual evolution away from separatists’ aspirations to join Russia .
 Pushilin, like his LPR counterpart, is more acquiescent than his predecessor .
 Moscow does not share Novorossiya's goal, he says . He recognises that Moscow doesn't share this goal with Russia .
 He still talks of "integration" with Russia, but in ways that suggest anything from close economic ties to a union . He still talk of “integration with Russia’s” Russia .
 Pushilin echoes Moscow's line that the D/LPR should pursue closer cooperation with Russia while remaining formally inside Ukraine .
 LPR head Pasechnik still pays homage to the “Russian world’s concept .
 B The Splintered Movement Moscow’s abandonment of plans to create Novorossiya has widened fissures among the activists who led the early Donbas demonstrations .
 Unlike the de facto republics’ leadership, this movement is varied in vocation and enjoys some backing from the local population .
 It includes peaceful organisers and municipal administrators as well as people who took up arms against Kyiv . It also includes peaceful organisers and municipal administrators .
 The movement's grassroots element is now cut off from the D/LPR leadership . It views as having betrayed the initial cause of Novorossiya, meaning separatist fighters spilled blood .
 Moscow's grassroots element has complicated and even paradoxical views of Moscow . The grassroots element of Moscow's political scene has complicated views .
 Former separatist leaders who fit this profile have been sidelined by Moscow . They are in opposition to new D/LPR leaders .
 Russia still harbour aspirations for unification with Russia, despite Moscow's rejection of these goals . On the one hand, they still harbour ambitions for unification .
 The territories becoming part of Russia or at least fully independent from Ukraine . They refer to the territories becoming parts of Russia. They are referred to as "part of Russia"
 Moscow has become critical of Novorossiya. On the other, they have become quite critical of Moscow .
 Former fighters and de facto officials who were close to Zakharchenko express virulently anti-Kremlin views . Crisis Group interviews former rebel fighters, Russian volunteer, Moscow, March, April and September 2018, April 2019 .
 A few have gone public with deep-seated resentment of the Kremlin and overt disdain for the D/LPR leadership .
 Khodakovsky’s post on the Vkontakte social media network, 9 January 2018, was posted on January 9 . The Russian-born Russian politician is known for his political views .
 Khodakovsky's regime has imposed its own people as leaders . Moscow also imposed itself as leaders to whom he must now answer .
 Former leaders' statements reflect both frustration with abandonment of the Novorossiya idea and flexibility as to what the de facto republic's future should be .
 tens of thousands of people took up arms over the last five years . Many also dislike their new leaders .
 The de facto authorities have in effect taken control of the original militias that fought Kyiv’s forces in 2014 . But it was difficult amid infighting among separatist factions .
 Many fighters cling to the goals for which they fought, killed and died . Many fought for independence from Ukraine and integration with Russia .
 absent an amnesty or relocation to Russia, they see no option but to keep fighting . Perhaps even more importantly, absent an Amnesty or relocate to Russia .
 These sentiments in effect limit what Moscow can and can't force the separatists to do .
 Moscow can demand a ceasefire, but it may well find that its proxies lack sufficient control over the militias to stop the shooting . For example, Moscow can demanding a ceasefire.
 The popular mood in areas of eastern Ukraine outside Kyiv’s control appears ambivalent about the region's political future .
 The conflict has left people both alienated from Kyiv and disappointed with Moscow, polls show .
 Locals are tired of the war and appear ready to side with anyone who offers a plausible plan for fixing infrastructure, supplying aid and resolving the question of the region’s political status . Locals have been in the war for more than a decade .
 54 per cent of D/LPR residents felt less Ukrainian than before the events of 2013-2016 . 38 per cent reported no change in their sense of belonging .
 The Experience of War through the Eyes of the Regional Population’s eyes . The Centre for East European and International Studies, May 2017 .
Crisis Group interviews suggest that many residents lack strong feelings one way or another . Many residents would accept whatever arrangement brought security .
 ‘We don’t care anymore who takes us – Russia or Ukraine – we just need to be somewhere’, a pensioner told Crisis Group .
 “I’d be happy to be part of Russia, and I wasn’t unhappy in Ukraine’s Ukraine, a pensioner from Donetsk remarked . ‘I wasn't unhappy in Russia’, a Pensioner said .
 The allusion to the Soviet Union as a benchmark for social security echoed those expressed by other residents in Donbas in 2018 .
 Those who oppose reintegration cite mistrust of the Ukrainian government rather than enthusiasm for the de facto republics' leaders .
 Russia's leaders rarely display a coherent vision for what life in an independent state or Russia would look like . They rarely display the vision for life in independent state.
Sievierodonetsk is a Russian factory worker . The factory is located in the city of Sievierodetsk . It was founded in the 1990s .
 People cite concerns that reflect both their first-hand experiences and tropes common in pro-Kremlin and “official” D/LPR media . People cite the supposed ubiquity of state-sponsored, far-right violence in Ukraine .
Five years of policies from Kyiv have felt to many locals like an intentional effort to cut them off as punishment for supporting the separatist cause .
 The Alienated Civilians of Eastern Ukraine, op. cit. Many residents lack strong feelings one way or another, stressing that they would accept whatever arrangement brought security .
 Kyiv initially condemned but then dramatically expanded the blockade, banning all trade with people or businesses located in the statelets . The blockade was initially condemned.
 This measure further weakened the D/LPR's economies and worsened the region’s humanitarian crisis . This measure also weakened the country's economies .
 Ukraine had with people in rebel-held areas . It also has had profound consequences for remaining links, whether political or economic, that Ukraine had .
 Ukrainian-owned companies cannot legally operate in the D/LPR, rendering such employment impossible .
 The blockade, combined with years of war, has led to shifts in local alignments and allegiances . After the blockade, the lawmaker said, the door is shut .
 New leaders have emerged in the economic, social and humanitarian spheres . Some of them women have emerged as leaders .
Crisis Group interviews include Kyiv, Avdiivka, Mariupol, Kramatorsk and Rostov-on-Don . At the same time, some who were influential before the war also remain relevant .
 Ukrainian officials and fighters view Ukrainian rhetoric, law and policy as implying they are not considered citizens . The vast majority of Donbas residents are Donbas natives .
 Ukraine's 2018 law defines both statelets as occupied by Russia . For example, Ukraine’s 2018 law on temporarily occupied territories defines both states .
 This wording can be interpreted to mean that their leaders are not Ukrainian, regardless of their country of origin or citizenship . It can also mean that they are not Ukrainians .
 Ukraine's military press service refers to D/LPR fighters as ‘Russian mercenaries’ or ‘occupiers’ According to data collected by sources affiliated with Ukrainian nationalist fighters, those killed on the D/ LPR side have been Ukrainians .
Ukrainian blogger Necro Mancer compiles the table from open sources . The Ukrainian blogger compiles a list of open sources.
 Mass media widely circulates Necro Mancer’s data but the blogger does not reveal their identity for security reasons .
 Ukrainian aid workers complain that the state treats them as something less than full-fledged citizens because they reside in and travel from rebel-held territories .
 The blockade, combined with the years of war, has led to shifts in local alignments and allegiances . The blockade has been in place for more than a decade .
 Facebook Email Civilians face exclusion in other aspects of their daily life .
 Kyiv's Supreme Court deemed D/LPR residents’ access to pensions unlawful . The only recourse civilians have is to sue to get their pensions reinstated .
 A long-awaited 2019 legislative amendment extended social subsidies for war veterans to civilians injured in the hostilities . It excluded those hurt while in D/LPR territory .
 The social policy minister of President Petro Poroshenko’s government said, “everyone who is pro-Ukrainian has long since left’.
 D/LPR media seized on his remarks, while not a single key member of that government criticised them .
 Kyiv question or even seek to undermine the citizenship of those who took up arms against the Ukrainian state is hardly surprising .
Ukrainians are described by Ukrainians as sympathetic to or complicit in the uprising . But such rhetoric has broader, more pernicious effects, affecting general civilian population .
 Kyiv's stated goal of peacefully reintegrating the breakaway territories is inconsistent with Kyiv’s stated goal . Kyiv is trying to reintegrate the breakaways territories .
 It reinforces the arguments of the separatists themselves that the local population is not, in fact, Ukrainian . It also reinforces the argument that the locals are not Ukrainian .
 V Toward Unity a new president in Ukraine could bring fresh opportunities to break the deadlock in Donbas .
 Ukrainian government's approach to parts of the east under separatist control seemed to stagnate . As Poroshenko's term drew to a close, the Ukrainian government’s approach to the east seemed to be stagnant .
 Ukraine’s new President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has spoken of a new truce and renewed negotiations with Russia . The new President has spoken.
 He and his team have the opportunity to lay the groundwork for the eventual reintegration of rebel-held parts of Donbas .
 Zelenskyy says the worst option of course would be to forcibly retake the territories . Moscow would likely provoke a military response from Moscow and a bloodbath in Donbas .
 It could even lead Moscow to recognise the statelets’ independence, according to a former Kremlin official . It did in 2008 during its war with Georgia over the breakaway republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 The large-scale military option is mainly advocated by nationalists not members of Ukraine's political establishment .
Crisis Group interviews in Kyiv suggest some politicians would prefer a military takeover over granting the rebel-held areas special status .
 Kyiv will have to find a way forward with Moscow, either through Minsk agreements or some new deal that covers much of the same ground .
 Kyiv remains the main address for peace talks . There are good reasons for Kyiv to do more to rebuild relations with its eastern population .
 Ukraine needs to reintegrate those areas into the Ukrainian body politic. First, it needs to do so if it ever hopes to re integrate those areas.
 Moscow's ability to negotiate on behalf of any of these other groups is limited . The growing divides among Moscow, the original separatists and Donbas’s population mean that Moscow”s ability to negotiations on behalf.
 Russia’s proxies now in power in the D/LPR would likely have to agree to whatever Russia promised on their behalf . But they might face substantial discontent from an already suspicious population .
 Any plausible settlement would involve the withdrawal of Russian troops, some level of autonomy for eastern Ukraine and the reunification of Ukraine with its east .
 If a deal with the Kremlin is essential for peace in Donbas, in itself it may not be enough .
 Improved relations between Kyiv and the Donbas population might not bring along the most hardened separatists . But they will make armed resistance to reintegration less likely .
 The more supportive the local population is of reintegration, the more likely they are to influence separatist neighbours .
 Better relations with the Donbas population might strengthen Kyiv’s hand in negotiations with Moscow .
 Reaching out directly to leaders in separatist held areas probably does not make sense . Reaching to separatist leaders probably doesn't make sense.
 Moscow insists on such direct engagement with the D/LPR de facto leaders . Moscow insists that it is already required for the Trilateral Contact group to participate .
 D/LPR's de facto leaders are so dependent on the Kremlin, it would be unacceptable for Kyiv . But such engagement would not only be unacceptable, but also not differ substantially from talking directly with Moscow .
 President Zelenskyy could attempt to build a constituency for reintegration among eastern Ukraine’s population . Instead, he could try to building a constituency.
 Moscow may now be convinced otherwise, particularly if they feel that their safety and that of their families is assured . This constituency might even include people who favoured separatism .
 New local leaders have emerged as the regions have changed over the last six years . Some women have emerged in recent years, including some women .
 Kyiv is building their confidence that Kyiv can protect their interests . Key to such engagement is building confidence thatKyiv will protect its interests .
 New Ukrainian government could encourage contact between Ukrainians in government-controlled parts of the country with those on other side of the line of separation .
 Ukrainians may reach out to their compatriots in these territories as a starting point to convince them that their security and their livelihoods matter to Kyiv . Such channels of communication might allow Ukrainians to reach out. Such channels may allow them to contact their compatriot.
 Donbas economic blockade will be lifted during next meeting, 6 June 2019 .
 It would enable economic links that, in turn, might help rebuild relationships across the front line .
 Kyiv should take steps to enable residents of the D/LPR to receive their pensions by delinking pensions from provable status .
 Kyiv may also consider easing its language laws, which now significantly limit the use of Russian in public life . Kyiv might also consider allowing Russian language to be used in public.
 Such steps would signal Kyiv is ready to engage and that it values them as citizens . Such steps are a prerequisite for any constructive political dialogue, says the author .
 If Ukraine is to reunify its east, Zelenskyy’s government will have to define and forge consensus among Ukrainian parties and within society .
 Ukrainian nationalists and former separatists fear reprisals in the event of reintegration . It will need to consider options for amnesties and security guarantees .
 improved relations with the people of the east will make solutions to these problems better informed, more responsive to their needs and thus more feasible .
 The situation in Donbas ought not to be narrowly defined as a matter of Russian occupation . Russian actions helped spark the Ukrainian conflict, and fuelled it since .
 Kyiv’s tendency to conflate Moscow and the de facto leadership has complicated efforts to reintegrate separatist-held areas . In this sense, Kyiv's tendency to Conflate Moscow has complicated attempts to re integrate separatist areas .
 If Ukrainian government wants to peacefully reunify with rebel-held territories, it cannot avoid engaging the alienated east . If the Ukrainian government want to reconcile with the rebels, it can't avoid engaging them .
 Kyiv would benefit from an approach that serves the interests of all Ukrainian citizens, wherever they live . But Kyiv will benefit from the approach, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Over time, such policies could bring a population in the east that feels abandoned by both Russia and Kyiv back into the Ukrainian fold .