 Master’s Thesis Committee member Scott Pegg is a member of the committee .
 Tijen DemirelPegg and Jasper Sumner have been praised for their support, advice and dedication . The pair are known for their dedication and advice .
 Scott Pegg for his guidance and constant support throughout both his undergraduate and graduate studies . Scott Peggles for his support during both undergraduate and Graduate studies .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization serves as a case study which can help answer this query .
 Initially, it is important to explore what realist and liberal scholars broadly argue on the matter of IOs, peace and stability .
 NATO as an organization is then examined, followed by the case study of the role it played in the Ukraine crisis .
 Many international organizations exist today which deal with a wide variety of issues . Many of the world's most important issues are addressed by international organizations .
 The League of Nations failed to fulfill its mandate of maintaining worldwide peace . It served as the model for its successor, the United Nations .
 Realists who argue that states are the principal actor in international relations look skeptically . IOs are self-interested and mainly concerned with security and power .
 Liberals believe in cooperation among states and promote the proliferation of international organizations . Liberals, though, believe in cooperating among states, extolling their virtues .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s eastward expansion. The heated debate between these two ideologies is evident in the case of the North Atlantic treaty Organization's eastward Expansion .
 NATO was originally designed to curb the Soviet threat and protect Western Europe from communist expansion .
When the Cold War ended and NATO’s original mandate had expired, liberals championed the continued existence and expansion of the organization .
 The 2014 Ukraine crisis provides a good case study which can help determine whether liberals or realists were right . Realists, on the other hand, warned of negative repercussions for eastward expansion of the alliance .
 Liberals have claimed that Russian aggression in the region justifies NATO expansion . Liberals claim that Russia's aggression justifies NATO Expansion .
 Realists have argued that it is the fact of actual and prospective NATO expansion which has caused this aggression in the first place .
 The horror wreaked upon the globe by the Second World War led to a strong and prevalent desire for peace among nations . The horror led to the creation of the United Nations, the North-Atlantic Treaty Organization, the International Monetary Fund, and many other organizations .
 The numerous international organizations today focus on matters as diverse as trade, human rights, defense, energy, health, aviation, agriculture and pretty much any topic one could think of .
 Liberals, on the other hand, have a generally more optimistic view of human nature, which they argue is fundamentally good .
 They believe that, through international cooperation, global progress, peace and stability are possible . They say that through cooperation, international progress is possible .
Realists have been skeptical of the benefits IOs might bring about . But liberals have championed the proliferation of IOs .
 This debate is significant in the realm of policymaking, as those Western leaders in power often follow liberal doctrine .
 The case of NATO expansion can help indicate whether or not IOs bring peace, democratization and stability to world politics and inter-state relations .
 Ukraine crisis of 2014 is a telling case study of the risks expansion sometimes entails . Ukraine crisis should encourage policymakers to think carefully before opting for liberal policies, authors say .
 A Brief History of International Organizations First and foremost, it is important to note that there are several types of international organizations .
 Some nongovernmental organizations can either be for profit or non-for-profit . Some, such as Doctors Without Borders, are for profit.
 The model for today’s international organizations can be found in the infamous post-World War I League of Nations .
 From the very start, economic interdependency was deemed central to successful intergovernmental cooperation . From the start, then, it was deemed critical to successful Intergovernmental cooperation.
 The League of Nations’s efforts to confront the Austrian famine and economic crisis reflect the importance of also having common backgrounds, cultures, histories or governments for successful intergovernmental cooperation .
 The League, 3 contrary to what its mandate would have required, was very ethnocentric and racist . The League was very racially insensitive and racist, according to the League .
 The organization's Intervention in Austria between 1919 and 1923 also reflected what were to become pronounced features of the approach of international organizations to intervention in the twentieth century .
 Some international organizations are solely dedicated to economics and finance . Economic concerns still guide many political moves .
 This is not surprising, given the important place economics hold in international relations . It could further be considered necessary, says author .
 Some organizations sometimes put profit ahead of people, or large economies ahead of poor ones . The occasional problem is that some organizations sometimes end up putting profit ahead.
 The League was unable to prevent the rise of men like Mussolini and Hitler, allowing, in part through inaction, World War II to break out . In the end, no matter their successes and efforts, the League was not able to prevent their rise. In the
 The League of Nations was at least an attempt to secure peace . It highlighted the desire for cooperation among nations . The League's founding claim did not achieve success .
 The League would serve as a template for the future of international organizations . The League could be used as a model for future of the world's top clubs .
 Most individuals have only a vague idea of what intergovernmental organizations are and of what they do . Most people have no idea what Intergovernmental Organizations and Their Functions are .
International institutions have exerted a significant degree of influence on international political processes . Satoshi Machida establishes the importance of IGOs .
 It is important to establish how scholars define and conceptualize IGOs and related attributes . It is also important toestablish how scholars defines and conceptualized IGO's and related Attributes .
 IGOs may only serve some, all, or none of these purposes, but at least one of these traits can generally be found in I GOs . These are not true of all international organizations .
 Krasner International regimes are an integral part of international relations, he says . In order to fully grasp the critiques of IOs, it is important to establish what these are as well .
 The regime’s norms include cutting global greenhouse gas emissions, developing new ‘green’ technology, slowing deforestation, utilizing and improving drought-tolerant farming, and other initiatives .
 The Kyoto Protocol is an internationally binding agreement that commits its signatories to reduce their carbon emissions . It is perhaps the most well-known global climate change regime .
 There is no clear-cut answer whether or not they are successful in doing so . There's no clear cut answer whether they are.
Thomas J Volgy, Elizabeth Fausett, Keith A Grant and Stuart Rodgers argue it is important to recognize formal intergovernmental organizations .
 IGOs’ bureaucratic organization and autonomy. They then turn to the thresholds set for IGO’s‘bureaucracy’ and autonomy . The thresholds are set for the IGO's bureaucratic organization.
After establishing their measures and variables, the authors constructed their database . The authors constructed the database .
 The Formal IGOs database has data for three different points in time, 1975, 1989, and 2004 . The database is based on data for the first time since 1975 .
 The timing of the creation of the majority of these organizations demonstrates faith in intergovernmental organizations and their ability to maintain peace and stability in the world . The timing shows faith in Intergovernmental organizations.
 IGOs Support for international organizations is not uniform across the world . Support and Legitimacy of IGO's Support for International Organizations is not Uniform across the globe .
 Machida explores how democracy and inequality across the globe affect the legitimacy of IGOs . Machida also explores the support for globalization across states .
 Throughout the years, there have been protests against the proliferation of IGOs . In the past, protests have been held against IGO's .
 To have support, IGOs require a fair degree of legitimacy, opponents say . Some institutions do not seem to possess in sufficient amounts, according to their opponents .
 Trust by not only great powers themselves, but their citizens as well, is therefore of the utmost importance as it relates to IGOs’ effectiveness . Trust by the great powers and their citizens are of utmost importance .
 If great powers do not trust that IGOs can achieve what they set out to, it is unlikely they will invest the time and resources into them .
If citizens of participating states do not trust that IGOs work for their benefit, they are unlikely to support that organization . If citizens don't trust IGO's work, they may pressure governments to leave or scale back participation .
 It is not easy for IGOs to garner legitimacy, especially in a world with no international government . Some argue individual states’ selfish aims are likely to be more important than international cooperation .
 As IGOs gain authority, the impression among citizens that they have less opportunity to influence policy and participate in their government can alienate them from these international institutions and inhibit the latter’s perceived legitimacy . This means that as IGO's gain authority. This means
 Some IGOs may lack legitimacy and effectiveness because of the democratic deficit . They might be 10 intended to provide stability, humanitarian aid or health care services, or to try maintaining peace .
 Democratic deficit is not the only factor which stands in the way of legitimacy, says CNN.com .
 Johnson, like many authors, starts by emphasizing the prevalence of IGOs and how they pervade world politics . Johnson: "IGOs are a big part of our politics"
 There is no denying the importance and impact of IGOs on the world has been and continues to be significant . IGO's impact on world has also been significant, according to CNN .
 The extent of that influence and whether it has had positive outcomes and is desirable is up to debate . However, the extent of the influence on the outcome is still up to question .
 Realists across the board hold some common assumptions about international organizations . Realism and the Limits of Cooperation generally speaking, realists hold some assumptions .
Realists argue states do cooperate based on shared interests, but they do so only to the extent they can benefit from cooperation . Realists say states do cooperation based on their shared interests .
 There is no certainty that states which successfully cooperate today will continue to do so tomorrow, if their situations were to change .
 IGOs are institutions, which Mearsheimer defines as “a set of rules that stipulate the ways in which states should cooperate and compete with each other’ The realist view is that rules are usually incorporated into a formal international organization .
 Susan Strange criticizes regime analysis and international organizations on five counts . She criticizes the regime analysis of international organizations and regime analysis .
 In the 1970s the balance of power between the two superpowers, the United States and U.S.R., was still very much in place . The power of the US was, and is, in no way, shape, or form infallible .
 Reality does not show nearly as dramatic a decline as some Americans perceived. Reality doesn't show a dramatic decline as Americans perceived .
 This realist critique, though harsh, holds some unfortunate truth to it, says the writer . The realist criticism is a "realist critique"
 The United States did not authorize the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq . The country still went ahead, ignoring the UN and international community’s wishes .
 This undermines the authority of IGOs, especially since the U.S. suffered no real consequences, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This undermines the Authority of I GOs"
 IGOs: "A rule that is riddled with exceptions no longer makes a clear statement" The rule is "riddled with exceptions" and cannot be taken as a serious predictor of state conduct, says IGO.
 IGOs have little to no true power and are instead at the mercy of great powers’ actions and decisions. Certainly this reinforces realist claims that IGO’s havelittle to no real power .
 The term regime is also value-loaded, Strange warns against . It is wooly, but the term regime also is alsovalue-loaded .
 regime is a French word with two main meanings . As the author points out, regime has two main meaning .
 There is no world government, no single international regime, in that sense of the term . No world government. No single regime, no one international regime. No one world government .
 "Above all, a single, recognized locus of power over time is the one attribute that the international system so conspicuously lacks," says John Sutter .
Despite the Bretton Woods system, economic and monetary matters were also 16 subject to instability and change, often guided by national interests .
 The assumption that regimes are fairly stable and static is simply unwarranted, says Strange .
 The issues which governments must address domestically and which they care most about are not necessarily those they deal with in international organizations . These matters are often not those the public regards as important either .
 "Attention to regimes" could lead academics to “abdicate responsibility for the one task a philosophy of international relations or international political economy that will not only explain and illuminate but will point a road ahead and inspire action.
 Regime analysis leads scholars to ignore important aspects of international relations . The world's most important relationship between the two countries is in the Middle East .
Ruling regimes have no stand-alone power and are merely tools at the service of great powers . Hence regimes are not standing alone, they are only tools for great powers.
Without great power backers, international regimes or institutions are impotent . Without great power backing, the world is impotent, says the UN .
 The UN is powerless unless the 5 permanent members of the Security Council agree on something . For instance, unless the five members agree on a solution, the UN has no power .
 It is foolish to blame the UN, given it is great powers who are unwilling to cooperate, not the IGO itself . Only when they do agree can the UN act; when they fail to do so, it is foolish.
 Mearsheimer is one of the most well-known realists in the field of international relations . He is also a former U.S. ambassador to France and Germany .
 Mearsheimer is bound to be skeptical of international organizations, he says . "With a mentality such as this, he is bound for be skeptical," he adds .
 Mearsheimer allows for the possibility of cooperation, he is simply, as all realists are dubious as to how successful it can be . He is simply a realist, he says .
 Each side considers its individual gain, but also how well it does compared to the other side . This means that states contemplating cooperation must consider how the profits or gains will be distributed among them .
 states in a realist world are concerned about the balance of power . States must be motivated primarily by relative gains concerns when considering cooperation .
 "Realists maintain that institutions are basically a reflection of the distribution of power in the world" He summarizes the realist mentality in just a few words .
 They are based on the self-interested calculations of the great powers, and they have no 19 independent effect on state behavior . They're based on self-interest calculations.
 Grieco says relative gains versus absolute gains is one of the main issues . The main issue is relative gains vs absolute gains .
 Grieco argues this is a faulty assumption. While liberals seem to suppose states care only about absolute gains, Grieco says this is not true .
 "False belief that institutions matter has mattered more, and has had pernicious effects," he says .
 Liberalism and Support for IGOs have a very different, much more optimistic view of humankind and international relations . Liberalism is more optimistic than Liberalism.
 This does not mean actors always choose cooperation, even if it is beneficial to everyone . This, of course, does not means actors always choice cooperation .
 There are a number of strategies and conditions which lengthen the shadow of the future and economic interdependence .
 This posits that democracies do not go to war with one another and are more likely to cooperate with each other . This posit that democracies don't fight each other and are likely to be more cooperative .
 This is fundamentally different from the realist idea that a country’s form of government has only a limited effect on policy, or to put it more bluntly, that states’ 21 internal characteristics don’t matter .
 Liberals are responsible for the very creation of international organizations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The IGOs are the most successful I GOs in the world . Their belief in and desire for cooperation among states worldwide led to the establishment of numerous IGO's .
Liberal proponents of international institutions, as optimistic as they might be, are not blinded either . Liberal proponents of International institutions are also optimistic, but not blinded .
 IGOs have been and continue to be successful, in many liberals’ eyes, and they remain relevant, especially as an instrument for peace, freedom and prosperity . IGO's have been, in some liberal eyes, successful, and in many liberal eyes .
 He points out that perhaps regimes deserve more credit than realists give them . He says perhaps regimes should be given credit for their actions .
 He notes the historical formation of international regimes is important to their study and scholars’ understandings of IGOs . He also notes the history of the world's most powerful regimes .
 The United Nations has been around since 1945 and still plays a significant role in world politics . The U.N. has been in charge of the United Nations since 1945 .
 The United Nations indisputably does have some impact on the world stage, despite its issues and lack of power . If it has lasted seventy years, one can hope this means the UN is doing something beneficial on world stage .
 It is legitimate to claim that, in some form or fashion, international regimes and organizations do matter . It's legitimate to say that in some fashion, some regimes do matter.
 The Kyoto Protocol failed to meet its stated goals, but it was successful in reducing certain countries' carbon emissions .
 The sum of CO2 emissions from Kyoto signatory nations has declined . There have been some notable failures, such as China, but overall there are more successes .
 Robert O Keohane writes that even though imperfect, there are mechanisms in place which promote compliance by member states with international regimes .
 He admits “Decentralized enforcement of 24 regime rules and principles is neither swift nor certain’s. He admits he is not swift or certain .
 Sometimes, governments even comply with international rules when it is not in that state’s self-interest .
 The compliance pull of law is based on the expectation of each participant that most others, most of the time, will obey the law . Franck says this is in part explained by the principle that, “In any society, but especially among states, the compliance
 The law does not necessarily benefit a state, but it does not always benefit the state . While this belief is fragile and its wavering can lead to chaos, there is a prevailing trend of compliance .
 This apparent deviation from egoism offers some evidence that realists’ pessimism might be at least slightly exaggerated .
 Mearsheimer asserts policymakers, particularly idealistic American ones, are deluded . He says policymakers, especially idealistic U.S. ones, have been deluded.
 Mearsheimer tends to exaggerate how much faith liberals have in institutions . He also tends to exaggerated the importance of faith in institutions.
 Assessing IGOs Helen V Milner concentrates on three economically-focused international organizations to demonstrate their flaws as well as the positive effects these have had .
 Anti-globalization activists have challenged Milner's claim that globalization is an answer . 27 Milner has combined normative and empirical studies in search of an answer.
 The three economic institutions she examines are in need of reform, Milner concludes . But they should not be abolished, she concludes, but they should be abolished .
International institutions are not static and do evolve over time . International institutions are also not static .
 Milner finds that these institutions are in need of reform, but are likely to have been more beneficial than harmful . Milner says these institutions should have been reformed .
 Whether or not these countries would have been better off without these organizations’ support is a counterfactual question which cannot be answered .
 These institutions have not had as beneficial an effect as expected of them. Even so, they have not been as beneficial as expected as expected .
 The WTO, IMF and World Bank have not been nearly as beneficial for developing countries as many would have hoped . The World Bank has not been as good for developing nations as many have hoped.
 It is possible their problems ‘lie in the pressures exerted by the large, developed countries and private producers and investors’ It is also possible they may also be caused by the pressure exerted by developed countries, according to experts .
 IGOs gave the developing world access to markets which could otherwise have been unattainable, and for providing economic aid to them . Still, it remains important to give due credit to these I GOs for their accomplishments .
 reform may be overdue, but it is not time to abolish these institutions . The institutions have helped in some, perhaps limited, developing nations, in some cases .
 The WTO, World Bank and IMF are plagued with issues, but it is important to move forward .
 Despite their flaws, it is imperative that these institutions are not dismissed but rather allowed to reform and change in order to better fulfill their mandates . Despite their faults, these institutions should not be dismissed but allowed to change and change .
 There is undeniable value to be found in international 30 organizations, just as there are inevitable shortcomings attached . There are undeniable value in international organizations, but there are also shortcomings attached.
 IGOs have impacted the world, sometimes in beneficial ways, other times not . IGO's have affected the world in some ways, but also in other ways .
 States often are self-interested, but many individuals are capable of empathy . This is sometimes reflected in the realm of international relations .
Realists claim that cooperation only works, and only works to the extent that states stand to benefit from it . Whether it stems from a common desire for peace and the desire to promote freedom and rights, international organizations and regimes do and will continue to exist, they say .
 Some IGOs give credence to liberal claims that they provide benefits worldwide and have a generally positive impact on the global population . Some of the World Health Organization, such as World Health Organisation, say they have a positive impact .
 The case of NATO illustrates the necessity to be cautious and take heed of realist warnings . NATO has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The expansion of the organization has led to violent conflict in Eastern Europe . Russia and the West have heightened tensions between Russia and West .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was originally designed to curb the Soviet threat and protect Western Europe from Communist expansionism . The Good, the Bad and the Ugly Introduction is a look at the North Atlantic treaty Organization .
 Some scholars have viewed this as a positive sign, one of the West’s triumphs and a vibrant sign of transnational solidarity .
 Others of the realist school of thought believe NATO's expansionism is dangerous and threatening . Others argue NATO is a source of tensions between East and West, particularly where Russia is concerned .
Examine Russia's interests in the former Soviet bloc, and its reactions to NATO's expansionist policies and actions in Eastern Europe .
Since the end of the Cold War, the military threat facing the West was greatly reduced . It was “widely believed that Russia is uninterested in attacking the West’s.
It is important to explore why NATO survived, who its opponents were and why, why alternate organizations did not successfully replace the alliance, and what effects NATO's expansion has had on east-west relations .
 In 1995, Kaplan predicted that NATO would not disintegrate, and two decades later he has been proven correct . In 1995 he said that NATO wouldn't disintegrate .
 Liberal Support For Expansion Liberals defend expansionism of NATO based on several arguments . Liberal support for expansion based on numerous arguments .
 There was and still is a widespread belief that this move will deter Russian aggression . First, there was and now is still a widespread believe that this will deter Russia .
 Justification for expansion overwhelmingly came from liberal American voices . The majority of the support for expansion was from liberal voices .
 Talbott also claimed “that collective defence remained an imperative and should be extended to the newly independent democracies’s new democracies.’
 liberals believed an expanded NATO that included former Warsaw Pact countries would be better able to counter were it to become a threat to Russia . This clearly indicates a fear of a resurgent Russia .
 The spread of democracy and the fear of a resurgent Russia are the two most significant hallmarks of liberal support for NATO extension . Liberal belief in the importance and benefits of international institutions are the most important hallmarks.
 In fact, the democracy argument was touted by all advocates of enlargement and the main justification for it .
 The prospect of membership could serve as a tantalizing carrot which would prompt democratization in NATO-aspiring countries .
 NATO should be able to credibly threaten member states with expulsion. If member states adopted democratic reforms and subsequently reverted to authoritarian rule, NATO could threaten them .
Historical record shows little to no evidence that NATO itself is responsible for bringing about democratization .
 In actuality, it appears as though the alliance does not care about reverting to authoritarianism, as demonstrated by the historical record .
 NATO membership “has exerted only minimal influence on democratization,’ he writes . NATO membership, he writes, has exerted “only minimal influence’ on democracy, he says .
 NATO membership has generated disparate results. Regarding civil-military relations, there is little support for either the carrot or stick arguments .
 NATO is a rational actor which is much more concerned with strategy than ideology . This fact lends credence to the realist idea that NATO is an rational actor . NATO is more interested in strategy than strategy, rather than ideology.
 In these cases, it appears as though democracy was the driver for seeking NATO membership, not vice-versa .
 NATO membership can democratize countries by improving civilian control of their militaries . The military did not seriously threaten democracy in these states, also casting doubt on the claim .
 Reiter notes that the countries seeking membership in 2000 were all fairly democratic already . Reiter says that the nations seeking membership were fairly democratic .
 NATO membership has not and will not advance democratization in 4, says Dan Reiter . Reiter concludes “that NATO membership is not and won't advance democratisation in 4’s 4.’
 In 2015, the country was only partly free, its score had improved only slightly, to a 3.0.0 . The country was still partly free.
 Estonia, Bulgaria, Latvia, Latvia and Lithuania, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia were already considered free as early as 1999 . Estonia,Bulgaria, Bulgaria and Latvia were already free as soon as 1999.
Eastward expansion appears less injurious to Russia than NATO’s,5 which would allow for both the spread of democracy in the region . The EU is seen as more powerful forces for democratization than Russia .
 NATO chose to pursue this policy. Despite all of the contentions, protests and prospects for conflict expansion posed, NATO chose not to pursue it . NATO chose the policy.
 NATO was one of the many institutions that the West could build upon to expand its influence throughout the world . The West seized this opportunity, and the West seized the opportunity .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S. and Europe teamed up to integrate their former adversaries into the Western order .
 Russia does oppose Ukrainian membership in the European Union . The West's main goal was to “integrate the 5’s 5. It is important to note that Russia does opposes Ukrainian membership .
 Three countries acceded to the alliance at the end of the twentieth century . The alliance was formed in the early 1900s .
 This move was largely guided by the United States, which some saw as having too much influence in post-war European affairs . Some saw the U.S. as havingtoo much influence.
 nations wanted to join the alliance, independent of the United States’ desires . Of course, nations wanted the alliance to be independent.
 The U.S. shares the greatest responsibility for NATO expansion . It is important not to discount the role new or prospective members played themselves .
 In March 1999, they officially joined as NATO’s newest members, which some argued insured lasting peace for the twentieth and twenty-first century Europe .
 Russia is often treated as a special case, but some liberals insist that the Russian government should instead be encouraged to apply for NATO membership .
 Russia joining NATO was always a far stretch, which has proven too optimistic . It is still laregly believed that NATO is a force for peace and cooperation .
 Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Poland officially joined the alliance in 1999 . The Baltics invited backlash in Russia when they joined .
 Nine more countries applied for membership in 2002 . After those three nations were accepted, nine more countries applications were accepted .
 Russia unequivocally stated its opposition to the accession of the Baltic states to the alliance . Russia had, from the very start, unequivocally expressed its opposition.
Estonia and Latvia border directly upon Russia and Lithuania . Lithuania is adjacent to Kaliningrad, an important Russian Baltic Sea outlet .
 The September 11th, 2001 terrorist attacks were partially responsible for a rapprochement between Russia and the west . The 9/11 attacks were partly responsible for the Russian-American relationship .
 This move toward greater acceptance of NATO, though it had started around 1997, was ‘helped along’ by Al Qaeda’s September 11th attacks .
 Russia 9/11 also provided an opening for improved eastwest relations . Russia 9-11 was terrible an event as it was, but it also provided a good start for improved relations .
 Neither Russia nor NATO are ready for the political leap of granting the former 44 memberhsip in the alliance . It would be a particularly hard sell for member states which are former Soviet sattelites .
 Russia and the rest of the western world have converging interests in south-central Eurasia, particularly the Middle East . Russia and other countries have converged interests in the form of stability in the region, particularly in the Mideast .
 Important to liberals’ ideas is the notion that Russia has been and remains a serious threat. Important to liberal ideas is that Russia is a serious threats .
 Harvey Waterman says some states still face Russian bullying in the form of overt military threats and threats to do economic harm . He says NATO membership may itself be a source of destabilization for some states .
 Realists challenge this claim that NATO expansion has the potential to deter future Russian aggression .
 Russian ambitions in the immediate post-Cold War were rather limited . There was no impetus for aggression toward the country’s neighbors .
 “The breakup of the Soviet Union left it…without the military strength to confront the west’s west,’ says the author . ‘The breakup’ left it ‘without military strength’ for the west, he says .
 Russia in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had lost its great power status . It posed no serious military threat to its former satellites . Russia had limited capabilities, and had limited powers .
 Realist Critique of Expansion Realists offer a wide set of counterarguments which dispute liberals’ optimistic predictions about the effects and benefits of NATO expansion .
 Reiter offers but one antienlargement argument when he writes that “The weakness of the democratization argument, coupled with the costs and risks of further enlargement, caution against pursuit of this policy in the near or medium term.
 The West should rely on the European Union to spread democracy, he says . Instead, he suggests, ‘the West should reliance on the EU to spreaddemocracy,’ he says.
Realists are skeptical, at best, about the veracity of Democratic Peace Theory, making it worthless in their eyes .
 There are scholars who would argue this has already happened, or that this trend is currently underway . There are also scholars who say this is already happening .
 The real financial costs associated with NATO expansion are significant, says John Sutter . Sutter: Some would argue that new members would contribute much to the alliance . But even if one were to dismiss these arguments, it was unlikely, he says .
Having more members complicates the decision-making process and renders reaching a consensus more difficult . Having more members contributes to the process, making it difficult to reach a consensus .
 The cultural aspects of the problem should not be underestimated either. The cultural aspect of the issue should not have been underestimated either .
 The desire to socialize prospective and actual member countries might be naïve and, in a sense, dangerous, dangerous . But it may not be as significant a hurdle nor a pressing potential problem .
 This can lead to clashes between the old and young generations of a country or region . This can be seen as a sign of conflict between the two generations of people .
 There are many cautionary historical tales of the problems westernization of cultures may entail, 9 and 9 . But these ought to be considered, even in Eastern Europe, despite some, perhaps even many, to adopt western norms .
Realists do not favor aggressive and belligerent policies, rather they emphasize caution, often referred to as prudence . Despite popular opinion, realists don't favor aggressive or belligerent policy.
Ideologically, pushing NATO's borders eastward would represent the strength and unity of democracy . It would establish long-lasting peace through the spread of western values against Russian authoritarianism and repression .
 The Organization’s eastward push aggravates the Russian government and anti-Western sentiments in the country, heightening tensions and therefore the risk of conflict . Practically speaking, however, it is prudent to halt the Organization'sEastward push, because it is
 Reiter cautions further enlargement is likely to cause greater damage to RussiaWest relations than previous rounds of expansion . Reiter also cautions that further enlargements will cause greater harm to Russia west relations than earlier rounds of Expansion .
 NATO and the perceived threat it poses to Russia. Realists would argue this intervention might only become necessary because of NATO and Russia .
 This potentially dangerous move was decried by some in U.S. politics .
 Gorbachev even called “for a new post-Cold War pan-European security structure’s new security structure .
 MccGwire 50 wrote in 2008, “It is officially accepted that there is no Russian threat to the [Central and Eastern European] states for the next decade or more. And yet, Mccgwire 50 writes in 2008.
 In the long-run, it can be assumed such a partnership would have been more advantageous, as the eastern giant would, or at least could, have been included in the post-Cold War order, perhaps leading to less resentment .
 Russia has an inclination for a combined east-west defense system, as well as a pan-European security alliance . Russia later sponsored an expanded Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 The resulting greater inclusion could have led to a rapprochement of values and to the creation of common, rather than conflicting, goals . The resulting great inclusion could potentially have lead to a greater inclusion.
Russian leaders emphasize the necessity for a joint Russian-Western role in devising and maintaining a framework for European security into the twenty-first century .
 The U.S. pushed NATO to accept the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland as new members . Mearsheimer notes that Russia’s weakness would preclude any retaliation .
 Russia has also opposed U.S. policy in the Balkans over the past decade, especially NATO’s 1999 war against Yugoslavia .
 A U.S. defense alliance could have avoided some of the conflicts which have arisen between these two nations in the 20-first century .
 There would certainly have been significant obstacles in the way of this happening, notably a probably inevitable divergence of interest between east and west .
 events such as 9/11 can lead to a convergence of said interests, as was observed in the early 2000s . But events, such as9/11, can also lead to an interest in said interests .
 The difficulty in both creating and creating the 10 Commonwealth of Independent States 52 are not to be underestimated . The difficulty of creating and maintaining such a prospectively far-reaching alliance is not tobe underestimated .
 Prospects for a coalition that included Russia and satisfied both east and west were not always so bleak . The coalition included Russia, which was satisfied with both East and West .
An equal NATO-CSCE partnership could have enhanced peace and stability in Europe . There was reason to be hopeful as an equal partnership would have enhanced stability in the region .
 This could have satisfied Russia’s desire for an alternative form of security expansion across Europe . This could be satisfied with Russia's desire for alternative security expansion .
 It could have allowed for pooling and optimized utilization of each organization’s resources . It could also have helped in burden-sharing and tighter integration of states .
 NATO's power has generally grown, while the CSCE has been marginalized . In actuality, NATO’s power is generally growing, while CSCE's has been marginalized .
 NATO expansion has actually helped stability in the region of Eastern Europe is debatable . Whether NATO expansion is actually helping stability in Eastern Europe has been questioned .
 Multiple events since the Cold War’s end have demonstrated the potential for contention that NATO can sometimes exacerbate .
 Russia-NATO crises include the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 and the Ukrainian civil war of 2014 . Two subsequent and fairly recent Russia- NATO crises include Russia's war with Ukraine .
 Five years later, a similar scenario played out in Ukraine, another NATO candidate state . Five years ago, Ukraine was a candidate state in Ukraine .
 Troublesome for Russia was the 2008 Bucharest Summit which “became a cornerstone for the membership process’s membership process .
 Leaders ‘welcomed Ukraine's and Georgia’s Euro-Atlantic aspirations for membership in NATO.’’ The decision ‘pushed the limits of Russian flexibility’
Western world grew more confident with Russia as relations with Russia improved . But these worries seemed to wane as the western world got more confident .
 The 2008 Bucharest summit allowed for more relaxed relations. Unfortunately, it was this caution, which fizzled out at the 2008 summit, that allowed for a more relaxed relationship .
 The mere possibility of extending 55 NATO’s sphere into Georgia broke this cycle, leading to reactionary rhetoric and actions .
Russia declared Georgia as part of its sphere of interest and as one of its red lines in reference to NATO’s expansion . “Russia, based on the lessons learned in Kosovo, declared Georgia a part of it,” Russia said .
 Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili is far from innocent in causing the war . Georgia’s use of violence in South Ossetia was deemed unjustifiable by the international community .
 Russia found the defense of its ethnic population abroad warranted intervention . Russia found that Russia's defense of the ethnic population needed intervention .
 Despite Georgian violence, the organization maintained its commitment to help move the country closer to membership . The organization is based in Georgia .
 The situation devolved rapidly, President Dimitri Medvedev said . Russia will provide effective assistance to South Ossetia and Abkhazia, he said .
 Russia-West relations did slowly and progressively improve again, until 2014, when Russia invaded Crimea . Russia- West relations did not improve again until 2014 .
 Ukraine could have contemplated NATO membership as early as 56 2007 . Russia could have considered joining NATO in 2007 .
There seems to be some inability on the part of the western world to recognize that Russia views NATO as an actual and legitimate threat to its security .
 Most western liberals find it unpleasant to admit this, strategically speaking, it makes sense for Russia to be worried . But most western liberals don't like this .
 Glaser warned two and a half decades ago, 57 “whatever benefits might provide must be weighed against the risk of increasing Russian insecurity.
 In 2012, Charles A Kupchan seemed optimistic about the prospects of improved East-West relations .
 The Ukraine Crisis has damaged relations between Russia and Ukraine in the wake of the 2014 Ukraine Crisis . The Ukraine crisis is the latest crisis in the country's history of conflict .
 reconciliation with Russia seems even more difficult to achieve than after the 2008 Georgian War . It is unfortunate the situation has devolved to such a point that reconciliation is difficult .
Waterman: The symbolism and fear of a real invasion of this sphere appear to have been stronger than scholars expected . He says the 2008 war with Georgia and the 2014 crisis in Ukraine are the reasons for fear .
 NATO is much too late today to do away with NATO, and it is unlikely at most that it will cease to exist any time soon .
 Limited expansion14 satisfied both the west and quelled Eastern European states’ fears . While simultaneously avoiding stepping on Russia’s toes would have been optimal .
 This could have pleased all sides or, at the very least, would not have angered and ‘threatened’ Russia .
 NATO’s expansionist policy was responsible, in part, for initiating the Ukraine crisis . As such, NATO's expansionist policies were responsible for initiating Ukraine crisis, according to reports .
 cultural, linguistic, regional and ethnic cleavages can be easily argued that they are partly responsible for the country’s struggling or failing democracy .
 The west of Russia used nationalistic pride and pro-west tendencies to rebel against their former 'master' while in the east and Crimea . The people expressed strong Russian nationalism during the Soviet Union's collapse .
Ukrainian politics is heavily divided along those same ethnic and linguistic cleavages . This situation means that Ukrainian politics is highly divided along the same ethnic, linguistic clevages .
 Russia is caught between two giants, the West and Russia, vying for power and influence . There are significant internal divisions, but the country is also caught between the two giants .
 Both have used economic, historical, political, political and ideological means to try to secure their goals . Both have tried to secure goals by using economic and historical means .
 The military alignments of Ukraine and the defensive alliances seeking its membership are paramount . The military alignment of Ukraine is paramount .
 The relationship between Russia and Ukraine has been a contentious subject . It was partly responsible for the recent annexation of Crimea by Russia and the separatist rebellion in eastern Ukraine .
 The Crimean peninsula was the flashpoint of the Ukraine crisis, in part due to its ethnic, cultural and linguistic ties to Russia . Its strategic value is the main reason it seems doomed, historically speaking, to be caught in the midst of wars .
 In 2010, the Kharkov Accords were signed between 60 Yanukovych and then-Russian President Dmitry Medvedev . These renewed and extended the agreement allowing Russia's Black Sea Fleet to be stationed in Sevastopol from 2017 to 2042 .
 The Accords would have been rescinded, posing a serious obstacle to Russia’s access to its Black Sea base in Sevastopol .
Fear of losing this strategic asset may have encouraged Russian President Vladimir Putin to annex Crimea . It is possible that fear of losing the strategic asset is what encouraged Putin to take Crimea .
 NATO's role in the crisis is more telling and significant than the European Union’s . The crisis began over whether the Ukrainian government should sign an economic deal with the EU or Russia .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Mainly, this is due to the nature of the North Atlantic treaty Organization .
 NATO is a military alliance which has been Russia’s adversary since its conception in 1949 . The European Union represents a serious economic competitor for Russia .
 The EU has no army and a poor track record on taking effective military action, says the EU . The European Union has been criticised for its lack of military action .
 Russia has real practical, tactical and strategic reasons to fear NATO encroachment into its sphere of influence . NATO-aligned Ukraine would expand this hostile military threat and bring it to one of Russia’s most important borders .
 In 2004, electoral fraud led to the election of pro-Russian candidate, Viktor Yanukovych . Ukraine’s Political Pendulum in 2004 was the country's political Pendulum .
 Ukraine was then swept up in a nation-wide protest against government corruption . The Orange Revolution later became known as the Orange Revolution .
Pro-western candidate Viktor Yushchenko was successful in bringing to power the more progressive, pro-Western candidate . It was successful.
Despite high hopes from constituents, Yushchenko was not proactive and accomplished very little .
 Viktor Yanukovych failed to bring Ukraine closer to NATO or EU membership . Two years later, his opponent, Viktor Yanukovych, was elected, putting the end to such pursuits .
 The country is heavily divided along regional lines regarding whether Ukraine ought to form deeper ties with the West or with Russia .
 In 2014, during Yanukovych’s second term, another movement, Euromaidan, took root, but this one was led by only a minority, and violence spread along with it .
 The instability created as pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych was forced to flee the country led to a series of events, centered around Crimea and eastern Ukraine, which have negatively impacted relations between Russia and the West .
 Crimean peninsula has been predicted to be a point of contention for years . For years, the Crimean peninsula had been predicted by many to be in contention .
 Russia annexed Crimea after Yanukovych's overthrow and introduction of antiRussian language laws . Crimea was transferred to Ukraine by former Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 .
 Russia violated Ukraine’s territorial integrity and international norms of non-intervention and sovereignty . This created an international uproar as Russia violated Ukrainian territorial integrity .
 The actual and planned eastward expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization has been accused of either being a cause for or a solution to the Ukraine crisis .
 Some argue NATO must expand to deter Russian imperialism . Others view the organization as a source of Russian fears which can lead to greater insecurity .
 Relative power is difficult to measure and is often subjectively appraised what seems sufficient to one state’s defence will seem, and will often be, offensive to its neighbours . Barry Posen says that relative power is hard to measure .
 neighbours wish to remain autonomous and secure, they will react by trying to strengthen their own positions . Neighbours will react to their neighbours' wishes to stay autonomous .
 States can trigger these reactions even if they have no expansionist inclinations . States can triggers these reactions if they are not expansionist. States can also trigger these reaction even if there are no expansionists in the country .
 Cooperation among states to mute competitions can be difficult because someone else’s ‘cheating’ may leave one in a militarily weakened position .
In order to determine which view, liberal or realist, is more applicable or correct, and what actions should be taken in order to maintain peace and stability in the region and among the West and Russia .
 The motivation behind Russia’s actions is important to try to discern what its intentions and capabilities were and are regarding plans in Ukraine and the rest of Russia's sphere of influence. First, the motivation for Russia's actions is crucial to determine its intentions .
 One must consider what factors indicate risks of further Russian hostilities and what indicates the contrary . Second, one must consider the risk of further Russia hostilities .
 63 NATO expansion and greater military activity on Russia’s borders will deter Russian aggression or make it more likely by heightening tensions .
 The Kremlin does not appear to have plans, desires, or most importantly, the capacity to invade Ukraine or any NATO member country at this juncture in time .
 The RussoGeorgian war and operations in eastern Ukraine were smaller-scale wars with a heavy reliance on propaganda and widespread use of information warfare . The invasions of Georgia in 2008 and of Ukraine in 2014 did not have for an end goal the occupation of the entire countries .
 Also important in these cases are the domestic separatist elements, to which the conflicts are largely confined .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea was largely a strategic move, but with deep historical and cultural ties which are often neglected but are actually primordial in understanding Russian foreign policy .
 NATO’s eastward expansionism is an aggravating factor for Russia . cooperation between the two should be encouraged, with an easing of tensions and respect for existing boundaries, principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Relations between Russia and the West have always been complicated . Russia, Ukraine and Ukraine have been at odds for years .
 Since the fall of the Iron Curtain, Ukraine has been fighting for control and influence over Ukraine .
 The ethnically diverse country, and the Crimean peninsula in particular, have been widely identified as possibly explosive points of contention . The Crimean peninsula and the Crimea have been identified as potentially explosive points.
 Russia and West have both tried to push and pull Ukraine to imitate them . Russia and the West (mainly through the EU and partly via NATO) have tried to pull Ukraine.
 Russia offers a very different model than Europe. On an ideological level too, Russia offers the same model as Europe .
 Ukraine and Russia share a Soviet and communist past and have similar historical experiences . On the one hand, the two countries have a similar history .
 The West offers a more progressive and human-rights and rule of law-based approach . The West is more progressive than the West, says The West .
This is an internally divisive issue as well, split along east-west lines . This is an internal divisive issue. This is also an internal issue, as well.
 As with political and economic choices, Ukraine can choose from seem antithetical and mutually exclusive . Ukraine can also choose from political or economic choices .
 Many of Ukraine’s nation-building decisions represent zero-sum games . Russia, or the West gains influence, power and money but seldom, if ever, can both prosper simultaneously .
 The potential of Ukrainian membership in NATO is perhaps the most controversial and zero-sum decision to face not only the country itself, but Russia and the West as well .
 Russia views the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as a threat and an enemy force . It is widely recognized that Russia views North Atlantic treaty Organization as threat .
 Russia does not accept the argument that its powerful nuclear retaliatory force provides it with absolute security, says Mearsheimer . Russia's case has dramatically shrunk since the Cold War’s end .
 States constantly seek to expand their spheres of influence and to expand surrounding buffer zones in order to increase their security . Russia seeks Ukraine’s alliance, or at least its neutrality.
 Russia feels NATO is a serious threat which it would be unable to combat successfully . Russia believes an attack by the Organization is not unbelievable or out of the question .
 Russia is highly territorial, so to speak, and is uncomfortable with western encroachments into its sphere of influence . Russia has had rather violent disagreements in the recent past with Ukraine . Georgia and Ukraine, two countries with which Russia has been involved in violent disagreements .
 It would be easy to say it was the Kremlin’s ambition alone that drove Russia to act as it did in the Georgian war, the annexation of Crimea and the Ukraine crisis, this would be an unfair and reductive statement .
 There are many other confounding variables aside from imperialist ambitions . There are other confounding factors aside from imperial ambitions .
 Ukraine has many more, stronger, and longer-standing historical, linguistic, economic, social ties to Russia than any other former Russian republic .
 Public opinion polls conducted in late 2004 confirm that roughly half of Ukrainians are saddened by the Soviet Union’s demise .
 The current rift between Russia and the West is “a result of a complex mixture of economic, political and historical factors’ According to Andrew T Wolff, the current rift is a result of an alleged promise not to expand NATO eastward .
 This should lead rational political actors to move forward cautiously with NATO expansion . This should be seen as a good example for the future of NATO .
 The West has a different take on the crisis than the West . The West is taking a different approach .
 According to realist doctrine, ‘liberal reforms’ are a façade, according to the realist theory .
 Regime type does not matter, as international relations are about power and capabilities, so whether Russia is liberal or conservative is actually irrelevant .
 The international system creates the same basic incentives for all great powers, Mearsheimer writes .
 The West in concerned about power plays just as much as Russia, and NATO is an instrument it can use to flex its diplomatic and military muscles .
 Poast and Urpelainen find that while IO membership can promote democratic consolidation through external support for institutional development, it cannot directly prevent authoritarian reversals in transitional democracies .
 The United States has pursued policies abroad where they encourage the formation of group rights along ethnic and religious lines . The U.S. also pursued policies where it encourages the formation and formation of groups .
US foreign policymakers often eschew their own country’s foundational values in favor of rigid, group rights-based regimes .
 These so-called ‘ethnocratic’ regimes enjoy a poor track record in terms of forwarding democracy and self-government. Indeed,’s so- called ‘Ethnocratic' regimes enjoy poor track records, says CNN .
 In Ukraine, the government which the U.S. currently backs is ethnically divisive . The government in Ukraine, which the United States currently backs, is racially divisive .
 The U.S. pursues anti-democratic policies by design or whether they stem from a genuine intention to democratize and liberalize nations is up for debate . Realists would argue this really does not matter, though realists would say this really doesn't matter .
 states must prioritize politically successful over moral actions, says John Sutter . Sutter: “There can be no political morality without prudence, that is, without consideration of the political consequences of seemingly moral action. That is to say that states must focus on political success rather than moral
Evidence is present which demonstrates two crucial elements policymakers either ignore or are unaware of. What is clear is that evidence is present.
Since NATO is a military alliance, the implications to Russia, should Ukraine or Georgia join the organization are fundamentally different than if it were the World Health Organization or the International Air Transportation Association, for instance .
 NATO does not just facilitate cooperation, reduce transaction costs and lengthen the shadow of the future . Despite joining NATO, Albania remains only partly free, says the author .
 His political base mostly comes from the east and south of the country, which holds a generally negative view of NATO . He favors building ties with Russia instead .
 In October 2006, only 17 percent of Ukrainian population supports NATO membership, a poll found .
 There is also significant reluctance among some NATO members themselves to admit Ukraine into the alliance .
 As 18 it should be noted this critique applies equally to Russia, which simply backs a different ethnocratic regime . As 18, it should also be noted that Russia's regime is not the same .
 In 2003, the shadow economy reached half of Ukraine’s GDP, and this figure ‘did not decline in the Yushchenko era’ . 71 aforementioned, this is something realists foresaw at the end of the Cold War .
 The prevalent view among Americans is that “the door to NATO membership should be kept open.’
 Putin and his government have been dedicated to stalling or stopping Ukraine’s westward pull .
 The current government,20 headed by Petro Poroshenko, may be western-focused . But the same cannot be said of the population at large .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions were already angered by the overthrow of Yanukovych . Many of them are ethnic Russians or Russian speakers .
 NATO is concerned, the lack of popular support in Ukraine itself makes joining the Organization unlikely . It is possible Russia also saw in the new 20 This This government, it should be noted, is comparably undemocratic as Yanukovych’s .
 The constantly changing political leadership, low approval ratings and rampant corruption of Ukraine indicate the contrary . Ukraine's political leadership is constantly changing, according to a report .
 Arseniy Yatseniuk offered to resign after weeks of vacillation . His administration was tarred by corruption scandals and stalled reforms .
 Mr Yatseniuk’s offer of resignation was followed by dissension and backroom horse-trading .
 The truth is that Ukraine is incredibly divided, especially along regional, linguistic and ethnic lines . The truth, then, is that the country is extremely divided .
 To state that Putin is solely responsible for destabilizing the country fails to take into account how the crisis started and the cultural cleavages that exist. To state Putin's role is not to blame, it is to state that he is responsible for the crisis .
 There are several factors that influence the likelihood of civil wars in Ukraine . Ukraine’s Civil War is currently being fought in Ukraine.
 Ukraine is fundamentally unstable due to the type of ethnic inequalities present in the country . Ukraine is prone to civil conflict due to ethnic inequalities .
 The initial breakdown of democracy in Ukraine came with a sudden and undemocratic regime change, not with a civil 74 war .
 The new regime was more discriminatory, and at least as undemocratic, as the one that preceded it . But the new regime is more discriminatory than the previous regime .
 Rebels and governments often calculate the chances of receiving international aid before launching into a civil war .
 Depending on the circumstances, international aid can lessen the likelihood of war breaking out or enable it .
 In the case of Ukraine, both sides received international support . Both sides got international support.
 The Ukrainian government obtained non-lethal military aid and the West’s political and financial support . The Ukraine government obtained the aid and West's political support .
 separatists backed by Russia, which provided training, weapons and professional soldiers . Meanwhile, the separatists were backed by the Russian government .
 The Kremlin encouraged separatists to declare themselves an independent republic . Perhaps it was the expectation that the Kremlin would back them which encouraged them .
 Donbass rebels initially tried to solve differences diplomatically, which they tried to do . In general, these kinds of rebellions start with an attempt to solve problems diplomatically .
 The separatists could feel reassured they would have, with Russia’s help, with the capacity to engage in an armed conflict with a reasonably good chance of success . But in the event that this failed, as was eventually the case, the separatists could feeling reassured they wouldn't have,
 The Russian Threat According to Liberals Liberals find reason to worry about the possibility of Russian imperialist ambitions . NATO should take on a more involved role in Eastern Europe, they say .
 Russia's air and naval incursions into foreign territory are seen as weakness of its neighbors . They focus on the weakness of Russia’s neighbors and on its repeated air and Naval incursions .
 Since 2014, there has been a worrisome increase in Russian military activity . There has been an increase in Russia's military activity since 2014 .
21 Liberals therefore feel vindicated in their push for expansion . Mearsheimer, who himself opposed NATO expansion, notes that “NATO expansion was predicated on the belief that Russia might someday try to conquer territory in central Europe’
 Sweden is particularly concerning to some, because of its weak military . Sweden's weak military is particularly concerned to some .
 The Swedish government apparently bought into the concept that the End of History had come and perpetual peace had descended upon Europe .
 Sweden opted for defense cuts and against NATO membership in post-Cold War era . Sweden did join the European Union .
 Many in the West have opined that Sweden and Finland ought to reconsider and take steps to join the defensive alliance . Many have said that Sweden, Finland should reconsider and join the alliance .
 Given negative public opinion toward NATO membership, it is unlikely Sweden or Finland will soon join the alliance .
 The Baltic states, on the other hand, are constantly wary of Russia and have built up their militaries instead . The Baltic countries, on their own hand, have built their own militaries .
 Russia is comparatively better equipped to deal with an aggressive Russia . As such, they are comparatively betterequipped to dealing with them .
 Russia and NATO cooperated on missions in 77 Afghanistan, but when the 2008 war between Georgia and Russia came, they found their suspicions vindicated .
 The Baltic states saw 2008 as the turning point in their relations with Russia . The 2014 Ukraine crisis took the rest of the West to embark on the same boat .
 The energy dependence of Europe upon the eastern giant led to continued cooperation . This was partly because “the international setting which led to the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia should have…spurred further politicomilitary integration’ on both sides .
 NATO member countries have agreed to provide Ukraine with non-lethal military aid following the annexation of Crimea and rebellion in Donbass . The U.S. and the United States are among the countries who have agreed.
 Russia is likely to view a significant and permanent foreign presence near its border as a threat . This is a cautionary move, as Russia is expected to view it as a significant foreign presence .
 The prevailing mood lately has been inflammatory, as evidenced by more frequent and large-scale NATO exercises near Russia’s borders since 2014 . So far, cooler heads have prevailed, on both sides, onboth sides .
 Realists can and do convincingly portray the Kremlin as rational, but realists can still be convincing . The Kremlin can be seen as rational.
 Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization states that an attack on one of its members is an attack against all . All member states are tasked with protecting each other in the event of war .
 Realists view this as a safeguard against Russian aggression, as a matter, not of intentions or desires, but of military capability . Realists, as expressed below, say this is not a matter of intent or desires.
 Some worry that Russia could run multiple Ukraine-sized operations in Europe within five years .
 Poland, the Baltic states, and most significantly, the United States, NATO’s leading country . Russia is and will keep building up its military forces, so will Poland .
 Article 5 means Russia would probably not attack a member of the organization, regardless of its improved capabilities . Article 5 says Russia would likely not attack an organization member .
 liberals have begun to worry that Ukraine might be changing the game in a way that makes the application of Article 5 murky .
 This is cause, some policy-makers and scholars contend, for an expanded and more permanent NATO influence and presence in Eastern Europe . It's cause, certain policy-maker and scholars say, for a more permanent presence in the region .
Troops permanently based in Eastern Europe serve as a deterrent against conventional warfare . They will not stop cyber-attacks, propaganda campaigns and funding of subversive groups .
 The Realist View: Don't Poke the Bear Realists have a much different opinion on the Ukraine crisis . They say the West's response to the crisis should be the same as NATO's .
 Realist thought offers a more prudent approach, one that still values military preparedness but advises against rash and alienating actions . Realist is a realist thought that offers a less prudent approach .
 NATO, the EU, and the U.S. to offer Russia a united front which opposes the latter's aggressiveness . There are some issues with the West’s reactions to Russia's actions .
 There is a lack of cultural understanding and an inability or unwillingness to understand Russia’s reasoning . There is also an inability to understand Russian's reasoning .
 There is a mainstream alarmist trend that contends Russia’s actions in Crimea were the beginning of a renewed imperialist dream . Russia is seen as the conquering aggressor in the region .
 For any scholar who understands Russia’s motivations, this is a questionable claim . Russia's motivations are not clear .
 The Kremlin is aware it would not be able to win a war against 80 NATO members . An invasion of one member country represents an invasion of all NATO members, it is extremely unlikely Russia would attack such a nation .
 Some observers believe Russia could use widespread violence in eastern Ukraine as a pretext for military intervention . If Russia had intended to invade all of Ukraine, as some believed, it would have already done so .
 Military experts agree Russia does not have the capacity to occupy the entire nation state of Ukraine . Military experts say Russia has not been able to occupy Ukraine .
 Other time frames of opportunity have come and gone without a wide-scale Russian invasion which would extend beyond Crimea . Other time frame of opportunity has also gone without the Russian invasion .
 Russia did not and does not wish to invade or occupy all of Ukraine, it appears . However, as realists often stress, it is impossible to be certain of countries’ intentions .
 Realists would focus more heavily on the fact that Russia does not possess the military capability and capacity to successfully occupy Ukraine beyond Crimea’s borders .
 Cooperation and Lack Thereof The United States has been actively cooperating with its NATO partners in the east following the 2014 crisis . The U.S. has been cooperating with NATO partners following the crisis .
 The U.S. had been working closely with Poland to improve defense in that region . The United States was working closely, particularly with Poland.
 U.S. has provided non-lethal military aid to Ukraine and significant American contributions to eastern European defense . Some believe those still fall short .
 Critics have argued more should be done to support Ukraine, reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe, and counter Russian aggression .
 McCain has argued in favor of sending lethal military aid to Ukraine, criticizing President Obama for refusing to do so . Obama has stubbornly refused to provide lethal military assistance, McCain says .
 relations with Russia have taken a serious hit since the crisis . While intra-NATO cooperation has benefited from the crisis, it has also taken a hit .
 This is a point some realist scholars have argued, quite convincingly at times, at times . It's a point that some realists have argued that, even though it's true, it's not .
 NATO’s eastward expansion was a point of contention before the Ukraine crisis arose . Even before the Ukrainian crisis arose, NATO's eastward Expansion was a topic of contention .
Eastward NATO enlargement is one of the main causes for the 2008 Russo-Georgian war and one of Russia’s predominant concerns with Ukraine . Expansion would be a grave mistake, as the prospect of eastward NATO expansion is a major concern .
 A geopolitically-motivated NATO would mean altering some of the alliance’s current trajectories . The alliance's current trajectory would be altered .
 Russia has not always lived up to its post-Cold War commitments, it should be noted .
 This would mark a dramatic departure from the current mentality, but it is not the only change necessary . This would be a dramatic change from theCurrent mentality .
 NATO would encourage creation of buffer zones which would reduce “tensions between the West and Russia through the creation of separating space’s space, it says .
 This would mean greater stability in Europe and lead to improved East-West relations . This would be good for Europe and would lead to better relations with the West .
 In Ukraine, there is strong opposition to joining the Organization, which makes Ukrainian membership unlikely . In Ukraine too, there are strong opposition.
 Russia's new and more radical government in 2014 would seek membership once more . This, evidently, suited Russia, which perhaps feared that the new government would seek more membership .
 It is unlikely this will happen, though, for the same reasons it was abandoned previously . It's unlikely that it will happen.
 The majority of Ukrainians do not favor NATO membership and it is an issue that is highly divisive and split along regional lines . As aforementioned, the majority of Ukraine do not support NATO membership .
 Ukraine has struggled to establish successful democratic government . Ukraine has been fairly consistently unstable throughout the past two decades .
 The West is easy to point to Russia's destabilizing influence and illegal actions toward its little brother . It is important to recognize that mistakes have been made on all sides, not just the easternmost one .
 The most notable error the West has made is the continued eastern expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The West has also made an error in the NorthAtlantic Treaty Organization's expansion .
 Russia sees this defensive military alliance as an enemy force and a real and serious threat . Russia sees it as a serious threat to its military alliance .
As the Cold War was drawing to a close, Mikhail Gorbachev was given assurances NATO would not expand further east .
 This promise was broken, leaving the Russian Federation bitter and betrayed . The Russian Federation is now in the middle of a crisis .
 The paternalistic ‘Motherland’ has always viewed Georgia and Ukraine as part of its own sphere of influence and as ‘off-limits’
 Russia seeks to maintain its superiority and influence in the region, impeding the West’s attempts to encroach upon this territory . Since all great powers seek to achieve regional hegemony, it is logical and by no means atypical that Russia seeks the region .
 Russia behaved as a rational actor, seeking to protect its geostrategic assets . By annexing Crimea, Russia sought what it wished without much bloodshed .
 Russia’s support of the separatists in Ukraine can also be viewed as rational, since the new government they were rebelling against was, at the minimum, pro-West, and could be considered anti-Russia .
 Liberalism can be commended on its pursuit of human rights and democratization, but in the Ukraine crisis, its proponents recommend warmongering .
 Russia and NATO have been seen as peaceful neighbors in the past . But for now, the best option is to halt eastward expansion .
 The League of Nations, though not the first IGO, served as the template for modern-day IGOs . The League Of Nations was the first of its kind .
 Its failures highlighted the importance of strong state commitment, economic interdependence, cultural ethnocentrism and perceived legitimacy .
Successful organizations have learned from the League's shortcomings, and today, they occupy an important place in international relations .
 IGOs have come to cover a wide range of subject matters, from aviation, to economics, to health and defense . I GOs have also covered economics, health, and defense, among other topics .
 IGOs strive to help governments improve cooperation on common issues which affect them . They do not all serve the same purpose .
 IGOs will continue to play a significant role in international relations for the foreseeable future . They have their limitations, but they will be able to continue their role in the future .
 Efforts should be directed at how to best reform and improve IGOs in order to maximize their utility, efficiency and beneficial impact . Efforts must also be directed to how to improve I GOs in the future .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was formed in 1949 in order to defend Western Europe from the Soviet Union .
 When the Cold War ended, there was much heated debate about what ought to happen to the organization . The organization had outlived its initial mandate .
 Liberals champion the proliferation of IGOs, believing them to be effective means of cooperation, and hence a force for peace and stability . Liberals champion IGO's, believing they are effective Means of cooperation .
Liberal voices strongly favored the continued existence and the eastward expansion of NATO in the post-Soviet world .
 Realists foresaw many potential problems arising from this expansionist path. Realists, on the other hand, foresaw potential problems .
 Realist thought offers a more prudent approach to 88 international politics . Realist thinks it offers a better approach to international politics.
 Since the world is anarchic, states are self-interested actors who value power above all else, as that affords security . Since anarchic states, states have more power than all else .
 realism prescribes a more prudent approach to international relations than liberalism . But a more pessimistic view than liberalism is more pessimistic than liberalism.
 While they view the world as constantly subject to discord, they tend to advocate for policies which make war less likely .
 In the case of NATO, realists favored either the dissolution of the alliance, or at least, they counseled against the organization’s expansion .
 Russia would fear western encroachments into its backyard, thereby upsetting the fragile balance of power . Correctly, they assumed pushing NATO's borders eastward would create instability .
 Liberal predictions argued NATO would be a force for democracy, peace and stability . However it could be argued the 2008 Russo-Georgian war and 2014 Ukraine crisis may have demonstrated the contrary .
 Fears that Russia would encroach upon Russia’s sphere of influence led to retaliatory rhetoric and action . Russia views the organization as a hostile military force .
 It is not too late to stop or restrain eastward expansionism and halt the growth of the defense alliance . It's not too early to stop, however, to stop eastward Expansionism and stop it .
 It has become unlikely that early liberal hopes that Russia would one day be incorporated into the organization will be realized . It has also become unlikely at best that earlyliberal hopes of Russia will one day become realized .
 It appears as though other means of west-Russia cooperation ought to be pursued, perhaps with the eventual goal of a NATO-like defense alliance which includes both the United States and Russia .
 Liberals support these organizations’ proliferation in the world based on the premise that they can help democratize nations and create more cooperative, and hence peaceful, relations between states .
 The case of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s expansion seems to indicate that, at least where this particular IGO is concerned, liberals are incorrect .
 NATO seems to have partial responsibility for stoking tensions and inciting conflict . In fact, where the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and 2014 Ukraine crisis are concerned, it seems.
 NATO is the only IGO of its kind, but not all IGOs are prone to conflict-inducing behavior . It should lead scholars and policymakers to move forward cautiously with IGO expansion .
 The Liberal Rationalist Solution to the Problem of War in International Relations . The Liberal rationalist solution to the problem of war in international relations .
 Theories of Norman Angell and David Mitrany are published in the Peace Theories . Theories are based on the works of DavidMitrany and Norman Angella .
 The Austrian hunger crisis and the genesis of international organization after the First World War .
 Preventing Civil War How the Potential for International Intervention Can Deter Conflict Onset can be done .
 The Link between States’ Influence and the Legitimacy of Intergovernmental Organizations. The link between states’ influence and theLegitimacies of Inter governmental Organizations .
 Re-Examining the Role of NATO and the EU in Light of the IntraAlliance Security Dilemma . Re-examining NATO and EU's role in the EU and NATO's role.
 Hellenism, Liberalism, and International Intellectual Cooperation as a Path to Peace are all part of the Peace movement .