 The future of Ukraine and the Donbass conflict are discussed in a new book . The book will be published on October 26 .
 I'm the co-director of the International Policy Center at the Ford School . I'm also co- director of the international Policy Center here at the school .
 I'd like to thank our co-sponsors, the Center for Russian, Eastern European and Eurasian Studies and the Wiser Center for Emerging Democracies . I'd also like to also thank our Co- sponsors.
 Will Lamping is an MPP student at Ford School . Thaya Rowe is an IPC administrator at the Ford School. The event was organized by the IPC's administrator .
 The Ukraine conflict is ongoing, but it's not clear if it will wind down or even if it continues . They'll discuss reconstruction, resettlement and demobilization in the event that the conflict winds down .
 Mel Levitsky is a professor of international policy and practiced here at the Ford School . He is also a professor at Ford School and a professor in international policy .
 Please write questions down on the note cards that were handed out to you as you entered . While they do, if you have questions, please write them down.
Passing them to one of our team members in the aisles who will walk along these sides and make themselves known with their show of hands . And please, pass them to a team member in aisle .
 Will Lamping will be asked to answer questions by the panel . They will then bring the cards down to me and to Lamping . We'll do our best effort to ask a representative of your questions .
 The task is to explain what does Putin want Russia and the crisis in Ukraine . "My task is, Will is my student and my TA," says Will .
 The Soviet Union did not collapse in a single moment of catastrophic, colossal disintegration in 1991 . In a real sense, the Soviet Union didn't collapse in any single moment.
 The fibers, the networks, the integrated populations, the Diasporas, the discourses and understandings that held the largest country on the globe together, are still in the process of fraying and unraveling as the current war in Ukraine shows .
 Russia, Russia and Russia have combined in a toxic mix that has exploded into open warfare . Conflicting ideas of ethnicity, nationality, of disputed histories have exploded into warfare .
 Thousands have been wounded, crippled, displaced from their homes, their lives turned upside down . Thousands have died, more thousands have been injured, crippled and displaced from homes .
 Old anxieties and attitudes, emotional attitudes and views towards friends and enemies remain . However, they remain.
 Russia and the Ukraine are out of the Soviet Union, but you can't take them out of Russia and Ukraine . In his view, you can take Russia andUkraine out of Soviet Union but you cannot take the USSR out of Ukraine .
 There are two major narratives, master narratives, one more dominant in the West and one in Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think, to be very crude, there are two big narratives"
 In the Western narrative, the events on Maidan two years ago were a democratic revolution, people rising up to resist corruption and dictatorship . The events were a reach by ordinary people for freedom, independence and a closer alliance with Europe .
 Ukrainians yearned for a better life and saw the possibility for closer relations with the West . In this view, Ukrainians yearning for aBetter life, Ukrainians saw a possibility for that life in closer relations.
 There was, in this view, very little genuine support for the rebellion in eastern Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . The rebellion was largely an artificial calamity encouraged and supported by Russia .
 Russia is the sole perpetrator of the conflict, given it's support for the former President of the Ukraine, Yanukovych, and later, when it brazenly annexed Crimea and invaded Ukraine .
 The crisis is largely the creation and responsibility of Putin and the Russians, says the Western view . The Western view is largely that the crisis is the creation of Putin.
 What happen there, in their narrative, is a coup d'etat was carried out in Kiev, according to the West . It was orchestrated by the West, particularly the U.S. and influence by fascists .
Within Ukraine, there was real, genuine opposition to Maidan and to this rise of fascism . Within Ukraine, the opposition to the Maidan government was genuine .
The Ukrainian government and paramilitary aggression in Ukraine has been blamed for the violence . This was particularly strong in Donezk and Lugansk, where genuine, spontaneous, grass roots resistance to the illegitimate regime in Kiev exploded in deadly warfare .
 Russia has played a supporting and largely humanitarian role in protecting the independence and freedom of eastern Ukraine . Russia has also played a role in supporting and supporting the independence of Ukraine .
 There are variants and versions of this less crude than the ones I've mentioned . Now there are variants of this.
 Putin is out to destroy Europe, the European union, says historian Timothy Snyder . Snyder believes that this is more than just a clash between Russia and Ukraine .
 Snyder equates Putin with Stalin's actions during the infamous Nazi Soviet period . Snyder also compares Putin to Stalin's acts during the Nazi Soviet era .
 Putin aligned with his grab bag of anti European populists, fascists and separatists . Putin is aligned with Hitler against Europe itself, according to the Russian leader .
 His allies on the far right are precisely the political forces that wish to bring an end to the current European order, the European union .
 Jon Stewart says the only thing we're going to call Hitler is Hitler . The Jon Stewart school of Hitlerology is of Naziology, he says .
 Putin himself to try to explain what he is about, he says . It seems to be a lot in Putin himself.
 Vladimir Putin has several sort of big elements in his general narrative . Vladimir Putin's general narrative has several big elements . Putin has many of his general narratives .
 The Yeltsin period was the late Soviet period, and indeed to the Yeltsins . The Soviet period was also the period of the early Soviet period .
 Putin's comments in Yeltsin period weren't acted on, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia was still weak, Russia was closer to the West, and Putin didn't act on many of these things . Russia was weaker than the West. Russia was also weak, but Putin did not act on this .
 The second element that he worries about is that Russia has not been given it's due. And therefore, the second element of his worries is that it's not given it was due .
In February 2007, in his speech at the Munich Conference on Security power, he put this quite bluntly, sometimes this speech is called the Introduction to a New Cold War .
 Putin was upset by the United State's emergence as the single hyper power, or uni power in the world .
 He rejected the notion that force could be used internationally if it were simply sanctioned by NATO or the European Union . Instead, he proposed that the only legitimization for armed force against another state was through the U.N., which of course, he would have a veto .
 Putin has a new confidence that wasn't there in Yeltsin's years . Putin's new confidence is a new point in the armor of Putin .
 The new wealth, as well as American over extension of it's capabilities, enabled the Putin administration to embark on a more assertive policy independent on what the U.S. might prefer .
 Putin's foreign policy closely mirrored his domestic politics. You could say that Putin's domestic politics closely mirror his foreign policy .
 If anything there are three elements to that, state-ism, realism and, increasingly, nationalism. If anything, there is three elements of that,State-ism and realism .
 His international policy was the corollary of his domestic policy, he says . But too little investment in the future, stability and continuity, most importantly, he adds .
 Putin has made it clear that he does not want to restore the Soviet Union . Putin has said that he is not interested in restoring the USSR .
 His foreign policy in this view is not imperialist or expansionalist, rather it is about having stability . He would argue, regional hegemony in the near abroad, the countries around his own country .
 He was ready to deal with any kind of regime, no matter how thin of his relations with Assad, he said . He was prepared to deal. He said he was ready.
 Moscow's policies can be interpreted to preserve existing influences in the region for the purpose, in his view, rather than imperial control . Moscow's view is of greater stabilization, instead of imperial control.
 The Kremlin is drive by these ideas of security and stability because of it's own sense of vulnerability . The Kremlin has a sense of weakness, of its own weakness .
 Russia's foreign policy cannot be understood if you just look at Russia or look at the Ukrainian Russian conflict . Russia's policy can be understood by looking at the Ukraine conflict .
 It has to be understood in the larger international context looking at the entire international arena . It must be understood that the entire arena is at the heart of the world's largest arena .
 The U.S. has a global ambitions of the single super power in the world, the United States . I mentioned it's general weakness, it's vulnerability of via the West, and the global ambitions.
 Russian realism contrasts with and has to learn to live with the liberal internationalism of the U.S. government, which has been evident for the last two decades .
 Russia aims for a regional hegemony in the so called mirror abroad . The United States, most forcibly under George W Bush, has promoted it's own ambitions for global hegemony .
 U.S. foreign policy has been largely ideological, driven by a vision of the world in which security can be achieved only by Western values of tolerance .
 American leaders believe that America has a special positive role to play in world affairs . U.S. leaders believe America has special role in the world affairs.
 Albright: "We are the indispensable nation. That is, in the words of Madeleine Albright, we are an indispensable nation"
 It's on vision of it's own unique position privileges it's its own freedom of action . It's not just on vision: It's a unique position that privileges its own freedoms of action.
 American interests are seen to be magically consonant with those of other peace loving states . For American interests, they are seen as less than those of others .
 Russia then is constructed as materialistic, venal, self interested, antidemocratic, naturally authoritarian and expanionists . In this vision, Russia then will be constructed, then, as materialists, then self-interested, self-interests, then a
 Gorbachev agreed to withdraw Soviet troops from the country's of the Warsaw Pact in 1990 . There would be no extension of NATO's jurisdiction one inch to the east .
 Genscher told Edward Shevardnadze, one thing is certain, NATO will not expand to the east . The German foreign minister said one thing was certain, was that NATO would not expand.
 Georgia and Ukraine would gain eventual membership in NATO . The Soviet Republics, notably Georgia and Ukrainian, would also gain membership .
 It's seen by many of it's members as enhancing their security . It's also seen by some as enhancing the security of members .
I wonder, by bringing those countries into NATO we haven't, in fact, created a serious security dilemma . I wonder, I fact, that by bringing them into NATO, we have a serious Security dilemma .
 NATO is then seen offensive by the Russians, who then have to react by increasing their security, sometimes through reckless acts . By increasing one side's security, NATO is also seen as offensive.
 The West saw it's moves eastward as benign and non threatening, we know that the Kremlin felt that the west thought and acted as if it's interests, alone, were legitimate . The Kremlin never considering whether Russia would see the movement of a potentially hostile military alliance closer to its borders
 Putin is the one whose acted upon it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin is one of the people who acted upon his actions .
 He knows that the European Union is 12 times larger economically than Russia . He says that the EU is more than the Russian economy .
 NATO's 70% of which is financed by the U.S. is 10 times larger than Russia's. And NATO's, 70%, is 10times larger than the Russian .
 Putin repeatedly stated that Russia, a nuclear arms state, must be taken seriously by the West . Yet, to spite his weakness, Putin repeatedly said that Russia must be take seriously .
 What he wanted in Ukraine, I believe, was a neutral, benign Ukraine that would be friendly to Russia . I believe it would be a neutral and benign Ukraine, which would be friend to Russia.
In my view were neither realistic, were impulsive and were reckless. But then he did certain things, which in his view were not realistic . Then he did some of the things he did, which were not real, were reckless .
 Ukraine is not pro-Russian or neutral, but it's annexing part of it's territory . Ukraine is now part of Ukraine.
 The Crimea thing was done quickly without wide consultation, in fact, changed the whole game . The Crimean thing, which is done quickly, was done without wide consultations .
Historian: "I would like to use this opportunity to just say some of my thoughts, because basically moving that much, not because of the political current situation"
 We have no chance as to make sense of this calamity, so to say. And my impression, impression, is that we have no chances as to making sense of the calamity , so to says .
 The first thing is why it can't make sense is because it's unprecedental . It's the first thing that can't be made sense is that it's precedental, says the author .
 Even the way they defined this war as a war says a lot, it's an unprecedented war . It's something we have for the first time or one of the first times, so to say .
 The author's idea is that we don't have any kind of book we can grab from the shelf and to read to get a sense of the events . The author says he wants to see how people react to events and events .
There is a mere concept that emerged recently in the social sciences, it's called precariat . It's a new concept that emerges recently in social sciences .
 This is the concept launched by British social scientist Guy Standing . The concept was launched by the British social scientists Guy Standing.
 Many people sitting here today are precariat they are along for this class. It's about a very global phenomenon and I believe many people sit here today were precariat, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It basically describes some kind of new emergent class, which is global, it is global . It is mostly people who are objective data, but their education level, and their skills, but they belong to middle class .
 For academic careers, or any careers to be secure, so they're very precarious positions, so say . But for their careers, they are very precarious, so to say . For their academic career, they can't be secure.
 Many people who are discussing this idea and invented has nothing to do this pattern of, bu then you had, in Poland, political, presidential elections . They have a recent discussion about this fundamental in Poland .
 It turned out to be this specific class, which is precariat, this sided, determinate, the outcome of the elections, so to say . The election was held in a very special way of determining the outcome .
 Poland's current president, Komorowski, felt the current president was the president . Now days in Poland, nobody discusses this because it's taken for granted .
 The year you were born will tell you how poor you will be, I'll tell you . It's a which is very much like generation or as tell me the year you are born, I will say .
In many sense what happened in Ukraine related exactly to this term, the precariat . So my point is, is that in many sense, what happened to the Ukraine related to that term .
 I'm not saying they have good education, but their education is very bad as to equality . I'm also not saying it's very bad for equality, it's not good for them .
 "They're hiding from employment, so to say. And basically they're going to some kind of idea to get knowledge, but because basically they are hiding from employers, so they're hiding. AndBasically they're trying to get know, but basically they's hiding from jobs, so
 A young generation has emerged from the last 25 years who have no perspective for the future . The regime has been extremely corrupt. So this is what you have there, you have a people, a young generation .
 Ukraine is the only definition, Ukraine of this class, of this young people. So my understanding, to a large extent, I'm not saying this is theonly definition, of these young people, he says .
 I could go on to some characteristic, probably come special values, because of others of important values . I could be on the list, but I could also go to some characteristics that may be important .
 It's not ideological differences between the older and younger generation in Ukraine, says Ukraine's president . It is not ideological difference between the younger and older generation, says the president .
 If you think that you, wa ror your and the war which ensued is about nation, nationalism, identity, you are wrong. So what I'm saying here, that if you won combat, if you think you,wa ror you, are wrong, you're wrong .
 I believe he accepted the Putin beliefs because he's misjudging Ukraine, she says . Because we're using old vocabulary of empowered, she believes he accepted Putin beliefs .
 He still believes Ukraine is a divided country, and this is nonsense, he says . He still thinks Ukraine is divided.
 You have to be in Ukraine to see the don't really matter, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine is Ukraine's most populous country .
 Security and corruption is the high spot, he says . "Nobody talks about language this kind of rubbish, excuse me for saying," he adds .
 Ukraine is Ukraine's second largest country in the world . The country has been in Ukraine since 2004 . It is the second largest state in the country, after Ukraine's annexation of Crimea .
 Putin was, has to pay for this mistake, for this ignorance . My second point, Putin was. Putin was,. has to paying for this error . Putin was .
 If he would be right, his project of Russian strength would be successful, if he was right, he says .
 Russia scenario, possible Russian Ukrainian scenario, has already been liberated in 209, a year after Georgia . The Russian scenario Ukraine, Putin, I don't believe way, according to Putin .
 Putin is if Ukraine would move to West and it was not talked about NATO, again, that's very important, it was talked about the European Union . The whole idea was of Putin is to move Ukraine to West, says Putin .
 Agreement was with European Union, which has long term commitments, it's a technical agreement . Agreement was also with the European Union.
 If this Ukraine would move West, there is a plan of say, of this integrating Ukraine into parts . It goes about the industrial heart of Ukraine . It also has access to the world through the Black Sea .
 Ukraine wants to go to Europe, but on a smaller case, like a cultural state, kind of thing . In this sense, it can go, but in this case, it could go on a small case, according to the Ukrainian government .
 I was at that time during Miadan, I was working closely in the team and we already knew that in December 16 of the first weeks of Miadan what is coming . I know that, because I was, because of the time duringMiadan I was.
 Most of the people in the world knew that it's not who is the main danger, it's Putin who is main danger . Most of those who knew Putin was the most dangerous .
 Ukraine is divided Russian land, which matters. Still it's a gain scenario which is based on the very wrong persumption, that identity matters .
 That said, that said, "I don't claim that Putin has failed completely, no. That said," he said, but he didn't say that he did .
 In a large extent, to some extent Putin has been successful, because by imposing the war on Ukraine, I believe, this is imposed war . Given this perspective, long term perspective, it's still a chance for Ukraine, that's basically what the resolution was about .
 Ukraine, introducing radical, political and mostly economical reforms is a threat, a level threat, because legitimacy, for providing these politics, is nothing else but to claim as , which is basically to say that it's accepted as a failure of the Russian organization .
 Polish scholar has tried to compare and Putin discourses by their presence .
 Putin says the core element or central element in Putin was security . Putin says it was a simple term from organization or simple term .
 This is say, denial or say refusal to make. So see what has happened here, basically this is says, say, deny or say refuse to make .
 Putin to a certain extent steal the chance for Ukraine for reforms, he says . Putin also provides Ukrainian government, which is very inefficient and corrupt, for a very convenient excuse.
 Once you have a war it's very hard to do, to embark on reforms, says CNN's John Sutter . "Once you have been in a war, you have to start reforms," he says .
 It basically says it's not about the reform, it's about the survival of Ukraine . It's about survival of the Ukraine, it says .
 I know that time is running, let me check 4 minutes. So what could be suggested? Let me check.
 I believe Ukraine has lost its chance for radical reforms. I believe to a large extent that Ukraine has been unable to make radical reforms .
 There was much expectations, there were very strong social support while Ukraine was on the streets . There was very strong support for Ukraine, according to the survey .
 I don't believe that Ukraine will go with radical reforms, successful reform, even so no claims he will start with reform and support, support, additional support .
 Ukraine is in a long term period of crisis, of political instability, says Putin . "This is very bad story without economic reforms, I'm sorry to tell," he says .
 Ukraine's window of opportunity is closed for Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Ukraine's "window of opportunity" is closed . Ukraine is the country's largest country in the world .
 Ukraine has a corridor, so to say, a new corridor, one way to go . But what I believe, that still, that is still, still, is Ukraine .
 In his calculation and expectations, or not is based on two new fundamentals, which are evident in the Ukraine, he says .
 Ukraine's young generation is the main advantage of Ukraine for the last 25 years . But the young generation may be the biggest advantage of the country's future .
 Professor Suny: You may take Ukraine out of Soviet Union but you won't take Soviet Union out of Ukraine . You may call, you may, what professor Suny put it nicely, he says .
People who now days are the ages of 18 and 29, say they have a chance to get older . This is the period when people of this age take responsibility for this country . For the next 20 some years, when they'll be in the middle age, say
 I believe there's a chance the smartest people would be in this age, this may be a new country . And I think there's also a chance there's an opportunity to be smarter in the future .
 Ukraine is another sprinter who does the long runs, slowly, to say, but rather surely .
 That's what happened with the circumstances, which I could not predict, he says . The circumstances of the incident are unknown .
 The author's final point is coming to his final point, and the vast support is very important . But, and here's coming to my final point.
 Ukraine is Ukraine's second largest country in the world . Ukraine has been declared a state of war in the past . Ukraine's president has been accused of corruption in the country .
Without the society, believe it or not, Ukraine would collapse in the first year of the military war, he says . And his second fundamental is a civil society, which is thriving in Ukraine .
 It was them who provided the main support, simply because, not because there were some daughters or sons, brothers, husbands, this you have to be there .
 The panel's theme is extensively post conflict strategies, says John Sutter . Sutter: It's premature for us to talk about that, but we should talk about it .
 The OSC sent out a report about a sharp increase in cease fire violations . The report was published just this morning .
 The head of a Ukrainian political party was arrested by Ukrainian authorities last week . Ukrainian authorities have arrested the head of the political party .
 This episode underscores just how fragile the recent reduction in balance has been, says CNN's John Sutter . "I'm going to come back to this in the end," he says .
 The level of fighting in the Dunbas has dramatically decreased since a high of about 296 per week in January to about a couple of dozen last month . The Dunbas have been at a low level of individual fighting per week since January .
 Third party groups are using cease fire violations as a leverage on the government to respond to what they thought was a selective application of justice . But what we have now is these third party groups, these spoilers, are using these kinds of violations on both sides .
 It does underscore just how fragile the current situation is and how easily we can return back to the vials of previous months . But it does underscore how fragile it is.
 Yunokoych's departure in February of 2014 was the first time the balance has been balanced since his departure . Now this topic has gone on for about 18 months, I want to begin by showing you how it has unfolded .
 This is some of the data that a research team and I, someone from our audience tonight, have been collecting . This is the data we have collected .
 This is an animation that shows rebel violence, this does not include political protest . So as you see, this is anAnimation that shows rebels' violence .
 During much of March of last year, there were initially peaceful protests, but then escalated to the seizure of government buildings . Several towns fell under rebel control .
 As you see those gray areas are the territories that the rebels controlled at that point . And as you see the gray areas, those are the areas that the rebel rebels controlled .
 The Ukrainian government initially hesitated in responding to it, but then in mid July they sent 4 battalions, actually 4 brigades, to sweep that southern border area to restore control .
 The 95th Air Assault Brigade of the Ukrainian armed force broke the front in July . It is the most capable unit that it has carried out this massive armored raid .
After September 5th there was a forced cease fire granted, which is what you're seeing right now . They initially had to pull back because they outran the logistics, they also tracked large concentration of the Ukrainian troops in a pocket around .
 There was technically a cease fire on the ground, as you can see, it's not holding . There was actually a cease-fire on the grounds, but it wasn't holding .
 The fighting has evolved into kind of static defensive warfare, kind of think western front after World War 1 .
 If you control that crossing, you reduce the travel time from by several hours . If you do it, you can reduce the time by a few hours .
 The second cease fire agreement has been enforced ever since, and since then the front line has remained relatively static . Overall the level of violence has gone down with the exception of a small spike, as you see there, towards the end .
 In June, some artillery duels happened there, and there were serious concerns that it would flare up again into another large rebel offensive . The rebels have been fighting a large rebel group in recent months .
I'm going to move on to the next slide because it kind of keeps going like this for awhile. I'm going on to a next slide. I'll go on to another slide, but I'm not sure if it's going to go on for awhile .
 distribution control as it currently stands. But that's essentially the distribution control that currently stands . The distribution control is essentially the same as it stands .
This is the distribution of violence over the entire period of the war so far . This is the Distribution of Violence over the whole period of war. This is not the first time this has happened .
 In the early stages of the conflict, during the protest days and the early insurgency phase, according to the data, were largely economic . So in the early years of the war, the early days were largelyEconomic .
 Violence is most likely and most intense in municipalities that are heavily dependent on trade with or that were exposed to trade shocks or other types of economic negative shocks . The strongest predictor of violence on the ground in these early stages is violence .
Russian Railroads is a single factory that exports locomotive engines to one customer, Russian Railroads .
 And they switched sides, for the most part, without a shot being fired . They switched sides. And they switch sides.
 Pro-Russian separatists did not resist when they moved in and took control over these towns . They did notresist the pro-Russian separatist movement when they took control of these towns.
 The conflict has been portrayed both in the Russian press and in the Western press. So contrary to the way this conflict is portrayed, this is not an ethnic conflict, it is not .
 There's one point that I want you to take away from tonight, it is that, it's that. And if there's a point that you need to take a break from this night, it will be that, I say .
 Russian language and ethnicity and how many Russian speakers reside in a given town does not predict violence . Russian language, ethnicity and ethnicity do not forecast violence .
 The only instance where Russian language does predict rebel control are in towns where there's not a large industrial workforce . The only place where the economic incentives are not very strong is in towns with no large industrial workers .
 Ukrainians, of course, know there are Russian speakers on both sides of this war .
 The causes of the fighting have changed a little bit, says CNN's John Sutter . In the later stages, there are, in the later stage, when we transitioned from protests and insurgency to full spectrum maneuver war .
 This may seem so ontological, but the best predictor of violence is violence . The best predictor is violence.
 rebels launch an artillery barrage against government fighting positions. So rebels launch artillery barrage.
After this artillery return, other units on the front line are being placed on alert and similar things spread out throughout the territory .
Self- perpetuation dynamic is the main driver of violence over this entire period, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Self-confident" is the key driver for violence in this period .
 The problem is our basic problems of thematic control on both sides, says John Sutter . We need to solve this problem, he says .
 Too many actors on the ground are not within the Ukrainian government or the Russian armed forces or even the self proclaimed People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk . There are simply too many actors.
 Some of the Ukrainian troops were formed out of self defense protest units in the Miadan, Kiev, they took up arms .
 Some of the now disbanded battalion have been accused of human rights violations . Some of them, like the now disbanding battalion, have been charged with human rights abuses .
 Most of them, at this point, have been now subordinate to the administrator of the interior . But that, of course, has not prevented the kinds of things we saw last week . Even though they are formally in the command structure of the Ukrainian government, they're still very much autonomous
 The rebel side's problems are similar to the problems of the rebel side, but they are not as bad as the government's .
 On the pro rebel side, basically local units formed out of either french political parties in Donetsk and Luhansk, or from former coal mining labor unions, we also have a lot of volunteers from Russia . A lot of ultra nationalists from Russia, a lot Of Russia,
 There's no real switch that Putin can flip to turn off the violence at any given point . A lot of these units have been now subordinate to the so called armed forces of .
 Once violence breaks out it becomes very difficult to contain in this kind of environment. And so once violence break out it is very difficult for people to contain, it is difficult to control .
 What predicts violence is simple matters of geography and logistics. And then, of course, it also predicts violence .
 The closer you are to the Russian border the more supplies you'll receive from Moscow and so on .
 If we do think that it has declined, when in fact it goes up and down, it's declined . But relative to the very intense level of activity that we saw last August and last January, it hasn't declined .
 Minsk One and Minsk Two. But as you can see right there, it's really hard to make that argument, says CNN .
In general, this case study illustrates the fact that countries do not, combatants do not stop fighting because it's a cease fire .
 Minsk two, before Minsk Two, that agreement happened because the rebel winter offensive failed . As we saw in Minsk 2, that deal happened because of the rebels' winter offensive .
 They initially wanted to take control of the entire territories of Donetsk and Luhansk . They originally wanted to control the whole of the region .
 Russian armored units going across the border. Putin did not have any appetite for at the time . They captured the airport, they captured the railroad crossing to .
 There's also logic, a very flawed logic, in how sanctions have worked, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The way that sanctions work is if you have compliance on the other side, if the side that's being sanctioned has the opportunity to comply . If a condition of these sanctions is get out of Crimea, no Russian leader, or anyone else, can do that without losing power
 There's a sense in Russia that these sanctions are there to stay, says CNN's John Sutter . "There is a sense that there are no sanctions in Russia," he says .
 The military opportunity costs of these operations is actually very small. There's also the question of Russian operations in Syria, whether they are, in fact, a big distraction from the fighting .
 The fighting's mainly done by mechanized units on the ground . There are 34 fighter jets, a few ground attack helicopters .
 There are many more stake holders now in the status quo than there were previously. The main reason why Donbas has gone down a bit is there are more stake holder now than before .
 Putin is the president of Ukraine, according to state media reports . Putin is also the leader of the country's largest state, Ukraine .
 Putin can turn up the heat whenever he wants. From Putin's standpoint, now, we have a frozen conflict which is essentially a veto of NATO integration for the Ukraine .
 On Poroshenko's side, Ukraine is a 50/50 country electorally electorally . But also, on Poroshenko’s side, the country is 50-50 country electorsally .
 The U.S. presidential elections are expected to be held in California and Texas . The outcome of the presidential elections will determine the outcome of each state's elections .
 There are also some fiscal savings that will come into play, and there are also fiscal savings .
 You didn't have to pay the salary of state workers in Ukraine for a while, not since last summer . Ukraine's state workers have been paid by the Ukrainian government since July .
 The military has increased military spending in recent years . The military is spending more than $1.5 billion .
Reintegrating the Ukraine is much more costly than, potentially, just keeping the status quo intact . But still, reintegrating Ukraine is more expensive than, perhaps, keeping it intact .
 The people who are not real stake holders in the status quo are the locals . Of course, the people who aren't really stake holders are the local people .
 The rebels on the ground in and also a lot of the volunteer battalions . The rebels are also a big part of the rebel movement .
 "I'm just going to pass forward from this slide straight to the conclusion. And so, I'm justGoing to passforward from this slides straight to a conclusion," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 U.S. Military aide to Ukraine during flare-up of last winter, particularly during the flare up of last year . The United States is sending military aid to Ukraine in our forces .
 The Russian and the rebel's side want anti-attack ammunitions anti-tank guided missiles . The people manning these kinds of static positions are in an open front .
 The U.S. military aid to Ukraine will deter the rebels from any future offenses, says CNN's John Sutter . The idea is that it will deter rebels from future offenses .
 Ukraine's military defeat is not due to any deficiencies of technology, military experts say . Military experts say the defeat is due to a lack of technology .
 It's due to poor logistics, inexperienced commanders, or a lot of difficulty maneuvering battalion and brigade sized units in the field . Poor intelligence and a complete breakdown of command and control but to the regular army and these volunteer battalions .
 "Sophisticated weapons into this kind of operating environment is very risky," he says . "It's very risky. And injecting sophisticated weapons into these kind of environments is very dangerous," he adds .
 javelin missiles are about a quarter of a million dollars each. I'm not going to mention the fact that javelins are a quarter-a-million dollars per missile .
 It would also entail United States training personnel being on the ground in harm's way . U.S. training personnel would also be in danger, according to the report .
 If we want U.S. troops on the ground in Donetsk, that's a potential strategy we could take, it's possible .
 A key to any kind of support will be to keep third party supporters in check on both sides .
 The problem is making the most capable units, according to the U.S. Army .
 They've increased their alliance on professional soldiers on what they call a contract personnel . They've also increased their relationship with other soldiers .
 The military says it only applies to specialized units, such as armor, artillery, airborne, that does not apply to infantry . But that doesn't apply to special units, it does to technical units, like armor and artillery .
 Infantry is merely cost groups and they have mothers who complain when their sons ascend into battle .
 Russia has relied on third parties like a lot of locals, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia has been hard to control, but it's not easy to control .
 At the beginning of the conflict, Ukraine only had 6,000 combat ready troops . Ukraine has also had a simple problem of mainly due to the fact that at the beginning.
 If we want to increase the alliance of the four million people who live there who have not yet fled on Russia, go ahead, keep them blockaded . If you want to increased their alliance of humanitarian aid from Russian, go Ahead .
 Ukraine's territories in Ukraine are not the best idea if we want to successfully reintegrate these territories in the Ukraine . That's not a good idea, says the Ukrainian government .
 Kiev needs to create an attractive vertical economic model in the territories that it controls . But, the bottom line is that Kiev must create a more attractive economic model .
 It needs to create incentives for people who live in the Donbas to look to Kiev to see the future in Kiev rather than in Moscow .
 All of the points of view are valid based on research, based on history, according to the author .
 It certainly doesn't pay for us or for the rest of us to have another cold war begin, says CNN's John Sutter . "It certainly doesn’t pay for me and for the others," he says .
 It's more expensive, it's dangerous, they're all the reasons that we fought for 70 some years . I wouldn't say 70 years but at least after the Second World War to contain the Soviet, the Soviet Union at the time .
 When I served in Moscow in the 70s, I visited the Ukraine several times . I have to say, when I served there in the 1970s, he visited the country several times.
 The KGB surveillance of them was much heavier in Ukraine than in Moscow, he says . He says .
 It kind of is an indication of the mutual distrust in both sides and the idea one might call paranoid . It's a sign of a mutual distrust.
 Henry Kissinger or somebody said about paranoia, paranoids is, even paranoias have enemies . But you know what Henry Kissinger says about paranoia . But, you know.
 Ukraine was an important part of the soviet union, big population, you know the breadbasket, so called, of the Soviet Union, etcetera, it's an important country. So, the sense that they're, that Ukraine was different because it
I think we want to put this in under the context of U.S. national interest, United States strategy, he says . But, he thinks, so, we need to put it in under a context of United States national interest.
I think the Russians, under Putin especially, have been very strategic in what they've been doing . I think the Russian government is very strategic. I think it's a good example of what they're doing under Putin .
 The USSR that the Soviet Union had during the Cold War before, right. First, and this has been mentioned before, they want to rebuild, respect, and fear, put those two together, respect and fear .
 Putin in particular, when I say they want, it's not just Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . They want, he says, and Putin in particularly, when he says they're not justPutin .
 It's a ruling lead they what one might have called the nomenclature during Soviet days . It's not a ruling. It's the ruling they may have called it a nomenClature .
 They want to be included in all the big boys clubs and to be part of decision making and important world events . They also want to include in decision-making and important events .
 The G8 with the European Union with the U.S. has to discuss it at the very highest level, the G8 .
 Russia sees its foreign policy oversees it as a kind of control factor internally as well . Russia's foreign policy has been very popular in the past .
 This is an old tactic of, not just the Soviet Union but Russia. You know, this is anold tactic of the Russian government .
 You create issues in the outside that require you to take certain controls internally because they're disruptive to the stability of the state. You create problems in the Outside that require the outside to take some controls internally .
Russian trials have gone on in Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We have seen a number of examples to that in terms of the press"
 Putin and his group view the U.S. as wavering, undecided, weak, and war weary, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Soviet policy maker is an open area in terms of what one can do to build influence worldwide . It gives you an open space to influence worldwide.
 The Russians saw this wavering, came in, and there was a negotiation, and then, the Russians came in . And then, then, he said, "Here we are back again; my own personal view"
 When the Red Line was crossed, we should've strategically bombed several places as much as we can, not civilian installations, but military to show that we had well resolved and that we can be dependent upon . I think, when the Red line was crossed. I think we should have strategically
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says it was "a watershed" for Russia. "From the standpoint of the Russians now, that was a watershed," he says .
 NATO is trying to persuade NATO to do more, etcetera. They saw that we were not willing to use force or to, and use force, he says . He says he doesn't mean sending troops into Ukraine, but at least arming Ukrainians going .
Russian strategic doctrine now at first build the armed forces, expand their reach on land, sea, and air . The elements of Russian strategic doctrine are at first being built on land and sea .
 Russian aircraft have come close to the national territory of NATO members and other Scandinavians . It's clear that not only are they building the armed forces back again but they're also using them for strategic purposes and for signaling purposes .
 Russia has been a weakened, weak country ourselves since the end of the Soviet Union . The country has been looking at Russia as a weakened country since the beginning of the 1980s .
 Russian history shows that sanctions lifted the popularity of the particular leader . Also, from the standpoint of the sanctions, which were discussed here, it's clear, that it was clear .
 Putin's argument is here our potential enemy is making it more difficult for you to live, he says . This is what's happened with Putin, this is what has happened with the Putin, he adds . The argument is that our potential enemies are making it harder for us
 That's a good excuse for not having a very high standard of living in fact it's the outside that's doing this. That's an excuse for having very high standards of living, it's not the outside .
 If they understood our motives, and in a way our own ideology, then this wouldn't be happening to you . If they understand our motives and understand our ideology, they would not be doing this .
 The idea is to denigrate the effect of the sanctions but also try to also get them taken off at some point .
Reestablish, and this has been going on for some time, it's not new, reestablish hegemonic relations with a number of near abroad countries . It's not just through what I would say peaceful means, but also by showing what the consequences of challenging Russian interests would be
 We've seen this in Georgia, we've seen it in the Ukraine, Syria in the same kind of thing, says CNN's John Sutter . We've also seen this, he says, in a way, the same type of thing .
 A lot of Syrians who live in Russia have married Russians in one way or another since they've had military installations . They're, first place, there's a lot of Russians in Syria, a lot in Syria .
Getting back into this strategic framework, Syria fits in very nicely. And so, getting back into the strategic framework is very good, says CNN .
 Russian troops have already shown they can use force, as they have, as well as the threat of using force . Russia has already shown that they can, then you have a number of places where we don't make the newspapers much, but where we have Russian troops already.
 The Russians have supported Armenia very strong, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Armenia and the whole issue of Nagorno-Karabakh are very strong .
 Russians are clamping down on Armenians in terms of their ability to maneuver . But, besides that, the Russians are clashing down on Armenia . The Armenians are not allowed to maneuver.
 Belarus, Georgia and South Ossetia are neighbor of 7,500 Russian troops . In the old, in the Stans, this is Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, we have Russian troops and Russian influence .
 There's even been an agreement signed recently to reestablish some kind of relationship with Vietnam . They had a base at Cam Ranh Bay during the Vietnam War .
 The Russians have been playing the China card, as well as the Chinese card .
 China has been playing the China card in a way that's quite clever, I think, quite clever. They've been playing it in a manner that's very clever, he says .
 China and U.S. have been having problems with freedom of, freedom of the seas with building of these islands . It's a perfect time for Russia to try. It's showing that, because China and the United States and our allies are having problems, it's
 Chinese suspect Russian, history, history will tell you that there's a lot of suspicion between the two countries .
 Russia and China to have a closer relationship. But, realistically speaking, it's not a bad deal for the two countries to have closer relationship .
 I don't know if that's the reason for moving, and I doubt it . I'm not sure if that was the reason, but I doubt that .
 The Russians have interest in the Middle East and need to be part of whatever solutions, whatever negotiations take place . There was a broader reason to establish that big boy image and show that they're, that they have .
 There's no Russian leader that could possibly say okay let's negotiate maybe we can figure out a deal where they'd have more autonomy .
 It's going to be part of Russia and it's not going to go back . There are some consequences they could pay, but, it isn't going to going back . It's not to go to Russia, but it's still going to pay .
 Ronald Reagan even said the Panama Canal is ours, we built it, we're going to keep it, he says .
 Putin made it, just a short time ago, a speech in which he showed the softer part of this doctrine, that is the doctrine that's the incentive .
 He said, essentially, look, we can work with our part, he always calls us partners, with our partners in the West . He said that the West can work together with their partners .
 We can negotiate on the Syria issues as long as we don't have to stay with Assad, he says . We can, presumably, presumably we can negotiate, he adds .
In Ukraine, Ukraine, if you need us, quiet obviously, we can talk about that as well . And, in Ukraine, we could talk about it as well. And, if we need us.
 There is a very clever policy of using the fist and using the velvet glove, I think, that is coming up . So, there is this very clever Policy of using fist and velvet glove.
 There are some big, very big United States interesting going in. First place, there are some very big U.S. cities .
 We do not want the policy established even, and remember, there's a bit of inconsistency here . There's a little inconsistency here, and we don't want it to be established even .
 Someone once said, foolish inconsistency is the hobgoblin of small mind . But, as someone once said. It's a good thing to say, but it's a bad thing for people to think .
 Obama's foreign policy and national security strategy fit in even into the Obama administration, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't admire very much. It seems to me there are several things that can be done which make sense"
First place, it's very important to keep the allies united on sanctions . First place, first place, is to keep all allies united .
 You need to make Ukraine, I think, part of the overall dialogue with Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia needs Ukraine to be part of a dialogue, says Putin .
 We need to keep the sanctions in place, as I said, and we need to keeping allies there, he said . The sanctions need to be kept in place as well as the allies there .
 We need to make clear to the Russians what needs to be done to reduce the sanctions . We need, how are we also need to be made clear to them, we need to cut the sanctions.
I think they have had a major effect in terms of investment capital flight . I think they've had a, certainly have a, major effect, on investment capital flights .
 We need to demand that the Russians not pull out, whatever they are, volunteers, mercenaries, Russian forces, out of Ukraine, we say . We also need to call on Russia not to pull out.
Moscow never recognized the forceful incorporation of Baltic countries, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia . The example I would give is when I served in Moscow, when I was in Moscow .
Helms Burton Amendment allows you to put a notation in the passport not valid for travel to Crimea . It can be even toughened because you can do something like we did with Cuba in the Helms Burton amendment .
 Crimean officials can't travel, can't have visas, they can't get to the United States, freeze their money . You can punish Crimean officials by making sure they cannot travel, they cannot .
 Not sure that will get anywhere given what, I think, are Russian attitudes toward maintaining control of Korea . Not sure what, or how, will get any of the Russian attitudes .
 The two sides need to press for more solid ceasefire and negotiations between the parties. So, then, we need to push for a better ceasefire and a better dialogue .
 Ukraine's need to solve this and it needs to be solved without pressure from either East or West . I think it's the Ukraine's that need to solved this. I think the Ukraine needs to solve it without the pressure from the West .
 Ukraine needs economic package to show advantages of working with the West, he says . Ukraine has to come up with an economic package for Ukraine to show the advantages of the West .
 An economic assistance package is important, particularly in balance of payments issues . I'm not sure that it should include membership or associate membership with the EU .
 Even preferences in trade like what we have in the general system of preferences with a number of underdeveloped countries .
 The two sides disagree on the full range of issues that they both agree on, not many of them at this point, but that we disagree on because that relationship is important . And, we need to have, and this is the last point I want to make,
 The negotiations themselves and the image of negotiating with what is a potential adversary is very important in and of itself . But, I think, the negotiations themselves are very important .
 Will Lamping will select a represented sample of your questions . I'm going to pass the microphone to Lamping and he's going to select a representative sample .
 Yaroslav: "What I see is real, in my mind, confusion and conflict among different actors, different political parties" "I think the best answer for that would probably have, have Yaroslav answer that question," says Yaroslav .
 Ukraine is a country which has to come to some that's basically what democracy is about . But there's a bit of Ukraine in a sense because you have a country with a country that has toCome to some. But there is a little bit ofUkraine in a
 rebels without Russian support are not capable of taking territory, says CNN's John Sutter . But, he says, the way that works is that they are capable of holding territory .
 Ukrainian defenses are not capable of penetrating through the Ukrainian defenses, which, at this point, are pretty well fortified .
 If the situation does not change of the ground, I would say, we'll seek a tangent stalemate . We'll see general freezing of the conflict along the lines, he says .
 If Russia chooses to intervene much more forcefully, we could potentially see deeper penetration within these two provinces . If Russia chose to intervene more forcefully it could potentially be a gray tank country .
 Once Russia gets past Ukrainian defense, there's very little stopping them as they roll right across all the way to the river .
 The most likely scenario is a continued stalemate. But, currently, I think, the most likely situation is a continuing stalemate . It's not clear what will happen .
Brezhnev doctrine was that the Soviet Union had the right to intervene in any country . The Warsaw Pact countries, essentially, that threaten socialism, was a broad, broad doctrine .
 Putin said Russia had a responsibility for protecting Russians and Russian speakers wherever they were . But the first thing that Putin basically said was that Russia had to protect Russian speakers .
 The Baltics have more than 30% of the population in some of the Baltic countries . It's a pretty important doctrine if you think of the Baltics, for example .
 A country can invade a neighbor for what are, essentially, linguistic and ideological reasons or ethnic, or ethnic reasons. So, in terms of what principles we need to fortify and support, I would say we need a country to get away .
 The idea of the responsibility to protect is part of the good thing that's happened post war, especially in the last ten years or so .
 The responsibility to protect says that if a dictator is abusing his own people, the U.N. has the right to do something about it under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter .
 We can't allow that to happen because that will have dire circumstances in terms of our own values, it seems to me . It seems to be to be that we can't let that happen, says the author .
 There were real abuse of Russians in Soniah and most importantly they didn't act on it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most Russians, in Baltic countries, prefer to live in those nice Baltic countries . The Baltic countries have a higher standard of living and all that, than Russia .
 In the last 20 years, there's no push from Russian diaspora in those countries . There's some work on this, but it's become increasingly identified as a separate nationality, almost.
 There are lots of Russians and Russian speakers in the north, but some might worry about this. And, you know, clearly, clearly a place like Kazakhstan where there are many Russian speakers .
 The Donbas is the local point in the Baltic States, says Ron. I think, I guess, I'm more on Ron's side of this question, because, the Baltic states, and the Donbas are the local points out there .
 In Donbas, there's a concentration of industries that are almost completely dependent on trade with Russia . It makes Donbas unique and makes it unlikely to be a symbol uprising in any other part of Ukraine .
 Russia has put pressure on the most vulnerable part of the Ukraine population . Russia has been implementing this import substitution scheme since even before .
 The next question actually speaks directly to changing identities and perception of identity, specifically in Ukraine .
 Professor Hrytsak says Ukraine needs a chance to act freely without the memory of the Soviet past . He claims Ukraine needs to inform the younger generation in order to reform .
 A year ago, a famous one, has suggested to accept the Russian language in Ukraine officially as a separate Russian . It is a separate language the way that American and British language are, British English language in Britain and England .
 In Ukraine, Russian language in Ukraine is very much different even in vocabulary . The reason he says is that in Ukraine, the language in Russian language is very different .
 I'm claiming this is which tried to breach division and to put so called third way. I'm also claiming this was a breach of division and trying to put it third way .
 Ukraine is divided on historical memory and language, but it's talking about different things like corruption .
 This is not attempt, but there are attempts visible, probably discourse to reformulate, so to say . It's not known if it's success or fail, but it's not clear if it will be successful or fail .
 I would say again, nobody have done some kind of studies but it's not that, probably which were thinking. And I would says again, no one has done some sort of studies .
 There are some claims that Ukraine is a demolished identity politics, an identity discourses . But still, there's some claims on this line, kind of studies or hypothesis that what we're witnessing is a demolition of identity politics .
 Ukraine band communist symbols within the public sphere. And, speaking of Ukraine public discourse, recently, Ukraine band Communist symbols .
 This very serious and taken seriously could be disregarded so to say. And this could be taken seriously, it could be very serious, it's said .
 It's so far I'm not witnessing this decrease when it comes to the and the service . But, it's not seen this decrease in service, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Two leaders of the private sector get less voices together combined the leader of the Jewish community in Ukraine, the presidential elections .
 But, again, it depends very much on what's going on in Ukraine, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The panel has to do more with a regional perspective, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine gives up its nuclear, kept its missiles, but gives up nuclear capability . Ukraine's borders are supposed to be respected, and its borders should be respected .
 "If that doesn't count anymore, again, I'm not saying that you invade as a result of the breech and then that doesn's count anymore," he says . "I'm not say that you invaded as aresult of the Breech and that doesn
 Putin assesses what kind of actions that he feels are in Russian national interests that can be undertaken in a relatively cheap cost . He says that figures into the way that they and the way he assesses them .
 Administration has been taking Ukraine seriously since recently, says the Ukrainian government .
There's some support along this plan, but some are using this kind of an argument, a trading deal for some kind of economic assistance package . "Let's face it, part of the failure of economic reform is that they are very expensive, the reform itself"
 There must be some kind of economic, there must be a budgeting. There must also be some sort of budgeting .
 The only budget that could come, is from the west, whatever it means, Washington, whatever you know . You can't, there's no, . and, there is no, and, the only budget to come, they're very costly, says the author .
 There's about 18 dozen books on Putin right now, including psychological studies, his kleptocracy and so forth . Now, you know, there's about 16 books on the Russian leader .
 The way I read him, as I said, is a realist interested, basically, in stability in security and wanting, in some ways, as Mel put it as well, playing a bigger role, he said .
 A neoliberal guy, in terms of his economic policies, wants to be well integrated into the global capitalist system . "This is a neoliberal guy," he says . "He wants to have his policies well integrated"
 Ukrainians would push for Ukrainians to be allowed to vote in Ukraine, says a former Ukrainian official . He says he thought, maybe, that would be a way out of the country .
 I can't talk about future strategy because I think it's, as Yuri put it, you know, maybe it's too early to talk about that . I think that's what Yuri says, as he says, it's not a strategy, he says . I
 In his own realism, he may come to the realization that he has overreached, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In his own real life, I think that in his own reality, he might come to his own realization" Sutter says
 Russia has weakened Russia and weakened its position on the globe, he says . He has also weakened Russia by overreaching and overreaching .
 I hope you all join me in thanking our panelists for a very nice presentation . I hope we all join us in thanking us for a nice presentation.