 The war came to Donetsk, because until the very last moment, almost nobody believed it would . Almost nobody believed the war would.
 Neither did Rinat Akhmetov, maintaining a ‘neutral position’ and refusing the governor’s office . He intended to profit from the role of a mediator between the new government and the big mining region .
 The Anti-Maidan were inspired by aversion to the capital . They were also inspired by the total confusion reigning in "Ukraine without Yanukovych"
 Neither believed the politically passive majority of the metropolis’s population was waiting for the understandable and legitimate government .
Police general Vitaly Yarema refused to storm the seized building of the Donetsk Regional State Administration . He waved a Russian tricolour in order to avoid victims and feared Russia's direct military intervention .
 Donetsk police did not believe in war either, and were seduced by bigger Russian salaries . They welcomed pro-Russian protesters and offered no protection to pro-Ukrainian demonstrators under attack .
 April 6, 2014 – the date of the seizure of the regional administration building . The key date in the history of Ukraine losing control over the situation in Donetsk is April 6 .
 That is to say, the day of the final seizure after a string of unsuccessful attempts . The seizure was the first time the seizure had taken place .
 The buildings of the Luhansk State Security Service of Ukraine and the Kharkiv Regional State Administration were seized on the same day .
 The Kharkiv building was freed the next morning by Ukrainian Special Forces without a single shot . Since then the city’s Anti-Maidan movement started to decline .
 The decision to storm the Kharkiv building came from the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine Arsen Avakov and the Head of the National Guard Stepan Poltorak . The decision was made by both the minister and the head of the national guard .
 Kyiv authorities were dominated by the supporters of Anti-Maidan political forces . All business was controlled by local oligarchs close to Yanukovych . This was largely due to the negative position of the local political and business elites .
 Local pro-Ukrainian activists failed to reverse the balance of power in the city .
 An acute shortage of Kyiv’s political and economic interest in Donbas is one of the most tragic aspects which led the region to war .
 In Donetsk, the only force to support Ukraine was the local Maidan . Law enforcement, local business elites, the media, and Kyiv.
 Dmytro Cherniavsky, member of the Svoboda party, was killed on March 13 . He was killed during the attack on another pro-Ukrainian meeting .
 In April 2014, Ukraine ultimately lost its monopoly on violence in Donetsk . In April 2013, Ukraine lost its control of violence in the Donetsk region .
 The war in Donetsk started not only because of the outside interference, but also because of refusal of the Ukrainian government and local elites to control the situation .
 When the war started, it acquired its own dynamics, which was significantly influenced by the supply of arms and personnel through the Russian-Ukrainian border . Ukraine lost control during the same summer of 2014, when it lost control of the border .
 The volume is a part of Donbas Studies project by IZOLYATSIA . It was realised with the support of The Human Rights Fund of the Kingdom of the Netherlands .
 Akhmetov was born in Donetsk, controlled a large part of the city’s economy . For years he has been considered the most influential person in the Donbas region .
 Titushky – informal groups of hired young agent provocateurs who used force under the protection of the ‘organs of law and order’ or influential businessmen . Titushki – informal group of hiredYoung agent provocatedurs .
 The term comes from Vadim Titushko, the first ‘sportsman’ to get in the media spotlight .
 Porebrik is a word meaning “kerb’ in Russian, used in the Saint Petersburg area only .
 The video shows one of the armed “green men” requiring pedestrians to step outside the porebrik . It became clear that at least this particular ‘green man’ was not from the Donbas .
 Industrial facilities as well as private car drivers were asked to beep at 12am for “a peaceful Donbas’ and against separatism. Industrial facilities and private car Drivers were also asked for beep .
 Reconstructors or reenactors are a subculture of people interested in reconstructing military battles of the past . They include people who have been involved in reconstruction of military battles .
 Igor Girkin as well as some others leaders of the anti-Ukrainian unrest in Donetsk and Luhansk actively participated in such reconstructions . Igor. Girkin and others participated in the reconstructions.
 Novorossiya – historical term used in the late 18th century Russian Empire to designate the territories in the south . It was mostly taken from the Ottoman Empire .