For Putin, invading Ukraine comes with political risk at home, these surveys show . Russians don't want it to.
 Even though Russia is an autocracy, its leaders pay attention to public sentiment .
Our new polling data suggests that invading Ukraine could be a difficult sell within Russia . Our team has followed Russian public opinion since August as part of the Russian Election Studies .
Sending troops into Ukraine is unpopular, but it has only become more so as Russians tire of the war Moscow has waged in eastern Ukraine since 2014 . Here are four things you need to know about how ordinary Russians view Putin and the events unfolding in Ukraine .
 Just 8 percent think Russia should send military forces to fight against Ukrainian government troops there .
 If Putin does invade Ukraine, he will have to convince the Russian people it was the right move or risk harm to his popularity . Putin's popularity remains lower than during most of his time in office .
 The Kremlin is making a wager about how fast and among which groups it can succeed . It takes effort, even with a formidable state media apparatus, to effectively shift public opinion .
This is especially true given that Russia’s government-controlled media have emphasized that Moscow has no plans to invade . The uncertainty entails risk.
 The information barrage against Ukraine and the West that accompanied Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea so far has not arrived . The information barrages against the West have not arrived so far .
 To change tack now would require a heavy propaganda lift, says Putin .
 Russians were not eager for war in Ukraine before the 2014 annexation of Crimea, and polls before Russia’s intervention in Syria showed opposition .
Public opinion changed quickly as events on the ground unfolded, and this could happen again . But public opinion changed rapidly as events in the world unfolded, it has been suggested .
Once Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fled the country in 2014 amid the Euromaidan protests, Russian state media kicked into gear .
 The Kremlin might be wagering that it can persuade Russians to align with whatever decision Putin ultimately makes about Ukraine .
 In recent years, Putin has tightened control over Russian media and sidelined critical journalists and independent outlets .
 Russians are less focused on foreign policy than domestic policy than foreign policy . Russians are more focused on their own country than their country .
 Fewer than 5 percent of Russians ranked any foreign policy issue as the conflict along Ukraine’s border escalated in late 2021 . There is reason to think securing public support for a wider conflict in Ukraine will not be as easy as it was to secure public approval for the annexation of Crimea
 Surveys well before Russia took over Crimea showed that most Russians thought Crimea was actually Russian territory . But that’s not how Russians see the rest of Ukraine .
 People have consistently opposed annexing Ukraine’s Donbas region, for example .
 Vladimir Putin’s rule increasingly relies on a picture of the West as an enemy . But polls over the past decade show that Russians do not in fact want to annex Ukraine to re-create the Soviet Union .
 Only about 6 percent of Americans said Russia should approach the West as an enemy . Only 6 percent said Russia shouldn't be an enemy.
Russians also do not see Putin as favoring a hostile stance toward the West . This has long been the pattern under Putin, and our polls indicate no ratcheting up of hostility toward theWest .
 Putin has been emphasizing that NATO is to blame for the ratcheting up of tensions . The public appears to share this view .
 Three in 4 Russians surveyed think NATO will try to weaken their country if Putin does not stand up to it . Three in four Russians think NATO would try to weakening their country.
 Russians see NATO as a threat even as they want good relations with the West . While Russians oppose a broader conflict in Ukraine, they would rather not approach the West as an antagonist .
 It's likely that a strategy of hard-nosed and prolonged negotiations would be more popular with Putin’s domestic audience than armed intervention . It’'s likely.
Sending arms or deploying Russian troops into Ukraine is unpopular . It has only become more so as Russians tire of the war Moscow and its proxies have waged in eastern Ukraine since 2014 .
 "To change tack now would require a heavy propaganda lift," says Putin .