 The war has been created for this seemingly never-ending war, even if some would prefer to forget .
 ATO HQ reports, including only Ukrainian army regular soldiers, 1 attack could be "Half day non-stop fighting"
 Russia invades a eastern Ukraine town; sends in Putin's "LPR""/""DPR" terrorists . Russiainvades a Ukraine town, sends in Vladimir Putin's "LPR" terrorist terrorists .
 Ukraine liberates a town; sends in civilian police with only pistols and a smile and a 1-800 local number to call .
 Aeroflot just begs to get into @EU sanctions by opening daily plane route from #Sochi to #Crimea .
Only Ukrainian army regular soldiers, 1 attack could be "half day non-stop fighting"
 Research into nuclear weapons policy indicates that U.S. and Russian/Soviet nuclear doctrine was and is almost wholly dependent upon their conventional power relative to one another .
 It took decades for the U.S. to develop a credible Flexible Response. Even when Kennedy's administration turned away from Eisenhower's New Look/First Offset/Massive Retaliation doctrine, not much changed operationally until the Nixon era .
 Only during the late 1970s did it become apparent that technological advancement could allow U.S. conventional forces to "fight outnumbered and win" against quantitatively superior Warsaw Pact, Chinese and North Korean forces .
 Reagan was the first U.S. president not dependent on nuclear weapons when it came to the Soviets . He was first president to be not dependent upon nuclear weapons .
 Both sides saber-rattled when they felt on the defensive and unable to challenge the other . The United States and the Soviet Union/Russia are the two countries involved in the conflict .
 Eisenhower's deployment of nuclear weapons was not only provocative but bordering on lunacy . The Soviet Union was a genocidal and aggressive power, the author says .
 No Russian general believes that "nuclear de-escalation" is even feasible . Galeotti noted that no Russian general thinks that nuclear de-escalations is even feasible.
 Putin's brinkmanship mimics what U.S. presidents did in the 1950s-1970s . It's all part of Putin's show; his brinkmanship that mimics that of U.N. presidents .
 Mlechin serves as an unwitting mouthpiece to convince the West that Putin is a "madman" and therefore cannot be confronted anywhere lest he set off the bomb .
 Nixon did nothing but pass information to the Soviets in the form of sat photos . The nuclear threat came directly from the Israeli side . Then vice versa later in Yom Kippur .
 IDF calls up strategic reserves scattered around the world to come home and merge with the IDF . U.S. Army tank officers suddenly left their United States units in Germany .
 Rumour has it #Ukraine hackers have got hold of #Russian army satellite intel database of their presence in Ukraine . Rumour is that they have a database of the Russian army intel database .
 Le Pen's office reacts to possible ban on entry to Ukraine for comments that the Russian actions in Crimea were legal . Le Pen said Russian actions were legal.
 Russia's #RVSN added 2,000 contract soldiers in 2016; now has 18,000contractees in its ranks . Russia's #RvSN #РВС�Н added 2.000 contract Soldiers in 2016 .
 UCA hackers got data on payments to Russian Ministry of Defense financing terrorism . UCA hacked payments to these soldiers .
 @InformNapalm completely obliterates @CrowdStrike Android malware report by fact-checking . Not "soldiers on their own"
 Nixon’s decision to go to DEFCON 3 was about deterring the Soviets from intervening . I am referring specifically to Nixon's decision to going to DeFCon 3 .
 Israel threatened to use nuclear weapons against Egyptians and Syrians in order to obtain U.S. aid . I am aware of Israel's threat to use nukes against Egypt, Syria and Syria .
 Israel was serious about using nuclear weapons given Dayan’s initial shock, says David Frum . Tel Aviv had communicated verbally to Washington, Frum says .
 Malofeev, #Russian orthodox billionaire, in 2014, bankrolled #Crimea annexation & Eastern #Ukraine campaign . The Russian billionaire bankrolled the campaign .
 Sen. Sessions in 2009-10 built a pro-VVP, racialist, anti-liberal network . The network was built by Sen.
 Russia is setting up two new divisional #artillery brigades in Southern MD this year . Russia is set to set up two more brigades this year.
 @rianru covers a poll saying Americans fear WWIII, versus how @RT_russian covers the same poll . The poll is based on a survey of Americans who fear WW3 .
 The initial Russia invasion of Donbass was well on the other side of the house . Some estimates placed the number closer to 17,000 troops in Ukraine .
 Russian state propaganda mock Baltic states on getting status of Northern Europe by asking will living standard raise or just taxes .
 Russian propaganda screams Ukraine pushing civilians to the front as human shields . Russian propaganda says Ukraine is pushing civilians as human shield .
 Russian regulars, irregulars and mercenaries combined total some 15,000 to 17,000, or ~38% of the total insurgent fighting strength . Overall, I would expect that Russian regulars and irregulars combined total 15,00-17,000 .
 I also agree that the insurgents are incapable of mounting a successful major offensive without direct and obvious Russian intervention, particularly with airpower and artillery support .
 The insurgents seem more than capable of blunting a Ukrainian offensive until clandestine Russian reinforcements arrive to shore up the front . Yet the insurgents seem to be more than able to blunter the Ukrainian offensive .
 The power outage in Ukraine last month has now been confirmed as a cyberattack . The power outages in Ukraine were reported last month .
 Once again we are witnessing an alarming escalation in fighting in Ukraine. Once again, we are seeing an alarming increase in fighting .
 Tu154 crash has made different siloviki clans on war footing by accusing via scapegoats each other in the accident .
 More Russian soldiers during the 2014 offensive inside eastern Ukraine . More than 1,000 Russian soldiers were killed during the offensive .
 Russian Yuriy Krupnov #Russia more likely to use nukes against @NATO persistent threats .
 Y/day 78 attacks on Ukr pos., w all types of guns from small arms to heavy guns .
 Russia's 76th Air Assault Division base in Pskov 20km from Estonia houses over 10,000 troops . The base is 20km away from Estonia, and is located in the city of Pskova .
 The #fakenews story about 3,000 extra tanks spread online. Fascinating to track how the story was spread online . The story is part of a series of stories that have been shared online .
 Russian army 136th Motorized Rifle Brigade T-90A tank crew member who got killed in #Luhansk in 2014 .
Russian forces attacked an Ukrainian army position near Novoaleksandrovka wit an ATGM causing 1 KIA & 1 WIA among Ukrainians .
 Moldova's new president, whose campaign was warmly supported by Kremlin as he said Crimea is Russian, now says it's Ukrainian . The Moldova new president's campaign has been warmly backed by Kremlin .
 Training tempo of the Russian army is intensifying every year . snap exercises are bigger, faster, harder, harder .
 In Dec., #OSCE Observer Mission reported high # of ambulances & funerary vehicles, incl. w/ signage that Russian mil casualties on-board . In Dec. #OSce Observer Mission reports high number of ambulance & funeral vehicles .
 Moscow continues to arm, train, and fight alongside separatists in eastern Ukraine . Russia continues to train, train and fight with separatists .
 Kremlin operative Vladislav Surkov fired chief of staff Aleksandr Pavlov over #SurkovLeaks .
 Kremlin official linked to emails on destroying Ukraine resigns, saying he's tired after 3 years of work . Kremlin official: "I'm tired. I'm tired"
 19 violations of the ceasefire over the past 24 hours have been reported . He keeps the war from being forgotten .
 Russia's MoD Shoigu inspected the #Kadamovskiy training ground where the new 150th division is deployed . The training ground is 40 km from #Ukraine .
 Kremlin puppets want Ukraine to sign new deal with Russia, want to attack Kyiv . LNR/DNR wants Ukraine to signs new deal.
 @NATO point of view. All you need to know about Russian Information Warfare from a @NATo point of View .
 battlefields in Eastern Ukraine represent part of a new era of warfare, or so we are regularly told . The battlefields are often seen as part of an era of war .
 Analysts, pundits, and military leaders point to cyber warfare, hybrid warfare, and gray zone . The gray zone is known as the gray zone.
 The Russian-Ukrainian war’s conventional character is far from new . But look away from these shiny new concepts for a moment, and it becomes clear .
 An acknowledgement of the conflict’s conventional character is largely missing from the discourse . While the new aspects of this war have generated discussion within the defense industry .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have revealed several innovations, most notably the employment of the semi-autonomous battalion tactical group, and a reconnaissance-strike model that tightly couples drones .
 A century ago, warfare looks strikingly like that of a century ago . However, even these innovations are being used within a form of warfare .
 The July 11, 2014 strike at Zelenopillya is perhaps the most noticeable example to emerge from the war of the combined effects of tactical drones with the battalion tactical group .
Attack was a preemptive undertaking against Ukrainian brigades, postured in assembly areas . The attack was planned to conduct offensive action against Russian and partisan forces .
 The buzzing of tactical drones and cyber-attacks targeting Ukrainian communications preceded the strike . Ukrainian communications were targeted by the drones .
 Thirty Ukrainian soldiers dead, hundreds more wounded, and over two battalions’ worth of combat vehicles destroyed .
 This strike created anxiety within the U.S. Army, specifically in relation to the sophistication of Russian cyber capabilities and the effectiveness of the new Russian reconnaissance-strike model .
 This strike highlights the disparity in artillery and rocket munitions between Russia and the U.S. Army . This strike also highlights the difference in artillery.
 Russia still possesses and employs a variety of munitions, to include dual-purpose improved conventional munitions and thermobaric munitions . The United States Army elected to eliminate from its arsenal .
 The Battle of Ilovaisk followed on the heels of the strike at Zelenopillya . The battle was held on the same day as the strike in the town of Zelenoisk .
 Ilovaisk, a city on a critical highway linking the Donetsk People’s Republic with Russia, was held by DPR partisans and Russian forces . The city is on the road linking Donetsk People's Republic with the Russian Republic .
 Ukrainian forces fed approximately eight battalions into Ilovaisk in August 2014 . In early August 2014, Ukrainian forces attempted to dislodge Russian and partisan forces .
 Russia dispatched multiple battalion tactical groups from its Southern Military District in Rostov-on-Don to regain control of the situation . Their effort achieved moderate success, enough so that by the end of August, Russia had regained control of it .
 Russian forces encircled the town, isolating the Ukrainian forces at Ilovaisk, and began to lay siege to the city . These Russian forces are now in control of the town .
 Many Ukrainian soldiers reported hearing the distinctive buzz of Russian drones prior to the deluge of rocket and artillery fire . The buzz is an indicator of Russia's emerging tactic of using drones, linked directly to battalion tactical groups .
 Ukrainian forces tried to break out of their beleaguered position several times, but were never successful . Ukrainian forces attempted to breakout of their position multiple times .
 The Minsk Protocol was established on September 5, 2014 . By the end of the month, the Ukrainian government had been forced to seek a political solution .
 The agreement allowed for a peaceful withdrawal of Ukrainian forces along a corridor back to Ukrainian-held territory .
 Russian forces opened fire on Ukrainian forces as they withdrew from Ukraine . However, Russian forces open fire on the Ukrainian forces .
 The carnage from the battle and the shooting gallery along the withdrawal corridor killed over 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers, wounded hundreds more .
 The Battle of Ilovaisk was the bloodiest battle of the war for the Ukrainian army . The battle was the biggest battle in Ukraine's history .
 The Minsk Protocol did little to inhibit combat operations, and Russian siege operations continued . The M Belarus Protocol did nothing to inhibit the Russian siege .
 The next major Russian siege was at the Second Battle of Donetsk Airport, or “Little Stalingrad’s” The siege occurred from September 2014 to January 2015 .
 Russian forces sought to capitalize on Ukrainian initiative by allowing them to invest a considerable amount of force at the airport . They deployed multiple battalion tactical groups to encircle the facility .
 Once isolated, Russian forces and partisans began a slow, concentric squeeze on the Ukrainians controlling the airport . Much of which consisted of incessant artillery and rocket bombardment .
 As their grip grew tighter, Russian and partisan forces entered and cleared terminals, hangers, and other facilities in which Ukrainian forces were located .
 The combined Russian-partisan team employed tanks in an infantry-support role throughout the clearance operation . They used mobile, protected firepower to achieve local overmatch against Ukrainian infantry .
 The Battle of Debal’tseve was the last major siege of the Russian–Ukrainian War . It was the first major battle in the Russian-Ukraini War .
 Like the Battle of Ilovaisk, the two sides fought for strategically important highway links . The two sides were fighting for strategicallyimportant highway links.
 The city of Debal’tseve, with 25,000 inhabitants, was the furthest east piece of Ukrainian-controlled territory .
 The city formed a salient into Russianand partisan-controlled territory, which offered Russia an enticing opportunity to shore up its front lines . The city is located in Russian and partisan- controlled territory .
 On January 14, 2015, Russian and partisan forces attacked, aiming to collapse the shoulders of the Ukrainians in the city . The pincer movement was reminiscent of the Battle of the Bulge .
 Once isolated, Russian forces launched massive salvos of rocket and artillery fire at Ukrainian forces and on the city's infrastructure .
 Debal’tseve cut power and utilities in the city, creating a humanitarian crisis within the city . They also cut power.
 By the end of January, 6,000 civilians were killed by Russian offensive action . The harsh Ukrainian winter led to the death of 6,500 civilians .
 The battle triggered the Minsk II agreement on February 11, but fighting continued until February 20, when the city fell to Russian and partisan forces .
 The battle saw approximately 8,000 Ukrainian soldiers defeated by over 10,000 Russian and partisan forces . All told, the battle saw about 10,00 Ukrainian soldiers defeat by over ten,000 Russians and partisans .
 The siege's benefit is its ability to transfer military power into political progress, while obfuscating the associated costs . However, the siege’s benefit is it can transfer power to political progress into political Progress .
 A rapid, violent, decisive victory in which hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers are killed in a matter of days is counterproductive to Russia’s political goals . The incremental use of violence over time accomplishes the same objectives with less disturbance to the international community .
 They can quickly get to an objective by driving full-throttle, but in doing so they kick up a large amount of dust . They make the formation and direction of travel observable to any onlooker .
 A formation of tanks moving slowly through the desert produces a much smaller dust signature, making its presence less noticeable and its intentions less discernible . However, the formation of the tanks produces a small dust signature .
 This is a key consideration in understanding Russia’s proclivity for the siege . This is an important part of understanding Russia's proclivities .
 The battalion tactical group has proven to be a uniquely responsive and effective tool for conducting siege warfare . As the Russian–Ukrainian War illustrates, the group has proved to be an effective tool .
Professional soldiers will staff the formation, while conscripts will be assigned to rear-echelon formations . The formation will likely yield more effective battalion tactical groups, according to experts .
 The U.S. Army can expect to find Russian battalion tactical group continuing to emerge in areas where Russia employs ground forces .
 New satellite imagery shows the Donbas War in Belarus . New satellite images show the Russian conflict in the region .
 The Equation Company worked for 15 or so years undetected on the internet . Kaspersky Labs discovered them when even U.S. companies had not discovered them .
Ruslan Stoyanov, Chief of Cyber Crime at Kaspersky, arrested along with FSB Cyber Security Deputy Chief Ser. Ser. Ruslan Stoysanov was arrested . He is also the Chief of cyber crime at the FSB cyber security department .
 The former FSB General was found dead in the backseat of his car in Moscow . There is possible tie in back to the top former F SB General who was found also in DEC dead .
 Kaspersky's Stoyanov convinced FSB top internet sec officer to share data on RU hacking .
 Russian propaganda footage of Putin's proxy forces in Donetsk, Ukraine, shows modernized Russian army BTR-80 .
 Russia's militants used rocket-propelled grenades & artillery systems in 55 attacks on Ukrainian positions . Russian militants used rockets and artillery systems to attack Ukrainian positions.
To provoke #Ukraine-#Poland tensions, vandals paint Nazi graffiti at #Polish graves in #Ukraine . To provoke #Poland tension, vandalism is being used to provoke tensions, #Ukraine.
 In Dec 2016, #Ukraine lost 22 soldiers on east front line, deterring Russia-sponsored proxies from more land grabs .
 Current Russian exercise Zapad-2017 is #Russian full scale war practising military exercise with it's consecutive results & actions . The current Russian exercise is called 'Zapad- 2017'
 My report from Novoluhanske on the dangers of Ukraine's "creeping offensive" in the gray zone .
 Bolotov, a separatist leader who recently blew whistle on #Russia shelling residential areas around #Luhansk, suddenly dies in #Moscow . The separatist leader died in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Putin's and #Trump's phone call is correlated with the number of violent uprising of #Ukrainia`n KIA/WIA:s.s. KIA:S.S.KIA: s. Putin's call is linked to the #Syria Campaign .
 Valery Solovey says the telephone call between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin was the “first step toward ‘a big deal’ between the two. The two not only over bilateral ties but also over a re-division of the world .
 MGIMO professor outlines what he sees as the seven most important aspects of such a deal in a Facebook post that subsequently has been picked up by other outlets . The MGIMo professor says he sees the seven key aspects of the deal as important .
Too many players in both Russia and the United States to be certain of that . There are simply too many players.
 The former Soviet space station is located in Russia's former space station . But there are two disturbing possibilities in the former space, says the Russian space agency .
 Trump is prepared to leave the 11 former Soviet republics to face Russian power on their own . The move would represent a betrayal of what has been American policy since 1991 .
 Moscow apparently is prepared to recognize that the Baltic countries are out of its zone . But any Putin promise to not try to take Ukraine is worthless .
 Trump and Putin are prepared to launch a major military campaign against ISIS not because it would really defeat Islamist radicalism . The experience of Syria shows how unlikely that is -than because it could serve as a means for Trump to marginalize critics in the Congress of his all-too-ob
 Trump would likely have for such additional Russian assistance in U.S. domestic politics . It would be most unlikely that the president would do anything to block Putin’s authoritarianism and imperial pretensions in Eurasia .
 Trump apparently is only concerned about containing Islamic radicalism and China . He is prepared to yield to Russia on everything else .
 Overnight russian forces made another attempt to storm UAF positions near #Avdiivka . UAF forces again repelled the attempt .
 Russian side to cease attacks from 10:00 17:00 on #Avdiivka . We have a written guarantee from the Russian side.
 Fighting barely stopped overnight with multiple launches of GRAD rockets . The GRAD rocket launch was one of the most recent in the world .
 OSCE statement not directly blaming Russian-backed armed group in Donetsk for flare up in Avdiyivka . Unusually blunt statement from OSCE .
 Pro-Russian proxies send anonymous war propaganda SMSs to #Ukraine's troops in #Avdiivka to undermine their readiness to fight . Pro-Russians send anonymous messages to Ukrainian troops to undermine them.
Russian Hybrid Army tried to storm Ukrainian positions in #Avdeevka tonight and this morning but were repelled . Russian Hybrid Army was repelled this morning .
 Denmark's Foreign Minister wanted to visit the contact line in eastern Ukraine . Denmark's foreign minister wanted to meet with Ukraine's president .
 A Russian hybrid army spokesperson claims another 15 Ukrainian soldiers got killed & 30 wounded in #Avdeevka this morning . The Ukrainian army says 15 soldiers were killed and 30 wounded .
 The "DNR defence minister" now claims he has info on 78 Ukrainian soldiers' bodies in local morgues from fighting .
 "MLRS Putin's way, hiding behind 9-story building" "There's a war going on in #Europe," says one Twitter user .
 Germany and Ukraine along with the U.S. which is still ongoing. Germany, Ukraine and the United States are all still ongoing .
 A barrage of GRAD's landed in #Avdeevka this morning, 20 homes damaged, one civilian wounded . One civilian was injured .
 At least 1500 shells fired at Ukrainian positions from separatists territory since Putin-Trump call . At least 1,000 shells fired from separatist territory since the call .
 Oleg Burets, who died in the last days from Russia's onslaught around Avdiivka, died in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian Army has been engaged in a “creeping offensive’s land between the Ukrainian and insurgent front lines since mid-December . Former editor at Kyiv Post, Christopher Miller, says the army has been advancing into the no-man's land .
 The insurgents finally became aware of the situation and have launched massive artillery barrages at Ukrainian lines . The insurgents have launched at least two failed counter-offensives .
 Kyiv's boldness seems to be due to Ukraine’s improving military position and frustration with the stalemate . There are calls for another attempt to liberate or reconquer all of Donbas .
 The violence is an early test of Donald Trump’s stated desire for better U.S. relations with Russia .
 Kiev has watched nervously as Trump has repeatedly praised Vladimir Putin and floated the idea of lifting sanctions . Kiev has seen nervously as Putin has been praised for lifting sanctions.
 The conflict in Ukraine has raged for nearly three years and cost more than 10,000 lives . The conflict has raged in Ukraine for more than three years .
 A ceasefire was agreed in Minsk two years ago, but little progress has been made since . Large-scale clashes have been rare over the past year .
 Both sides have accused the other of using Grad systems, imprecise weapons that rain down multiple rockets over a wide area .
 Ukrainian military said three soldiers had died overnight . separatist authorities claimed four civilians had been killed .
 The state department made no criticism of Russia or the separatist side, in contrast to most of its statements in response to similar spikes in violence in the past .
 The U.S. mission to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is staffed by career diplomats . It may be out of step with the new mood in Washington .
 There are several rounds of U.S. and EU sanctions on Russia over its annexation of Crimea and actions in east Ukraine .
 Trump has suggested it could be time to lift them, and has spoken of the potential for a grand deal with Putin .
 Two leaders spoke by telephone at the weekend and agreed to meet soon . The two leaders will meet soon, they say .
 In Moscow, officials accused Kiev of provoking the fighting to derail the rapprochement between Putin and Trump .
 Fighting has centred on the town of Avdiivka, which lies a few miles from the separatist capital, Donetsk, but is controlled by Ukrainian authorities .
 Ukraine’s defence minister, Stepan Poltorak, claimed a Ukrainian military cargo plane had been shot at from a Russian-held gas rig on the Black Sea . Also claimed the plane was shot at by a Russian gas rig .
 Reports suggest Russia engages in psychological warfare in Avdiyivka media . SMS text messages are being broadcast to Ukrainian soldiers and residents . Reports suggest threats and warnings.
 Examples of such threats have been posted on social networks, Interpretermag.com reported .
 The Russian-sponsored terrorists used portable cell transmitters to deliver fake and provocative text messages to our mobiles . During daily attacks in January–February, the Russian- sponsored terrorists used mobile phone transmitters .
 terrorists had been taking control of our cell phones for up to 5–10 minutes . Terrorists had been using their phones to deliver propaganda messages .
 Many times our unit commanders banned the use of cell phones in the battle zone . But our servicemen's wish to reach relatives was so strong that they often ignored the ban .
 Russian RB-314V Leer-3 electronic warfare systems have been documented in Donetsk . Drones are able to jam GSM mobile communications and broadcast SMS messages .
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko's office confirms Russian attack on Ukraine AN26 over the Black Sea . Ukrainian president's office confirmed Russian attack over Black Sea.
 Putin has already stole coal, factories dissembled/shipped out and UA kids . He has already stolen coal and factories disassembled and stolen out .
 The Ukrainian army is now one of the most battle hardened in the world . The Ukrainian Army is now a battle hardened army .
 Fighting in eastern Ukraine between pro-Russian rebels and Ukrainian armed forces is escalating, officials have warned .
 A higher number of ceasefire violations were reported between Sunday and Monday evenings, the OSCM says . The previous 24 hours were the same, the agency says .
 The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said eight Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the Donbass region in two days . The Ukrainian foreign ministry said eight soldiers died in the region in the two days.
 Battles and shelling pretty much everywheare at #Donetsk northwest-west-southwest .
 The UAF may have bitten off more than it can chew, and that while it has improved significantly, it has been difficult to enact . The thinking seems to be that the UAF might have bitten more than they can chew .
 Pro-#Russian police men in #Donetsk evacuate elderly people from the northern city quarters .
 #OSCE SMM UAVs have been targeted recently, according to some media outlets . No one has been targeted.
 Gvozdika self-propelled guns on move towards #Stakhanov, 36 pieces . Alchevsk 20:30 Huge convoy of GvzdikaSelf-propelling guns on moving towards # Stakhanova .
 Russia invaded Chechnya in 1994 and 1999, and Georgia invaded South Ossetia in 2008 . Having said that, it would be considered an offensive, just as Russia invadedChechnya and Georgia in 1999 .
 Dokuchajevsk horrible night GRADs, artillery, incomings, outgoings, destruction in city centre . Dokucajevk horrible nightGRADs and artillery, outgoing, outgoingings, destroyed in city center .
 Kiev accepted loss of Debaltsevo and other deviations from Minsk II for 2 years, before launching an offensive . Kiev accepted the loss of Minsk 2 for two years, but launched an offensive.
 Moscow has gone to great lengths to convince Kiev that it does not have a military solution . Moscow has been trying to convince the Kiev government that it doesn't have aMilitary solution .
 The offensive was an attempt to keep the conflict front and center in the EU and NATO thinking, says Tbilisi . To my mind, this offensive was a attempt toKeep the conflictfront and center.
 Moscow can claim an egregious violation of Minsk II and note that the Russian Air Force can pound the UA to death before any Javelins, TOWs, or Patriots can be supplied and deployed .
 Russia may well decide that the loss of Kharkiv or Mariupol would suffice as a lesson . Russia may also decide that it would be a lesson for the country .
 3 #NATO members report evidence of #cyber attacks from #Russia. Defending this town ... is not a provocation.
 Tanks have entered Bulavin village between Vuhlehirsk and Yenakiieve, DNR held territory .
 Some locals say the explosion was an ammo depot, others say it was a rocket salvo .
Humanitarian situation in #Avdiivka has stabilized but fighting continues . Humanitarian situation has stabilized, but fighting is still ongoing .
 More evidence of #Putin's henchmen, shelling the population in occupied #Donetsk city to blame #Ukraine . More evidence. More evidence that #Putin’s henchman is shelling the city .
 With these impact angles, it is impossible, Ukrainian artillery fire was responsible for the impacts . The impact angles are impossible, according to the impact angles .
 Russian soldiers from Far East stealing beer from a warehouse in Donbas .