 As separatist forces creep closer to Mariupol, Greece considers a further alliance with Russia . Greece's Greek community could put this new friendship on hold .
 Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras' visit to Moscow. There is talk of a potential alliance between Russia and Greece against Europe .
 Russia's readiness to provide financial support has laid the emotional and economic foundations for this alliance . Alongside religious affinity and shared anti-Western ideology, Greek commitments to host future Russian pipelines .
 The roadmap outlining the extension of the Turkish Stream oil pipeline to Greece is signed on 21 April in Athens . Gazprom chief Aleksei Miller and Alexis Tsipras are yet another plank in this alliance .
 Aleksandra Protsenko, 67, is a retired secondary school headmaster from rural south-eastern Ukraine . He is the president of the Greek community of Mariupol . Protsko is a former headmaster of a secondary school in Ukraine .
 Protsenko's position regarding separatist aggression near the Azov coast could become a stumbling block to renewed Greek-Russian co-operation . Some 100,000 Ukrainian Greeks, home to some 100,00 Greeks, live in Greece .
 Violence against Ukraine's Greeks featured prominently in the Greek press as potential justification for closer ties with Russia . Mission creep near Mariupol takes on fresh significance .
 Russia's policy in south-eastern Ukraine is far from a coherent expansion strategy . Russia's foreign policy in the region is not as coherent as it should have been .
 Donetsk region will become another Transnistria, according to Moscow . First, the northern and central parts of the region will be part of the new Transnistsia .
 The self-proclaimed republics will allow Moscow to exhaust Kyiv and blackmail Europe . Russia will be able to blackmail Europe, according to the self- proclaimed republics .
 Donetsk is a real stronghold of Russian influence in the east of Ukraine . With military bases and training camps set up by Russian instructors around Donetsk, Russian military personnel commanding the local forces .
 Russia's capture of Debaltsevo makes Donetsk a bridgehead for any future offensive . supplies of soldiers, weapons, and armour have started coming from Russia by train .
Ukrainian troops will most likely have a tough time repelling future offensives or breaking the Republics' defence lines .
 Russia seems likely to succeed in the north and centre of Donbas . But it is not interested in developing a full-scale offensive . Russia is likely to be successful in the region but not in the centre .
 Moscow needs the region to look like a republic proclaimed and organised on an entirely local basis . To support its narrative, Moscow needs to be more organised on a local basis.
 Ukraine's Azov battalion and separatist fighters have resumed fire in Shyrokine, near Mariupol .
 The south of the region, including the Azov coast, has specific strategic value . The Azov region is located on the Russian coast .
 It is the gateway for an overland corridor to Crimea, which Russia needs to secure supplies of electricity, water and food to the peninsula . It is also the gateway to an overlands corridor.
 Russia would have to put in a lot of work to get through to Crimea . This route would stretch through several Ukrainian regions, beyond the Donbas .
 Russia tries to keep its offensive against Mariupol off the radar . Unlike the operations in Donetsk and Luhansk, Russia is trying to keep it off the Radar .
Reports of attempts by Russian special forces and unmarked regular forces at swiftly capturing the town . The town was captured by Russian Special Forces .
Russian reconnaissance groups have also tried to penetrate the area several times . Russian reconnaissance groups are also trying to enter the area .
 Moscow failed to take over the city and failed to secure an overland corridor to Crimea . The peninsula remains heavily dependent on supplies of water, gas and electricity from mainland Ukraine .
 New authorities redirecting local rivers towards the south Crimean coast in order to secure water supply for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol .
 This move will most likely result in the loss of arable land and a further shortage of water and food . This move is likely to lead to a shortage of food, water and water .
 The prospect of the 'Kerch strait' bridge between mainland Russia and Crimea being built is still under discussion .
 The task of capturing Mariupol remains an urgent task for Russia . As such, the task is an urgenttask for Russia.
 Criminality and social degradation have taken their toll in this region . Criminality, social degradation has taken its toll in the region .
 The city hosts large metallurgy plants and other enterprises with a skilled working class and technical intelligentsia . The city is home to a large number of metallurgical plants .
 With this demographic profile, the working ethics of the local population differs from the militant, self-centred culture of the rest of the Donbas .
 Mariupol managed to avoid the traumatic experience of the 1990s – the collapse of state institutions and the rise of criminal dictatorships .
 The metallurgy plants of Mariupol were effectively controlled by Vladimir Boiko . The plants were also controlled by Boiko.
 Boiko spent his entire life working in Mariupol, climbing the ladder from low-skilled worker to engineer and director of the plant . Boiko was born in the city, and spent his whole life working at the plant.
 Question marks hang over the legitimacy of the independence referendum in Mariupol last year .
When Yanukovych came to power in 2010, Boiko was deprived of his shares and position . He was forced to sell the plant to the president's closest associate Rinat Akhmetov .
 This aggressive takeover of Mariupol's main steelmaker by a highly controversial figure did not make the town more loyal to the Yanukovych regime .
 When Ukrainian forces retook the city, local residents met them with relief . Ukrainian forces retake the city .
 Mariupol acquired special meaning in 18th century as part of Catherine the Great's project to reconquer Constantinople and introduce the Russian Empire as the successor to Byzantine glory .
 Most of the settlements in the regions had Greek-related names – Mariupol, Odessa, Simferopol, Sevastopol, Theodosia and so on . Most of those settlements hadGreek-related name – Mari upol, Simfopol, SimFo
 Russia even invited a number of Greek colonists to settle in Ukraine . A great number of Greeks have lived in Ukraine since the beginning of the year .
 The Greeks of Mariupol were successfully integrated into Ukrainian society . Unlike similar communities in other post-Soviet countries, they were successful integrated into the country .
 Protsenko lobbied for more funding for the Greek-language schools in Mariupol and the area . He started out as a school teacher and cultural activist in the early 1980s .
 Protsenko was promoted and became director of a small town school just outside of Mariupol . In 1986, he was promoted.
 Protsenko has built up a strong reputation at home and abroad . In pursuit of cultural and educational rights of Ukrainian Greeks, he has built a strong presence in Ukraine .
 Protsenko's name is often associated with the newly-established Mariupol State Institute of Humanities . Greek is the main language of instruction .
 The MIH prepared a number of teachers for local Greek schools . It became one of the symbols of the integration of the Greek community into Ukrainian society .
 Greek minority has attracted a lot of attention from the Greek state and media . Mariupol's Greek minority is the largest in the country and has attracted much attention .
 Protsenko turned from a local minority rights activist into a national and international leader . He became President of the Federation of Greek Communities in Ukraine and member of the Presidential National Minorities Commission .
 Protsenko was one of the coordinators of the World Council of Hellenes Abroad . He headed up the Greek Foreign Ministry's Secretariat for Greek Diaspora . In the mid 1990s and early 2000s, he was the head of the Greek foreign ministry
 Protsenko is popular among the Greek diaspora from America to Australia . This is important in Greece – a country particularly sensitive to its compatriots abroad .
 All of this has made the Greeks of Mariupol more than just a cultural community in a remote Ukrainian area . It has made it more than a culture community in the Ukraine .
 Mariupol's Greeks have become a significant factor in national politics and an important factor in bilateral relations . Mariupoli's Greeks are a key part of the country's political process .
 Russian imperial design from the 18th century has come to impede Russian narratives about south-eastern Ukraine . Ironic it may be, but this community, largely a creation of Russia's imperial design, is largely a result of Russian imperial designs .
 Protsenko has challenged statements by Syriza about repressions against ethnic minorities in Ukraine committed by the Ukrainian state . Protsko has directly challenged statements.
 Protsenko has repeatedly stated that during the brief period when Mariupol was controlled by self-proclaimed republics in 2014, separatists relied on local criminal elements .
 Protsenko's rich local knowledge has helped her to frame the developments in Mariupol in a narrative of 'normal people vs. hooligans and bandits' She successfully challenges Russia's narrative of the crisis in Ukraine as an inter-ethnic or centre-periphery conflict .
 They bear the names of those killed in the shelling of Mariupol in January . They were killed by shelling in January.
 The symbolic meaning of the city increased tenfold in October 2014 . Several civilians of Greek extraction were killed during the shelling of Mariupol suburbs .
 Several public appeals by Ukrainian Greeks to the Greek government to save them from the horrors of war have only bolstered the importance of Mariupol in Greek public debate .
 Russia is blamed for the sufferings of Greeks, although not explicitly . It is not stated explicitly, but it is said to be responsible for the suffering .
 For Greek society and its multi-million diaspora, the developments in Mariupol have struck a painful chord .
 Greece has experienced a number of tragedies over the past century – repressions by the Ottoman Empire, occupation during the Second World War, mass migration in the 20th century and waves of refugees and repatriates coming to Greece.
 Aleksandra Protsenko divides her time delivering food to Ukrainian armed forces around Mariupol . She also attends hospitals to treat fighters of the volunteer battalions, and organising cultural activities .
 Alexis Tsipras' overtures to President Putin have been limited by the Greek community . Alexandra Ivanovna hands out food parcels, Mariupol's Greek community imposes significant limitations on Tsipra's overtures .
 Tsipras has to face a permanent threat to his public image by forgetting about Greeks who were killed during shelling in Mariupol .
 Despite some signs of rapprochement between Russia and Greece, these limitations emerged prior and even during Tsipras' visit to Moscow .
 Greece would support further sanctions against Russia in the case of further Russian aggression against Mariupol . Earlier this year, there were suggestions that Greece would back further sanctions .
 The Russian and Greek leaders spoke about various common interests in public during the visit . The Greek prime minister refused to meet representatives of Crimea's Greek communities .
 The Greek consulate in Russia does not issue visas to Greeks of Crimea, recognising it as part of Ukraine . The Greek consulates in Russia, like other EU consulates, do not issue visa to Greeks.
 Tuesday's roadmap does not guarantee a strong energy link between the two countries . Even Tuesday's map doesn't guarantee strong energy links between the countries .
 Athens and Moscow dreamt up a joint oil pipeline project bringing Russian oil from Bulgarian port of Burgas to Alexandroupolis terminal in northern Greece .
 This dream lingered for a decade, between 1993 and 2003, until it was abandoned due to negotiating fatigue and aggressive competitors .
 Greece and Russia may have made strong commitments to Turkish Stream . But doubts remain over the response of the European Commission and Energy Community .
 Athens cannot give what Moscow wants – a veto on sanctions in case of further expansion in Ukraine . Russia might be prepared to provide financial incentives in exchange for Greek support within the EU .
 If Russia launches an offensive in the area and captures Mariupol, Athens will find it difficult to give even rhetorical support .