 Strife over Ukraine’s Donbas region remains the single most intractable political problem in contemporary Europe, says U of A historian .
 It’s been four and a half years since tensions between Ukraine and Russia erupted .
 There is no sign the underlying causes of the conflict will be resolved any time soon . Despite an uneasy truce negotiated two years later that remains in place .
 Ukrainians poured into the streets of Kyiv in November 2013 to demand closer ties with the European Union . In November 2013, Ukrainian protesters demanded closer ties to the EU .
 Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych fled the country in the spring . He ultimately opted not to sign the EU Association Agreement .
 He resurfaced in Russia, declaring that he had been deposed in a coup by right-wing insurgents . He has since been released from prison .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin was in Sochi at the time, attending the Winter Olympic Games . Putin was also attending the Games .
 There followed a dubious referendum, conducted under close military control, to incorporate Crimea into Russian Federation .
 Armed pro-Russian groups took over government buildings in a number of eastern cities, sometimes assisted by locals, but led by outsiders .
 Putin and others spoke of the establishment of Novorossiya . It was a reference to the new territories annexed by Catherine the Great in the 18th century .
 The armed conflict that followed, however, was largely restricted to two Russian-speaking regions of Eastern Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 All other cities of Eastern Ukraine soon ejected the militants and restored their governments . All other countries soon ejected their governments.
 The militants set up base in Sloviansk under the leadership of a maverick Russian intelligence officer, Igor Girkin .
 Ukrainian troops advanced on Sloviansk at the start of July after two earlier failed attempts to recapture the city . Two earlier attempts to capture the city were unsuccessful .
 Girkin was dismissed as ‘defence minister’ on August 14, 2014, but Donetsk remained the militants’ new headquarters .
 Russia then took a more direct role, supplying anti-Ukrainian forces with advanced military technology, material supplies and “volunteer troops’s” troops . Russia also supplied anti- Ukrainian troops with advanced technology and material supplies . The
 Ukrainian forces entered Ilovaisk on August 18 but were promptly encircled by militants . A massive contingent of Russian forces crossed the border starting August 24 .
 Putin assented to a peaceful retreat by the Ukrainian army, but the Russians fired freely upon the government forces . About 1,000 were killed and a further 500 were taken prisoner .
 The initial agreement in September was followed by a second meeting in February 2015, supervised by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine attended the meeting .
 It called for an immediate ceasefire, the removal of heavy weaponry and the release of prisoners . It also called for elections with a temporary law of self-governance in the occupied regions . Ukrainian control of the state border by the end of 2015 .
 The summit gave some credibility to the leaders of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic . Aleksandr Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitsky .
 Three years later, the ceasefire technically is in place, but fewer provisions of the Minsk Protocols have been followed .
 About 11,000 people have died, and a further 1. million have fled the region, to other areas or to Russia .
 There are daily casualties in the conflict zone, mostly by shelling and rifle fire . There are also daily casualties from shelling and fire .
 Plotnitsky fled Luhansk in November 2017 and Zakharchenko was killed by a bomb on August 31, 2018 . Girkin left in August, left in November, and Plotnitky fled in August .
There is ample evidence to suggest that Russia became disillusioned with Girkin and Zakharchenko . There is evidence that Russia become disillusioned both with the two men .
 Putin favours the use of UN peacekeeping forces in Donbas . He insists Ukraine must communicate directly with the leadership of the two republics .
 The future of this region remains in doubt, not least because of the lack of clarity in the policies of the major actors involved . Ukraine's future of the Ukrainian industry is in doubt.
 It remains the single most intractable political problem in contemporary Europe . It is the single biggest problem in modern Europe .
 David R Marples is a professor of Russian and East European history in the Department of History and Classics . He is also a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 A version of this opinion-editorial appeared Oct. 2014 in the Edmonton Journal . The Edmonton Journal is a newspaper in Edmonton, Alberta .