 In the other 93 percent of Ukraine, things have not gone in the Kremlin’s favor, according to the Kremlin .
 Ukrainian politicians focused on consolidating their country’s independence and national identity . The status quo is tolerable for Ukrainian politicians, and that includes Poroshenko .
 Crimea and the Donbass back, yet Russia's ongoing occupation has its benefits too . They would prefer to get Crimea back, but Russia’s ongoing occupation is its benefits, they say .
 Russia chopped off two regions with the least developed sense of Ukrainian identity . In seizing those areas, Russia cut off the two regions. In seizing the two, Russia took control of those areas .
 No pro-Russian candidate could win a Ukrainian election. With them gone, no pro- Russian candidate could be able to win the election .
Long gone are the days when candidates such as former President Viktor Yanukovych could win a majority of votes . Yanukovych was openly sympathetic to Russia .
 The ongoing confrontation with Russia reminds Ukrainians daily why they want to build a nation wholly separate from Moscow . The ongoing conflict reminds Ukrainians why they wanted to build an independent nation .
 Ukrainian occupation of the Donbass has accelerated Ukrainian integration with the West . Even if formal membership in NATO and the EU is still distant, the occupation has accelerated Ukraine's integration .
 Ukraine's occupation of the Donbass has accelerated Ukrainian integration with the West in other ways . But even if formal membership in NATO and the EU is still distant, the occupation has accelerated the process .
 Ukrainians received the right to visa-free travel to the EU in 2017, something that Russians can only dream of . Ukrainians received right to travel to Europe in 2017 .
 NATO countries are training Ukraine’s military, which is now the strongest it has ever been . Ukraine is the strongest military in the world .
 Kiev hopes Ukrainians would cast off their Western-oriented government and try to rebuild ties with Moscow . A third rationale for Russia’s ongoing occupation of the Donbass might be to cause problems for Kiev .
 The Kremlin long hoped that time was on its side, considering the deep fractures within Ukrainian society and the inability of the political class to address them .
 Russia's occupation of the Donbass does exacerbate all of Ukraine's problems, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia’s occupation of Donbass is a problem, he says, but it doesn’t help Ukraine's situation .
 Ukrainians have not cast out their leaders and opted for a government that is friendlier to Russia . But Ukrainians are not casting out their political leaders and opting for a new government .
 The West looks no more likely to change course than the government in Kiev. So, too, does the West, which looks more likely than the Kiev government .
 Western countries have seen momentous political shocks over the past five years . But support for keeping sanctions on Russia until it leaves the Donbass is as strong as ever .
 In 2017, Congress enshrined sanctions on Russia into law in a nearly unanimous vote in the U.S.
 Europe has seen major political transitions since the EU imposed sanctions on Russia in the summer of 2014 . Europe's political transitions have been seen in recent months .
 François Hollande, the French president who negotiated the 2015 cease-fire in Ukraine, left office in 2017 with historically low approval ratings . His successor has kept France’s policy toward Russia unchanged .
 Merkel was buffeted by a political crisis over refugees and the rise of the far-right Alternative for Germany party .
Center-right political party remains resolutely in favor of sanctions . But her center-right party is resolutely against sanctions .
 In Brussels, the consensus in favor of sanctioning Russia looks as durable as ever . The consensus in Brussels is that Russia should be sanctioned .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin couldn't leave Crimea even if he wanted to, says Putin .
 The Russian government has formally annexed the territory . Putin has staked his political career on forcing his country into a confrontation with the West over the issue .
 Some Russians are beginning to question whether the annexation of Crimea has brought as many benefits as promised .
 Russia chose not to annex the territory, hoping Kiev could be coerced into taking it back as a Trojan horse . The move would give the Kremlin leverage in Ukrainian domestic politics .
 Ukraine's presidential election proves that there is no scope for pro-Russian policies in Ukraine’s capital . All the reasons for continuing the Donbass occupation look increasingly stale .
 Ukraine is united against Moscow, NATO is rebuilding Kiev’s military . Russia still faces revolutions along its borders, and sanctions are here to stay. Ukraine is unified against Moscow .
 Kremlin shows no sign of changing course after staked everything on confrontation with the West .