 The Russo-Ukrainian War in Ukraine has been an active protracted armed conflict since 2014 . The conflict has been a long-running conflict between Ukraine and Russia .
 Over one million people have been displaced within Ukraine in the past eight years . Hundreds of thousands have fled the country .
 civilians in eastern Ukraine still live in active conflict areas with limited access to humanitarian aid services . Several attempts to broker peace have occurred, but several attempts have occurred .
 Recent events have stoked fears of a Russian invasion and siege on Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital .
 Russia launched a military invasion on February 23, 2022 . The Russian military invasion is expected to take place in February 2022 .
 Since 882, Ukraine has experienced over a thousand years of intermittent periods of conflict . Those in the 20th Century significantly impacted the humanitarian crisis today and conflict with Russia .
 The most important root of the current conflict lies in the fight for national identity tied to geography, developed over centuries .
 Kyivan Rus in 882, the city and region that would come to be known as Kyiv was conquered from Khazar tribes by Prince Oleh of Novgorod .
 At its height in the mid-11th century, it stretched from the Black Sea in the south to the middle of modern-day Finland in the north and from Ryazan in Russia in the east to Slovakia in the west .
The empire would last until 1240, when it fell to a Mongolian invasion . The empire would have lasted until the fall of 1240 .
 Galicia-Volhynia became a vassal state to the Mongolian Empire as part of the Golden Horde . After the fall of Kyivan Rus, the area became a territorial area known as the Cossack Era .
 The Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland vied for control of different parts of Galicia-Volhynia against the Mongols . During this period, the brutal and recurring contest for this territory began .
 This period marks the beginning of the European powers’ appreciation for Ukraine’s advantageous geopolitical location on the eastern entrance of Europe on the Black Sea .
 “Ukraine,” meaning “borderland’ started to be more widely used to refer to the territory which makes up most of the country known as Ukraine today .
Today's meaning tends to bolster Russian sentiment that Ukraine should be a territory of Russia . It is not an independent country within the context of the current conflict .
 The Title Page-3 refugees were widely known as “Ruthenians’ until the 19th Century when there was a consolidation of nationalist idealism . But roughly can be considered the same group as what is referred to as native Ukrainians .
 Poland and Lithuania took control of most of the Mongolian Empire . Only Crimea in the south on the Black Sea left under the control of the Mongols as the Crimean Khanate .
 Crimean Khanate remained an independent, majority-Muslim territory under the Ottoman Empire until 1783 when it was annexed by the Russian Empire . In the mid-1500s, Ukraine fell under Polish administration with the creation of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth .
 These rebelling peasants later came to be known as Cossacks . They used brutal guerilla-type military tactics to overcome Polish settlers .
 The Khmelnytsky Uprising began between 1648 and 1657 . The Cossack Uprising was a calculated rebellion between the two years of 1648 .
 The Uprising resulted in the creation of a Cossack state under the command of Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky . The Cossacks allied with the Crimean Tatars and native Ukrainian peasants .
 The Cossacks committed violent attacks against Commonwealth forces and groups of Jews . During the 9-year rebellion, the Cossack considered to be complicit with Polish rule .
 The Uprising came to an end when the Cossacks swore allegiance to the Tsardom of Russia . Cossack territories were incorporated into what later would become the wider Russian Empire .
 The Cossack era is of particular importance to understanding the current conflict in Ukraine . The COSSack era has been a key part of the Ukraine conflict .
Ukrainian nationalists view the Cossacks as a significant symbol of Ukrainian ability to resist invaders .
 This era marks Ukraine’s first significant relationship with Moscow . It is Ukraine's first relationship with Russia .
 The Cossacks felt betrayed by their lack of sovereignty and pivoted their rebellions toward Russian authorities until the late 18th Century . The Peter I expanded control over the Ukrainian territory .
 The Duchy of Austria and the Kingdom of Hungary came to control western parts of Ukraine . As conflict disintegrated the kingdom of Poland, the Duchs of Austria, the kingdom was taken over by Ukraine .
 The Russian Empire would take the rest of the Ukrainian territory, including Crimea, which the Ottomans lost as a result of war .
 Under Peter I, controls were placed for the first time on the use of the Ukrainian language . The autonomy was abolished, sparking discontent among the Ukrainian peasants .
During the reign of Catherine II, fearing secession, a widespread Russification program was instituted . Later, during the reign, Catherine II feared secession, and the program was implemented .
 Russian became the compulsory language in schools, universities, churches, and in publications .
 Catherine II, Ukraine was turned into the province of “Little Russia’s” Cossack leaders stripped of any decision-making powers .
 By 1772, nearly all geographical territory that makes up modern-day Ukraine was subsumed into the Russian Empire . The exception of one small western part, Galicia, which was still controlled by Austria .
 The Ukrainian National Revival refers to a period of organized national resistance and intellectual revival . It began towards the end of the 18th Century .
 The reign of Aleksandr II marked the beginning of the decline of the Russian Empire with its loss in the Crimean War . As such, the cracks began to form, and Russification during this period was largely limited to cities and industrial centers .
 The bulk of the Ukrainian population, the peasantry, were not deeply impacted and retained the language and culture . The majority of the population was not affected by the changes .
 In particular, an event known as “Bloody Sunday’s’ in 1905 allowed for a rise in Ukrainian nationalism .
 Most ordinary Russians lived in abject poverty, working in dangerous working environments up to 15 hours a day with no access to modern facets of life .
On January 22, 1905, thousands of striking workers peacefully marched to the Winter Palace to demand a reduction in the working day to eight hours, an increase in wages and improvements in working conditions .
 Nicholas II issued an edict stating that subjects could freely choose their religion . The edict effectively ceding control of the territories through religion .
 intellectuals had been given more space to grow nationalist movements . While imperial government still controlled Ukraine, intellectuals had more space.
Ukrainian nationalism was given even more room to grow with the onset of World War I . It further weakened imperial rule .
 Nicholas II viewed World War I as an opportunity to exercise tsarist might to regain control of the empire . The mistake was a costly mistake that only served to expose his weaknesses .
 Ukraine declared itself an independent country in 1918 . However, this independence was short-lived as the Russian Revolution raged across the former Russian Empire . Ukraine was forced under the Soviets’ expanding thumb in 1922 as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .
 ordinary Ukrainians resisted the principles of the Soviet government, such as atheism and collectivization . Rather, ordinary Ukrainians, still mostly farming peasants, resisted the government .
 Joseph Stalin set his sights on crushing Ukrainian nationalism and harnessing Ukraine for expansion of his agricultural policies . After Vladimir Lenin’s death, Stalin wanted to expand Ukraine's agricultural policies.
 Ukraine, then and today, is often called the “breadbasket of Europe’s” Ukraine has the most fertile soil on the European continent and a fairly temperate climate .
 Ukrainians' resistance of Soviet policies created the perfect storm for Stalin’s totalitarianism .
 Between 1932 and 1933, Stalin instituted an artificial famine aimed at breaking Ukrainian resistance and furthering unattainable agricultural goals . The famine was intended to break Ukrainian resistance .
Ukrainian villages saw their food rounded up, dumped, and left to rot in fields guarded by soldiers . The peasants were punished for resisting Soviet rule .
 Soviet officials silenced any news about it, Title Page-6 refugees.org including that of Western journalists .
 During this period, the demographic losses due to the famine amounted to 10 million, with 3. million direct famine deaths, and a further 6. million birth deficits . During the period, there were 6 million births deficits .
 The Holodomor continues to have significant impacts on Ukrainian nationalism today as it is viewed as an assault on national identity . The HolODomor has significant impact on Ukraine's national identity.
 The famine was accompanied by a broader assault on Ukrainian identity . As historian Anne Applebaum highlights, she highlights the famine .
 agents of the Soviet secret police were targeting the Ukrainian political establishment and intelligentsia .
 The famine provided cover for a campaign of repression and persecution against Ukrainian culture and Ukrainian religious leaders .
 The official policy of Ukrainization, which had encouraged the use of the Ukrainian language, was effectively halted . All those targeted by this campaign were liable to be publicly vilified, jailed, sent to the Gulag or executed .
 The famine was so deadly, it was officially denied by the Kremlin for more than half a century . It has played a large role in Ukrainian public memory, particularly since independence .
 The modern Russian government refuses to acknowledge Holdomor as a genocide . The U.S., Canada, and more than a dozen other countries recognize it as such .
 In World War II, the Nazis occupied the Ukrainian SSR, bringing it under control as the Reichskommissariat Ukraine under Adolf Hitler’s lebensraum, or ‘living space’ plan in Eastern Europe .
 Some Ukrainians with the Holodomor still fresh in memory, distrustful of the Soviet regime and hoping the Nazis would defeat Stalin, joined the Nazis .
 Hitler prized Ukraine for its agricultural bounty and Ukrainians were again betrayed by an occupying power . Yet, much like Stalin, Hitler prized Ukrainian agricultural bounty .
Despite the Nazis ravaging the Ukrainian SSR, Ukraine remained between a “rock and a hard place,” as the assault by the Soviet government in Moscow remained constant .
 Soviet secret police deported close to 1.25 million people from Ukraine to Siberia . They actively hunted Ukrainian nationalists during this period .
 Between 1944 and 1947, more than 256,000 Ukrainians were deported to Siberia to curb Ukrainian nationalist resistance . Stalin expressed interest to deport all Ukrainians, with Stalin expressing interest to deportation .
 At the same time, the central government gave incentives for ethnic Russians to move to Ukraine . The central government also gave incentives to move.
After Stalin's death in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev became the Premier of the Soviet Union . He had a strong affinity with Ukraine .
 Soviet policy of cracking down on any Ukrainian nationalist movements. Subsequently, while he recognized Stalin’s extermination.org of ethnic Ukrainians, he provided some freedoms .
 The strict control of Ukraine, along with increased collectivization, continued and kept Ukrainians effectively quiet as agricultural providers of the entire Soviet Union .
 A long period of stagnation between 1971 and 1985 caused by central government policies instigated by Ukrainian Leonid Brezhnev impacted Ukraine particularly badly with the annual agricultural growth rate falling from 3. to 0. percent .
 Ukrainians were further betrayed by the central government in Moscow in its approach to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster . The disaster occurred in the north of the Ukrainian SSR in 1986 .
 More than 3 million were directly affected by the radiation fallout . 30 million were endangered by radiation falling into the Dnepr River and millions more in neighboring European countries .
Central government in Moscow insisted that the disaster, and its impacts, be kept secret from all, including Ukrainians living around Chernobyl .
 Authorities in Sweden detected radioactive materials that could only have come from the Soviet Union . Officials finally evacuated affected areas. It was only after authorities in Sweden discovered radioactive materials .
Despite Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms, the Ukrainian population was kept in the dark about the true magnitude of what had occurred .
 As the Soviet Union began to crumble, her republics claimed independence one by one .
 In August 1991, the Ukrainian SSR became an internationally recognized indepdendent country .
 Ukraine set its sights on establishing engagement with the West, most importantly Europe, and turning away from Russia . Ukraine largely viewed as simply a successor state to the Soviet Union .
 In 1994, Ukraine entered into a cooperation agreement with the European Union and one with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Ukraine is the first post-Soviet state to do so .
 The second presidential elections resulted in a peaceful transition of power . It was the second presidential election in a year .
 Most of the 1990s were marked by political crisis, economic decline, and social dislocation . Yet, despite these achievements, most of them were marked with political crisis and economic decline . The 1990s have been marked by social and political dislocation.
 Corruption, as common in many post-Soviet states, became widespread while development stagnated . Corruption is common in some post- Soviet states .
 The Ukrainian language became the only official language in Ukraine with the government mandating a progressively dominant role in all facets of life, including education, television, media, and government .
 Language in particular created a rift in Ukrainian society that has contributed to the current conflict in a significant way . Language in particularly created a split in Ukraine.
Despite the upgrade of Ukrainian following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the language has continued to play second fiddle to Russian throughout the country .
 Ukraine's post-Soviet identity crisis has become politically explosive since the 1990s . Efforts to regulate and promote the use of Ukrainian in place of Russian have proved politically explosive .
 The national debate on the language issue has reflected lingering divisions within Ukrainian society . Both Russian and Ukrainian are commonly spoken and widely understood across the country .
 Despite government mandates, Russian continues to dominate the eastern parts of the country . Despite government mandate, Russia is commonplace in the central parts of Russia .
 The government stands firm that Russian will not be recognized as an official language . The government, perhaps in response to centuries of Russification, stands firm .
 Ukraine’s pro-Kremlin political parties have encouraged Russian-speaking Ukrainians to think of themselves as a distinct and oppressed minority since the early 2000s .
 Many Russian speakers have seen value in the separatist movements. As such, many Russian speakers see value in separatists .
 Kyiv governments have done little to sway those who reminisce for the times of the Soviet Union over the years .
 The country began to be divided between those in the west dominantly speaking Ukrainian looking towards the European Union. Those in the east dominantlyspeaking Russian looking towards Russia .
 The elections were marred by massive corruption and rigged by authorities so that pro-Russian Yanukovych would win the presidency . The election was rigged so that Yanukovych would be elected to the presidency.
 Widespread peaceful protests followed in what has come to be known as the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution is the name of the Our Ukraine party .
 A re-vote was ordered by the Supreme Court of Ukraine, resulting in the election of pro-West Yuschenko instead .
 A new hope was instilled in the Ukrianian people as a result of the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution showed solidarity and commitment to combatting corruption .
 Yuschenko declared he would root out the corruption that plagued Ukrainian business and official life . He oversaw a culture of bribery and cronyism instead, he said .
Ukrainian president's aggressive drive to project Ukrainian language and culture has unnerved millions of ethnic Russians . He tore down Soviet-era monuments and made the exSoviet state fit to join Europe's mainsteam .
 In 2005 and again in 2009, disputes over natural gas prices and payment took place involving Russian state-owned gas supplier Gazprom . Many European countries that depend on natural gas supplied by Russia through a Ukrainian pipeline, resulting in Russia cutting off the supply .
Ukrianian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko successfully negotiated a deal with Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin with new, more standardized prices and processing . With Western European countries breathing down the neck of Ukraine to work to turn the gas back on, Ukraine's prime minister successfully negotiated
 By the time the 2010 presidential election rolled around, most had lost hope in the ideals of the Orange Revolution .
 President Viktor Yuschenko and Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko were once allies . They were now bitter enemies .
With the pro-Western party divided, the country’s trust significantly weakened, particularly in the eastern regions of the country . This gave former pro-Russian candidate Viktor Yanukovych ample opportunity to be successful .
With Yuschenko and Tymoshenko running separately against Yanukovych, the pro-Western platform was significantly weakened . With Yuschenko running separately, the Pro-West platform was weakened .
 Yanukovych received 48 percent of the vote, Tymoshenko, 45 percent and Yuschenko, less than 6 percent . Yanukovych is the leader of the country's second largest party in Ukraine .
 The majority of pro-Russian voters were in the east, and the pro-Western voters in those regions closer to the European Union .
 Yanukovych won and Ukraine’s policies once again pivoted toward Russia . As such, Yanukovych won.
 Yanukovych had former Prime Minister Tymoshenko arrested and jailed on trumped-up charges of abuse of office while brokering the 2009 gas deal with Russia .
 Yanukovych limited freedom of the press and freedom of assembly . Among other restrictions, Yanukovych limited press and assembly freedom .
 In 2013, Yanukovych refused to sign the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement . The agreement would have allowed visa-free movement of Ukrainians among other provisions .
 In response, between 400,000 and 800,000 protestors flooded Maidan Nezhaleznosti (Square of Freedom) in central Kyiv demanding Yanukovych sign the agreement .
 At the end of Euromaidan, Yanukovych fled to Russia and the interim government signed the European Union agreement . Yanukovych was ousted at the end.
 conflict only continued in Ukraine, this time in the Crimea region in the south of the country on the Black Sea .
 Crimea is an important geopolitical location for the Ukrainian navy due to its port access, making it a valuable asset for defense purposes . It should be noted here that Crimea is a valuable place for Ukraine's navy . It is also an important geographical location for Ukraine .
 In February 2014, armed soldiers with no identifying insignia started occupying key facilities and checkpoints on the Crimean peninsula . Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin denies the involement of Russian soldiers .
 Ukraine’s Western partners urged Ukrainian troops on the peninsula not to engage them . By early March, Russian troops had secured the entire peninsula .
 The local government in Crimea refused to recognize the interim government in Kyiv and demanded a referendum to leave Ukraine and join Russia . A few days later, a few days after the government refused torecognize the interimgovernment .
 The Russians colonized Crimea during the reign of Catherine II, establishing Sevastopol as the homeport for the Russian Black Fleet . The Russians invaded Crimea during Catherine II .
 Crimea was then part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until 1954, when it was transferred administratively to the Ukrianian SSR.98 Russia used these two historical events paired with the fact that Crimea was ethnically majority Russian to justify its actions in the name of self-
 The interim govenrment is scrambling to pick up the pieces after the Euromaidan Revolution was powerless to respond . The interim government is still scrambling to find the pieces .
 There were pro-Russian protests in many oblasts . Two were particularly contentious .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have historically been the center of Ukraine’s heavy industry . In the east, there is a region of economic significance called Donbas .
 During Ukraine’s economic decline in the early 2000s, the population fell sharply along with the Gross Domestic Product . The population was particularly affected by poverty, government mismanagement, and high mortality rates .
 A regional identity had developed with a lingering Soviet mentality and a mixed language, surzhyk .
 Only 27. percent of people in Donetsk oblast and 30.3 percent in Luhansk oblast supported separatism and a union with Russia . Few people travelled to Western Europe and many travelled to Russia for work .
 The Donbas region had been subject to a campaign under pro-Russian President Yanukovych aimed at growing mistrust of the Western-oriented leadership in Kyiv . At the time of Euromaidan, similar Russian propaganda was used in the region .
 There was little opposition to separatist leaders staging demonstrations and takeovers of government buildings . Many in the Donbas region supported, or at least tolerated, separatist leaders .
 Ukrainian security services managed to remove occupiers and quell protests . But soon they were overpowered by armed rebels flooding into the region .
 separatists extended their power in the Donbas region . They took control of weapon arsenals and personnel, as well as border posts and airports . Ukrainian government control was largely too weak to stop the insurgency .
 In March 2014, the defense minister said only 6,000 Ukrainian soldiers were ready for combat . However, after drafting volunteer units, Ukrainian forces managed to take back some territory from the separatists .
 Russia shelled Ukrainian territory, transferred more state-of-the-art military technology and troops without insignia under the guise of “humanitarian convoys’s” Russia sank Ukrainian patrol boats in the Sea of Azov .
 In 2015, another ceasefire was attempted, this time with the agreement that the oblasts would be given temporary self-governance under the Ukrainian government . This time, the agreement was largely ignored, with the deal largely ignored .
After an escalation in violence in the spring of 2018, shelling and skrimishes still occur regularly . The violence has escalated in the past year .
 Both the DPR and LPR have held elections and adopted constitutions, though neither should be considered democratic under international standards . The judiciary and the mass media are under political control, filled with Russian propaganda, and repressive, with aribitrary detentions and torture reported .
 DPR and LPR are deeply dependent on Russia economically with most infrastructure destroyed, trade patterns broken, and banks collapsed . Both the DPR andLPR are heavily dependent on the Russian economy .
 The last year has seen the conflict scale up with tensions rising between the Russian and Ukrainian governments . Millions fled the region and more than 10,000 civilians have been killed, though this figure is likely much larger .
 In April 2021, Ukrainian authorities asserted that Russian troops along their eastern border swelled from 100,000 to 120,000 . The Russian build up, which drew down in June only to scale back up in October, led to international concern .
 Russia recognized Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states in February 2022 . In February 2022, Russia moved troops into Donbas, moving troops to Donbas .
 On February 23, 2022, Russia launched a military invasion into Ukraine . The invasion took place in February 2013 .
 How the conflict plays out will be determined by a myriad of factors, including how much Russia believes a military invasion in Ukraine is worth the risks of prolonged violence . U.S. and European allies could severely hurt the Russian economy .
Much of the conflict is tied to a struggle to claim identity, as evidenced by thousands of years of the country's history as outlined here in brief .
 identity in Ukraine is not as black and white as it may appear on the surface . Yet, identity in the country is not black andwhite as it appears on thesurface .
 It is far more complex than just ethnically Russianidentifying Russian speakers vs. Russian speakers . It's far more Complex than just just ethnical Russianidentification .
 In Ukraine, it is quite common to find nationalistic Ukrainians who speak Russian far more often than Ukrainian .
 Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the east are vehemently against Ukraine becoming part of Russia .
 Many Russians view Ukraine as a territory of Russia, even using a different preposition usually designated for use with territories of a country . Many view an annexation of Ukraine as the return to the Kyivan Rus empire .
 The current conflict is the result of Russia’s geopolitical ambitions, a weak independent Ukrainian government, and tensions among many complex identities that have grated against each other in the region for thousands of years .
 Over two million internally displaced persons have been forced to flee from their homes in the east since the conflict began . Ukraine is the ninth largest country in the world in terms of the number of IDPs .
 Ukraine is among the poorest countries in Europe with a per capita GDP of $4,380 and an average yearly salary of between $7,000 and $16,000 depending on industry and region . Ukraine is one of Europe's poorest countries, with an average annual salary of $16
 Only half of IDPs surveyed said they felt integrated into local communities . Lack of housing, income, and employment opportunities remain the biggest issues for IDPs trying to integrate .
 A significant number of IDPs have resorted to living in uninhabited and uninhabitable places within the country . The Chernobyl exclusion zone in the north of the country is a clearly unsafe location .
 IDPs would rather live off the land in radioactive areas to escape shelling and starvation .
 In 2019, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees recorded a 59 percent increase in people of concern in Ukraine . Most of them are in the conflict zone behind the contact line .
 There are far more impacts than those highlighted here, but these are the most significantly recorded . The most significant impacts are in the United States .
The conflict has had a particularly disastrous impact on elderly civilians living behind the contact line . The conflict has been described as a 'disaster' by many .
 Many young or skilled people emigrated or fled to the rest of Ukraine or to Russia . About one third of the people in need of humanitarian assistance in the region are of pension age .
 At the end of 2014, Ukraine ceased payment of pensions and social benefits to people in the occupied regions .
 The city of Donetsk was the region's main medical hub before the conflict . It had a nationally recognized medical university with the largest cancer center in Ukraine .
 The hard-won infrastructure for providing HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment services has been shattered . The access of international aid organizations to the separatist regions has been reduced .
 Many civilians cross the contact line on a daily basis, though there are few facilities for safe passage . The United Nations and International Committee of the Red Cross are the only organizations admitted .
 Many have crossed in unprotected areas, exposing themselves to mines and unexploded munitions . The contact line zone is said to be one of the most mined in the world .
Every fourth resident near the contact line lacks a reliable source of drinking water . Every fourth resident in the area has a reliable drinking water source .
Over three quarters of families inside the conflict zone struggled to secure food, nongovernmental organizations say . 82 percent of people living in the DPR and LPR struggling with increased food prices and scarcity .
 COVID-19 pandemic has seen price of a “borsch basket’s basket increase almost by 30 percent . Reports of trafficking involving various forms of exploitation have been reported .
 The U.S. Trafficking in Persons Report says about 5,000 prisoners in the LPR are subjected to slave labor reminiscent of the gulag . Food and medicine prices are skyrocketing in the area .
 Today, the modern political borders of Ukraine do not border Lithuania . Today, Ukraine's political borders do not borders Lithuania .
 Belarus would have been split between Galicia-Volhynia, the Kingdom of Poland, and Lithuania . During this time period, modern-day Belarus would be split between the territory of Galicia and Lithuania.
Serhii Kudelia, The Donbas Rift, 54 RUSSIAN POLITICS and Law 1 at 11 . See also, SerhiiKudelia and The Don Bas Rift .