From overwork, sometimes I already catch states, as if all this is not real . And from overworked, sometimes,sometimes I already caught states, I alreadycatch states .
We are scolded for analytics this is very in my profile, so I will explain what is wrong . We are scolding for analytics, so we will explain it to us .
 Recently, we have been increasingly pressed to customize reports to the requirements of management . I once touched on this topic, but now I'm more focused on it .
 All these political consultants, politicians, politicians and their retinue, influence teams all created chaos. All these created chaos, all this created chaos and chaos .
 Most importantly, no one knew there would be such a war, they hid it from everyone . No one knew that there would have been such awar, they hide it from all .
 TOTS at owioHanan Qiipanisdd ima calculations, nothing like this will happen . Nothing like this is happening .
 The report will be just for show, but create neyopasiee@ tosy syntaxdaniquages . You understand that the report will not be for show .
 Using Pastebiticam to enhance your experience, you can use ave aiokiés paliey éidocgboekiesngolicy to enhance the experience . You can also use the same tool to help you improve your experience .
2eheastetiidenly they really throw meteorites and expect that everything will be according to your analytics, which was written from the bulldozer .
 A total piz_ets. I don't even want to pick another word. That is why we have a total pizz_ets I don’t even want the word to be chosen .
 No one knew that there would be such a war, so no one prepared for such sanctions . No one was prepared to face such sanctions.
 They had not yet begun to fight, but they were simply torn to pieces in some places . They were covered there on the march in a terrible way .
 Even our pro-Russians turned against him. They wanted to return Tsarev, so even the pro-Russianians turnedagainst him .
 If we say that it is impossible to occupy, then any of our authorities will be killed there in 10 minutes, as we leave. If we said that it's impossible to occupied, then we will leave, we'll be killed in 10 seconds .
 There is a rule that by covering the poor quality of management with quantity, you only spoil everything . The rule is to not cover the poorquality of management.
 The ideal option, which does not exist, would be with the ideal option. And this, I repeat, would have been with the perfect option .
 Our roads simply won't be able to handle such supply caravans everything will come to a standstill . Our roads will be unable to handle the supply of such supplies .
 The two reasons fall out at the same time, although even one is enough to break everything off .
 For the first two days there was still control, but now no one knows what is going on there . The situation has been under control for two days .
 commanders may not know how many of them are running around nearby, how many are in captivity . And there, even the commanders might not know.
 There is no FAQ PASTEBI Niess . There is Chechnya in terms of LOGIN SIGN UP .
 Bepaiss they paste CO vcietnca that it was necessary to create the most 17. The most 17 of the world's most popular CO VcietNca was created in 2007 .
 The group was initially preparing protests within Ukraine against Zelensky . They were initially preparing for protests against the Ukrainian government .
 Further civilian losses will go exponentially and resistance to us will also only increase . Further civilian loss will go up exponentially, resistance will also increase .
 Only one landing group had a conditional success . They already tried to enter the cities with infantry out of 20 landing groups .
 The assault on Mosul after all, this is the rule, so it was in all countries, nothing new. Remember the assault on Iraq?
 Cities can be under siege for years, and even function, according to the experience of military conflicts in the same Europe .
 Next week there will be a turning point in one of the sides, simply because the situation cannot be in such an overstrain .
 There are no analytics it is impossible to calculate the chaos, here no one can say anything for sure .
 Rates will rise, in the hope that suddenly some option will shoot through. Rates are expected to rise .
 The trouble is that we, too, can now miscalculate and lose everything in one move . We can now lose everything, too.
 It’s just that there is no option for a possible victory, and defeat is everything, sailed at all . It's just that it's just not possible to win, and there's no option, and Defeat is everything .
 100% repeated the beginning of the last century, when they decided to kick weak Japan and get a quick victory, then it turned out that the army was in trouble . Then they began to take the Bolsheviks for ""re-education"" into the army after all, they were out
 The Bolsheviks, who were not really known to anyone, picked up anti-war slogans and it started like this LOGIN SIGN UP PAS i FS ss.
 The Donbass crisis, it seems, should have drawn all the attention to itself and become the subject of bargaining . The crisis was necessary to divert the attention of Westerners from the topic of the Russian spring in Crimea .
 Soleimani gave deliberately false inputs in order to solve his problems . Then they decided to push Erdogan into 4 pipes of the South Stream and entered Syria this is after he gave false inputs .
 If we were given real introductory information, we would at least indicate that the original plan is controversial, that we need to double-check a lot .
 Some fucking adviser will convince the top to start a conflict with Europe demanding to reduce some sanctions . Now it remains to be seen that some fucking adviser is convinced to start the conflict .
 The Americans introduced such control there with the involvement of the IAEA, that sucking on the topic is stupid .
 We will start to miss the hungry 90s. Now it will cover us so much that we will be missing the 90s . We will also start to be able to eat more.
 Nabiullina seemed to be taking normal steps but this is all like plugging a hole in a dam with a finger . The auction was closed.
 Kadyrov beats his hoof for a reason they have their own adventures there . Kadyov beats his Hoof for the reason he has his own adventures .
 He created for himself the image of himself the most influential and invincible . He created the image for himself of himself.
 Turkey blocks the straits to transport supplies there by planes . It's like heating an oven with money, it's like heated an oven.
 All this is happening at the same time, we don’t even have time to bring everything into one heap. Notice that all this is being done at same time .
 We rushed with the Ukrainian question, as if we were running a hundred meters, and fit into a cross-country marathon . Here we rush with the Ukraine question, and answer it to the question .
 VV Putin will press the red button to destroy the whole world, he says . From the cynical, I will only add that I do not believe that he will do so .
 There is more than one person making a decision, at least one person will jump off . At least one decision will be made.
 There are some doubts that everything is functioning successfully there, but there are also doubts that it is working .
 Experience shows that the greater the transparency and control, the easier it is to identify shortcomings . The greater the greater it is, the more it is the easier to identify problems .
 It is not clear who controls and how, but always bravura reports everything is always wrong there. And where it is notclear who controls or how .
 The Federation Council member's closest representatives and ministers come close to him . He says he does not believe in the readiness to sacrifice oneself of a person who does not let the members of the Federation Council come close .
From overwork, sometimes I already e time at work, my head is a little floating, catch states, as if all this is not real. And from over work, sometimes it's not real .