 Artem Rybchenko, Ambassador of Ukraine in Switzerland, comments on the latest conflict with Russia near the Sea of Azov .
 Since Russia's annexation of the Crimea in 2014, there have been armed conflicts in eastern provinces bordering Russia . There have been clashes between Russia and Russia since the Crimea annexation .
The latest crisis between Russia and Ukraine took place on November 25th . The latest crisis took place in Ukraine on November 26th .
 Russian ships rammed a Ukrainian tugboat and opened fire on two Ukrainian gunboats . Russian ships were trying to reach the Ukrainian port of Mariupol through the Kerch Strait .
 Some media pointed out that the crisis was not entirely unwelcome for Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko .
 The Ukrainian president, dressed in camouflage uniform, demanded a 90-day period of martial law for the country .
 Artem Rybchenko is the Ukrainian Ambassador to Switzerland . He personally knows President Poroshenko, who personally knows the president .
 Russians could exploit the situation and start entering in our country anywhere, says the author . "Because of the latest crisis in the sea of Azov and our forced focus on this hot spot, we are forced to focus on the hot spot"
 President Poroshenko initially wanted to declare martial law for the whole country for 90 days . He initially wanted a 90-day period of martial law .
 The election law requires that 90 days before the elections there is no martial law in power . The law requires the election to be held 90 days prior to the elections .
 Parliament decides that the martial law will be in place for 30 days so there is no conflict with our election law . Parliament decided that the law would not conflict with the election law.
 The martial law is implemented in most of the regions bordering Russia . It is also implemented in some of the countries bordering Russia.
 It allows our leadership to organize the necessary level of preparation for all of the army. It allows us to organize a level of preparedness for all the army .
 By the end of the year, it is possible to extend the martial law. If it proves necessary to extend it, it's possible to do so, it could do so .
 The Kremlin has been increasingly aggressive since summer, since the new bridge between Crimea and Russia was opened . The new bridge has been opened .
 We know this because our ships were stopped for controls, and procedures took up to seven hours . We know that because our ship was stopped for control, we know this .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said Russia had "no justification" for seizing the Ukrainian ships .
First official open Russian aggression since occupation of Crimea in 2014 . First official Russian aggression in Crimea since Crimea occupation in 2014.
 Before, whenever Russia was involved in aggressions towards us, they said, “It is not us.’ It was not us,’ they said .
 Video footage shows one of the Russian ships ramming into an Ukrainian ship .
 One of the Russians taped the scene and sent it per Whatsapp to his girlfriend . As far as I know one of the Russian taped the scenes.
 Russian state television has broadcast footage from the interrogation of three of the Ukrainian captives, including an officer . The footage was broadcast by state television .
 The Ukrainian prisoners say their ships had deliberately ignored Russian requests to stop . The prisoners say they were deliberately ignored Russia's request to stop.
 You will see that the captives were reading their statement from a screen . You will also see that they were reading the statement from the screen .
 It took some time for our lawyers to get in touch with our imprisoned fellow citizens . It took them some time to talk to our imprisoned citizens .
 Experts say they are pretty sure those are not regular prisoners but Russian agents who spy on our arrested men .
 The only life line for Ukrainian ports of Berdjansk und Mariupol is the Strait of Kerch .
 Russia controls the Strait of Kerch in the Sea of Azov . Russian ports in the sea are threatened to be cut off from the world .
 The international community condemns the Russian occupation of Crimea . Apart from a few countries, the international community considers it a violation of international law .
 Russia has since built a bridge 17 kilometers long to connect Crimea and Russia . Nevertheless, Russia has been building a bridge for Crimea .
 The bridge cost the Russians around 10 billion dollars and it was deliberately built low so the big sea ships can’t pass under it .
 Small ships can still run under the bridge, but big ships can’t pass anymore . Big ships can't pass anymore.
 Russia is protecting the bridge with its military, and warns that Ukraine might blow it up . Russia is also warning that Ukraine may blow the bridge up .
Donbass, Crimea, or the Sea of Azov, now, our priority is political and diplomatic measures. Regardless what conflict we talk about, Donbass is now our priority .
 NATO ships close to the strait of Kerch to safeguard the passing of the ships that could put Russia under pressure .
 For years Russia has been alarmed by NATO’s growing incursion into the region .
Turkey, Romania and Bulgaria are members of the alliance . Three nearby states, Turkey, Romania, and Bulgaria, are also members .
 NATO conducts air policing operations out of Romania . NATO intercepts Russian jets approaching their air space .
 Russia with its weapons can reach NATO members such as Bulgaria, Rumania, Turkey . Russia with their weapons can also reach NATO member countries such as Turkey, Bulgaria and Turkey .
 We bring our country to a new European, NATO standard, which is normal. We bring the country to the new standard, according to the European Union .
 The army was in a poor state after the “Revolution of Dignity’s” in 2014 . The new government took power in 2014, the new government was in poor state .
 Some Russian agents and people were in the ministries of our government . Some Russians were in our government, according to a report .
 The daily conflict makes us stronger and I am proud of our highly professional army, says Army chief . "The daily conflict make us stronger," he says .
 Last year, the U.S. naval construction battalion began building a marine operations control center for the Ukrainian Navy in the city of Ochakiv at the shore.
 If they want to reestablish the Soviet Union, it’s not going to work, says CNN's John Sutter . The Soviet Union was founded in the 1950s and was formed in the 1960s .
 The latest move of President Trump cancelling a direct meeting with President Putin was a good signal . The escalation in the Sea of Azov was a very good signal.
 Ukraine has a good relationship with the Confederation of Switzerland . Ukraine is the country's ambassador to Switzerland .
 Switzerland had the leadership of OECD in 2014 . The Federal Councilor and Foreign Minister Burkhalter was very forthcoming when Switzerland was in charge .
 There is a clear cooperation in humanitarian and technical assistance from the Swiss side which is highly appreciated . In addition, today there is clear cooperation.
 The European Union and all the leaders of the G7 countries are big friends of Ukraine . It is also thanks to personal friendly relations with President Poroshenko .
 Russian trade ships coming out of the Sea of Azov entering international waters . President Barack Obama has put forward sanctions for Russian ships coming from the Sea .
 While there is strong support for Ukraine, Western sympathies have suffered . While there are strong support, there has been a lack of support for the Ukraine .
 Reforms that the West called for are protracted, namely, regarding corruption . The West has called for reforms that are protracted .
 According to Transparency International, Ukraine ranks as the most corrupt country in Europe after Russia . Ukraine is ranked as the world's most corrupt nation after Russia.
 The situation on the Crimea and other economical issues. But it is not so easy to do everything at the same time with warfare .
 The military engagements in Donbass take a lot of resources, says John Sutter . Sutter says that the military engagements are very difficult .
 Ukraine is ranked by the International Monetary Fund as the poorest country in Europe . The West has a lot of support from the West for Ukraine .
 Try to become a member of the team which works 24/7 to bring an over 45 Million people population country back to a normal and stable life .
 Ukraine earns one million dollars from its agricultural sector . Ukraine can’t use it for pensions and the stabilization of some funds .
 The Donbass region has to make it stronger, not for the development project . We have to use it to make our region stronger, according to the local government .
 It is a deliberate strategy to make us weak and to keep us from prospering, says the author . The strategy is to make our economy weak and make us stronger, he says .
 The strategy of my country is working. Regardless, we have a much stronger economy compared to 2015 which means that the strategy is working .
 Artem Rybschenko, 35, has been Ambassador of Ukraine in Switzerland since August . He has been ambassador to Ukraine since August.