Axios WorldAxios on Facebook and Twitter.com .
 Andrii Shadrin’s unit sets off daily from its makeshift base to points along the front lines in Luhansk Oblast in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has described soldiers in the Donbas as some of the best Ukraine has .
He says the shelling is constant and "chaotic," striking mainly civilian infrastructure . He says it is often interrupted by orders for a mission, and once said a drone had been spotted overhead .
 The Institute for the Study of War with AEI’s Critical Threats Project.
 The last Ukrainian fighters in Mariupol surrendered on Tuesday after a weeks-long siege . More than 90% of Luhansk, where Shadrin is fighting, is now under Russian control .
 Shadrin's unit came under fire as it was repairing equipment on an outpost directly on the front line . The morning after our first conversation, Shadrin was under fire .
 A piece of shrapnel struck his leg as Russian infantry and tanks began to advance on them .
 Shadrin, 26, treated his own wound until he could be evacuated to a hospital . Shadrin was treated by a trained medic until he was evacuated .
 Once he realized he could walk, he returned to base in Donbas . He returned to his former base .
Some of his worst days have come when traveling through recently shelled towns . Andrii Shadrin's worst days were when he was traveling through some of his most recent towns .
 Shadrin acknowledges that many civilians who remained behind likely supported Russia before the full-scale invasion . Shadrin says many civilians remained behind.
 Vladimir Putin and the Russian army did a lot for the unity of Ukrainians all around Ukraine . The Russian army and Vladimir Putin did a lots of things for Ukraine's unity .
"Everybody now understands whom we are dealing with," he says. "Because everybody now understands what we are doing"
 Andrii Shadrin says his parents don’t share that view of Russia, or the war .
 Shadrin's parents were born in Soviet Russia . Shadrin says his parents haven't told him that directly .
 The only correspondence had been weekly text to inform them he's alive . Their only correspondence was weekly text.
 Putin sent in "little green men" to foment a separatist insurgency in the Donbas . Putin took that step after Ukraine’s president, Viktor Yanukovych, was toppled .
 Shadrin traveled to Kyiv for a few days to take part in the protests . Shadrin's parents didn't tell his parents when he went to the city .
 The boyish face from the other side of the war. It’s hard to picture, looking at the thick-bearded, bareheaded and grizzled warrior .
 Shadrin was 18 then, studying IT in college and taking extra lessons to perfect his English . Shadrin, 18, was 18 when he was studying IT at college .
Russian soldiers set a barricade in Feodosia, Russia, in March, 2014 .
When the Russian occupation began, the Ukrainian Marine base in Feodosia was surrounded .
"They took all the goods... and just left me lying on the ground," he says .
 He volunteered for Right Sector, a militia that has been described as ultra-nationalist or far-right . In the meantime, he volunteered for the militia, which has been called ultra-Nationalist .
 Shadrin says that wasn't his experience, and that he served with soldiers from diverse backgrounds . Shadrin: "That wasn't my experience"
 Russia deems Right Sector an extremist group . Shadrin says he'd be arrested if he returned to Russian-occupied Crimea .
Shadrin hasn't seen home or parents for eight years after joining the military . He hasn’t seen his parents or his family for 8 years .
 Andrii Shadrin has served a half dozen six-month rotations in the Donbas . He has devoted his entire adult life to this war, barring a brief stint as a civilian from 2020 to 2021 .
Shadrin admits that the outcome of Russia's Donbas offensive is uncertain, given the force of the Russian troops and artillery . In the longer term, he's confident the Ukrainians will fight as long as it takes.
 The image hangs there like an apparition, before he waves it away . "I'm a regular 26-year-old man who likes to have a couple of beers," Shadrin says .
 I've lost a lot of my friends, he says, and of course I don't want to lose any more . He says he's lost many of his brothers and friends .
 Naomi Shavin is a senior producer at the National Television Network . Shavin has been working on the show for more than 20 years .
 He says the shelling is constant and \""chaotic,\"" striking mainly civilian infrastructure .
 The last Ukrainian fighters in Mariupol surrendered on Tuesday after a weeks-long siege . More than 90% of Luhansk is now under Russian control .
The morning after our first conversation, Shadrin's unit came under fire as it was repairing equipment on an outpost directly on the front line . As Russian infantry and tanks began to advance on them, a piece of shrapnel struck his leg .
A trained medic, Shadrin, 26, treated his own wound until he could be evacuated to a hospital . It was “a usual day, with a little bit of bad luck,’ he says .
 Once he realized he could walk, he returned to base . "Destruction in Donbas"
Russian-speaking region is largely Russian-speaking, where many get their news from Russian state TV . But now, he says the civilians his unit aids beg them to stay, not to leave them alone, with the Russians .
 "Because everybody now understands whom we are dealing with," he says . "Destruction in Donbas" is one of the most destructive buildings in the world .
 "Shadrin in the Donbas in 2019" is a new feature on CNN's iReporter.com .
Russian soldiers set a barricade in Feodosia in March, 2014 . The barricade was set up by Russian soldiers .
 Shadrin and some friends pooled money for juice, snacks and cigarettes, which he delivered to the marines . Shadrin says he did it until he was caught by some Russians .
In the meantime, he volunteered for Right Sector, a militia that has been described as ultra-nationalist or far-right . Still, he successfully enlisted a few months later .
 Shadrin says he served with soldiers from diverse backgrounds . He says he'd be arrested if he returned to Russian-occupied Crimea .
Shadrin hasn’t seen home or his parents for eight years . He hasn't seen his parents or home since joining the military .
 This story has been corrected to reflect that Shadrin was initially rejected by the Ukrainian military, not the Russian military . This story was originally corrected.
He says the shelling is constant and is striking mainly civilian infrastructure .
Shadrin’s unit came under fire as it was repairing equipment on an outpost directly on the front line .
 Shadrin, 26, treated his own wound until he could be evacuated to a hospital . It was “a usual day, with a little bit of bad luck,’ he says .
 Andrii Shadrin's worst days have come when traveling through recently shelled towns . Some of his worst days \u003c/strong\u003e have come during recently shelling towns .
Shadrin acknowledges that many civilians who remained behind likely supported Russia before the full-scale invasion . Two civilians died as he tried to save them, he says .
Russian state TV has been used in Ukraine for years to help Ukraine's unity . But now, he says the civilians his unit aids beg them to stay with the Russians .
 Their only correspondence had been weekly text to inform them he\u0026#x27;s alive .
Shadrin was 18 then, studying IT in college and taking extra lessons to perfect his English . He says he had long hair, he had an earring in his ear, and had a boyish face from other side of the war .
 Ukrainian Marine base in Feodosia was surrounded by Russian troops .
 Shadrin and some friends pooled money for juice, snacks and cigarettes, which he delivered to the marines . Shadrin says he was beaten pretty hard by some Russians .
 They took all the goods... and just left me lying on the ground, he adds .
In the meantime, he volunteered for Right Sector, a militia that has been described as ultra-nationalist or far-right . Still, he successfully enlisted a few months later .
 Russia deems Right Sector an extremist group, Shadrin says he would be arrested if he returned to Crimea . Shadrin served with soldiers from diverse backgrounds .
 Andrii Shadrin has devoted his entire adult life to this war . He has served a half dozen six-month rotations in the Donbas, fighting Russian-backed separatists .
 Ukrainian Cpl. Shadrin was initially rejected by the Ukrainian military, not the Russian military . This story has been corrected to reflect that Shadrin had been initially rejected .