 The Russian strongman, who is directing a protracted war against Ukraine, is ‘a bully’ and “a person who represents the greatest threat to peace and security in Europe of our time’s time, Alexander said .
 The Russian Coast Guard attacked three Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait, ramming a tug boat and firing on the other two vessels . On Nov., the Russian Coast Guards attacked the Ukrainian vessels .
 The Russians seized the Ukrainian vessels and took 23 Ukrainian sailors prisoner . Three of the sailors were wounded .
 The Kerch Strait is the passage between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov . It is the longest stretch of the sea between the two seas .
 The strait is considered an international waterway through which ships have the right to pass freely . Under international maritime convention, the strait can be seen as a waterway .
 Russia is attempting to assert total control over the Kerch Strait and all waters off the Russian-occupied Crimea peninsula, which rightfully belongs to Ukraine . Russia is trying to assert complete control over all waters of the Crimea peninsula .
 Crimea was taken by Russia in a 2014 stealth invasion and subsequently annexed by Moscow in contravention of international law . Crimea was seized by Russia and then annexed by the Russian government in 2014 .
 Earlier this year, Putin tightened his grip on Crimea, opening a newly constructed bridge across the Kerch Strait . The bridge provides a physical link between Russia and Russian-occupied territory .
 Moscow launched another front in its war on Ukraine in 2014 . In addition to the invasion and annexation of Crimea, Moscow launched a new front in the war on the country .
 The Putin regime has been using insurgents to destabilize and disassemble Ukraine . The Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic have been used in the Donbas region .
 President Petro Poroshenko characterized the incident in the Kerch Strait as “a bold and frank participation of regular units of the Russian Federation” in an assault on Ukrainian forces .
 Ukrainian leader says Russian attack in strait represents "qualitatively different threat" to his country .
 Ukraine and Russia have bilateral agreements between them . This raises issues about freedom of movement on international waterways, he said .
Third, Alexander contends that Putin is using the incident to distract Russians from domestic problems . Third, Alexander says Putin is trying to distract Russian from domestic issues .
 He alleges Putin is using “patriotic fervour’ to keep his approval rating high and prevent domestic protests . He alleges that Putin is trying to prevent protests in Russia .
 Alexander said it is in the Russians’ interests to assert complete control over the international waterway .
 The annexation of Crimea by Russia by Russia is unprecedented in international relations . He correctly asserted that the annexation by Russia, a permanent member of the UN Security Council, is unprecedented .
 10,000 people have been killed in the conflict, he said . And he pointed out that 10,00 people have died in the war .
 UNHCR reports that 1. million people have been displaced since the outbreak of the conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014 .
 Former Canadian ambassador says Russian leader will not be deterred by anything except military force .