 The aim of this paper is to find an unbiased analysis into the ongoing Ukraine Crisis . The aim is to provide an analytical understanding of the different actors who played a part in it and how they benefitted .
 This essay is an attempt to probe the roots of these narratives . The essay is not merely state but, but, probe the origins of the narratives .
Through the use of theories of ethnic studies the reasons for the conflict will be studied . The role of actors will be examined .
 In the course of the writing, I strive to explain the narratives as to understand the motivations behind the actions of the actors .
 It is not the intention of the paper to come to conclusions as I feel the ongoing crisis lacks a particular culprit . The paper is not intended to come into conclusions as it does not have a specific culprit .
 I also believe that it is imperative to understand motivations in a post conflict setup, as to comprehend the backdrop of the conflict to assist in building perpetual peace . I also believes that it's imperative to understanding motivations in the post conflict setting .
 This paper will primarily deal with two fundamental hypothesis and through the course of the paper, these hypothesis will be discussed . The paper will focus on the two fundamental hypotheses .
 The author, however, is not under the impression that only one single narrative can be held true or studied in isolation .
 The two hypothesis will serve as perspectives to the various events involved . The two hypotheses will help explain the events involved in the world .
 The conflict in Ukraine is predominantly an issue of ethnicity and lack of a national identity . It has been prevalent since its independence of 1991 .
 Russia’s historical links with the Crimean peninsula go back to Catherine the Great .
 Crimea was gifted to Ukraine by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 . Crimea was given to Ukraine in 1954.
 When Ukraine became independent in 1991, Russian President Boris Yeltsin decided that Ukraine would be with Crimea . Russia’ Black Sea fleet remained at Sevastopol under lease .
 In 1994, a memorandum was signed protecting the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The memorandum is signed by the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine has a long history of being dominated by foreign powers and has been independent for a short period . Ukraine has beenIndependent for short period.
 Ukraine has been divided between Ukrainians who see Ukraine as part of Europe and those who find themselves intrinsically connected to Russia . The country is divided between Ukraine and Russia .
 Ukraine has various regions and ethnic minorities of which Russians are most prominent . However, Ukraine has several regions and a number of ethnic minorities .
 The parts of Ukraine where Russians have had majority are the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and eastern oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk . Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa, Kharkov, and Odessa are among the areas where Russia has majority .
 The western regions have a mix of Hungarian population and other minorities . Poles, Belarusians, Jews and Bulgarians in the south have been Ukrainians for decades .
 Ukrainian state's internal politics is a dynamic mix that makes divergence internal politics inevitable . It is this dynamic mix in the Ukrainian state that makes separation between political parties inevitable .
 On November 21, 2013, anti-governmentprotest began in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev which toppled off the current crisis .
 Yanukovych rejected a deal for greater integration with the European Union . He took a billion bailout from Russia instead, taking a billion from Russia .
 The Western Ukraine wanted the deal with EU for two reasons; it would bring peace to the troubled economy . It would be a symbol for closer ties with Europe as culturally and politically desired .
 Ukrainians saw Yanukovych as a corrupt, autocratic leader who was an instrument in the hands of Russia . The deeper reason for the protests was that many Ukrainians saw him as an instrument for Russia .
 The government made some imprudent decisions by sending Berkut internal forces to the regions of protest . The government only worsened the situation .
 By February 2014, the protest took such a drastic turn that led to the President to disappear, and the protestors to take control of the Presidential administration buildings .
 Another grave blunder by the Parliament was to ban Russian as the second language . It caused a wave of anger in Russian speaking regions .
 This created an opportunity for Russia to enter Ukrainian premises in support of their Russian minorities . This created a opportunity for Russian to enter Ukraine to support their minority groups .
 In late February, unidentified gunmen in combat uniforms appear outside the Crimean airport and begin to seize government buildings .
 The mass in Crimea rally in support for the ousted President and call to secede from Ukraine .
 The bands of gunmen rapidly start growing and it becomes evident they are Russian military forces . The entire peninsula is under military occupation .
 The region inordinately vote to become a part of Russia when called for a referendum . On 16thMarch, 2014, Russia voted to become part of the country .
 Crimea is of high importance to Russia as it holds Russia’s large military base and from keeping NATO away from the East . Crimea is Russia's largest military base in the region .
 Separatist rebels began emerging in eastern Ukraine soon after the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 They seized towns of Sloviansk, Donetsk and Luhansk in the eastern region known as Donbas which were chiefly Russian speaking . They seized the towns of Slovakia, Donetsk, and Donetsk .
 It was in protest of the toppled President Viktor Yanukovych, who was from the eastern region himself . It was a protest of Yanukovych's toppled President Yanukovych .
 Learning from the preceding in Crimea, the eastern region also rallied for independence .
In retrospect, the sense of disenfranchisement in the eastern region is real and the rebels do have indigenous organic support . In retrospect, in retrospect, it is real, and the feeling is real .
 The fight has escalated to the undeclared conflict between Russia and the Russian minorities on one hand and Ukraine in another . It is this fight that has escalated. It is the fight that is escalating to the unclaring conflict between the two countries .
 The Ukrainian government for the initial months was afraid to make a move after Putin made a statement that if Ukraine got aggressive then he would blame Ukraine for the deaths and invade to protect Russian speaking citizens .
 Russia denied all support to the rebel occupation in the East and also agreed to de-escalate the crisis in the Geneva talk .
 Ukrainian government decides to release offensive to drive out rebels . The offensive is aimed at driving out the rebels .
 The Malaysian Flight MH17 was shot down on 17thJuly .
 Ukraine redoubled its attacks except, Russia decided to overtly invade the region with military troops by mid-August . Ukraine redupled its attacks, except for Russia's military troops .
 Since 2014, many international actors have gotten themselves tangled in the middle of Ukraine and Russia . Many actors have been involved in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 Germany and France decide to craft a ceasefire agreement with Ukraine and Russia in February 2105 . USA considers supplying lethal aid to Ukraine after USA considers lethal aid .
 European leaders oppose to arming Ukraine’s forces so as to not ignite the conflict further . European leaders say they want to stop the conflict from escalating further .
By 2016, the war spirals to its worse and millions of lives are affected in the conflict zone . By 2016, millions of people are affected by the war .
 Since the beginning of the conflict in 2014, roughly 31,600 people have either been killed or injured . The High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad Al Husseinstates in March, 2016 .
 The conflict hit an all-time low by the end of 2016 and the beginning of 2017, when Ukraine carries out missile launches near Crimea . Trump comes to power in USA, hinting to approve the Russian annexation.
 The conflict setting was an unbiased narration of the conflict . The paper used models of ethnic studies to study the roles of the actors involved .
 Scholars have spoken about the role of ethnicity, politics, geo-strategies as causes to the conflict . They have also spoken about ethnicity and politics .
 The idea of this discourse is not to revisit the same arguments but to help supplement and find authenticity of these reasons . The idea is to find the authenticity of the reasons behind the arguments .
 I attempt to show how elites, through the use of media, unbarred the anxiety of identity crisis, using it as a tool for mass mobilization . I attempt a show of how elites use media to unbarbarred anxiety of Identity crisis .
 Max Webber, pioneer of the study of ethnicity, defines it as a collective group with similar cultural characteristics . Webber is also a pioneer of study of ethnic groups .
Hor Horowitz understands the concept of ethnicity as a differentiation between individuals and groups on the basis of colour, language, or religion .
 The high potential ethnicity has to drive conflict in relation to other identities such as social class or political affiliation because they lack the clear boundaries of ethnicity . This definition is more widely accepted now .
 Groups build trust and facilitate coordination through “distinct sense of difference, owing to culture and descent’
 The Ukraine crisis developed as a consequence of existing divides that aggravated the differences between the ethnic Russians and the Ukrainians .
 The underlying structure of Ukraine has been analysed by many scholars . David Marples focuses on the ethnic and social composition of Ukraine and the existing voting patterns .
 Many studies suggest that ethnically divided societies often confront voting and party systems based on ethnicity . It's easier for leaders to mobilize on shared identity since it is easier for them to mobilize .
 Brass advanced the idea that ethnicities are transformed, for political power and economic benefits, between the competing elites . Brass was an instrumentalist.
 The conflict in the east can be seen as a rational outcome of the deep cultural and political division in Ukraine . The conflict is seen as the result of a political and cultural divide in Ukraine.
 Russian advocacy has been to promote the “artificial nature of the state which was destined to collapse’s state. Also, Russia has been promoting the ‘artificial Nature of the State’
 There has been a rampant crisis with regards to the lack of strong “national identity’ in the nation, which was to fill the gap after the Soviet fall out .
 V.P. Gagnon argues that ethno-nationalist feelings are created and not predisposed .
 It is a tool in the hands of the threatened elites to mobilize masses and accept the role elites play in instigating conflict . It is also a tool to mobilize the masses and mobilize masses, says the writer .
 A strong and stable national identity provides social cohesion, helps to integrate minorities and thus guarantees territorial integrity and national security . It can then be defined as a venture developed by the political and cultural elites and implemented by means of education, media and symbolic politics .
 Democratic consolidation cannot be achieved without national unity based on a shared historical memory .
 The developments suggest that Ukraine's ruling elite failed to accomplish its task of forging a strong national identity . This failure has resulted in a political crisis, the annexation of Crimea by Russia and the armed conflict .
 National identities in Ukraine-Russia borderlands have moved and crystallized in reaction to significant political events . Internal and external political actors have mobilised history and symbolism to promote their agendas .
 It would be unwise to understand the pro-Russian irredentism in Crimea, the separatist in the Donbass region and the political polarization only through the internal growth and failures of Kyiv's identity politics .
 Nationalism, anti-West hatred and nostalgia in Russia have offered alternative identities to the Russian speaking population of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Previously, elites who found themselves in position used symbolism to promote only an idea of national identity .
 The yellow-blue flag, the coat of arms and the anthem which was borrowed from the Ukrainian tradition of national liberation struggle was made official symbols of post-Soviet Ukraine . Despite the resistance of the orthodox Communists, the flag was made the official symbols.
 The normative vision of Ukrainian history reduced "the nation" to ethnic Ukrainians . It was pushed to become the central element of the civic education of the younger generations .
 The 2004 presidential campaign and Orange Revolution unbarred the dilemma of identity politics and regional cleavages . However, the 2004 presidential election unbarring the dilemma.
 It continued to appeal to its core electorate, cultivating a negative identity . Instead, it continued to Appeal to the core electorate .
 The Euromaidan in 2013, turned into massive protests, re-activated the old phobias of radical Ukrainian nationalism in the east and south .
 The stated narratives above lead to a conclusion that it was in reality regionalism, played through a perceived idea of ethnicity by the political elites that was the true cause of divide in the state .
 The above rhetoric can be studied through the application of ethnic theories, on nationalism, of ‘ethno symbolism’ where the elites treat ‘the other’ as a negative entity .
 Media comes to play a vital role in promoting the agendas of these elites, which will also be further discussed .
 Russia remained more than a neighbour for majority of Ukrainians. Even after the disintegration of Soviet Union, Russia remained a neighbour .
Family ties, labour migration waves, a common marketplace of media and the leverage of Russian culture made very difficult to develop a clear Ukrainian identity .
 Moscow had not anticipated the Orange revolution and the failure of the ruling elite . What Moscow hadn't anticipated was the Orange Revolution and failure of ruling elite.
 This failure changed Moscow’s stance and predetermined its reaction to Euromaidan . This failure has changed Moscow's stance on the crisis .
 Moscow increased its support for pro-Russian groups, promoting anti-NATO protests, defending the Russian language .
 Russia utilised media so perfectly by representing Ukraine as divided nation, an simulated state with incompatible communities . Russia used media to represent Ukraine as a divided nation .
 The Russian media attempted to undermine the 2014 protests in Kyiv, which had begun as pro-European . The 2014 protests began as a pro- European protest .
Russkiy mir, a soft power project of Russia, was employed as a way to associate the discourse of shared past, common values, culture and history with Russian nationalism . The project was intended to reduce European values to issues of sexual minority .
 Russia's political elites saw Ukraine as a part of their country’s identity and hence relied on national myths to devise narratives to bind Ukraine to Russia .
Russkiy mir transformed to Russian nationalism which equated to Russians and Russian-speakers, denying the existence of Ukraine . With the annexation of Crimea, the concept of Russkiymir transformed to Russia .
 Russian media invented the concept of ‘Novorossiya’ which implied that the southern and eastern region of Ukraine was a part of Russia .
 It is a representation of the construction of a new geopolitical reality, it is said . It's a representation. It is an example of the new geopoliticalreality, it says .
 Russia even though being an external factor was able to undermine the state and its nation-building because the state was weak, corrupt and spilt by the ruling elite . However, Russia was not able to turn the state into a powerful nation .
 The lack of national identity in Ukraine acted as a catalyst for the divide fuelled by Kremlin, says the paper .
 The penultimatesection of the paper will probe into the geo-political roots and dynamics for the Russian intervention .
 Ukraine has special importance to Kremlin because of its close links to Russia in the military field . Ukraine has close ties to Russia. Ukraine has a strong military presence in Russia .
Russia is heavily dependent on Ukraine’s Aerospace and Defense industry . Russia is heavily reliant on the industry .
 Ukraine's imminent position will influence Russia’s long-term geostrategic orientation . Ukraine's immediate position will impact Russia's long- term geostR geostradical orientation .
 Russia's concern was that if Ukraine signed the Association Agreement with EU, it would hamper the prospect of Ukraine joining the Eurasian Union, a dream of Putin .
 Russia was also threatened with Kyiv wanting to maintain closer ties with NATO, which would have hampered the naval power and access to ports . Kyiv wanted to maintain close ties with the NATO .
 Russia wanted to dominate the Black Sea as its ideology has always been to depend on itself for its defense . Through its Crimean bases, Russia wants to dominate Black Sea .
 Crimea had plans to establish a partnership with America to develop its natural gas reserves . Another reason was that Crimea had planned to establish partnership with U.S. to develop gas reserves.
 If this would have planned out, Russia would lose its largest customer . Russia's largest customer would have been its biggest customer .
 Putin’s deadlock over Ukraine spurred his popularity by 80% in Russia. More importantly, Putin's deathlock over the Ukraine spurred him to popularity .
 He played on the grievances of the Russians in Ukraine who did not want to be a part of Europe to further his greed . He did not wants to be part of the Europe to continue his greedy greed .
 The American missile defense plans, with bases in Poland and Czech Republic, intimidated Russia’s nuclear power .
 The push to join NATO seriously challenged Russia’s position in the region . Then, the push for Russia to join the alliance was seriously challenged .
 With the EU's Association Agreement, it was a serious blow at Putin’s face and the security of the state, acting as the tipping point for Russia .
 In his book, he argues that ethno-symbolist feelings are created not predisposed .
 These elites appeal to the masses with the falsified or manipulated threat from externals and coerce them into believing that their collective existence is threatened .
 It becomes very important for elites to have control over media houses, if only partially, over the media houses .
 Novorossiya was created to build an ethnic link and draw on the sentiments of the Russians in Ukraine .
 The primary goal of the paper has been to utilise the theories and concepts of ethnic conflict argued by scholars in tandem with the Ukraine crisis . The paper is based on the theories, concepts and concepts argued by scholar and scholars .
 The aim of the paper was to see the conflict from different narratives . However, it was keeping in mind the aim was to make the conflict different .
 In this last section, I accept there may have been a lapse in impartiality . I accept that there may be a lapse of impartiality in this section .
 Russia, Step by Step, Wants to Regain an Imperial Role in the Global and European Security System . Russia, Russia and Europe have a joint role in the global security system .
 Russia conquered southern Ukraine and Crimea, taking them from the Ottoman Empire . Russia conquered Crimea and Ukraine and took the Crimea in the early 1900s .
 Ukraine pledged never to use economic coercion to subordinate Ukraine to their own interest . They also pledged to never use economic coerced to subordinate the country to its own interest.
 On 20thFebruary, 2014, Kiev sees its worst day of violence for almost 70 years . Kiev is expected to be the worst day in the city's history.
 Crimea's secession referendum on joining Russia is backed by 97% of voters . On 18thMarch President Putin signs a bill to absorb Crimea into Russian Federation .
 NATO satellite imagery spotted Russian artillery crossing the border from the eastern side . Videos were leaked of Russian tanks crashing through the region of Donbass .
 U.N. warns that Ukraine's prolonged stalemate is causing grief and isolation among millions living in the conflict zone .
 Between November 16, 2015, and February 15, 2016, 78 civilian casualties were recorded in eastern Ukraine . The estimated casualty figures since the beginning of the conflict to more than 30,000 are estimated .
 The figures include civilians, Ukrainian military personnel and members of armed groups .
 Ethnic Russians faced no discrimination and this paved why Russian ethnic nationalism was more marginalized than the Ukrainian . Ethnic Russians face no discrimination .
 The majority of Russophones were comfortable in combining political loyalty to Ukraine with their Russian local identities . The majority were comfortable with combining their political loyalty with their local identities.
 Popular clichés about the fascist threat posed by the nationalist Galicia. The notion of a de-nationalised Donbass with Soviet identity and criminal mentality poisoned the public discourse for the coming years .