 As we write, oil and gas billionaires in Texas are clinking their champagne glasses .
 They are giddy over the price-gouging on gas and oil and the resulting avalanche of profits lining their pockets . They are also giddy about the cost of oil and gas .
 Ditto for the U.S. arms dealers, who drool over the destruction of weapons stockpiles and the rise in their stock prices .
 Biden’s State of the Union address before Congress turned into a frenzied war party, including the shameful chanting of ‘Fund, fund, fund the police’ The Black Lives Matter movement has called for defunding murderous police departments .
 The 14,000 people murdered by Ukraine in the Donbass region since the 2014 U.S.-sponsored coup, let alone the rest of the world .
 Many people are finding time to celebrate, regardless of how many lives are lost . But be assured that through their manufactured tears, they are still finding time.
 The Phillippines have suffered bombings, sanctions, destruction and death at the hands of the U.S. and the Pentagon . Ask the people of Yemen, Palestine, Iraq, Iraq and Syria, Syria, Lebanon, Lebanon and Lebanon.
 Sanctions have choked and strangled workers and children in Cuba, Venezuela, Venezuela and Nicaragua, Nicaragua, Zimbabwe, Iran, North Korea and dozens of other countries .
 This is not the same U.S. imperialism that emerged triumphant from the Second World War . This is rather an imperialism with a contracting capitalist economy that faces a new world situation .
 The potential for this war to become broader should not be lost on anyone. The potential to become wider should be seen by anyone .
 What is celebrated today, in an economy marked by runaway inflation, may usher in a more significant global capitalist recession .
 There is a tipping point where sanctions will become deleterious to Western capitalism, says John Sutter . The U.S. dollar is a stranglehold on the world market .
 Today may become a turning point for imperialism and the world’s working class .
 As for the mainstream anti-war movement, it has forgotten the lessons of the Iraq War . The Iraq War was the first Iraq War.
 When the first Gulf War started in 1990-1991, with its attendant lies and demonizations, the anti-war movement was split . The first Gulf war started in 1991.
 Significant sections called for “sanctions, not bombs,” wanting to distance themselves from the Iraqi government .
 U.S. missile strikes killed more people in Iraq than in the decade of sanctions that followed . The sanctions were designed to bring Iraqi people to their knees .
 It would take a more expansive and continuing war, fueled by the lies of “weapons of mass destruction,’ to accomplish that . The war would take more than a decade to complete .
 U.S. bombings and the use of depleted uranian weapons are among the most common reasons to kill Americans . The United States is known for its use of uranian arms .
 Kweisi Mfume was a TV host at the time of the Gulf War . He remembers speaking at a debate against the war in the 1990s .
 A member of the royal family of Kuwait was being prepared to go on in a separate broadcast to build up the false narrative of herself .
There are similarities but also important differences between that war and the current one . There are similarities and differences between the two wars .
 The imperialists’ goal is to plunder Russia’s vast resources, just like in Iraq, says the author . The imperialist’goal is to loot Russia's vast resources.
 The West viewed Russia's oil, gas and mineral resources as loot and Russia as a vassal state . But it soon became apparent that the capitalist West had no intention to allow another competitor into its ranks .
 Vladimir Putin represented a block to the plans in the same way that Saddam Hussein did in Iraq, regardless of the capitalist character of Russia . President Vladimir Putin, who followed Yelstin, represented the same block to these plans .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was established as a military alliance to contain and threaten the Soviet Union . It was established to contain, threaten and contain the USSR .
 There are a couple of simple proverbs that have borne the wisdom of their meaning through the ages . There are two simple pro-verbs.
 Everyone who has experienced the evil machinations of a boss who destroys unity between workers understands that the boss needs to ‘divide and conquer’ in order to maintain dominance .
 Think of the sabotage of last year’s union drive of Amazon workers in Bessemer, Alabama .
 The militarization of the U.S. took root well before the United States Constitution was written .
 These settlers are still honored for stealing the homes of the Indigenous peoples . The Indigenous people are still recognized for stealing their homes .
 The old colonial empires spanning the globe maintained their rule by creating divisions . The divisions were created by the British Empire .
 In India, the seeds of the division between Hindus and Muslims were cemented by British colonialism . In India.
 When the British were finally driven out, they left their former colony partitioned, with tens of millions displaced and more than a million killed . The British were eventually driven out.
 In modern times, an endless list of U.S. imperialist wars have ravaged the world . The list is a long list of imperialist wars .
 The CIA-run contra war was designed to crush the liberation struggle in Central America . Beginning in 1980, the CIA- run contra war began in 1980 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North was a member of Ronald Reagan's National Security Council . North was found to be one of those orchestrating this.
 Those drugs flooded the streets of US cities in an attempt to stifle the progressive movements fighting for jobs, housing, medical care and education .
 The United States media portrays each new U.S. intervention as a “just fight’ in wars where the social structures of the targeted countries are totally devastated . Think of how the United States Media portrays each U. States intervention as an ‘just fight'
Tidal wave of evictions has begun. Stephen Millies Rents are going through the roof while evictions have begun .
Rents jumped by 28% in Dallas, 26% in Phoenix, 25% in Las Vegas and 24% in Cincinnati . Rents jumped in Cincinnati, Dallas, Phoenix and Las Vegas .
 Neither broken supply chains nor rising wages can be blamed for this rent-gouging, says author .
 Even the idiots at Fox News can’t claim the People’s Republic of China or Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin are responsible .
 A quarter of families had to pay their landlords more than half of their income . A quarter had to paid their landlords over half their income.
 Most visible are hundreds of thousands of human beings forced to live on the streets of the wealthiest country on earth . Many of the world's wealthiest people are living in the richest country on Earth .
Millions of families have to double-up with relatives . Millions of families need to double up with relatives.
 The Census Bureau estimated there were 43 million families living in these conditions . There were also 43 million people living in such conditions .
Black, Indigenous and Latinx people were two and three times as likely to have died from COVID-19 as whites . This overcrowding is a big reason why they were more likely to die than whites .
Banksters are committing wholesale robbery by raising interest rates on mortgages . Banksters are raising interest rate on mortgages to steal money from customers .
 investment bank BlackRock wants to get in the action by gobbling up homes . The investment bank wants to buy homes .
 This outfit has $10 trillion in assets under its control to play around with . The company has a $10 billion in assets to play with with .
 That’s more money than the economies of every country except the U.S. and China . That's more money.
 Landlords want to start mass evictions. Landlords are fighting back against evictions . Landlords say they want to stop evictions from happening .
 Dliver North itary expansion benefited the U.S. economy . Kathy Hochul, joined with Re’s Re, was authorized to do everything hat | did .
 Those who gained small privileges as a result were encouraged to support, or merely ignore, U.S. imperialist wars .
 The Crown Heights Tenants Union in Brooklyn, N.Y., successfully fought the eviction of the Robinson family .
 Queen Afua Helen Robinson speaks at a rally outside the home . Publicans want to end bans on throwing families out of their homes .
 These measures were enacted in 2020 at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic . They were enacted at the start of the new pandemic.
 Congress and state legislatures only did so because they were afraid of what 20 million suddenly jobless people might do . Congress and states were afraid that 20 million people might be jobless .
 It was millions of people who marched demanding "Black Lives Matter" that kept these bans in place . Millions of people marched demanding “Black lives Matter’s” ban .
 Santa Clara County is home to San Jose and Silicon Valley billionaires . Just 34% of households that applied for help got it, according to CNN.
 244,000 of the county’s children live in families who can’t afford basic needs . These outfits have a total stock market value of $5. trillion .
 Issa Smith was evicted over a disputed lease with her landlord in Kalamazoo, Michigan .
 She now lives with her two children in a motel room that doesn’t even have a refrigerator . The motel room has no refrigerator or refrigerator .
 Issa Smith has to pay for the tiny place that eats up almost all of her disability assistance benefits . The $1,800 amonth that Issa Smith pays for the place eats up her disability benefits .
 tenants don't even have the right to a lawyer like criminal defendants do . In most places tenants don’t even have a right to an attorney .
 landlords can be evicted for almost any reason, with landlords trying to steal the security deposit . Families can be Evicted for nearly any reason .
 Families shouldn't be evicted just because the landlord doesn't like them. Families shouldn’t be evictions just because they don't like the landlord .
 The Crown Heights Tenants Union and other organizations stopped the Robinson family home from being stolen . The Robinson family family home was stolen from Robinson's home .
 They were victims of an attempted ‘foreclosure rescue scam’ in which they unknowingly signed away the title to their home . The scam was an attempt to get the title back to their house .
 Even before we talk about racist police murder in the U.S. we have to say that is an outrageous number in itself .
 It’s an indication of repression against working people in general, says the writer . It's a sign of repression, he says, to discourage any protest against injustice, wage slavery and exploitation .
 Black and Brown youth are killed at twice the rate of white people, according to the U.S. Department of Justice .
 The Washington Post began taking the numbers of killings by police when it realized that the FBI's numbers were only half of the actual shootings in 2014 .
 The study confirmed that police violence has been grossly underreported for at least four decades . The study also found that the police violence in the past has been underreported .
Police reporting was exposed to the world and to the administration of Barack Obama in 2015 . Yet nothing was done to correct it, and it still persists here in 2022 .
 Police killings have been steady at nearly 1,000 per year since 2015 . That parallels the crisis of police killings since 2015, from the Obama administration through the Trump administration .
Since racism is an integral part of capitalism, it doesn't matter whether a Democratic or a Republican regime is in power . Since racism is a part of the economy, it's not a matter of whether a Republican or Democratic regime is on power .
 Racism and racist repression are primary tools in maintaining this system . Racism is a key tool in maintaining the system of racism and repression .
 They are primary tools used to keep the working class divided and weak . They are key to keeping working class separated and weak, they say .
 The answer is to come together, police and communities, Biden said at the NYPD headquarters .
 It inherited nuclear weapons from the Soviet Union and has developed formidable defenses . Most importantly, it inherited nuclear arms from the USSR .
 The Russian Federation would likely have already shared the fate of Libya and Iraq . Without these differences, the Russian Federation could have already been involved in both countries .
 War is continuation of politics by other means Imperialism forces other countries to defend their borders . War is part of a series of wars that has been fought by other countries .
 Russia not only shares a border in Eastern Europe with Ukraine, but it also shares an extensive 2,615-mile border with China .
 To weaken Russia, potentially overthrow Putin, in the guise of putting in a more “democratic regime’s” regime, would place China in an untenable military situation .
 The U.S., Britain and Australia, referred to as AUKUS, included the delivery of a nuclear-powered submarine fleet for Australia . This also cannot be divorced from the Sept., 2021, trilateral security agreement between the U.K. and Australia .
 At the same time, the U.S. Africa Command, AFRICOM, was busy involving itself in coups from Mali to Guinea .
 AFRICOM is U.S. imperialism's answer to China’s “Belt and Road Initiative,” which has taken up building needed infrastructure in Africa . AFRicOM is the United States' answer to the ‘Belt & Road Initiative�
 Mayor Adams has made reactionary statements in regard to hiding racist police killings, pushing rightwing buttons . Adams has been accused of hiding racist killings .
 The report highlighted four areas that speak to the global nature of U.S. imperialism’s war in Ukraine . All of this speaks to theglobal nature of United States imperialism.
 It is aimed not just at Russia and Donbass but at China, Venezuela, Cuba and Cuba, Cuba, Iran, Nicaragua and any people on any continent struggling to determine their destiny .
 The unintended consequence is that this may strengthen ties between China, Russia, Iran and others . This may strengthen the ties between Russia and Iran, China and other countries .
 This is of no concern in the myopic vision of the imperialist rulers, who are driven by the inner workings of their own capitalist system to expand or die .
 Fascism, Russia and Ukraine is an error to forget the history of fascism and the Nazi advance into the Soviet Union .
 Hitler’s war — World War II — is etched into the psyche of Russian people and all former Soviet peoples .
 Hitler’s forces were not only bent on exterminating Jews, Roma people and queer people, but also communists and leftists .
 It was aimed straight at the heart of the fledgling Soviet socialist revolution . The Soviet Socialist Revolution was aimed at a fledgling Soviet Socialist revolution .
 Page 3 to prioritize to end systemic racism and violations by law enforcement against Africans and people of African descent . March 14, 2022 Page 3 will focus on ending systemic racism .
 Biden is proposing with his friend, Mayor Adams, to deliver reparatory justice . He addresses these points — just the opposite .
 It was no accident that Biden, Obama, and especially the fascist former president Trump have done nothing but enable police murder . It's no accident.
 Biden and Kamala Harris refused to even consider taking funds from the police or reorganizing the police to make them less lethal, especially against Black and Brown communities .
 Barack Obama was approached by Black Lives Matter activists pleading for him to take the military weapons away from local police . Obama's administration was asked for the weapons, like assault weapons and tanks, during his administration .
 He offered only to make sure all cops would have cameras instead — and we’ve seen how that has not slowed down the murders by cops .
 The Democrats and Republicans are given their marching orders from the super-rich who put them in power .
 Stopping police violence threatens to keep in place the status quo of exploitation and racism, so it is not allowed to be discussed .
 It will take amovement specifically against police murder, prioritizing the issue of how racism is used to murder Black and Brown youth to make any real changes .
 The heroic resistance and sacrifices of the Russian people and their partisan communist allies are undeniable . The heroic Resistance and sacrifices are undeniable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is not a single person in Russia today who does not have members of their family tree who died in the fight to stop the Nazis .
 The Soviet Union bore the brunt of casualties — over 15% of the population . Over 15% were killed in the Soviet Union .
 The United States is at the very bottom in terms of World War II casualties, according to the U.S. military report .
 Seldom mentioned is that China lost over 20 million people, far exceeding U.S. losses .
 The sympathy of the Russian people for the people of the Donbass republics, Odessa and others repressed inside Ukraine is not contrived but deeply felt .
Mass pressure on Putin on this issue should not be shoved aside. And mass pressure on the Putin on the issue should be pushed aside .
 It is a form of cynical, opportunist intellectualism for some who call themselves anti-imperialists or anti-war to dismiss the fascist threat inside Ukraine . It is the form of cynicism for some of the pro-Ukrainian opposition.
 One does not even Continued on page 4 Page 4 Page4 March 14, 2022 .
 After the Russian Revolution of 1905, she and other leaders had tremendous prestige among the workers on the European continent .
 Lenin and others on the ‘Basel Manifesto’ that was addressed to the Extraordinary International Socialist Congress held in November 1912 .
 A key part of the manifesto was the one about using the crisis created by imperialist war to struggle for the abolition of capitalism . The manifesto was written by the British Labour Party .
 As a result, Luxemburg and Liebknecht were imprisoned in June 1916 for two and a half years .
 Luxemburg and Liebknecht were captured and executed in Berlin on Jan., 1919, by the Rifle Division of the Cavalry Guards.
 For a number of years she fought by the side of Simon Bolivar in the revolutionary war against Spanish colonialism . She fought for many years.
 Manuela Saenz joined in a conspiracy to oust the Spanish viceroy of Peri . Simon Bolivar took part in the successful liberation of New Granada in 1819 .
Saenz and other pro-independence women conspired to recruit colonial troops from the Spanish royalist defense arsenal in Lima . Saenz and others conspired with other women to recruit troops.
 The action was a success, with United States imperialism unleashes global war on workers . Continued from page 3 have to go back to 2014, despite that being a mere eight years .
 Days ago, Zelensky named the fascist Aidar Battalion’s commander governor of Odessa .
 One month before Russia’s intervention, the United States sent a specially-equipped satellite phone to allow Zelensky direct access to President Biden and the Pentagon .
 African and Indian medical students were blocked and abused by Ukrainians at the border . Ukrainian border officials are accused of racially abusing medical students . The incident did not stir the kind of protests it should have.
 Imperialist-installed dictators and their murderous policies in oppressed countries. The growth of the repressive state apparatuses (the police and military, courts and prisons), including in the U.S., and the growth of neo-Nazi movements internationally, are all intertwined .
 Ukrainian fascism, which is not only neo-Nazi but shares a lineage with the original Nazi movement through Stepan Bandera .
Much of the regiment, including ¥ Manuela’s half-brother, defecting to the anti-Spanish arm of José de San Martin . The socialist and communist workers’ movement was strong in Europe .
 José de San Martin awarded Manuela Saenz with the highest distinction in ss the campaign against the Spanish Royalists . The title of “Caballeresa del Sol’ — the Order of the Sun of Peru.
 Saenz supported the revolution against Spain by gathering information, distributing leaflets and protesting for women’s rights . During her years of collaboration with Bolivar, Saenz was involved in the revolution .
 Saenz did not feel constrained by gendered conventions of feminine behavior . Saenz didn't feel constrained. Saenz was not constrained by feminine conventions .
 Bolivar named her “Libertadora del Libertador’ (“The Liberator of the Liberator’s) after she saved his life on Sept., 1828, by confronting assassins intent on killing him .
 Radical abolitionist John Brown characterized Tubman as one of the bravest persons on this continent .
 She was five feet tall, commanded others with unflagging strength, had brilliant intelligence and carried a rifle . She was 5 feet tall and had a brilliant intelligence, had a rifle.
 Tubman was born into slavery on a plantation in Dorchester Coun. But when war was actually declared, it collapsed .
 The political agreements and resolutions for comrades to oppose their imperialist governments dissolved under the war fever and patriotic jingoism . The political agreement and resolutions were signed by comrades in the UK .
 Lenin’s slogan, “Turn the imperialist war into civil war,’ originated during this period .
 1917 was not an abstract slogan, but rather a pragmatic preparation for 1917 . It was not a abstract slogan. It was a practical preparation for the war .
 Without preparation, the Bolshevik Revolution likely would not have succeeded . Without that preparation, it would likely have succeeded, says the author .
 On this International Working Women's Day, it's essential to recognize Clara Zetkin, its founder, and Rosa Luxemburg .
 Lenin played critical roles along with Lenin in opposing the capitulation of the social democrats .
Both were theoretical leaders in oe General Harriet Tubman @\ty, Maryland . Both were theoretical leader in the Maryland state .
 In 1849, when the owner of her plantation died, she was aware that all of the slaves could be sold away from their families . Life expectancy could be as short as two or three years .
 When Tubman reached Philadelphia, Tubman was, under the law of the time, a free woman .
 Passage of Fugitive Slave Act in 1850 gave legal cover to those who could be paid for her recapture . But she operated with caution, so she worked with caution .
 Tubman was forced to guide her passengers on the Underground Railroad all the way to Canada . The Fugitive Slave Act forced Tubman to guide passengers to Canada.
 Tubman developed oratorical skills at abolitionist meetings and at women's rights gatherings . Tubman visited Maryland to help freedom seekers escape .
 During the U.S. Civil War against slavery, she earned the title of General Harriet Tubman . During the Civil War, she was awarded the title.
 She fought as a Union soldier, a scout, a spy, a nurse, and a leader of Black and white troops fighting for freedom .
 Moses' capture was at one time as high as $40,000, an unimaginable bounty in that era . Rewards were offered for Moses’ capture .
 Zetkin became a fighter against the rise of Nazism . Rosa Luxemburg and her comrade Karl Liebknecht were executed during an uprising of German workers .
 This is not a Russian war on Ukraine, or a war by the fascist-sympathizing oligarchs of Ukraine . It is a war on the world’s working class, according to the U.S.
 We dream of a world where people can lay down their swords and where borders separating humanity will dissolve . We also dream of the world where we can see where borders will dissolve, we say .
 It will take the dismantling of imperialism and capitalism and the building of revolutionary socialism to make that dream a reality . But it will take a long time to make it a reality, says author .
 Imperialism is not a policy chosen by one government and dropped by another . Imperialism isn't a policy picked by a government, it's a policy that is not chosen by a single government .
 Lenin wrote, an imperialist war waged for the political and economic exploitation of the world . The First World War was the outcome of imperialism.
 The imperialist powers raised huge armies and navies, not only to forcibly subjugate oppressed people in the colonies, but to make war against other countries competing for control .
 Lenin wrote “Imperialism’s” in 1916 . The world was already divided among the great capitalist powers .
 The war resulted from inter-imperialist rivalries to redivide the world . The war was fought in the Middle East .
 World War II signaled a turning point in world imperialist relations . World War 2 signaled a turn point in World imperialist relations.
 The United States emerged from WWII as the world’s most powerful imperialist country, gaining control of former European empires in Asia and Africa .
 The overturn of the socialist Soviet Union and the breakup of the Soviet republics into individual nation states was a dismantling of a planned economy . The break-up of the USSR resulted in capitalist economies that are under-developed .
 There has not been a sudden, almost magical appearance of an imperialist Russia .
 Lenin thought that there were a few characteristics of imperialism, including the rise of finance capital and the export of capital, not just commodities .
 The U.S. exports not just commodities but capital — mostly in the form of loans or investments . The U., for example, exports not only commodities, but capital .
 Russia’s economy is almost neocolonial today, according to the Economist . Russia's GDP is smaller than that of South Korea or India, the Economist says .
 Russia’s economy is almost neocolonial, dependent on the exchange of raw materials such as oil and ores . Russia's economy is dependent on raw materials like oil and Ores .
 This is the classic economic relationship of acolony to imperialist finance capital . This is a classic relationship. This is an economic relationship.
 During the Soviet period, Russia and the other republics that formed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics made remarkable industrial progress .
 Between 1921 and 1988, there were no years of negative economic growth . There were no recessions, except for the World War II years .
 The Soviet economy fell into recession only in 1989 as the Gorbachev government began to dismantle the planned economy .
 Under Gorbachev, Yeltsin finished the job of dismantling the Soviet economy . In the new non-Russian ex-Soviet republics including Ukraine, socialist industry was dismantled .
 The years of Yeltsin are now remembered as perhaps the worst period in Russia’s 1,000-year history . The years were the worst in Russia's history .
 This was the greatest economic disaster any country has seen in modern times, in war or peace . This was a great economic disaster, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By the end of 2020, some 45% of the population were in the poor category, according to a study by the Ptukha Institute .
 The deep poverty has created the conditions for fascist gangs to emerge, says the author . The poverty has also created conditions for fascism to emerge .
 Po Putin’s role Putin took a more protectionist direction, unlike Yeltsin and Gorbachev, who had fawned on the West .
 Under Putin, there has been little growth of Russia’s manufacturing production that had been demolished by the ‘perestroika’ reforms .
Under Putin, Russia continues mainly as an exporter of raw materials . Yet, under Putin, the country continues to be a raw materials exporter .
 Russia now accounts for about 6% of the global aluminum supply, 3.5% of copper supply, and 4% of cobalt supply . Russia now account for about 7% of world's aluminum supply .
 Russia is the world’s largest producer of crude oil and second-largest producer of dry natural gas . The United States is in the top 10 exporters of grain crops, including barley, corn, rye, oats and especially wheat .
 From 2017-2019, it was the biggest exporter of wheat, accounting for about 20% of the world market . The world's biggest wheat exporter is now the biggest in the world .
 The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have taken over the economies of the world . The IMF and the World Bank have taken control of many economies .
 Today almost every country is capitalist, and most are exploited by imperialism . Most of those exploited by finance capital, by finance Capital .
 Russia, too, is an exploited country in relation to imperialism, like Mexico . Mexico is a country that has been exploited by Russia .
 NATO targets Russia Russia is the primary provider of gas and oil to much of Europe . Russia is also the main provider of oil and gas to Europe .
 Russia in competition with the U.S., the biggest producer of gas in the world . That’s put Russia in Competition with the United States, the world's biggest producer .
 The United States has been on a drive to control the world market in oil and gas . The U.S. has been in a bid to control world market.
 This can be seen in its attacks, actually acts of war, against Iran and Venezuela as well as its war on Iraq . This can also be seen as a result of the Iraq war .
 These are countries that had sought national sovereignty over oil and gas . These are nations that sought sovereignty over the issue .
 Russia, too, has been a target, especially its Nord Stream 2 pipeline, but not just for that . Russia has also been a targets for the pipeline .
 The countries put under NATO include Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Croatia, Croatia,. Albania, Albania, Romania, Bulgaria .
 NATO put Ukraine and Georgia, both bordering Russia, on the table in 2008 . In 2008, NATO put the inclusion of Ukraine, Georgia, and Ukraine on the list .
 The first war in Europe since World War II didn't just start . Despite the war propaganda that’s presented as news these days, the first war on Yugoslavia didn’t just start.
 That war was launched by the U.S. and NATO against Yugoslavia in 1999 .
 NATO bombers hit Belgrade, Pristina in Kosovo, Podgorica in Montenegro and several other cities . For 78 days, from March 24 to June 10, 1999, NATO bombers struck Belgrade.
 The U.S. directly bombed the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Belgrade . Three Chinese reporters were killed in the bombing .
 Russia told the U.S. and NATO “no’t to expansion to Ukraine and Georgia, on Russia’s borders . Russia understood the lesson of Yugoslavia and told the United States, NATO ‘no” to expand to Ukraine .
 Former U.S. ambassador to Russia said Ukraine joining NATO constituted a security threat for Russia . William J Burns is now director of the CIA .
 The so-called Maidan coup in 2014 was openly supported and financed by NATO . NATO put in a government that made NATO membership a policy mandate .
 Many Ukrainians resisted the Maidan coup, particularly in the working class . Actually, many Ukrainians resisted it, especially in working class.
 In the Maidan civil war, fascist gangs emerged as a force for the coup . The Maidan Civil War was a civil war between the two sides .
 Resistance to the coup was strongest in the eastern section of the country . Resistance to coup was strong in eastern section.
 A neo-nazi pro-Maidan gang targeted the Odessa House of Trade Unions, near the center of the resistance .
 The building was firebombed and at least 48 anti-fascists and labor activists were burned alive . The building had been set on fire and was burned alive.
 The independent Donetsk People's Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic were created when the people there voted overwhelmingly (89% and 96%) to secede from the Maidan regime . The independent republic and the independent republic were created by the people who voted overwhelmingly
 Ukrainian National Guard’s Azov regiment, a neo-nazi stormtrooper-like operation, has been subjected to continuous attack since then .
 More than 14,000 have been killed in Ukraine’s war on Donetsk and Lugansk .
 Russia was pushed into a corner by the unrelenting drive for NATO entry to Ukraine as well as the growing buildup of neo-nazi militias and war on Donetsk and Lugansk .
 Ukraine had promised in the Minsk agreements it signed in 2014 and 2015 there would be a ceasefire, an end to all fighting, withdrawal of heavy weapons, release of prisoners of war, and recognition of self-government .
 Putin may not be an anti-imperialist leader, but the Russian military operation to “demilitarize and denazify’ Ukraine and recognize the Donetsk People’s Republic is a move against imperialism, United States and NATO imperialism .
 The United States military-industrial complex and Western media have pushed a narrative that any Russian incursion into the Ukraine is an invasion . The U.S. military- industrial complex has pushed the narrative.
 As we have previously written, Russia is not the true aggressor in this situation . As we've previously written.
Since 2014, Ukraine and its imperialist allies have waged literal and economic warfare against the two Donbass republics . Since 2014, the alliance of fascists and military brass couped the popularly elected government in 2014 .
 Struggle-La Lucha has thoroughly covered the real reasons behind this aggression . Struggle- La Lucha is known for its violent and aggressive behavior .
 Any Russian military operation in the Ukraine is really an act of self-defense against nearly a decade of war and provocation from NATO and the Ukrainian government .
 In recent weeks, in addition to fever-pitch saber rattling, another disturbing trend has developed in the media in regard to the Ukrainian Jewish community .
 The U.S. and allies have used this war crisis as an opportunity to push Zionist ideology and muddle history . The United States and their allies have been using the crisis as a way to push Zionism ideology andmuddle history.
 The aim of this media blitz has been to falsely compare Russia and Nazi Germany, with the hopes of pushing more Jews towards Zionism .
 The long history of Ukrainian nationalist collaboration with Nazi Germany and the present alliance between the government and neo-Nazis is despicable .
 Jacob Goldstein, Anna's father, decided it was time to move his family after pogroms devastated his village .
 Ukraine was part of the Russian Empire at the time, where anti-Semitic pogroms were as common as the Qteruecie .
 The Bolshevik Revolution led Russia into a new era. Fewer than 15 years after her great grandmother left her small village in the Ukraine .
 The Tzar's oppression of the Jewish community was a significant contributing factor to the Bolshevik Revolution . It is important to realize that the Tzar’s oppression of Jews was a major contributing factor.
 Many Jews took up arms against the Tzar in the revolution of 1917 . It was for that reason that many Jews were fighting against him .
 The USSR fought for the rights of all oppressed people inside and outside of its borders . That Revolution led to the formation of the USSR, a socialist state .
 Less than 40 years after that revolution, the vile specter of fascism and hatred would haunt Ukraine and the surrounding area again .
 Eventually it would be the troops of the USSR that destroyed that specter and liberated Jews from Nazi concentration camps .
 In 1941, there were just under three million Jews living in Ukraine . Ukraine is now known as Ukraine . The Holocaust and the Holocaust occurred in 1941 .
 Nazi Germany gained control of most of the western part of the USSR as part of Operation Barbarossa . That same year, Nazi Germany took control of the west of the country . The operation was part of Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union .
 This offensive was a violation of the non-aggression pact between the two countries . It resulted in the Nazi occupation of Ukraine .
 Adolf Hitler ordered the formation of SS death squads almost immediately after Nazi forces occupied the western USSR . Almost immediately after Nazis occupied the west USSR, Adolf Hitler order the creation of the death squads .
 These death squads were called ‘einsatzgruppen’ and were particularly brutal in the Nazi-occupied regions of Eastern Europe .
 The death squads went to work immediately, targeting the Jewish community, as well as all other Soviet citizens in Ukraine, with confinement, torture, and murder . These death squads were also targeting all Soviet citizens .
 Nazi forces commenced an extermination campaign against the city of Mykolaiv, Ukraine . Starting on Sept., 1941, Nazi forces began an exterminationcampaign against the Ukrainian city .
 Within two weeks, over 35,000 people were murdered, the majority of them Jewish .
 Towards the end of the Mykolaiv massacre, the most infamous Nazi massacre of Jews occurred . The Mykolasiv massacre was the most famous Nazi massacre.
 Nazi forces killed 33,771 Jews in the Babi Yar ravine outside of Kiev . In a single day, 33,700 Jews were killed in the ravine .
 This author’s extended family were some of the many who fell at Babi Yar .
 The Babi Yar massacre was followed by a violent campaign of terror against all Soviet citizens in the area that resulted in approximately 150,000 deaths .
 It would be dishonest to discuss the atrocities without discussing Ukrainian collaboration with the Nazi occupiers .
 German Nazis were unforutnately not the sole perpetrators of these crimes against humnanity .
 In fact, many Zelensky, Babi Yar and Aidar, are in fact, according to a Western corporate media report .
 The memorial was damaged when Russian missiles destroyed a TV tower used by the Ukrainian government to push anti-Russia propaganda .
 Russia did launch an attack on a Ukrainian TV tower, but the Babi Yar memorial was not damaged .
 Reporters from Ynet News visited the site personally and discovered there wasn’t a dent in any of the structures .
 Ynet News is the online publication of Yedioth Ahronoth, the largest newspaper in Israel . Ynet is the largest paper in Israel.
 All statues are intact and the site remains unscathed from the military conflict . Photographs clearly show that all statues are still intact .
 corporate media continue to circulate Ukrainian President Volodomyr Zelensky’s false claim that the Russian military targeted the Holocaust memorial .
 combined Russian and Donetsk People's Republic forces launched a successful offensive against the Ukrainian nazi Aidar Battalion . Aidar soldiers captured in the first days of March .
 Aidar's high command was dismantled and the destruction of Aidar headquarters . Aidar was destroyed by attacks on its headquarters .
 During this offensive, DPR forces captured many Aidar Battalion soldiers . During the offensive, many of the soldiers were captured .
 Armenian and Ukrainian independent media were able to take pictures of one soldier . Armenia and Ukraine independent media took pictures of the soldier .
Every Jew, Roma person, LGBTQ2S person, communist or anyone else who entered Buchenwald saw that slogan . Every Jew and Roma person saw it .
 Aidar Battalion’s commander was recently named governor of Odessa . President Zelensky named him the governor of the city .
 Odessa is home to one of Ukraine’s largest and most historic Jewish communities . Odessa has one of the world's largest and largest Jewish communities.
 Nazi commanders and soldiers donning concentration camp slogan tattoos . Of these massacres were carried out by Ukrainian Nazis .
 Large movements of Ukrainian Nazis branding themselves as ‘nationalists’ enacted constant horrors against Jewish, Ukrainian and Russian people in the region .
 Both organizations espoused fascist and anti-Semitic ideology, and openly collaborated with Adolf Hitler’s forces . Both of these organizations espouses fascist and Anti-Semitism .
 Tens of thousands of Jews, Poles, and Russians were slaughtered at the hands of these groups .
Ukranian People’s Milita, a wing of the OUN, killed 6,000 Jews in Lviv . This included the massacre of 6,00 Jews by the Ukranian people's Milita .
 The horrors inflicted by these groups and their leaders cannot be understated . The horrors of these groups cannot beUnderstated .
 When the Holocaust ended, the Nazis and their Ukrainian allies had killed over one million Ukrainian Jews .
 The Ukrainian government lauds many of the OUN and UPA’s leaders as national heroes .
In 2010, Ukrainian President Viktor Yushcenko awarded UPA leader Stepan Bandera the “Hero of Ukraine’s award.’
 Yuschenko's successor, Viktor Yanukovych, officially repealed the award . Yuschenko’s successor Viktor Yanukovych was officially repealed by the award.
 Ukrainian parliament has attempted twice, in 2018 and 2019, to reinstate the award . However, the parliament has tried twice, twice, to return it to the award.
 2019 attempt was championed by Servant of the People, current President Vlodymyr Zelensky’s political party .
 Ukrainian nationalist organizations led mass marches through Kiev in celebration of nazi-collarborator Bandera’s birthday .
 The entire world has joined Washington in condemning Russia's recognition of the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics in Donbass and their anti-fascist military operation in Ukraine .
 NATO allies and dependents have repeated the lies of an “unjustified Russian invasion” verbatim from U.S. State Department news releases .
 The opposition of many countries and movements to NATO expansion is being carefully hidden from workers and oppressed people .
 Many countries that are themselves targets of U.S. war, sanctions and slander campaigns . This is especially true in the case of the many countries that have been targets of United States war .
 Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has faced down many U.S.-instigated coups and assassination attempts . Maduro has been accused of trying to assassinate him .
 Maduro announced his government's support for Russia's decision to recognize the Donbass republics .
 Minsk agreements that were established to guarantee peace. This resulted in the Minsk agreement that was set up to ensure peace . This led to the peace agreement in Belarus .
 President Miguel Diaz-Canel and a large, high-level Cuban delegation met with visiting chair of Russian Federation’s State Duma, Vyacheslav Volodin .
 They have written to us, sending us messages explaining why they are waging this struggle . They have sent us a series of messages explaining what they are doing .
 Ukrainian troops are looking for ways to overcome them, to liquidate them . There have been thousands of deaths there over all these years, there have been many deaths .
 Former Bolivian President Evo Morales was the victim of a U.S.-backed coup in 2019, after an election marred by Washington's interference .
Militant people's movement led by Indigenous workers and peasants returned to power . Morales was able to come home in 2020 .
 The action was in response to a call by the World Federation of Democratic Youth to take action to save the lives of the Kononovich brothers .
 Both accused of alleged collaboration with secret services of the Russian Federation and Republic of Belarus . Both are accused without any basis whatsoever .
 "This is why we want to express our demand for their immediate release. RASIKA RUWANPATHIRANA’s demand for immediate release .
 Any harm to the lives of Aleksandr Kononovich and Mikhail Kononovic will be the responsibility of the Government of Ukraine . Any harm of the deaths of the two will be responsible for the government of Ukraine.
 Pavlenko was personally responsible for the murder of Jews during World War II . He commanded an SS battalion and was responsible for killing Jews .
 Khasevych was a leader in the OUN and one of the most famous Nazi propagandists of the time . He was a member of the Nazi Party .
 Vitali Klitschko, the Mayor of Kiev who championed these proposals, is still in office . It should be noted that Klitschkos, who championed the proposals, has been in office.
Ukrainian government has continued to honor fascists, particularly since 2014 . As can be seen, the Ukrainian government has honored fascists .
 Jewish president, Viodymyr Zelensky, has not changed even with the election of a Jewish president . This has not been changed even though he was elected president .
 Contemporary neo-Nazi movements today would have us believe that Russia is an inherent threat to Jewish life .
 At the turn of the 20th century, the Russian Tzar and his empire were a grave threat to Jewish life .
 The only threat to Jewish life in this conflict is the fasicst Ukranian government filled to the brim with Nazi collaborators . The government is filled with Nazi collaborator.
 The Ukrainian government has continued to support neo-Nazi militas and political parties in the present day . The government has been praised for its support of World War II-era Nazis .
 The Ukrainian government has been heavily influenced, if not controlled, by the fascist movement . Ever since Euromaidan of 2014, the Ukrainian government is heavily influenced by the movement .
 Just three years ago, The Nation published a telling exposé on the growing nature of the fascist movement in Ukraine .
 The article describes large scale neo-Nazi marches with thousands of tiki torches and Nazi flags . The article is published in the New York Times .
 The level of neo-Nazi infiltration in the current government coupled with NATO funds and arms getting to neo-Nazis is even more concerning .
 NATO has consistently trained and equipped the Azov Battalion, a fascist militia operating in the Donbass republics . Since 2014, NATO has regularly trained andequipped the battalion .
 This presumably includes Jews, Russians, and even progressive Ukrainians . This presumably include Jews, Russian, and Ukrainians .
 In 2019, the Azov Battalion was officially integrated into the Ukrainian National Guard . The Azov battalion was officially inducted into the National Guard in 2019 .
 Vadim Troyan is the current leader of the Ukrainian National Police . He is a veteran of the Azov brigade and a known neo-Nazi collaborator .
 Troyan consistently encourages his troops and deputies to study Stepan Bandera and carry on the proud tradition of “Ukrainian nationalism,’ which is really just Nazism. Troyan regularly encourages troops, deputies toStudy StepanBandera .
 It would seem that the current Ukranian government is simply a revival of the pro-Nazi organizations of the 1940s . The current government would seem to be a revival.
 These rabbis include the Chief Rabbi of Israel and a prominent Rabbi in Odessa . They include the chief rabbi of Israel.
 Both rabbis are IDF veterans and support right-wing Zionist ideology . It should be noted, both of these rabbis, are Israeli veterans .
 The implication is that Vladimir Putin is built in the mold of Adolf Hitler and that the fascist state of Israel is the only safe place for Jews .
Ukrainian nationalists and fascist movement have ties to the fascist movement . The assertion is far from the truth, given the historical and present connections .
 The Ukrainian government is from the fascist aligned Ukrainian government and its neo-Nazi militias . It is from a fascist aligned government and the neo-Nazis .
 These are organizations that openly wave swastika flags and call fornew pogroms against the Jewish community . These are groups that call for new pogoms against Jews .
 Israel is this place where war is as common as the air we breathe. There is also a sick irony in that idea because Israel is a place where War is asCommon as air .
 The Israeli government commands one of the most aggressive and vicious militaries and police forces on the planet .
 Israeli military offensives against innocent Palestinian people in 2014 and 2021 . There is no better demonstration of this than the Israeli militaryOffensives.
 To this day, Israel continues to launch unprovoked attacks on countries like Syria, all on behalf of the U.S. ruling class .
 Israeli communist Roman Levin refused to continue serving in a military that enforced apartheid against Palestine . Ethiopian Orthodox Jewish teenager Solomon Tekah, who Israeli police brutally murdered in 2019, was killed in 2019 .
 Neither of these two countries care about the welfare of the Jewish community, or any other oppressed community for that matter .
 Israel's use of Israel as a cudgel to turn us against our brothers and sisters in the Donbass and Palestine. That means questioning the use of Israeli as a Cudgel is a question .
 The true nature of past Ukrainian nationalist movements and the current fascist-friendly Ukrainian regime is analyzed . That means analyzing thetrue nature of the current Ukrainian regime .
 World condemnation for NATO, solidarity with Donbass and Russia Continued from page 7 aggression proves it .
 Washington and NATO are responsible for the unfolding crisis in Eastern Europe. China is the world's most populous country and another target of the United States New Cold War .
Three journalists were killed in NATO's bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in 1999 . The incident prompted widespread anti-U.S. protests in China .
 The hashtag, created by the state-run People's Daily newspaper, has been viewed more than a billion times .
 Hezbollah rejected a statement by the country's Foreign Ministry that condemned Russia's actions . The Lebanese resistance movement rejected the statement .
 Hezbollah member says statement violates principles of neutrality espoused by Lebanese government . Minister of Labor Mustafa Bayram says statement violated principles of neutrality .
 Hezbollah Secretary General Sayyed Hasan Nasrallah slammed the West’s ‘double standards’ and stressed that the U.S. is not trustworthy .
 The Foreign Ministry of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or socialist North Korea is one of the statements from numerous countries and left organizations that condemn the United States manipulations that cornered Russia into carrying out military action in Ukraine .
 The U.S. empire employs every means from manipulation of proxies to direct military assault as it chases profits and leaves a path of destruction from one side of the globe to the other . The statement referred to the way that the United States empire uses every means.
 North Korean leaders understand full-well that military readiness is the only guarantee of survival against imperialism .
 The U.S. has suffered from the brutality and treachery of imperialism, they say . They know that the blame for the current crisis belongs at the doorstep of the White House .
 North Korea endured one of the most brutal military assaults of the 20th century . In the 1950-1953 war that left the Korean peninsula divided in half.
 Millions of North Korean people lost their lives in North Korea. Millions of people have been killed in recent years .
 Civilians trapped in buildings set ablaze by the U.S. military .
 North Korea and its allies withstood the assault but drove the imperialists back to the U.S.-imposed division at the 38th parallel . It was a great military feat.
 Since 1953, the United States has refused to sign a peace treaty with North Korea . North Korea has maintained bases, tens of thousands of troops and at times nuclear weapons in South Korea .
 U.S. Navy warships patrol the waters nearby and nuclear-capable B-52 bombers are stationed in Guam .
 North Korea celebrated Army Day, marking the foundation of the Korean People’s Army in 1948 .
 SYRIA Hezbollah, along with the governments of Syria and Iran, form the Axis of Resistance against U.S. imperialism in Western Asia .
 Russia and Russia have fought to free Syria from the ultra-right Daesh movement and other Western allied “rebels,’ and from U.S. occupation troops, in a war that has gone on for more than a decade .
 Syria was among the first countries to welcome the news of Russia’s decision to recognize the Donbass republics .
 The issue is related to geopolitics and not to politics in the simple sense of the word . That is, the issue is, not to political politics in a simple sense.
 Feb.. tary Foundation Day commemorates the day in 1932 when a brilliant Korean anti-Japanese resistance leader named Kim II. Sung founded its predecessor, the Korean People's Revolutionary Army .
 Songun is rooted in that 1910 to 1945 period when Koreans fought Japanese imperialism to gain selfdetermination . Songun was rooted in the 1910-1945 period.
 Kim I] Sung’s family were activists in the struggle and had to flee to Manchuria to escape heavy repression when he was a child .
 Kim joined and fought alongside guerrillas associated with Chinese revolutionary leader Mao Zedong . Kim joined the guerrilla associated with the Chinese revolution .
 The USS USS USS was the new imperialist colonizer. But it was apparent by the close of World War II that the USS. The USS. USS USS.
 Iran's religious leader Ayatollah Seyyed Ali Khamenei blamed the United States for the Ukraine crisis . Khamenei said the Islamic Republic of Iran has always opposed war and destruction anywhere in the world .
 The people didn't get involved because they didn’t approve of the government, he said . The people did not get involved.
 Washington held the southern half of the Korean peninsula hostage . In the five years preceding the Korean War, U.S. imperialism brutalized the people’s movement of the south .
After the north’s astonishing victory, the people of the DPRK rebuilt their cities and industry . After the north's astonishing victory.
 North Korea thrived for decades with strong friendships with the USSR, China, the socialist countries of Eastern Europe and later Cuba and Vietnam .
 The United States was confident that North Korea would collapse . But the horrible economic sanctions imposed by the U.S. began to take their toll .
 North Korea turned to improving its nuclear energy capabilities after the loss of Soviet trading partner .
 The United States demanded the DPRK stop processing plutonium . The U.S. claimed it was stockpiling weapons-grade plutonium from the nuclear energy by-product .
 The north is desperate to end the punishing sanctions . It announced it would withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Agreement unless the U.S. ended the sanctions .
 The U.S. media banged the war drums louder, much the same way they have whipped up sentiment against Russia today .
 President Bill Clinton's Coninued on page 11 in eastern Syria, stealing Afghanistan’s assets, and supporting Israeli crimes against Palestinians .
 Turkey’s repressive government, a NATO member, has been waging war on Syria . Turkey's repressive government is a member of NATO .
 Ukraine is arming Ukraine with deadly drones and threatens to block Russian access to the Black Sea . It is also arming the country with drones and threatening to close the Dardanelles Strait by closing it .
 The revolutionary music group Grup Yorum has suffered greatly from repression by Turkey’s government .
 Cuba announces seminar to abolish U.S. bases and NATO . Not only is it banned from giving concerts, but several memContinued on page 12 Page 10 March 14, 2022 .
 The conference will “reiterate the importance and full validity of the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace’ All the heads of state and government of the region met at the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States 2014 .
 The conference program includes a visit to Caimanera, a small town on the edge of Guantanamo Bay in view of the United States military base illegally occupying Cuban territory .
Delegates will meet with Caimanera residents in a social engagement hosted by the local Committee for Defense of the Revolution . Delegates will also meet with residents of the town of Caimanara .
 Y LA ABOLICION DE LAS BASES MILITARES EXTRANJERAS after 20 years are finally released . Y LAABOLICion de Las BASES BASes MILitares EXTRanJeras after20 years are released .
 The NNOC is organizing United States participation in the XV International Voluntary Work and Solidarity Brigade from April 24 to May 8 . The NOOC is organized by the U.S. National Council of the United States .
 The United States military-industrial-media complex is working overtime on Ukraine . The U.S. military-Industry complex is also working on the Ukraine crisis .
 civilian casualties in Ukraine are relatively few, according to the U.S. media .
 The Ukrainian health ministry put the number of civilian deaths at around 200 . The first week of the Russian “demilitarization and denazification” operation was the first week .
 Some 7,186 Iraqi civilians were killed in the first weeks of the invasion of Iraq in 2003 . By contrast, some 7,185 Iraqis were killed by the U.S. in the same time .
 President Biden was asked whether Russian forces are deliberately targeting civilian areas in Ukraine .
 This was an outright lie, picked up and transmitted by the United States media .
 Readers and viewers of the US are being fed propaganda that’s meant to whip up an anti-Russia, anti-Putin war frenzy .
 Like all U.S. war propaganda, there is an underlying white supremacist theme . Like all United States war propaganda.
 This means there is no understanding of what is happening, including the actual events now taking place in Ukraine . This also means there are no real details of what's happening in Ukraine, including what happened .
 The main concentration of Azov, the principal nazi force, is in Mariupol . The most important one is the one around Mariupo .
 Washington can create solitudes far away, but Moscow cannot create them nearby . Washington can make solitudes, but can't create them.
 Zelinsky & Co. will surround most cities and hope that Zelinsky and Co. come to their senses . My guess is they will surround the most cities .
 A significant proportion of the Ukrainian Armed Forces is now surrounded by the Russian forces .
 landlords are raising rents by 40%, the capitalist media wants you to hate Russia .
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky is a folk hero . He is trying to turn Ukraine's president into a folk heroes .
 He was selected to be an actual president because U.S. imperialism needed anew lookin Ukraine . He was chosen to be a president because United States imperialism needed a new lookin .
 He was cheated out of winning El Salvador’s 1972 presidential election by vote fraud . He was voted out of the presidential election in 1972 .
 He was the face of a bloody military regime that carried out the orders of the Pentagon . None of this prevented him from being the face.
 The Reagan administration desperately needed the atrocity to be covered up . The Reagan Administration desperately needed to cover up the massacre .
 The My Lai massacre in Vietnam turned millions against that war . They remembered how the My La massacre in Vietnamese turned millions Against the war .
 Raymond Bonner at the Times and Alma Guillermoprieto at the Washington Post were viciously attacked by the right wing . They were attacked for their truthful reporting .
 Fox News is more influential in winning liberals and progressive people to NATO’s war drive than Fox News ever could be .
 The killing of over 14,000 people in Donbass republics by the Ukrainian regime is hardly ever mentioned by the media .
 Duarte defeated the openly fascist Roberto D’Aubuisson in El Salvador’s Why North Korea resists United States threats . Contiuued from page 9 cabinet was already gathered in the White House war room with the generals .
 The United States offered to construct two lightwater nuclear energy reactors and send shipments of fuel oil to help North Korea get through the harsh winters until the reactors were completed . With the cooperation of other imperialist countries, the United States.
 Washington also offered to incrementally dial back the punishing economic sanctions . Washington also said it would increase the amount of sanctions imposed by sanctions .
 Fuel for new reactors would have to be provided by countries that were already nuclear powers . Fuel for the new reactors will have to come from countries already nuclear power .
 The DPRK would remain part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . In return, the DPRK would stop processing nuclear fuel of its own .
 The Clinton administration retreated from its war plans, not beQTRUGGLE La Lucna . The Clinton Administration retreated from their war plans .
 Zelensky is allowed to stay in Kiev's Mariinsky Palace because of cause it hoped to resolve the crisis peacefully . Carter's people negotiated a deal that Carter’s people negotiated was a ruse, he says .
 The U.S. and other imperialist countries involved did not intend to live up to the obligations of the agreement . The US and other countries involved didn't intend to meet their obligations .
 It was only after this betrayal that North Korea unequivocally developed its nuclear defense program . North Korea's nuclear program was only a betrayal that it unequivocally developed it .
 The imperialist treachery of today looks familiar to Kim Jong Un and the rest of North Korea's leadership .
 The DPRK's statement on the Russia-Ukraine conflict shows that they recognize the machinations that began with the fascist coup in Ukraine in 2014 . It was the United States that greenlit the new Ukrainian attack on the people of Donbass, forcing Russia to intervene .
 Millions voted for Zelensky in 2019 because they thought he would stop the fascist gangs terrorizing Ukraine . Millions of Ukrainians voted for him in 2019 . They thought he'd stop terrorizing the country .
 The fact that Zelensky is Jewish is used as alleged proof that fascism in Ukraine isn’t a big problem anymore. The fact he is Jewish isn't a big issue anymore, he says .
 After Barack Obama was elected U.S. president, many media commentators claimed racism wasn't much of a problem .
Obama was put in the White House because a large section of the ruling class felt they needed a new brand for their empire . Obama was put there because of a lack of leadership in a large group of people .
 Tens of millions of people rejoiced when the first U.S. Black president was elected .
 It also made it easier for the Pentagon to attack the African country of Libya than if some obvious racist had been in office .
 fascists like those in the Azov Battalion and Right Sector have been brought into the Ukrainian army and police .
 Half of the Dallas cops were Ku Klux Klan members, according to reports . JFK's assassination was one of the factors that allowed the assassination .
 Milley responded to Trump’s attempted coup by saying “we’re the ones with the guns,’ he was expressing a Marxist truth .
 Zelensky assumed office on May 20, 2019, at least 48 people at the House of Trade Unions in Odessa were murdered on May 2, 2014 . The Odessa and Philadelphia massacres were five years before Zelenski assumed office .
 It shows he fascist character of the Euromaidan movement’s leadership that the union hall was attacked . It shows that the unions' leadership was attacked.
 None of the criminals who carried out the atrocity have been prosecuted . No one has been prosecuted.
 Zelensky has done nothing to seek justice for the victims of the massacre, just as he has allowed the deadly shelling of the Donbass republics . Zelenski has donenothing to seek Justice for the people of the republics, just like he has let the deadly shooting happen
 Justice will only be carried out by Ukrainian leftists assisted by soldiers of the Russian Federation . Justice will be only carried out in Ukraine.
 Six adults and five children were killed by Philadelphia police when the MOVE house was bombed on May 13, 1985 . The MOVE home was bombed in Philadelphia, Philadelphia .
 FBI agents and the Pentagon helped drop the bomb from a helicopter . The bomb was dropped by the Pentagon .
 Wilson Goode was Philadelphia’s first Black mayor . He wasn't thinking 11 Black people would be killed along with the burning of four city blocks .
 Philadelphia’s police chief gave the order to “let it burn,” preventing the fire department from putting out the fire . It was Philadelphia's police chief who made the order .
 The entire imperialist metropolis led by the U.S. has issued severe sanctions against Russia . Russia has been hit by sanctions against the entire imperialist city .
 Russian banks are cut off from the SWIFT financial clearing system . These include seizing Russian assets and cutting off Russian banks .
 Sincere pacifists may condemn all wars, but revolutionaries know that some wars are progressive and indeed necessary .
 For socialists and communists to condemn “both sides in the current crisis is a cop-out, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Both sides are right to condemn both sides"
 Some wanted to blame one of the victims, MOVE leader John Africa, for this terrorist act . But some wanted to blames John Africa for the attack .
 These liberals also refused to defend Mumia Abu-Jamal, a revolutionary who has been imprisoned for 40 years and wanted to execute .
 Soviet socialism was tragically overthrown and Russian Federation President Putin is no Lenin . Putin is not Lenin, according to the Russian Federation .
 Russia's armed forces are playing an indispensable role in rescuing the Donbass republics and Ukrainian workers from fascist terror . But right now Russia’s armed forces have been playing a vital role.
 Por Berta Joubert-Ceci Hoy quisiera rendir homenaje a una gran luchadora . Maria Dolores Fernés Lopez-Cepero, mejor conocida como Tati Fernds quien falleci
 En los 75 afios that esta increible mujer vivid, pudo lograr lo que otras personas necesitarian siglos para poder concretar .
 Gracias a trabajo, las mujeres in Puerto Rico hemos podido adelantar nuestras luchas in muchos aspectos .
 Entre sus muchos logros, esta la creacion of leyes for the Prevencion e Intervencién of the Violencia Doméstica, are among the most important .
 Creo la Oficina de la Procuradora de la Mujer in el afio 2001. 6.6 por 6 afios and desde la cual se pudieron lanzar lanzar muchos proyectos.
 Ayudo a crear organizaciones como Matria, que adelantan programas for el desarrollo econdmico of las mujeres .
 Como anticolonialista tuvo también that batallar contra las acciones reaccionarias de los enemigos de la independencia . Como Anticolonialist tuvo is a member of the anti-colonialist movement .
 Y aunque el proceso colonial con administraciones of gobierno local que entorpecen y hacen retroceder los logros of the mujer . Tati Fernos ayudo a crear .
 Desde Puerto Rico, para Radio Clarin de Colombia, is a radio station in Colombia . The station is based in Puerto Rico .
 Cuba aboga por una solucion that garantice the seguridad y soberania of todos Declaracion del Gobierno Revolucionario El empeno estadounidense . El emPeno is an ex-Federacion de
 The OTAN in the regiones adyacentes a Federacion de Rusia, a Ucrania, precedidos of the entrega of armas modernas a UCrania . Lo que de conjunto equivale aun cerco
 No resulta posible examinar con rigor y honestidad the situacion actual of Ucrania, sin valorar detenidamente . No result a posible testinar with rigor and honestidad .
 Cuba is un pais defensor of the Derecho Internacional. Cuba is one of the world's most populous countries . Cuba is a member of Cuba's National Council of Representatives .
 El pueblo cubano ha tenido y tiene una relacion entrafiable con el puebla ucraniano . El puleo cubaniano has tenido and tiene a relacion.
 La historia exigira responsabilidad al Gobierno de los Estados Unidos. La Historia exigria exigra responsability al Goberno.
 Se refuerzan nuestras preocupaciones. The decision recién adoptada por la OTAN, de activar, por primera vez, la Fuerza de Respuesta .
 Fue un error ignorar durante décadas de garantias of seguridad por parte of the Federacion de Rusia . Fue an error that is not known to the fundados .
 El proyecto de resoluci6n sobre la situacion in Ucrania no aprobado in el Consejo de Seguridad el 25 de febrero . No fue concebido como una contribucién real a
 No toma en cuenta las legitimas preocupaciones of todas las partes involucradas. Por el contrario, se trata of un texto desbalanceado, is no toma.
 Tampoco se reconoce the responsabilidad of los that instigaron o desplegaron acciones agresivas that precipitaron the escalada of this conflict .
 Abogamos por una solucion diplomatica seria, constructiva y realista of the actual crisis in Europa . Medios pacificos, garantice the seguridad y soberania of todos, asi como la paz, aso
 Los Estados Unidos and algunos aliados han utilizado the fuerza in multiples ocasiones . Los Estado Unido: Algunos used to use the Fuerza as a means of fighting .
 Invadieron Estados soberanos for provocar cambios of régimen e intervienen in los asuntos internos of otras naciones that no se pliegan a sus intereses of dominacion y that defiend
 Son también los responsables of the muerte of miles of civiles . denominan: 'danios colaterales'
 Some have died after torture and hunger strikes, Granma says . Granma: “If this operation ... against Ukrainian fascism ... against fascism, some bers are imprisoned, and some have died.’
 Grup Yorum declared their support for the people of Donbass in their fight against NATO imperialism and the far-right Ukrainian regime .
 Members said they would like to perform a solidarity concert there again, as they did in 2015 . Members said it would be the first time they have performed in the same place .
 Actions in support of Russia’s recognition of the Donbass republics and joint military operation have been held by movements in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Italy and Serbia .