 Photographic analysis reveals the same woman in all three cities . The same woman is the same person in each city .
 It was clear that the invaders who the Ukrainians dubbed “Little Green Men’s’ were neither . The invaders who were dubbed ‘Little Green men’ are neither .
 Ukraine’s historical, cultural, religious, and economic ties to Russia make it a vital interest to Moscow .
 He celebrated the campaign's Key Principles of Russian success in avoiding armed violence and Unconventional Warfare preempting American interference .
 The purpose of this document is to provide a primer on Russia’s unconventional warfare operations in Ukraine . The purpose is to give an insight into Russia's unconventional warfare operation .
 His thesis was that the wars of princes and ideologies were in the past and that new conflict would be between civilizations . His main thesis is that the war of princes was in the present and the future is in the future .
 The division between the Latin Church and Orthodoxy was exemplified by the 1472 marriage of the Grand Prince of Moscow Rus Ivan III to Sophia Paleologue .
 Ivan III began to refer to himself as Tsar, the Russian derivation of Caesar . He began to call himself Tsar .
 Moscow’s post-Cold War incursions into the peripheral states and regions surrounding the Russian Federation occurred within this historical context that has featured concern, obsession, and paranoia about the defensive buffer . Since tsarist times, since tsarist time, has featured concerns, obsession
 Cossack bands, agents masquerading as tradesmen or explorers, and conventional military units were the primary means of securing Russian control over the vast swaths of land incorporated across Asia .
 Russian expansion in the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries . By the twentieth century, tsarist Russia was in its last throes . Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 replaced anachronistic regime with a vigorous, ideological power .
 Russian leaders sought the most efficient methods of bringing weaker powers to heel . They avoided the stigma of outright imperialism, invasion, and war with the West .
 The Baltic states each declared independence from the Soviet Union . The Russian government under Mikhail Gorbachev responded by attempting to crack down on Lithuania .
 It aims at affecting the consciousness doctrine, information is of the masses, both at home and abroad, and a dangerous weapon . It aims to affect consciousness doctrine.
 At its roots, the theory is weapon, it has unlimited military and nonmilitary, technological, technological and range . It is easily social and easily social, it is easy to use .
 It links directly to geopolitics in service to the state and the Russian civiliza . Jolanta Darczewska is a Russian state.
 Military-political leaders become aware of this change. Main Phases of Conflict Development Neutralization of military conflict Military Localization of Military Conflict Crisis reactions .
 Ukraine has been dominated by Poland to the west and the Russian Empire to the east since the Middle Ages . The country has shared ethnic and cultural roots with Russia .
 Ivan Mazepa threw in his lot with Charles XII of Sweden against the tsar in 1704 . But Ukrainian ten-hryvnia note featuring Ivan Mazepsa in 1703 was also a Cossack hetman . In 1704 another Cossacks het
 Ukrainian nationalists on the one hand and the pro-Russian population on the other. Centuries later, these two figures elicit both praise and condemnation from Ukrainian nationalists .
 Russian and Soviet narratives point to the Treaty of Pereyaslav to illustrate the perpetual union of the Ukrainian and Russian peoples .
 Map of Ukraine's borders stabilized as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was expanded at the end of World War II . Poland and Romania were taken from Ukraine and Romania .
 Recent Russian propaganda points to the artificial nature of Ukraine’s borders and the mixture of West-leaning populations with pro-Russian eastern Slavs .
 Russia rankled under the threat of losing more of its East European buffer states to the EU and NATO . The new administration, led by prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, brought hopes of political and economic reform .
 President Yushchenko enacted symbolic measures that many in Russia and Russian speakers considered "anti-Russian" The Holodomor was recognized as genocide and official hero status for Ukrainian nationalists who fought the Red Army during World War II .
 Political Framework Leading up to Euromaidan. In describing the political context of Russia’s intervention in Ukraine it is tempting to reduce the complexities into a bipolarity of pro-Russian and pro-Western blocs .
 The Rada featured intense political conflict in the months leading up to Euromaidan . Viktor Yanukovych attained the presidency in 2010, and soon after his associate Mykola Azarov formed a government .
 Opposition parties blocked access to podium in early 2013 to protest direction of government policies . Party deputies could vote for absent members of the parliament .
 Euromaidan President Yanukovych and Russian president Vladimir Putin moved quickly in an attempt to calm the opposition . Yanukovych and Putin move quickly in a bid to calm opposition .
 The Pravy Sektor was a far-right Ukrainian nationalist group that emerged as a paramilitary during the November 2013 protests . The interior minister authorized police forces to use physical force against the group .
Calls for the ouster of Yanukovych grew stronger amid efforts to intimidate demonstrators . Despite all these efforts, cries for Yanukovych's ouster grew stronger .
 Crimea's leader of a large paramilitary force in Crimea appealed to Putin for help . Sergei Aksyonov was expelled from Crimea after the expulsion of Yanukovych .
 Ukrainian forces simply lacked combat power to overcome the Denis Pushilin Russian-backed resistance . Other Ukrainian forces lacked the combat power.
 Vyacheslav Ponomaryov, the pro-Russian mayor of Slovyansk, threatened to kill hostages if his forces were attacked . In late April, he said he would kill hostages, including an American journalist, if he was attacked .
 On May 22, rebels from Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts declared the establishment of New Russia . The area includes southern and eastern Ukraine .
 The presence of Russian-made antiaircraft weapons neutralized the Ukrainian government’s air advantage . The downing of an Ilyushin Il-76 transport in mid-June killed forty-nine troops who were aboard .
27 Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu was reportedly appointed to his position because he was politically neutral . Putin wanted to avoid strengthening the “St.
General Valery Gerasimov outlined Russia's new methods of warfare in Ukraine . He highlighted the nonmilitary factors as the most decisive . The most notable military officials involved in the campaigns in Ukraine were general ValeryGerasimov .
 Key to understanding Russia’s foreign policy is understanding the role of the oligarchs, the super-rich Russian businessmen who are close to Putin .
 Western sanctions targeted the oligarchs because they are viewed as both influential with Putin and vulnerable to economic and financial pressure . The oligarchs were targeted by Western sanctions because they were seen as both powerful with Putin .
 Dmitry Medvedev, former law professor and president, is now prime minister of Russia . He is also former president of Russia and former president .
 Russian expansion into the Black Sea basin in the seventeenth century was driven by both imperial ambitions and hopes to open significant maritime trade routes . Russian expansion in the 17th century is driven by imperial ambitions .
 The fleet and its affiliates own high-value assets, including resorts, real estate, and War . Many opportunities to distract operate outside of Ukrainian tax regimes domestic public opinion and below market rates .
 These nonmilitary activities integrate the remnants of the Black Sea Fleet and affiliates into regional political and intellectual politics, business, and crime .
 An undemocratic Maintain Buffer of Russian Influence in Peripheral regime worried about the States against the West . Russia has historically maintained a ring social and political crises .
 The policy of mainRussia amid recession and taining a buffer zone of friendly states falling oil prices is likely to be expressed by Joseph . Joseph is pondering further acts of Stalin after the devastation of World aggression .
 War II policy meant to ensure that Andrei Illarionov could never again be invaded by a Western force .
 Georgia's orientation toward EU and NATO membership was consistent despite the 2008 Russo-Georgian War . Georgia's position would leave the Russian mainland vulnerable to Western influence and military action .
 Losing Russian security and economic influence in central Europe jeopardizes Putin's geopolitical aspirations for the Russian state . Ukraine’s westward shift through Euromaidan constitutes a devastating blow .
 The Russian Army organized eighty-five brigades through 2009, including forty combined-arms brigades . 41 brigades were specialized brigades for missiles, artillery, rocket artillery, air defense, and engineers .
 In the summer of 2014, at least 13 BTGs and elements of five SPETSNAZ units were poised on the Ukrainian border .
 The main military operations in Ukraine were commanded through Russia’s Southern Military District with its headquarters in Rostov-on-Don . The military operations are commanded through the Southern Military district .
 Russia's use of SPETSNAZ evolved since its involvement in Georgia in 2008 . Russia’s use in Georgia has evolved since it was involved in 2008.
 When deployed, agents initially confine their efforts to political agitation and other nonkinetic methods . Agents initially confined their attempts to create a political environment favorable to Russian policies .
Former members of the Chechen “Vostok’s” Battalion. They also employ sympathetic paramilitaries, such as former members of Chechen Battalion .
 A paramilitary group called 43 the Russian Orthodox Army began operating in the Donetsk region after the ouster of Yanukovych .
 The Night Wolves motorcycle club is a proxy group of Russian nationalists founded in 1989 . The club was founded by Russian nationalists in 1989.
 Chetnik Guards commanded by Bratislav Zivkovic formed an irregular unit in Crimea . They operated in coordination with Cossack paramilitaries there .
 Alexey Mozgovoy has been seen traveling openly in Moscow, where he enjoys celebrity status . He has been asked for autographs and requests for autograph requests .
 Alexander Mozhaev is a Cossack militia leader operating in eastern Ukraine at the behest of the Putin regime . He is a member of the Cossacks militia leader in the Ukraine .
 Military-political leaders become de-escalate the situation, but they are aware of this change . The opposite effect had the opposite effect .
 The start of conflict activities was relatively sudden and brief, quickly transitioning to the next 1. Emergence of differences of interest.
 Ukraine declares Protests in Kyiv against QQ Feb., 2014 . Russian troops seize Referendum and QQ Late Mar.14– preempt any embryonic resistance independence . This suggests intensive and activities peace QQ Dec.91 QQ February., 2014 QQ Mar
 President Victor YanuUkrainian naval Crimean border crosssubsequent treaty leads present to Putin’s designs .
 IL-76 aircraft begin to Russian annexation United States and EU . The crisis stage featured nearly Russian factions form . Russian gunmen seize into region .
 Russia’s new QQ 2004–2005 Yanukovych flees government buildings in effect . Russia's annexation remains in flawless execution of Russia's new QZ 2004-2005 Yanukovych. Federation.
 Russia formally annexes Crimea and Russia nating in a staged referendum . Pro-Western interim pro-Western Russia formally authoRussia formally takes over Crimea .
 President Yushchenko government. rizes use of Russian Crimea . President YUSHchenko government rizes using of Crimea .
Flict moves to eastern QQ Feb. 2014 Kirovske air base QQ Mar., 2014 Putin’s autocratic government Ukraine .
 Ukraine orders troops to rapidly sealed the annexation of Crimea . Pro-Russian President Sevastopol supported withdraw from Crimea . Ukraine orders forces to rapidly seal the annexation .
 QQ Mar., 2014 firmly in control of Crimea, he was under Russian pressure, Russian navy blockable to present the world with a QQ Feb., 2014 . He abandons deal with Ukrainian navy fait accompli .
 QQ Dec.13 upswing of conflict in eastern Putin responds with QQ Mar.–22, 2014 Nonmilitary measures Ukraine . Non military measures Ukraine so as to divert attention trade and financial Russian troops seize from Crimea .
 Military measures intended to calm additional sites and protests and bring consolidate positions . Military measures aimed at calm protests and consolidate positions in the region .
 During the escalations stage Direct military Differences transform into conflict . Intensifying contradictions are revealed during the escalation stage .
 Putin took actions calculated to threat Military-political leaders become aware of this change . But potential Emergence of differences had the opposite effect .
 The March military of interest 2014 annexation of Crimea led to an upswing of unrest in eastern Ukraine . The March 2014 annexation led to a threat upswing in the region .
 Ukraine declares indepenProtests in Kyiv against Ukraine resumes conscription. OSCE helps negotiate QQ Mar.–Apr.14 diplomatic agreement at Geneva .
 Pro-Western and President Victor Yanukovych Russian agents organize, in face of ongoing aggression cease-fire . Putin’s sustained pro-Russian factions become violent .
 QQ Sep.14.14 unconventional warfare campaign in QQ 2004-2005 QQ Feb. 2014 protesters in major cities and QQ May 2, 2014 President Poroshenko eastern Ukraine under an umbrella of Orange Revolution .
 Pro-Russian activists die promises greater autonomy in pro-Russian President Putin . Pro-Western President Putin condemns interim crowds and ‘little green men’ in a fire in Odessa .
 The crisis stage came to a head with QQ 2010–2013 QQ Mar. The crisis was over bribery and subversion of Malaysian Airlines Pro-Russian President Referendum and subsequent to neutralize government referenda on independence .
 Under treaty leads to Russian officials, police, and some alleged results strongly favor western Ukraine . Under treaty, Russian officials and police are accused of violating treaty .
 Maidan government signs Association QQ May 25, 2014 Russia expelled from G8 . Putin and Poroshenko signed a deal to negotiate natural gas deal in 2013 .
 Poroshenko elected, instead saw surprising political QQ Apr., 2014 QQ Oct. 2014 Q QQ Mar., 2014QQ Mar. 2013 QQQ Nov.14 Russian aggression. 2014 Geneva agreement (US, Ukrainians elect pro-Western– resilience from the Kyiv government Putin
 Separatists in Luhansk and NATO support, along with Russia’s Poroshenko signs trade QQ Apr., 2014 . Donetsk hold elections agreement with EU .
 More President Poroshenko’s sustained seize television station in QQ Jul., 2014 Russian troops enter Ukraine . More President poroshenko's sustained seize TV station in Ukraine .
 Despite cease-fire, fighting counteroffensive led Russia to resort media with Russia Today . Russia Today is Russia Today.
 QQ Summer 2014 continues, at times escalating to increasingly explicit invasion . QQ summer 2014 continues to be increasingly explicit .
 During this phase the Russian objective was to create the political conditions necessary for later decisive military and paramilitary action . During this period the Russian objectives were to create political conditions needed for later action .
 Russia is considering ending START inspections in response to US and European agitation concerning Ukraine . The move was calculated to grab the attention of Western leaders .
 Ukraine's troops departed without violence, and the Russian flag was raised over 57 installations . Ukraine’s troops left without violence .
 Russian oligarch Igor Kolomoisky formed a private army of fighters from as far away as the United States to thwart Russian aggression .
 Valery Gerasimov, “The Value of Science in Prediction,’s ‘The value of science in Prediction’ was published on February 27, 2013 .
 Adrian Karatnycky, “Ukraine’s Orange Revolution,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2005 .
 Albina Kovalyova, “Meet the Russian Orthodox Army, Ukrainian Separatists’ Shock Troops,” NBC News, April 16 .
 Alexander Marquardt, “Night Wolves Join Pro-Russia Side in Southern Ukraine,’s ‘Night Wolves’