 The rebel forces in the east of Ukraine arrived in the key town of Debaltseve on Wednesday 18 February . The advance took place after a new ceasefire was due to come into force on Sunday 15 February .
 Merkel and Hollande flew to Moscow in an attempt to draw up a “road map’ to peace with Vladimir Putin . This latest attempt at a ceasefire agreement was driven by Merkel and Francois Hollande .
 The resulting 13-point agreement was signed by Merkel, Hollande, Putin and Poroshenko . The agreement was due to come into effect at midnight on Saturday 14 Feb .
 It included the withdrawal of heavy weaponry from the front, an amnesty for prisoners on both sides, and the lifting of restrictions on the Republics and some form of autonomous control .
 Germany receives one third of its gas from Russia, which is its eleventh largest trading partner . Germany has a substantial economic interest in ending the conflict in Ukraine .
 Merkel is busy trying to deal with the eurozone crisis and the new SYRIZA government in Greece . The problems in Ukraine are a headache she could do without without .
 The Germans have always taken a softer, more diplomatic tone with Russia over the conflict in Ukraine . The Germans are more diplomatic with Russia, in contrast to the USA whose direct economic interest in the country is not large .
 Obama has sent Joe Biden or John Kerry to do the USA's dirty work . Obama himself has remained aloof from this particular conflict .
 Obama no longer controls the U.S. Congress, which is dominated by the Republicans . He also has a lot on his foreign affairs plate already with the rise of the Islamic State .
 The USA was not included as a party to this round of Minsk talks, although he may well have been pleased that a ceasefire was on the cards .
 Merkel has her own reasons for excluding the USA from the talks, beyond just the different economic relationships of Germany and the USA .
 Revelations that U.S. intelligence services have been spying on Merkel and other senior German Establishment figures have soured the relationship .
 The USA’s meddling in eurozone affairs regarding Greece has not gone down well with Merkel . Merkel sees such issues as the preserve of Germany .
 The combined effect of crises in all spheres is straining the relations between different capitalist powers . The combined effects of crises are straining relations between capitalist powers, says CNN .
 Putin needs some respite from the pressure that economic turmoil is putting on his administration . The West’s sanctions against Russia are hurting the economy .
 Kiev's troops had encircled up to 8,000 troops in the town of Debaltseve . It is a key transport hub for linking Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics . Poroshenko and his backers were willing to sign a ceasefire agreement .
 Kiev also requires time to regroup, despite Poroshenko’s promises, says Kiev .
Despite powerful interests in a ceasefire, the advance of the rebels did not stop after Sunday . Despite these powerful interests, the rebels continued to advance .
 On Tuesday 17 February the rebels began to take Debaltseve and on Wednesday Kiev confirmed that its troops were retreating . On Wednesday the Kiev government confirmed that it was retreating .
 Debaltseve would solidify Ukraine's front line with the Republics . The airport has been taken over by the Ukraine government .
 Minsk II ceasefire never considered Debaltseve as being covered by the ceasefire . They never considered it as a cover-up for the conflict .
 What Obama, Merkel and others fail or refuse to acknowledge is that this conflict, sparked by the Maidan movement, has taken on a logic of its own .
 Donetsk People's Republic leader Zacharenko was quick to point out that it did not mention Debaltseve . He considered it his right to continue the fight for that key town .
 In a defiant statement he also said that the DPR would fight back against any provocation that came from the Kiev forces .
 Dmytro Yarosh, the Ukrainian MP who is also the leader of the fascist Right Sector and its paramilitary battalions, claimed the ceasefire violated the Ukrainian constitution . He vowed that his battalions would continue fighting for the unity of the whole of Ukraine .
 The reality is that Putin does not have full control of what the rebel forces are doing on the ground . The reality of Putin is that he is not fully in control of the rebels .
 His standing in the eyes of many people in the east of Ukraine, who may have had illusions in what he was capable of delivering, has been greatly diminished .
 Many had the illusion that it would be enough for them to have a referendum to get decisive backing from Russia as with Crimea . Many had an illusion that the referendum would be sufficient for Russia to get a referendum .
 Many people in the east no longer see the republics’ integration into Russia on the agenda . Many are accepting their future in formally independent republics .
 The Russian government has always said that some Russian troops are fighting in Ukraine as volunteers . Putin's insistence that this is entirely of their own accord is hard to believe .
 OSCE Secretary General Lamberto Zannier admitted recently that he had seen Russian individuals but no Russian units fighting in the Donbas . Putin himself has pointed out that if he wanted to take Kiev in a matter of weeks, he could take Kiev .
 Viktor Muzhenko acknowledged that no Russian regular army units were fighting in the Donbas . He had information about civilian and military individuals who were present in the Republics, he said .
 The Kremlin exercises a degree of control over the Republics as it controls their lines of supply over the border . Ultimately, the Kremlin exercises the power to control the country .
 Poroshenko does not have full control over the battalions of fascists he has been recruiting into the state apparatus ever since they played in the Maidan movement .
Ukranian nationalists feel increasingly able to assert their own autonomous goals . Now that these people have been legitimised by being incorporated into the military command and their leaders being elected to parliament .
 The rebels will not stop until the rebel Republics are smashed and they will attack anyone, including Poroshenko, who stands in their way . They will not be stopped until the rebels are smashed .
 This leaves Poroshenko in a very difficult position because on the one hand he needs a ceasefire to allow the country to stabilise . He recognises that this must involve some degree of autonomy for the rebel Republics .
 Poroshenko will find himself with few elements of the state apparatus with which to defend himself . But this is something the fascists will never accept, he says .
 Earlier in February U.S. officials were reported to be seriously considering sending “lethal aid’ to Ukraine for use by Kiev government .
 Right wing Republican senator John McCain is one of the main advocates of this line of action . McCain is a key figure in the GOP's right wing .
 The threat of the USA arming Kiev seems to have receded. With the signing of a ceasefire the threat of arming Kiev has receded .
 Debaltseve appears to be in the works of the ceasefire, as it seems to be doing at all other points along the front .
 The case for lethal U.S. intervention was slightly undermined by a farcical situation in Ukraine . Republican Senator James Inhofe showed pictures of Russian tanks which he claimed were invading Ukraine .
Ukrainian MP and commander of Donbas Battalion Semyon Semenchenko dated from the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia . It later turned out that these pictures were provided to him by a Ukrainian MP . The pictures, provided by him, were taken by him
 WMDs were used as a pretext for intervention in Iraq, says Obama . Such events will remind the U.S. people of how they were lied to about W MDs, he says .
 There is little appetite among ordinary Americans for embroiling their country in further conflict for no clearly discernable reason .
 In circumstances of civil war such as Ukraine is experiencing at present the military aspect takes precedence over social and economic elements . The military aspect of Ukraine is at present at present.
 Russian nationalist and other suspect elements have taken over the leadership of the Republics . This means the subordination of those initial, class-based demands of the anti-maidan movement .
 Mozgovoy explains that it is the oligarchs who are responsible for the destruction of Ukraine . He says they would rather see death and chaos than loss of their profits .
 He speaks about the need to expropriate the palaces built at public expense . He says there is a lot of wealth in Ukraine that rightly belongs to the people who live there .
 Mozgovoy has also been in communication with some anti-oligarch elements in Kiev . Ukrainian lawyer and politician Tetiana Montian visited him in Alchevsk .
The Ghost Brigade were among the first to enter Debaltseve after it was taken by rebel forces . The Ghost Brigade had been in the area for years .
 Within the Ghost Brigade there operates a Communist Battalion, whose commander entered the town wearing a traditional Eastern European fur hat with a red star and hammer and sickle emblazoned on the front of it .
 Mozgovoy’s statements in favor of a class war of the people against the oligarchs have an echo among many people . His association with traditional soviet imagery has an echoes among people .
 Poroshenko and his cronies in the East are given little training or equipment . Such sentiment is unsurprising when those who are forced to fight for Poroshenko are not given training . Poroshenko's cronies are not trained or equipped .
 For those with families and little money such circumstances are a death sentence for those with little money . For those who have little money, the death sentence is a life sentence .
 There is a growing movement to mount legal challenges against the conscription on the grounds that Ukraine has not declared war . One man told the journalists ‘I don’t want to be cannon fodder’ One man said: “I don't want to
 The feeling that has always existed on a certain level in the West of Ukraine that this is not the people’s war but that of the oligarchs and the politicians is finding more fertile ground now .
 Military aid passes through the Ministry of Defence where large portions of it are simply stolen .
 Kiev City 12th Battalion had been set up purely to steal equipment as it was delivered . In September there were reports that the Kiev City 11th Battalion was set up to steal the equipment .
 The people at the front are being forced to fight a fratricidal war . Those in whose interests they are fighting are getting rich by stealing essential supplies .
 Poroshenko and his allies as no better than Yanukovych or any other oligarch. Such a state of affairs cannot but expose Poroshenko, his allies .
 The psychology of people in the East is on an entirely different level. But if Kiev is undermining the support from and morale of its own troops, it is on a completely different level .
 From the very beginning, following the removal of Yanukovych, the Western-backed government in Kiev has been provoking people in the East .
 These provocations have escalated into a full blown war against the Donbas . The Donbas have been involved in a war against each other .
 Kiev has blockaded Donetsk and Luhansk, cutting off access to money, medicine, food, electricity, pensions, and humanitarian aid . Kiev has also blocked humanitarian aid, blocking humanitarian aid and blocking aid .
 The Kalininsky hospital in Donetsk is the largest in the region but only has supplies to treat its 90 dialysis patients for two to four more weeks . The hospital only has 90 patients who will die unless more supplies arrive .
 Kiev has hardened people’s attitudes towards the government, many no longer consider themselves Ukrainian . Many see the war as a fight for their homes and families against a hostile government backed by fascists .
 900,000 refugees from the conflict have fled to Russia, not to Ukraine . This feeling in the East is no longer possible to ignore, and it makes the argument that the conflict can be put down to Russian aggression harder to sustain .
 Some Western journalists have been staunchly pro-Maidan . Some have recently visited the Republics and spoken to the people themselves .
 Such a change in consciousness explains much of the strength of the rebel forces, says one rebel leader .
 Kiev forces are increasingly disillusioned with what they are fighting for. This misses the point that the rebels, by and large, are Fighting for a cause they believe in .
 It is not a mythical Russian invasion that explains the relative strength of the two sides . It is this fact, not a theoretical Russian invasion, that explains why it is not .
 Kotsaba was arrested by the Ukrainian Secret Service on 8 February . He was arrested on suspicion of treason .
 The authorities are worried by this anti-war sentiment that is beginning to take root . They are cracking down on those who try to nurture or encourage it .
 Kotsaba is still currently locked up, having been given 60 days pre-trial confinement with no bail . The prison has been given no bail.
 This is part of a wider assault by the government against democratic rights, says the author . The author says the government is arresting anyone who dares raise a voice against the war .
 The Euromaidan movement formally stood against the corruption of the oligarchs and Ukraine’s economic crisis . While the conflict rages on, the fundamental causes of the initial removal of Yakukovych and the subsequent events have yet to be resolved .
 This is the result of capitalism, and its particularly virulent mafia form in Ukraine . This is a result of Capitalism and its especially virulent Mafia form in the Ukraine .
 The IMF recently granted Ukraine additional bailout money bringing the figure to around $22 billion in total . The IMF has granted Ukraine more bailout money .
 The IMF is brutally honest in how badly this is going to hurt Ukraine . The IMF has strings attached to the international bourgeoisie .
 The economy contracted by 7.5% in 2014 and the currency has collapsed over the last few weeks . The currency has also collapsed in recent weeks .
 Wages and pensions are to be fixed, in a climate where inflation is very high, and price increases on fuel and some cuts to be ‘front-loaded’ Domestic gas prices are expected to increase fivefold in the next four years .
 Under conditions of war and terrible living standards, to impose such a burden on the people of Ukraine is monstrous, says the Ukrainian government .
 The IMF is hoping to take advantage of the instability caused by the war to pile on extra cuts to living standards . No doubt the IMF is trying to use the instability to get rid of it .
 There is only so much that people can take and eventually there will be a straw that breaks the camel’s back .
 The Greek people are proving that they are not willing to accept these kind of attacks . Greek people have been attacked by a number of people in recent weeks .
Ukranian people will be even less able to bear the cost of the capitalist economic crisis, as well as the weight of the oligarchs’ war .
 Debaltseve the rebels may be content to observe the fragile ceasefire, at least for a time . This could be reciprocated by the forces in Ukraine .
 Things are balanced on a knife edge and there are so many independent factors, not under the control of those who signed the Minsk agreement, that things can change sharply very quickly . Things can change very quickly, but things are balanced.
 The potential for class struggle is there, both in the Republics and in Ukraine . However, what remains clear is that there is a potential for a class struggle .
 The class contradictions in society are being brought to the surface. The process will be accelerated by the actions of the IMF and by relative calm on the military front .
 Ukraine is an organisation capable of uniting people across east and west on a class basis and under a socialist banner . But what is lacking in Ukraine is a group of people who want to change the country's politics .
Until an organisation capable of challenging capitalism is present, the threats and reality of economic and military catastrophe will be ever present . Until an organisation can challenge capitalism, the threat and reality will be present .
 The building of such an organisation is the task of Marxists in Ukraine, and all over the world . The building is the work of the Ukrainian Marxists .