 Petro Poroshenko has ruled out "swapping" Crimea for Donbas . He says Russian Federation must stick to the Minsk peace plan he negotiated with Vladimir Putin .
 Poroshenko has been fighting a war against Russia-backed separatists in Eastern Ukraine . He replaced his pro-Russia predecessor, Viktor Yanukovych, in 2014 .
 Demonstrators also filled the streets of Kiev to honor the victims of violence on February 20, 2014, when snipers shot dozens of protesters pushing for the ouster of former President Viktor Yanukovich .
 Fighting has escalated in the conflict between the Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine . The conflict has strained relations between Russia and the West .
 Moscow recognizes documents issued by certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin says Moscow disagreed with the logic of the Minsk agreements .
 The vote on Ukraine's annexation to Russia was never recognized by the world community . Russia sent in troops to the Ukrainian region of Crimea, but a vote on the annexation was not recognized .
 The U.S. will continue to hold Russian Federation accountable, the Vice President said . "As you know President Trump believes can be found," he said .
Artemenko's initiative has been disavowed by both the Russian and Ukrainian governments . Artemenko is the founder of the Russian-Ukrainian initiative .
 The possibility that Flynn gave Pence misinformation about what he told a long-standing U.S. adversary raises troubling questions .
 He said following his first meeting with President Obama that Obama had asked him to consider keeping the policy in place .
 The process of withdrawal lasts one year and, in the case of South Africa, would take place this October . South Africa's withdrawal process will take place in October .
 And I feel that this country is made up of all immigrants, and it belongs to all immigrants. And I'm proud of this country, and I feel this country's immigrants are all immigrants .
 The stock witnessed 2.59% gains, -2.13% declines and -5.97% declines for the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month period, respectively . The stock saw 2. 59% gains and 2.97%.
 The company had revenue of $129.75 billion for the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $130.22 billion . The company's revenue was more than $100 billion .
 Weaver tweeted the claim on Monday evening in response to stories about Kasich and the president meeting this Friday . Weaver also tweeted the claims on Monday.
 Kasich sources say the governor is in the dark on the objective of the meeting . Our Kasich sources also say the Governor is in a dark on his objective .
 They continually heighten editorial and journalistic standards to make independent and exciting news for everyone . Therefore, they continuallyheighten editorial, journalistic standards .
 Tuko.co.ke team works all day round to create many innovative features for its readers . The team also works to create new features for readers .
 Dhoni had stepped down as India's limited-over captain at the start of 2017 . India face England in the ODIs and T20s against England at the end of the year .
 An exchange of fire followed for about 30 minutes, during which one militant was killed .
 Other terrorists escaped taking advantage of undulating hilly terrain and jungle cover . Other terrorists also escaped.
 Facebook will aggressively go after sports content to up the competition. Sports Media Consultant Lee Berke told Reuters that Facebook would aggressive go after content .
 Facebook and Major League Baseball remain silent as to the status of the spreading rumor . Both representatives for Facebook and MLB remain silent .
 'Motherhood has been heavily on my mind because I am going to be a mother soon,' she said . She continued .