 Russian humanist writer Viktor Astafiev predicted in 1995 that the fostering of this heroic myth could lead to a jubilee year of the Great Victory . The Great Victory could lead, he says .
 As Victory Day approaches, people tugging at my sleeves are tearing them off and the telephone is never silent .
 Everybody needs patriotic talk about the war. I defend myself as best as I can, I say . I defend my own life as best I can .
 The nation is ready to drown everything that is most sacred in an irrepressible and irresponsible glossolalia. God, what kind of nation are we, after all, are we. After all, we are ready to drowned everything that's most sacred.
 Without thought nor conscience, they do not even comprehend the blasphemy of decorating oneself .
 You reaquire that courage in wartime and massive suffering be extolled, and forget as you do so, that the more you lie about a past war, the more quickly you will draw a future war nearer .
 Twenty years ago, this writer prophetically remarked how the Great Lie about the Great Patriotic War prepared the ground for the current Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 Allies first signed the act of German capitulation on 7 May 1945 at the Staff Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander .
 Stalin ordered celebrations be established on 9 May as the day of “the Victory of the Soviet people’s” and not of the Allies in general . Dwight Eisenhower, in Reims, France, and only two days later was an analogous act signed at the Soviet HQ in
For Soviets, the Second World War became a foreign war, while the GPW became a native one . For Soviets, it was a foreign War, while GPW was a native war .
 In 1946, the marking of the anniversary included a procedure of awarding the personnel who participated in the fixing of the ‘Victory flag’ on the Reichstag in May 1945 – five men all told .
 In 1947, 9 May was declared to be a working day, and the single day off in the USSR became 1 January . The single day of the day was declared in 1947, but the day of May was 1 January.
 The only common attribute of the early celebrations of victory are the salutes .
 The cult of memory of war and victory was born during the times of Stalin . It actually did not become truly widespread at that point .
 Stalin exploited it selectively in order to solidify this own cult as a wartime political genius . He did not seek to remind Soviet society of its traumatic wartime experiences. needlessly.
 The revival of the Soviet Union and the infallibility of the Generalissimo were extolled instead . The revival was a revival of might and greatness of Soviet Union .
 Stalin did not permit Nikita Sergeyevich to establish attendant official medals . Only Ukrainians were granted the creation of a separate “national order’s’ — the Order of Bohdan Khmelnytskyi .
Until 1961, only Leningrad, Sevastopol, Stalingrad and Odessa had been so designated . Until 1961, the only three cities were designated .
 Khrushchev secured this measure only after considerable effort, given the circumstances with which the defense of Kyiv had become associated in the minds of former marshals .
 It involved the largest encirclement of a Soviet force and the biggest defeat of Soviet armies during the war . The biggest defeat in the war was the biggest of the Soviet forces during the conflict .
 Over a half-million men were taken prisoner, and the commander of the defenses of the Ukrainian capital had been Andrei Vlasov .
 Moscow did not become a "hero city" until Leonid Brezhnev’s tenure in 1965 . For that matter, Moscow didn't become a ‘hero city’ until he was in charge .
 Berestia had been the location of an anti-Soviet uprising in the first days of the war . The city itself was not, since the city was not .
 The myth of the GPW was given new life during the Brezhnev period . After the brief ‘thaw’ under Khrushchev, the neo-Stalinists came to power .
 The memory of the war was transformed into a veritable cult. In any case, it was as they directed the political life of the USSR from the mid-1960s to the 1980s .
 It became one of the foundations and means of legitimization of the myth of the superiority of the Soviet system . It also became the foundations of the myths of Soviet superiority .
 Soviet society found itself in the grips of this grandiose myth. Gradually, under pressure of a powerful propaganda machine, Soviet society was under pressure .
 Soviet veterans became, volens nolens, both active agents and passive cogs of a massive falsification . Soviet veterans were both active and passive .
 In 1965, the day of the Great Victory was re-established as a day off . The practice was briefly discontinued during the period of disavowal of the cult of personality, of wearing medals.
 Veterans who had been completely neglected under Khrushchev once again felt the euphoria produced by a strong dose of emphatic celebration and civic recognition . Veterans who have been completely neglecting under Kh rushchev felt the Euphoria .
 Soviet society itself came to pay for this demonstration and artificial “rehabilitation of memory” with another round of severe prohibitions of the truth . And yet, in the end, Soviet society came to paid for this demonstrated and artificial "rehabilitating of memory"
 After the collapse of the USSR, attitudes to the GPW became fundamentally different in Ukraine and Russia .
 78% of Russians listed the GPW as the most important determinant of Russia’s fate in the 20th century .
 The GPW and the Victory remain the key myths and the core content for the creation of a new Russian identity .
 Its affirmation is programmed as a dimension of an exceptionally victorious, heroically patriotic, triumphant, and positively loaded history . It is programmed to be an exceptionally successful, patriotic and triumphant, says the author .
 In such a history there is no place for defeats, nor mention of crimes committed by the Soviet leadership against its own people and against other peoples .
 The unwillingness of Russian society to recognize its responsibility for the crime of totalitarianism inevitably leads to its solidarity with the present undemocratic regime .
 In Ukraine since 1991, there have been ongoing debates about the relevance of the term “the Great Patriotic War’s” The term has been used in textbooks, official memorializations, etc.
Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma talked about the importance of a renovated historical memory . They did very little in this respect, they said .
 Instead of institutionalizing traditional Ukrainian holidays and traditions, their regimes sought to adapt Soviet ones to them . The Soviet regime sought toAdapt Soviet ones.
 Kuchma reinstated the Day of the Defender of the Fatherland of 23 November . The day was also reinstated on November 23 .
 In 2003, Kuchma also revived the tradition of official 1 May celebrations .
 This was marked on 22 September, deliberately set as prior to the Day of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army .
 Ukraine’s political orientation towards Russia was influenced by the circumstances of the country's political orientation . Ukraine's relationship with Russia significantly influenced a turn of the political orientation of the Ukraine government .
 Russo-Ukrainian military brotherhood during the war became commonplace . The common Soviet past became commonplace.
 The crowning of this policy was the arrival in Kyiv, in the fall of 2004, of Russian President Vladimir Putin . In 2004, Putin celebrated the liberation of Ukraine from the Germano-fascist invaders .
 The politics of memory underwent a change during Viktor Yushchenko’s term as president . The politics. of memory was changed during the president's term .
 The Stalinist USSR was seen as an empire which caused Ukraine considerable harm . As a whole, according to the new model, the Stalinists were seen as a whole .
 Ukraine is a post-colonial, post-totalitarian, and post-genocidal country . The president spoke about Ukraine’s former colonial status .
 As for the memory of the Second World War, the Ukrainian model remained crippled . The Ukrainian model remains crippled .
 The term "Great Patriotic War" was fostered as before, as was the Day of Victory of 9 May . Soviet-Russian symbology was still in evidence at each event .
 The GPW is a mnemonic system that has elements of Soviet heroic rhetoric about the GPW . It is quite distant from what might be considered an objective apprehension of historical events .
 Ukrainian political officer Oleksiy Berest took part in the “raising of the Red Banner’ on the Reichstag in 1945 . This was manifested in his conferring of the designation of Hero of Ukraine.
 Soviet symbols were to be treated as official during commemorations of 9 May . President Yushchenko’s edicts, according to the president, are to be honored .
 George’s banner and Russian songs were also in evidence during the commemorations of 2008 .
 The term ‘Great Patriotic War’ reappeared in Ukraine’s primary and secondary school textbooks . It also seemed paradoxical that it was actually after the Orange Revolution that the term “Great Patriotics War” reappeared .
 The politics of memory that Yushchenko pursued led to a straining of relations with the Russian Federation .
 Russia clearly sought to re-establish its political and cultural dominance in the post-Soviet space . GPW played a significant role in this respect .
 Viktor Yanukovych made an attempt at revanchism in the sphere of political memory after Yushchenko’s defeat . The new president, Viktor Yanukovych, was made by the new president.
 The Verkhovna Rada’s silent abetting of the erection of a monument to Stalin in Zaporizhzhia did not only bring calm to Ukrainian society, but roiled it .
 Yushchenko's policy of distancing the country from communism began to be eclipsed by a policy of reanimation of a heroicized Soviet legacy against a background of a revived Ukrainian national narrative .
 Victory Day celebrations under Yanukovych once again included a military component . As mentioned above, Victory Day was also included in the military celebrations .
For the first time since Ukraine’s declaration of independence, military hardware reappeared on the streets of Kyiv on 9 May 2010 . In fact, for the firsttime since the declaration ofindependence, military equipment reappeared in Kyiv .
 The streets of Lviv also witnessed an alternative gathering, whose participants insisted that on this day those who perished in World War Two should be remembered and prayed for .
 A scandalous event took place during Yanukovych’s presidency in connection with the celebrations . In 2011, in Lviv on 9 May, a street fight in Ukraine turned into a streetfight .
Law on the Flag of Victory was a direct borrowing from legislation promulgated in the Russian Federation, an exploitation of veterans, and an act which would cause the intensification of civic confrontations .
 The city councils of Ivano-Frankivske and Lviv passed ordinances prohibiting the exhibition of any flags bearing Soviet symbols on Victory Day .
 All of this led to the first instances of outright physical violence on the streets of that city since independence . The violence has led to a number of violent incidents since independence.
 According to a 2013 poll, 75% of respondents declared they would mark the occasion .
 Almost every family in Ukraine suffered during the war. It appears that this is less connected to ideology than it is to the fact that almost every single family suffered during war .
 My father fought in the ranks of the Red Army throughout the war . For example, his grandfather and paternal uncle were killed in the fighting .
 This was not viewed as a celebration, but a tribute of memory to those who perished, and a gesture of respect . As such, this was not seen as a Celebration, but as a tribute for those who survived .
 Victory Day was first commemorated on 8-9 May, as it is in most of Europe . After the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine, Victory Day is celebrated in Ukraine .
 The official ceremonies were organized as a day of remembrance of the dead . A memorialization of the physical ruination caused – that is, a marking of the horrors of war in general .
 George’s banner, which had become, in the interim, a clear symbol used by the separatists of the Donbas .
 This symbol was also used for the first time as a logo of the conference titled “World War II and the Creation of Historical Memory in Contemporary Ukraine’s’ annual conference .
 In 2014, 9 May was commemorated under conditions created by the Russian occupation of Crimea and the beginning of events in the Donbas . The majority of Ukraine’s cities cancelled any major ceremonies in order to avoid provocations .
 A triumphant parade was held in Russian-occupied Sevastopol, with the personal participation of Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Ukraine has fundamentally rejected its Soviet heritage, as well as the hybrid war being conducted by Putin in the Donbas .
 In 2014, President Poroshenko issued an edict abolishing the Day of the Defender of the Fatherland, which had been marked on 23 February . Also in 2014, president Poroshenko also issued a edict abolishing the day of the Day.
 Ukraine’s chief executive instituted a new holiday – the Day of the Defender of Ukraine . It will be marked on 14 October, to coincide with the Feast of Mary the Protectress and UPA Day .
 8 May will be marked as a day of remembrance and peace . One of them was the law “on the Immortalization of the Victory over Nazism’s”
 In 2016, 9 May will be officially commemorated not as Victory Day, but as the Day of Victory over Nazism in the Second World War . 9 May is the day of victory overNazism.