 The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:11m., in room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
 Winston Churchill famously described Russia as ‘a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma’ But he said next, he commented on unlocking that riddle .
 The problem is that we are not dealing with the interests of the Russian people, says the Russian government . "We are not deal with the interest of the Russians," says the government .
 We could be if we were broadcasting into Russia the way we did during the Reagan administration when we had that message about political pluralism and tolerance and that message of educating people effectively .
 Vladimir Putin is in a position where he is calling the shots. Instead, we are dealing with the interests of Vladimir Putin, he says .
 He has not shown much interest in cooperating with the U.S. And he has not demonstrated muchinterest in cooperating.
 Many of his policies are directly undermining America, including selling advanced weapons to Iran, sending waves of Syrian refugees across their borders .
 U.S. policy toward Putin's Russia is on the agenda today . The hearing will be held in Washington .
 Over the past year, he has repeatedly sent Russian warplanes to buzz U.S. ships and planes in international waters .
 These are reckless acts, these are provocative acts, and could easily result in direct confrontation . These are dangerous acts, says the author of the book .
 Russia has a constant stream of disinformation that it puts out about the United States, about the U.K., about what actually happens in the world . The committee has examined Russia's propaganda machine .
Independent media and dissidents are forcefully sidelined in Russia . And, 2 meanwhile, back in Russia, independent media and dissident dissidents are firmly sidelined .
 For the media, when I say “forcibly,’ I mean imprisoned or sometimes shot. And for the press, I mean imprisoning or sometimes shooting, he says .
 The administration has repeatedly rushed to try to cooperate with Russia . A big part of the problem is that the administration has rushed to cooperate, beginning with one-sided concessions .
 I would just point out, when we pulled out the interceptor system in Poland and in the Czech Republic, I think that was a blunder . I would only point out that, when it was pulled out, it was a mistake, he says .
 We were quick to join diplomatic efforts in Syria, even as the opposition forces we support have come under repeated Russian aerial attack .
 The administration will concede a great deal for very little in return for the concession. This has convinced the Russians that, once again, the administration will give a great Deal for verylittle in return .
 A tougher and more consistent approach on our part might convince Putin that cooperation is more advantageous than the reflexive confrontation that he often resorts to . A tougher approach on his part could convince him to cooperate more easily .
 If he continues playing a zero-sum game and regards the U.S. as an enemy to achieving his ends, then the possibility of compromise is zero under that circumstance .
 Much of his behavior to date fits that description, most glaringly seen by his invasion of Ukraine and what happened in Georgia . Much of him to date seems to have been in a very bad mood .
 Putin has repeatedly calculated that the administration’s response to his aggression will be lackluster . Unfortunately, the administration's response to Putin's aggression has been lackluster .
 The U.S., in cooperation with the EU and others, has imposed sanctions on the Russian economy . The administration has refused to provide Ukraine, for example, with the anti-tank weaponry needed to stop Russian tanks .
 The tragedy is that there are many problems where both countries could benefit from cooperation . Both countries should benefit from each other's cooperation.
 One witness has studied its rapid spread in Russia and in Central Asia . The largest number of recruits for ISIS outside of the Arab countries is in Russia .
 U.S. has targeted opposition forces that are supported by the United States far more than any targeting of ISIS forces . But, as we know, his real agenda was to save the Assad regime .
 It is clear that U.S. strategies to deal with Russia have failed. It's clear that United States strategies have failed .
 If we want to accomplish a different result, we must negotiate from a position of strength, he says . "If we want a different outcome, we need to negotiate," he says.
 Only then will cooperation be possible with a man who has demonstrated that the hope of cooperation cannot survive the cold calculation of his narrow interests .
 Eliot Engel has pushed for a number of years to get back to Radio Free Europe . He says he has advanced to try to get a program back to a program, which we should be doing with social media, with television .
 Russia should be broadcasting into Russia, telling Russians what is actually going on 3 in their society . We should be explaining the issue of tolerance, of political pluralism, of these perceptions .
 If Putin is going to continue to put out disinformation and misinformation and lie about the West, at the very least we could be telling the truth about what is happening inside Russia to Russians, says Peter Bergen .
 I am grateful that you have focused the committee’s attention on this challenge. You and I have long shared deep concerns about Russia's aggression under Vladimir Putin, he says .
 Ambassador McFaul says he was impressed with his service as our top diplomat in Moscow . McFaul: "I was particularly impressed"
 I know you were the target of all sorts of absurd accusations and harassment by Putin’s allies . I know that you were never afraid to push back against misinformation and stand your ground, I know .
 The diplomat says he is exactly the kind of diplomat we need to meet 21st-century challenges . He thanks him for his service .
 I have come to view Putin’s Russia as a unique challenge on the global stage . I've come to see Putin's Russia as an unique challenge to the world .
 Putin may not answer questions because he is playing by his own set of rules . But there may not be answers to those questions because of his own rules .
 Putin has ignored Russian law, cracking down on the human rights of Russia’s people and literally robbing future generations of their prosperity . Putin has ignoring Russian law.
 He has destroyed Russia's standing in the world, walking away from the country’s international obligations and shoring up the brutal Assad regime in Syria .
 He has threatened the norms that have largely kept the peace in Europe since World War II . He has trampled on the sovereignty of Russia's neighbors, testing the resolve of NATO, and working to undermine Western unity .
 I want to be careful not to conflate Putin and his corrupt leadership with the Russian people . I want not to Conflate Putin with the Russians, I say .
 He is an unapologetic, authoritarian kleptocrat, a grave threat to his own people and to stability and security across Europe and beyond . He is unapologetically, authoritariankleptocrats, a serious threat to Europe's security and stability .
 For now, the best approach seems to be one of geographical containment . The best approach appears to be a geographical containment, rather than geographical containment.
 We cannot fix what is ailing Russian society, but we can try to keep it within Russia’s recognized borders . We can't fix what's ailingRussian society, we can keep it in Russia's recognized borders.
 NATO has no ambition to chip away at Russia’s territory, but it is confident that the alliance will keep its Article 5 promise .
 NATO is ramping up its presence in East4 ern Europe, sending a clear signal that the alliance will not back down in the face of Putin's aggression . Putin uses lies and confusion to cast doubt on NATO’s ability, so I am glad that NATO is ramps up
 I believe and I have said for a long time that I think NATO is being tested. I believe, I have been saying for long time, that it's being tested . I believe that NATO is not being tested, he says .
 As violence in eastern Ukraine escalates again, it is clear that sanctions haven't done enough to thwart Putin's ambitions .
In the long term, I believe we have weakened Putin's ability to project a destabilizing force beyond Russia’s borders . But sanctions are better than nothing, and, in the long-term, I think, they are good, but not good .
I recently introduced legislation that, in my view, would take us in the right direction . I recently introduced a bill that would take the country in the wrong direction .
 My bill, the STAND for Ukraine Act, would tighten sanctions on Russia . It would reject any form of recognition of Russia’s rule over Crimea in the same way we didn’t recognize Soviet occupation of the Baltic states during the Cold War .
 It would also help drive investment in Ukraine and push back against Russian propaganda and disinformation . It would help to drive investment and pushback against Russia's propaganda .
 Putin’s apparent approval ratings have a lot to do with the fact that there is simply no alternative to his approval ratings .
 Even if the United States isn't popular in Russia, we know that the country’s citizens are disgusted by corruption at every level of government .
 Russia is not focusing on Russia today because we want to pick a fight, or drag the country down . We want to breathe new life into old animosities, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We want to see their country become a stable and prosperous European power and partner on the world stage . We want their country to be a stable, prosperous EuropeanPower .
 I look forward to hearing our witnesses today and hearing what they have to say, and I thank them again for coming . But I lookforward to hearing their witnesses today, and what they've to say .
 Ambassador McFaul served 5 years in the Obama administration . McFaul was Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Russia and Eurasia at the National Security Council .
 During that time, he has served as the Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and Ambassador to Czechoslovakia from 1981 to 1983 . He has also served as Special Assistant for President for national security affairs, and ambassador to
 Leon Aron is a resident scholar and director of Russian studies at the American Enterprise Institute . He is also a director of Russia's Russian studies and resident scholar .
 Without objection, the witnesses’ full prepared statements will be part of the record . The witnesses will have 5 calendar days to submit statements and questions and extraneous material for the record.
 The HONORABLE MICHAEL MCFAUL, SENIOR FELLOW and DIRECTOR AT the FREEMAN SPOGLI INSTITUTE for INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, STANFORD UNIVERSITY Ambassador McFaul . McFaul is the HONorable MICHAELMC
 Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel and other memb^ers of the committee, including several of you that I had the pleasure of hosting in Moscow when I was Ambassador .
 It is great to be back with Ambassador Matlock and Leon Aron, people I know well, says Aron . It's great to have them back, he says . The two will be back together for the second time .
Two men will be on the road in the U.S. today. I guarantee you, if you listen, you are going to learn something from these two gentlemen .
 In fact, you have to go deep into the Cold War to see a time that has been so confrontational, he says . The Cold War has been a time of confrontational.
 "I want to focus on the diagnostics first, in part because I am an aspiring professor, recovering bureaucrat, and I think it is important to know the “why’s question before you do the prescription.”
 "I am going to first focus on that and, in my limited time, then get to prescriptions," she says . "I'm going to start with that and in his limited time," she adds . "In my limitedtime, I will first focus"
 Russia, and Putin in particular, is pushing back after decades of American aggression against him . One argument is that Russia and Putin are pushing back.
 The U.S. lectured Russia about markets and democracy, we expanded NATO, we bombed Serbia, we invaded Iraq, we supported color revolutions . Putin just had to push back; he was compelled to annex Crimea and intervene in eastern Ukraine .
 The main conflict is the main conflict that has sparked the confrontation . The conflict is most likely to have sparked the conflict .
 Mr. Chairman, in his opinion, were in the American national interests, he says . "Mr Chairman"
 We expanded the northern distribution network to supply our troops in Afghanistan . We had an alternative route instead of Pakistan, which was vital to a military mission we had in 2011 .
 We got them to support U.N. Security Council Resolutions 1970 and 1973 on Libya . We got the U.S. to support the resolution on Libya.
During this period, 60 percent of Americans thought Russia was a friendly or allied country, and vice versa inside Russia .
 The period of cooperation that I just described looking at these previous variables. So you can’t explain the time of cooperation, I just describe looking at the previous variables .
 A second explanation is that Obama was weak and created the permissive conditions for Putin’s aggression . A second reason is that he created a permissive environment for Putin's aggression .
 We will have time to talk about that in questions and answers in more detail . Maybe we will have a time to discuss that in question and answers .
 The U.S. has not had good options for deterring Russia's use of force or suppression of democratic movements in Eastern Europe, says John Sutter .
 Georgia did not have military means for stopping Solidarity in 1981 under Ronald Reagan, 1968 in Czechoslovakia, or 1966 in Hungary .
 The Obama administration's response looks more like Ronald Reagan’s response to what happened in Poland in 1981 than George Bush's response to Georgia in 2008 . The response to the Georgia incident looks like Reagan's response in 1981, says John Avlon .
 The third explanation, and what I think is the real driving explanation, is domestic politics in Russia and in Ukraine . This is all about domestic politics, and very little to do with American foreign policy, either strong or weak .
 He sees the hand of the CIA in fomenting revolutions in the Arab world, in Ukraine and in Russia .
 There were giant demonstrations against his regime in December 2011 and in the spring of 2012 when he was Ambassador . He needed a new argument to suppress those people, he says .
President Obama has described the United States, the Obama administration, and me personally as the enemy . He has described us as those that are fomenting revolution against him . President Obama has called the U.S. "the enemy"
 There is not an easy way to cooperate with him if he sees the world in these zero-sum terms . If he sees an American hand behind these uprisings, be they in Moscow or Kiev.
 It is a tragic moment in U.S. -Russian relations; I don’t celebrate this at all . I don't celebrate it at all. It is an unfortunate moment in the United States - Russian relations .
 Russian government has a patient, comprehensive policy for de7 terring Russian aggression . But it is in our national interest, and supporting Russian society, it says .
 One, most important of all, to deter Putin’s aggression, is to help Ukrainian democracy and markets succeed, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: To deter Putin's aggression, to help Ukraine's democracy and market success, is the key .
 The legislation will be introduced in the coming weeks . It will be the first time the legislation has been passed in the House of Representatives .
 Third, pushing back on Russian propaganda, not through American propaganda, but through facts . Third, pushes back on Russia through facts and facts .
 Fourth, working with the government in limited ways when we can, when it serves our national interest. Fourth, work with government inlimited ways when they can .
 The Russian people are supporting the Russian people. There is no reason to contain both the state and the people, says the author .
Russia relations today arc more strained and more confrontational than at any time since the end of the Cold War .
 Even some periods of the Cold War seemed more cooperative than our current era . In fact, even some periods were more cooperative .
For the first time since the end of the World War II, a European country has annexed territory of a neighbor . The annexation is the first since the war's end .
 Vladimir Putin intervened in eastern Ukraine in an attempt to wrestle more territory away from Kiev’s control . Putin then went a step further and intervened in the east of Ukraine .
 Putin has increased his autocratic grip, in part by blaming the U.S. for ‘fomenting revolution’ against his regime .
 Once again, Russian media outlets portray the United States as Russia’s number one enemy intent on weakening .
 The Kremlin's media is responsible for many of the evils in other countrie.s including the civil wars in Syria and Libya and the Nazis who came to power in Kyiv .
 The current level of vitriol against the United States and the West more generally even worse than during the Cold War days .
 The Obama administration’s response to these Russian actions has been qualitatively different than any other period in the post -Cold War era .
 The chief of staff in the Kremlin was not on a sanctions list during the Cold War . Even during the most difficult periods of the Cold war, the Kremlin did not make the list .
 NATO is now retrained again on deterring a threat from Russia . In parallel, after decades of focus on other missions, NATO is retrained on deterting Russia .
 President Obama argued that the three greatest threats to the world were Ebola, ISIS, and Russia . In his address to the U.N. General Assembly, President Obama said Ebola was the biggest threat to world .
 Russians and Americans now view each other again as enemies. In parallel to these actions and reactions between our two governments, majorities of Russians and American citizens now view them as enemies .
 For last three decades, U.S. presidents sought to integrate Russia into the West and in parallel encourage democracy inside Russia .
 The Domestic Sources of Russian Foreign Policy. Too often, we in the U.S. jump to the discussion of “w'hat must be done’s” before properly diagnosing the problem .
 In the case of U.S. -Russia relations, we w'ill only develop successful policy prescriptions if wc accurately understand the causes of our current conflict .
 U.S. and allies in Europe have been pressing on Russia too hard for too many decades and Putin just had to push back . One popular explanation of our current confrontation in Moscow is that the United States and our allies have been pushing on Russia.
 Putin tlnalty felt compelled to strike back by annexing Crimea and intervening in eastern Ukraine, or so the argument goes . We lectured the Russians about markets and democracy, then expanded NATO, then bombed Serbia, then invaded Iraq, then attacked Iraq .
 Presidents Yeltsin and Putin both suggested that Russia should consider joining NATO at one point in their eareers . NATO expansion was never popular in Moscow .
 Most Russian officials did not support the NATO campaign against Milosevic, the Bush administration’s invasion of Iraq, or so-called color revolutions .
 President Obama and Russian President Medvedev worked together on several projects . During the era of the Reset, from 2009-2012, the two worked together to improve security .
 The New Start Treaty is the most comprehensive set of sanctions against Iran ever . It was passed in the spring of 2010, and developed the Northern Distribution Network . It is a mix of air, rail, and truck routes tlirough Russia and other countries .
 Kyrgyzstan's two governments worked together to diffuse tensions in the Caucuses . They also managed to manage ethnic strife after the government there was toppled .
 In 2011, President Medvedev even agreed to abstain on UN Security Council Resolutions 1970 and 1973 . In 2011 he also agreed to refrain from voting on UN Resolutions .
 No Russian leader had ever acquiesced to a UN-approved military intervention into a sovereign country . No Russian president had ever agreed to a military intervention .
 During this period, NATO expansion was not a contentious issue in our bilateral relations. During this time, NATO Expansion was not an issue in the bilateral relations .
 President Medvedev attended the NATO summit in Lisbon in November 2010 . He echoed other Western leaders in waxing effusively about NATO-Russia relations .
 President Medvedev engaged in a serious discussion with his NATO counterparts on missile defense cooperation . The Russian president was speaking with his counterparts on the issue .
 During the heyday of the Reset, roughly 60% of Americans viewed Russia as a friendly country . A similar number of Russians had a positive view' of the United States .
 All of this cooperation occurred after NATO expansion, after the Iraq War, and after the Orange Revolution in Ukraine . All of these positive attitudes tow ards each other’s country .
 A second explanation also places the blame on the U.S., but for doing too little, not too much .
 In response to Putin's more belligerent policie.s, the Obama Administration began to pivot aw'ay tfom cooperation W'ith Russia long before Putin intervened .
 The U.S. has never had effective policy options to deter Russian aggression in its neighborhood . The United States has never been able to deter Russia's aggression in the region .
 Putin actually did invade a neighbor, Georgia, during the Bush administration in August 2008 . President Bush did not punch him in the nose or stop that intervention .
 President Ronald Reagan did not prevent Soviet-inspired crackdown on Solidarity in December 1981 .
 President Johnson could not stop Brezhnev from intervening in Czechoslovakia in 1968 . President Eisenhow'er failed to prevent Soviet tanks from rolling into Hungary in 1 956 .
 The driving force of our current clash with Russia is not American policies, but domestic politics in Russia and Ukraine, specifically Putin’s response to popular challenges to his authority and the authority of his former ally in Kyiv .
 Relations with Russia began to deteriorate rapidly after Putin's return to the Kremlin in 2012 . Putin’s decision to suppress popular opposition to his rule was seen as a political move .
In December 2011, tens of thousands of Russian protested against a falsified parliamentary election . In December 2011. In November 2011, thousands protested against the falsified election .
 Not since 1991 — the year that the Soviet Union collapsed — had so many Russian mobilized on the streets against the government . Not since that year, the Russian government has been in trouble since 1991 .
 Putin’s old social contract economic growth in return for political passivity was no longer sufficient to appease these middle class protestors . Putin's old social contracts are no longer enough to appease the middle class.
 He needed a new argument for legitimacy, so he turned against the United States, labeling us again as Russia's enemy . He called those demonstrating against him American agents .
 Putin argued that the U.S. w'as seeking to topple his regime. In particular, Putin argued the United States was seeking to toppen his regime .
 Putin, his aides, and his media outlets accused the leaders of Russian demonstrations of being United States agents . Putin and his aides have been accused of being U.S. agents .
 President Obama sent T. T was ambassador to Moscow to foment a "color revolution" against Putin's regime . While T. was ambassador, these same media outlets constantly propagated the idea .
 President Putin and his government also blamed the U.S. for fostering instability and regime change in the Arab world .
 During this period, U.S. policy towards Russia did not change .
 Putin blamed the United Slates for fostering regime change against his ally, President Yanukovich, in the fall of 20l3.3. Putin also blamed the U.S. for fostering regimes change.
 Putin always sees the hidden hand of the CIA behind popular protests . In his view, individuals cannot act on their own .
 Yanukovich fled Ukraine in February 20 1 4, after a desperate effort by Western intermediaries to forge a compromise between the Ukrainian government and the protestors . Putin blamed the United States again.
 He first annexed Crimea and then intervened in the Donbas in support of secessionist groups there . To exact revenge against the new' government in Kyiv, he also annexed Crimea .
 Putin intervened in Syria to make sure his ally, Mr Assad, did not suffer the same fate as Mr Yanukovich in Ukraine . Two years later, Putin intervened to ensure that Mr Assad and his ally didn't suffer same fate .
 Putin’s intervention in Ukraine was initially very popular among Rusians . Putin's intervention in the Ukraine was first very popular with Rusians.
 Putin’s perceived success among Russians in battling neo-Nazis in Ukraine, the evil 4 12 Americans, and the decadent West more generally will make it hard for him to change course .
 Putin needs perpetual conflict with external enemies, not full-scale war or a direct clash with the U.S. or NATO, but a low-level, yet constant confrontation to support the narrative that Russia is under siege from the West .
 Russia's new confrontation with Russia is correct, says David Cameron . Stay the Course if ray explanation for new confrontation is correct.
 The conflict did not start as a result of a particular U.S. foreign policy action, so seeking to “correct some United States foreign policy will not produce a change in United States -Russian relations .
 Putin did not intervene in Ukraine to stop NATO expansion, because NATO expansion to Ukraine was not on the agenda in 2014 . For instance, Putin didn't intervene to stop the NATO expansion in Ukraine .
 The United Slates cannot stop promoting regime change in Russia as a way to win favor with Putin . The Obama administration was never and is not today promoting regime changes in Russia .
 The U.S. and Europe would wait patiently until the United States and Europe grow tired of confrontation and seek cooperation again . Such a policy would prove to Putin and his government that they can annex territory, use military force .
 Suggesting moral equivalency betw'een Russian behavior and U.S. actions abroad is also very damaging to our national interests. Suggestingmoral equivalencybetw'en Russian behavior is very damaging.
Donald Trump says Putin's policies are a public relations win for him .
 Instead of searching for corrections in our past policies, w'e need to stay the course with our cuirent polices, says author .
 Obama administration responded correctly to Putin's belligerent actions in Ukraine . Obama administration, together with European allies, responded to Putin’s belligerent action .
 Obama outlined the stakes at play in his speech in Tallinn on September 2, 2014 . He said Russian intervention in Ukraine “is a brazen assault on the territorial integrity of Ukraine — a sovereign and independent European nation.
 It challenges that most basic principles of our international system cannot be redraw'n at the barrel of a gun . It challenges the most basic of principles of the international system .
 It undermines an international order where the rights of peoples and nations are upheld . It can’t simply be taken away by brute force, it says .
 The West’s unified and comprehensive response to Putin's aggression was impressive and effective, but now' needs to be maintained and deepened . The West's unified response to the Russian leader was impressive.
 Support Ukrainian Reform 5 13 Putin is waiting for Ukrainian economic and political reform to fail . Support Ukrainian reform 5 13Putin is waiting to fail, says Putin .
 There is no better w'ay to rebuff Putin's belligerent foreign policies and autocratic domestic practices than to consolidate democracy and .strengthen market practices in Ukraine .
Ukrainian government has achieved success under difficult circumstances . The Ukrainian government has had success in recent years .
 Ukrainian government has reduecd government expenditures, raised heating tariffs, tightened monetary policy, and eliminated energy dependence on Russia . In close cooperation with the IMF, the government has increased heating tariffs .
 Ukrainian military reform and expanded training also continues, supported by American assistance .
 The U.S. has committed $600 million to Ukraine has increased the effectiveness of Ukrainian military forces to deter future Russian offensives . The $600m in securityssistance that the United States has committed to Ukraine is increasing the effectiveness.
 Ukraine's new leaders have proven capable of enacting major institutional reform . Ukraine’s new leaders also have proven able to enacting big institutional reform.
 The State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs has been remarkably successful . For instance, the overhaul of the police patrolling system, aided by support from the State Department’s Bureau of international Narcotics .
 U.S. support for Ukrainian civil society has been a smart, impactful investment . Ukraine's civil society remains robust, and continues to pressure the government to maintain momentum .
 The influence of Ukrainian big business conglomerates in politics needs to be reduced, says the author .
 The new government has to make more credible commitments to fighting corruption . New government must make more commitments to fight corruption .
 U.S. policy should assist them in making these eommiiments, through aid conditionality, technical assistance, and political support, according to policy .
 The U.S. and European allies should be doing more to reach out, nurture, and support directly the people in the Donbas, including the 1-1. million of them currently displaced in other parts of Ukraine .
 They need short-lenn humanitarian assistance, as well as long-term support . They need education, housing, and retraining to rebuild their futures .
 The probability of a Russian attack of a NATO ally is low, according to the probability of the attack .
 Putin will take advantage of opportunities, including splits within the alliance or ambiguities about NATO’s commitment to defend all members .
 We must deny him new opportunities, and reduce to zero his doubt about our commitment to defending all NATO allies against military threats . We must also reduce his doubts about our commitments to defend all NATO partners against military threat .
 President 6 14 Obama made the right decision to dramatically increase the size of the European Reassurance Initiative to S3 billion .
 NATO's plan to deploy four battalions on a rotational basis in Poland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania is the right decision to complement a series of decisions taken earlier, including the creation of the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force .
 The U.S. should participate in one of these deployments and at the same maintain our bilateral military cooperation with all of these countries . The United States should participate. It should also participate in a deployment and maintain its bilateral military Cooperation .
 The United States and our allies should lift sanctions against Russian companies and individuals immediately after Putin and his surrogates in ea.stern Ukraine implement the Minsk agreement. Lift Sanctions against Russian firms and individuals should be lifted immediately .
 Lifting sanctions beforehand would be terribly damaging to U.S. and European credibility . The sanctions would be very damaging to America and Europe .
 A partial lifting of sanctions in return for a partial implementation of Minsk is a dangerous, slippery slope . A partial lift of sanctions is also dangerous, according to a report .
 Sanctions put in place in response to the annexation of Crimea should stay in place until Russia leaves Crimea, however long that may be .
 The U.S. government should not seek to counter Russian propaganda with American propaganda . The United States should not try to counter Russia's propaganda.
 The best method for countering disinformation is real reporting from credible journalists in Russia, Ukraine, and other countries in the region . Instead, the best method is to counter disinformation by using credible journalists .
 Our focus should be on providing .short-term training opportunities, yearlong fellowships at American and European universities, and internships at Western media organizations .
 Education and the free-flow of information are our best tools in this long stmggle against Russian propaganda. Education and free- flow of information is our best tool in the long stMggle against Russia .
During this period of confrontation, our two governments still managed to w'ork together to remove chemical weapons from Syria and to maintain unity in the P5+ 1 process .
 When opportunities to cooperate with Russia arise on issues of mutual benefit, we should pursue them . We should not link cooperation on these issues to progress on other issues of disagreement .
 Putin has achieved his goal of shoring up Assad and his regime, at least in the short-term . Putin’s military intervention in Syria has been a success, for instance, in the past .
 If the Obama administration continues to work with Russia on Syria, w e must demand more from our Russian counterparts . The Obama administration must push them to pressure Assad to do more, including allowing more humanitarian assistance .
 Many Russians believe Putin's current course of confrontation with the West does not serve Russia’s long-term economic and strategic interests . Many Russians in the government, business, and society quietly believe that Putin's present course of confrontations does not serving Russia”s long term economic
We should not isolate these people, but instead maintain contact with them . We should not isolated them, but rather maintain contact.
 A three-week trip to Palo Alto is no better way to undermine Russian propaganda than a trip to the city .
 There is no better way to show that Americans are not obsessed with ‘destroying Russia’ then to send Russian students to spend an academic year in our schools and universities .
There are no better ambassadors for our country than young Americans studying at Russian universities or interning in Russian companies . There are nobetter ambassadors for the U.S. than young American students studying in Russia .
 The HONORABLE JACK MATLOCK is the U.S. Ambassador to the University of the United States . Matlock is a former member of the National Security Council .
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, thank you for your invitation to join these distinguished scholars . Mr Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
 I am very pleased to join these distinguished scholars in discussing our relations with Russia . And I'm very pleased with these distinguished scholar in discussing Russia's relations.
 Ambassador McFaul coauthored, among his other works, a fine book which he makes a required reading for his students of Russia .
 He had a larger staff to deal with Russia than the entire Soviet Union . I would have to say that I don't know whether it was an advantage or disadvantage, but he had a bigger staff .
 I think, the best staff anyone could wish at the time that we were dealing with the Soviet Union. So I don’t know whether that was a blessing or a curse, except that I had, he says .
Russian relations have taken of late, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he is deeply concerned with the direction U.S. has taken in Russia .
 We can debate — and I will participate in it if we wish — what caused this. We can talk about what caused it, and I'll participate if we want to do it .
 I would simply say that the perception on both sides, in both cases, has distortions, I think . And I would just say that that the view on both side, inboth cases, is distorted .
 There is cause and effect in the interaction that went both ways. Theirs may be greater or lesser than ours, but there is cause or effect in their interaction .
 The Cold War has been compared to the height or depth of the Cold War . But the issues are quite different .
 The Cold War was fundamentally about ideology. The Communist-ruled Soviet Union tried to spread its control of other countries . Karl Marx had called proletarian revolutions against existing governments .
 The Soviet leaders called their system socialist, but it actually was state monopoly capitalism . It tried to replace market forces with government fiat .
 It was a catastrophic failure in meeting people’s needs, but it managed to build a formidable and, in some respect, unmatched military power . It was the first time the military had been able to meet people's needs .
 One that has more state control than many others, but basically capitalist . The state has more control than other states .
 Today’s tensions are more like those that, through incredible misjudgment, brought on World War I . That is, competition for control of territory in and outside Europe .
 Every European country involved suffered more than they could possibly have gained. Every country involved has suffered more.
 Since World War II, the danger has risen exponentially if countries with nuclear weapons stumble into military conflict . The danger of nuclear weapons is exponentially higher if countries stumble into a military conflict.
 The number of nuclear weapons that remain in the U.S. and Russian arsenals represent a potential existential threat to every nation on Earth . Russia and the United States are among the countries with nuclear weapons .
 President Ronald Reagan and General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev met in their very first meeting . One key element was an agreement that Reagan and Gorb Mikhail made in their first meeting. The two made an agreement in the early hours of the meeting .
 Secretary of State George Shultz was able to argue convincingly that an arms race between us was absurd .
 In just a couple of years, we had abolished a whole class of nuclear weapons and our arsenals . The Obama administration made an important contribution to our national security .
 nuclear cooperation with Russia has deteriorated and seems practically nonexistent since then . But, since then, nuclear cooperation has deteriorated, and seems virtually nonexistent .
 It is urgent to restore cooperation if we are to inhibit further proliferation. It is urgently needed to restore that cooperation. We need to stop further proliferation .
 We are unlikely to do so if we proceed with plans to increase our military presence in Eastern Europe . We are likely to increase military presence if we do so .
 I am aware that one of our presumptive candidates for President has indicated that he might find some form of nuclear proliferation desirable . I am also aware that some nuclear proliferation is desirable .
I believe that is profoundly mistaken, as is the idea that allies should pay us for their protection . I believe that's profoundly mistaken. I believe it is a very different idea .
 I do not believe we should use our fine military as hired gendarmes to police the world . Even if those protected were willing to pay the cost, I don't believe they should .
Military alliances can create liabilities rather than augmenting power, says President Obama . These comments reflect one important truth which we need to recognize, he says .
 When our interests are not closely aligned, an American security guarantee can create a moral hazard, says John Sutter .
 American security interests and Turkish behavior are at odds, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have trouble, to take just one example today, to find much concurrence between U.S. and Turkey"
 Some of our alliances formed under the different conditions of the Cold War should be reviewed . The Cold War was a Cold War era.
 Many of our constituents are worried about our over-military-involvement in the world, he says . U.S. military is trying to solve problems that can't be solved by military 18 means, he adds .
 We must set our priorities, and the highest priority should be the protection and security of the United States of America . The U.S. must set its priorities.
 The only thing that threatens our existence would be another nuclear arms race that gets out of hand . The only threat would be a nuclear arms war that gets to hand .
 President Ronald Reagan understood. Let’s bear that in mind, because that is something Reagan understood, he said .
 The Soviet Union has a crazy system, says John Sutter . He was a heavy critic of communism .
 Gorbachev: We didn't bring down communism, we didn't. And, as a matter of fact, we did .
 It was brought down by internal pressures when we ended the Cold War and ended the external pressures on the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union's internal pressures were brought down when it ended Cold War .
 Russia has been accused of human rights violations in Ukraine and Syria . The Russian government has been criticized for its human rights policies . Russia has a history of abuses in the past, including human rights and human rights . The U.S. has been involved in a number of
I believe there are dignified ways we can reduce tensions with Russia on those issues and others . I believe there is a dignified way to reduce tension with Russia .
 The U.S. and Russia have common interest in fighting terrorism, says the Obama administration . Now, if there is any issue that the United States and Russia has common interest, it is in fighting terror .
 I still don’t understand why we have not been able to have more effective cooperation. And I don't know why we haven’s not been successful in working together, he says .
 The main thing we need to bear in mind is that, in confronting these things, are not in conflict . The U.S. and Russian basic interests aren't in conflict, he says .
 Russia will either be part of the problem or part of a solution, as we must, according to the U.S. President Barack Obama . As we deal with the problem, Russia will both be involved in the solution .
 It is in our interest to do what we can to encourage Russia to join us in confronting them. It is obviously in ourinterest to doWhat we can. It's obviously in their interest to help Russia, it's in our interests to help them.
 They are unlikely to do so if they regard us as an enemy or a competitor for influence in their neighborhood . They're unlikely to be an enemy, they say, if they consider us an enemy .
 Politics is driven by perceptions, says John Sutter . Sutter: We can argue about who is more responsible for the situation .
 We have been trying to encircle them and try to interfere in their internal politics. And their perceptions are that we have been moving against their interests . And they have been consistently moving against them.
 President Putin has made many mistakes, many that are not in Russia’s interests, many of them not in his interests .
 Russia's President, Russia’s Government, is a matter for Russians to decide . But Russia's Government is the matter for Russia.
 A nuclear war cannot be won, must never be fought, and that means there can be no war 19 between us . A nuclearwar cannot bewon, must not be fought .
 To act on any other principle can create a risk to our Nation and the world of unimaginable gravity, says John Sutter . "To act on a principle cancreate a risk," he says .
 The House Foreign Affairs Committee will discuss the important issue of U.S. relations with Russia .
 American Ambassador in Moscow. He is also one of his successors as U.S. ambassador in Moscow .
 He and I once were mutually supportive when w'c were the only Americans participating in a security conference in Moscow' in the 1 990s . He was the only American to participate in the security conference.
 I am deeply concerned with the direction U.S.-Russian relations has taken of late . I'm deeply concerned about the direction the U.N. has taken in recent years .
 The Cold War was fundamentally about ideology, but not ideology . The Soviet Union was trying to spread its control of other countries by encouraging what Karl Marx called “proletarian revolutions’"" against existing governments .
 The Soviet leaders called their system ‘socialist,’ but it was actually statemonopoly capitalism . It was tried by the Soviet leaders to replace market forces W'ith government.
 It was a catastrophic failure in meeting people’s needs, but managed to build a formidable — and in some respect, unmatched — military power . It was the first time the military has been able to meet people's needs .
Russias is now a capitalist country and is not trying to spread communism in the world . Russias is not a communist country, but a capitalist nation .
 Today’s tensions arc more like those that, through incredible misjudgment, brought on World War I Thats . Today's tensions arc like that of those that brought on WWI Thats.
Every European country involved suffered more than they could possibly have gained. We know how it ended; every country involved had more to do more .
 Since World War 11, the danger has risen exponentially if countries with nuclear weapons stumble into military conflict . The danger of nuclear weapons is exponentially higher if countries stumble into a military conflict.
 Secretary of State George Shultz was able to argue convincingly that an arms race between us was absurd . With that statement agreed, Shultz said that the arms race was absurd.
 In just a couple of years we had abolished a whole class of nuclear weapons in our arsenals . Shortly thereafter, we cut strategic nuclear weapon in half .
 The Obama administration made an important contribution to our national security . Since then nuclear cooperation with Russia has deteriorated, it seems practically non-existent .
 1 am aware that one of our presumptive candidates for president has indicated that he might find some form of nuclear proliferation desirable . We are unlikely to do so if we proceed with plans to increase our military presence in Eastern Europe .
 I don't believe we should use our fine military as hired gendarmes to police the world . I do not believe we shouldn't use the military as a police force, even if those protected were willing to pay .
 The comments reflect one important truth, that military alliances can create liabilities rather than augmented power . These comments do reflect a real truth, and that alliances can be created by military alliances .
 The larger an alliance becomes, the more varied will be the security ambitions of its members . The larger alliance becomes. The more varied would be the Security ambitions of members .
 American scciuity interests and Turkish behavior are at odds . One contemporary example has trouble finding much concurrence between the two .
 Perhaps it is time to have a European commander of NA'fO and a supportive role for the U.S. It is time for the United States.
St dangers to civilized life in this century such as terrorism, failed states, oiganized crime, and environmental degradation do not conflict . But the main thing we should bear in mind is that in confronting the greate, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia will either be part of the problem or part of a solution, as we must, according to the U.S. President Obama .
 Mr Aron is the director and director of RUSSIAN STUDIES . He is also a professor at the University of New York University .
 The U.S. and Russia have been in a tough, even rough, patch in the relations between the United States and Russia .
 There are many reasons for this troubling state of affairs, for which both sides bear responsibility . Both sides are responsible for both sides' actions .
 Vladimir Putin's system of beliefs, his vision of Russia in the world, and his understanding of his role as Russia’s leader .
 I don't believe that his foreign policy, in particular his relationship with the United States, is made on an ad hoc basis . I want to do it because, contrary to a fairly popular view, I don’t believe that he's made it on an Ad hoc basis.
 I think it is part of a long-term geopolitical project rooted deeply in his ideology, in his self-imposed personal mission, and domestic political imperatives of his regime’s survival . I think, instead, it's part of an ideology rooted in his own personal mission.
 Few tenets in Vladimir Putin’s credo that can be fairly ascertained now after 16 years in power .
President Barack Obama was the President of the U.S. President in 2009 . He was the first president to take a break from the White House .
 One, the end of the Cold War was Russia’s equivalent of the 1919 Versailles Treaty for Germany, a source of endless humiliation and misery . The end was Russia's equivalent of Russia's version of the Versaille Treaty .
 Putin is to recover and repossess for Russia political, economic, and geostrategic assets lost by the Soviet state at its fall . Three, the overarching strategic agenda of a truly patriotic Russian leader, not an idiot or a traitor or both, are to recover
 A few years back, I called this the Putin doctrine, and I think he has implemented it successfully and consistently from day one of his Presidency . I called it a few years ago, and it has been successful and consistently since then .
 Putin's favorite philosopher, Ivan Ilyin, is a former KGB officer . Ilyin moved from Switzerland to Russia to re-inter with the Donskoy Monastery in Moscow . His remains are in the Monastery, which is located in the Russian capital .
 Ivan Ilyin believed that Russia is never wrong but perennially wronged, primarily by the West . The West’s hostility to Russia is eternal and prompted by West's jealousy of Russia's size, natural riches . The plots against Russia are relentless, and while truces are possible
 Putin's foreign policy is also shaped by a large, urgent and powerful domestic political imperative, he says . In addition to ideology and ideology, Mike McFaul referred to this, Putin’s foreign policy has a large role .
 By the time of Putin’s 24 third Presidency, the toxic domestic economic climate had begun to reduce Russian economic growth to a crawl .
 Putin's popularity dropped by almost one-third between 2008 and 2011 . Most troubling for the regime, Putin’s popularity, which was and continues to be a key to the regime's legitimacy, has dropped .
 Alexei Kudrin says Russia had hit an institutional wall and needed a different economic model . Putin's personal friend, trusted adviser, and former First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, AlexeiKudrin, says Putin's friend .
 He began to shift the foundation of his regime’s legitimacy from economic progress to what might be called patriotic mobilization .
 There followed the annexation of Crimea, the hybrid war in Ukraine, and then Russia’s involvement in Syria .
 Putin appears to have stepped on an authoritarian escalator from which there is no exit except by physical demise or revolution . There is no escape from the escalator.
 Washington and Moscow are too wide to bridge, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the gap in ultimate goals between Washington and Russia is too wide .
 The coincidence of goals is not just possible but vital to the interests of the U.S. Yet there is one area where the coincidence of goal-scoring goals is important .
 Today, Russia does indeed find itself under siege — of course, not by the West, despite what the state propaganda machine asserts on national television daily .
 It is under the siege from what, in Mr Rohrabacher’s subcommittee a few months ago, he described as the Russian jihad .
 Moscow can and should cooperate with Moscow in Central Asia, says the author .
 Central Asia more vulnerable to Taliban and ISIS than any other region in the world today . Central Asia is more vulnerable than any else in the region today .
 Russia's problem is primarily Russia’s problem, but it will be our problem, as well, when an area with a population of 68 million people becomes a terrorist haven .
 A recent article in Foreign Policy titled “Playing Tic-Tac-Toe with Putin’ is entered into the record . Mr Chairman, in conclusion, I would like to ask that a recent article of mine in Foreign policy is entered in the record
 The American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, 501(c) educational organization . It does not take institutional positions on any issues .
 The U.S. and Russia have a tough, even rough, patch in the relations between the United States and Russia . "This is a tough and even rough patch," says CNN's John Sutter .
 There are many reasons for this troubling state of affairs, and both sides bear responsibility . Both sides blame each other for the situation .
 Vladimir Putin's credo, his vision of Russia in the world, and his understanding of his role as Russia's leader . Putin's understanding of Russia's role as leader is a key to Putin's success .
 "I want to do this because, contrary to a rather popular view, I don't believe that his foreign policy is made on an ad hoc basis," he says . "In particular the regime's relations with the U.S. is making on an Ad hoc basis"
 It is part of a long-term geopolitical project, rooted in deeply held ideology, a seif-imposed personal mission, and domestic political imperatives of his regime's survival . Instead, it's part of an ideological project rooted in deep held ideology.
 A few years back, 1 called this program the Putin Doctrine, which he implemented virtually from Day One of his first presidential term in 2000 .
 Russia is "menaced by an external force" with the "greatest threats coming from NATO and the United States" They believe, and there is plenty of evidence in their articles and interviews .
 Putin believes Russia is never wrong, but is perennially wronged by the West . Like Ilyin, Putin believes that Russia is not wrong, and is always wronged .
 The West's hostility to Russia is eternal and prompted by the West's jealousy of Russia's size, natural riches . Russia's incorruptible, saintly soul and a God-bestowed mission to be the Third Rome, the light among nations .
 The plots against Russia are relentless, and while truces are possible, genuine peace with the West is very unlikely . The plots are often tactically advantageous to Russia .
 The use all sorts of pressures, including economic sanctions and even direct military intervention, are used to wage large-scale information wars . The use of economic sanctions, such as sanctions, has been used in recent years .
 By the time of Putin's third presidential term, Russia's economic growth had fallen to a crawl . The toxic domestic economic climate had reduced Russian economic growth to a crawling .
 Russian economy would no longer deliver the 8-10 percent growth in real incomes, as it had between 2000 and 2008, according to economists .
 Public opinion polls consistently revealed people's perception of the authorities at every level as deeply corrupt, callous, and incompetent .
Putin's popularity dropped by almost one-third between 2008 and 2011 . Putin's popularity was and continues to be the foundation of the regime's legitimacy, according to CNN .
 Denis Volkov: "Russian Elite Opinion After Crimea" is a Russian Elite Opinion after Crimea . Volkov is a former member of the Russian National Security Council .
 He began to shift the foundation of his regime's legitimacy from economic progress and the steady growth of incomes to what might be patriotic mobilization .
 The U.S. declared war on Moscow in order to preserve its diktat in world affairs . Russia is rising from its knees and because of that, the West, first and foremost the United States, declared war .
Russia's foreign policy has become a mesmerizing kaleidoscope of breathtaking initiatives and brilliant successes . Not only will he protect the Motherland, but also he will recover the Soviet Union's status of being feared .
 There followed the annexation of Crimea and the hybrid war in Ukraine and then Russia's involvement in Syria . The annexation was followed by Russia's role in the Ukraine war .
 The regime's patriotic mobilization must be judged a great success. Thus far, the regime's efforts have been judged a good success .
 A patriotic fervor at the sight of the Motherland besieged yet somehow also victorious . A Russia that again, as in the Soviet days, is mightily shaping world events along with the U.S.
 Vladimir Putin appears to have stepped on the Stalin-Brezhnev-Hussein-Gaddafi president-for-life escalator from which there is no other exit except by physical demise or a revolution .
 The United States does not waste time and effort in areas where the gap in ultimate goals between Washington and Moscow is too wide to be bridged. Of course it does not— so long as the U.S. does not.
 The West is confronted with the repugnant choice between Assad and ISIS . ISIS and the al Qaeda affiliate Jabhat al Nusra on the other .
 Russia, in the meantime, will have been restored to the Soviet Union's position as an indispensable international player . Russia will be restored to its position as a key outside actor in the Middle East .
 The state propaganda machine asserts on national television dally. Not by the West, of course, despite what the state says .
 It is under siege from what I called the Russian Jihad when testifying a few months ago before Mr Rohrabacher's subcommittee . The Russian Jihad has been under siege for months.
 He was sentenced on December 3 of last year to life in prison plus 30 years . He was found guilty of life in jail plus 30-year sentence .
We can and should cooperate with Moscow in Central Asia, to paraphrase Churchill . But we can and we can cooperate with Russia's soft underbelly, says Churchill .
 Afghanistan is likely more vulnerable to the Taliban and ISIS than any other region of the world . Central Asia is likely to be more vulnerable than other regions .
 The world's largest prison in the world is held in the U.S.
" Soufan Group, December 2015. An Updated Assessment of the Flow of Foreign Fighters into Syria and Iraq."
 Mehdi Jedinia, "IS 'Cyrillic Jihadists' Create Their Own Community in Syria," "Voice of America"
 Russian Muslims have been targeted in recent attacks on Russian soil .
 The Soufan group's estimates of ISIS fighters from Russia and the former Soviet Republics total 7,100 .
 Washington has a population of 68 million people . The area is a magnet for would-be world jihadists .
 Russia and the U.S. can work together there, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he's happy to discuss the signs and causes of Central Asian peril .
There is a hopeful track record of U.S. cooperation in trying to stabilize Afghanistan, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Central Asia may be able to inform a Joint effort to defend Central Asia from subversion and a takeover by militant fundamentalism .
 I was going to ask you about your perceptions on Central Asia and where we could cooperate here . I was also going to question your perceptions about Central Asia .
 "There are literally thousands of recruits coming out of Russia into ISIS right now," says CNN's John Sutter . "There is the wider problem of this radicalization and the pace of it," he says .
There is this room for cooperation, but at the same time, there are questions about what Putin would seek from us, what could he offer . It seems to be that there is thisRoom for Cooperation, but there is still a question .
 Putin's counterterrorism efforts are not sure what form they would take, he says . He says he's not sure if Putin's efforts will take, given the way in which we conduct our counterterrorism operations .
 Instead of hitting ISIS, he hit the Free Syrian Army, and instead of hitting the army, he hits the markets . He hit the markets instead of fighting ISIS .
 West's effort to tackle Islamist terrorism is counterproductive, says West . West's response to Islamist terrorism seems counterproductive in terms of the effort of actually going after Islamist terrorism .
 The goal of Putin in Syria is to save the Assad regime, and we could discuss why he wants it . Putin wants to present the West with a total repugnant choice between Assad and ISIS, and Russia as the dominant outside player in the Middle East .
Last week there was not just a terrorist act, there was street fighting in the city of Aktobe .
 There are 6 million guest workers, many of them illegal, in Russia . Many of them come in and out from Central Asia .
 Russian speakers from Russia and the former Soviet Union are the second-largest language group in ISIS after Arabic speakers . For example, Russian speakers are from Russia.
 We cannot help Putin inside the country, and we could discuss why he has this problem . We could discuss the radicalization of its own Muslims and the guest workers .
 Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan are very troubled states . But in Central Asia, I believe, Tajikstan, KyrGYzstan and Uzbekistan are very difficult states .
 If they fall, the danger to us is that they will become havens for terrorists, he says . "If they fall," he says, they will be havens for terrorism .
 Gulf-state money floods into that region and acquires either radio stations, television stations, newspapers, newspapers .
 And change the indigenous Muslim faith, or ideology, to a new ideology, says the Muslim leader .
 These are customs that are being imported here, but they are changing our culture . As they would say to us, these are not our customs, they're not our Customs . But they are change our culture.
What we see happening across Central Asia is also happening across southern Russia. And it looks like what we see across Central Asian is happening across the country .
 I would argue this is going to be the next big problem because of the rate at which this is happening. And I'd argue this will be the future big problem .
 The last point I wanted to ask you — I am almost out of time — is just some of the stuff that we hear on RT television or in Russian propaganda . The virus was created by the United States.
 A $450 million budget is spreading this kind of nonsense across Latin America, Central Asia, Europe, around the world . " 24 hours a day," says CNN's John Sutter .
Russian-speaking population in Eastern Europe is having an impact among Russian-speaking people . There has to be a more effective way to move forward to counter this disinformation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is just a constant, big lie, propaganda effort that has to be countered . And it is just the constant,big lie, it's just a big lie.
 We are working together to make U.S. international broadcasting more effective . We're working to make United States international broadcasts more effective.
 U.S. airwaves are not just airwaves but empowering the local Russian-speaking population in the former Soviet Union .
 StopFake is a very effective site in Kiev run by students of the Mohyla Academy . One of the examples that I gave, testifying on the issue of the Russian propaganda in the Senate, was StopFake .
 This is ultimately the only way to counter the Russian propaganda, he says . It gives the people of those countries, and of course, this could be spread, he adds . This is the only ways to counter Russian propaganda.
 NATO did not admit Ukraine and Georgia, by the way, in 2008. First of all, back in 2008, it was a strategic blunder .
 The Bush administration said that they pushed to have it done but that the Germans and then, to a lesser degree, the French blocked it .
 I think our lack of bringing them into NATO makes it virtually impossible for them to come into NATO in the future . I think that was a time lost, and I think we should have brought them in, he says .
 It is really the center of where we have our disagreements with Russia. It's really thecenter of where our disagreements are with Russia . Russia is the place where the two countries have their disagreements .
Reports indicate that the fighting has stepped up again in Ukraine . If we allow Putin to start this nonsense in, don’t even talk about it anymore, I should say .
 Putin feels pressure in one part of the world he will intensify the military campaign in the Ukrainian east as a valve to release that pressure .
 Ukraine is fighting serious corruption problems, and it limits its government’s ability to respond to the Russian aggression . At the same time, Ukraine is battling serious corruption issues, and its government is fighting corruption problems .
 I just think that we have the most pro-Western government in Ukraine that we could possibly have, and God forbid that government falls. I mean, I just thinks that we are the most Pro-Western Government in Ukraine . I mean. I'm just thinking that we've the most
 If we want NATO to continue to be successful and not just worthless, it seems to me Ukraine is where we make our stand . Ukraine has been the place where NATO has made its stand, I say .
I disagree with the administration’s lack of providing weapons to the people of Ukraine . I disagree with Obama's lack of weapons to Ukraine .
 Ukraine can never beat Russia, and so, if we provide LJkraine with more weapons, it will just escalate the situation . I know they feel they feel that Ukraine cannever beat Russia. If we provide more weapons to LJKraine, it would just escalation the situation
 When Russian soldiers start coming home in body bags, I think that his calculation will be different . I think he can just make trouble whenever he wants to and there will be no price to pay .
I want you to expand on Ukraine, because I think that is really where it is all about. So I want it to expand, I want to expand. I want that to happen in Ukraine, and that's where it's all about, I say .
 I do believe that the best way to support reform and those that care about democracy and markets in Russia is to have Ukraine succeed . I do think that the most important way to help Ukraine is to be reformed is to support reforms .
 I believe that the best way to deter further aggression from Ukraine is to help Ukraine succeed . I believe Ukraine should not be allowed to continue its aggression .
 The key moment in all of European security right now is what this government will do over the next 2 to 10 years . It is when the government is collapsing, when democracy is not working, when the economy is not producing that creates permissive conditions for more mischief .
I think there were people that used to be in the government that were better . I think there are people that were good people who were better people .
 Former Minister of the Economy Jaresko was a great Finance Minister . He was a former Minister of The Economy .
 The macroeconomic front is facing some real big challenges, especially on the macro economic front, according to the IMF .
 IMF officials are pleased with the progress they have made in the last few days, they say .
 The Ukrainians agree that they agree, that the Ukrainians agree, and that they need more focus on corruption . The one issue they agree is to get the oligarchs out of the political process .
 That is going to be a long process, and we should be engaged in that process, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says we need to be engaged with that process .
 I think what happens in Ukraine really determines the fate of what Russia will do with respect to that part of the world . I think the situation in Ukraine will determine Russia's future in Russia .
 I disagree, but I want to make sure everybody understands I do disagree with Ambassador Matlock right now . One, I disagree — I disagree. One, he says, I want everyone to know what I do . I disagree .
 To pull back now would be a very dangerous thing, I think . It would create uncertainty about our commitment to our NATO allies. But to pull back would be very dangerous, I say .
 The best way to keep the peace is to quote Ronald Reagan, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin needs to have zero doubt in his mind that we are going to have our Article 5 commitments to our allies, including our allies the Baltic states and Poland .
 The debate about Ukraine joining NATO was over when we got to the government . By the time we got the government, just to be clear about the historical record was over .
 Whether that was good or bad, again, we can talk about that; it was not on the agenda . We can discuss that, again. Whether it was good and bad, we could talk about it again, again .
 When I see on RT that they are doing this in Crimea to stop NATO expansion, it is nonsense, it's nonsense. So when I see that they're doing this, it was nonsense .
 I was in the government for 5 years, and pretty much every meeting with Mr Putin and Mr Medvedev . But the issue of NATO expansion never came up once, because the issue was over .
 It all is a post facto rationalization for what Putin did in Ukraine that he brings that up. It's a post- facto rationalisation for what he brought that up . It's the post-Putin rationalization.
 Mr Chairman, for making sure that this was a very balanced hearing today, he said .
 Some of the things that are going on in the policies here don’t reflect many of his fellow members’ ideas of what the policies should be, he says .
 The U.S. and Russia are two major countries in the world . But they are trying to find a way that we can actually have peace between them .
 Ronald Reagan wanted to create a new era of friendship between the U.S. and Russia . Reagan's efforts to defeat communism and end the Cold War were part of his efforts to end Cold War .
 Ambassador Matlock played an important role in this, as well, and I am very happy to see him and hear him with us today. And I know that Ambassador Matlocks played a important role, and he played a very important role.
 I have been watching this for a long time, as well, and I am appalled at the depth that we have let our relationship sink to at this point . Let me just note, I have watched this for long time. Let mejust note, he has been watching it for a
 We are at the lowest point of any time since the ending of the Cold War . The lowest point since the end of Cold War was at the beginning of the year .
 Some people have indicated already that they believe that all of this can be related to Putin . And I do not believe, as some people have said, that all this is related to the Putin .
 The fact is there has been an unrelenting hostility toward Russia from the very days that we were negotiating with them . That led to the withdrawal of Soviet troops, which were Russian troops from Eastern Europe, which led to major arms reduction agreements .
 Some of their family were murdered by communists, who happened to be Russians, during the Cold War . Some of them had very good reasons .
 It was not Russia that was the enemy in the Cold War, it wasn’t the Russian people, but was, indeed, communism . It was theenemy in Cold War .
 Russia built rockets and missiles to support radical elements around the world . It was the communism that spurred Russia to build these rockets, and threatened us, to create revolutions .
 Thousands of documents that have just been declassified have just recently been released . But yet there have been thousands of documents.
 The Russians were unable to get into Europe in either case . There was no ability for the Russians to enter Europe .
 I testified in the Senate against the original NATO expansion . I thought it was not in the United States interest, and I thought the expansion was not necessary to begin to divide Europe again .
 At the end of the Cold War, we had a Europe whole and free, and that was the objection . The objection was to the idea that Europe was free and free .
 A Cold War alliance should have been preserved as it was, and used it by moving the things left, says author .
 The reason for not expanding NATO was the interest of the U.S. So the reason that I had not expanded NATO is the reason I had to do it.
 Bush administration said if Soviet Union did not use force in Eastern Europe, there would be no expansion of NATO jurisdiction . However, Bush administration and our allies made statements during German unification .
 Secretary Baker said not one inch to the east, and Gorbachev answered that, of course, that would be unacceptable . Secretary Baker: "I don't want to see any more of the east"
 This is long before any of these “hostile acts’ that we are being told about happened. That was long before there was ever any Mr Putin, and in fact, this is not the case .
 People were still going to be treating Russia as if it was the Soviet Union. That people were still treating Russia like if it were Soviet Union . That people still were still being treated as if Russia was the USSR .
 Russian planes are buzzed by Russian planes, our ships, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We have had this incredible hostility that ... we have been buzzing"
 The ship that was being buzzed was in the Baltic Sea . I don't remember where I heard this, I don’t know how many miles from St. John's. The ship was beingBuzzed .
 We have nuclear weapons delivery systems that are being aimed at Russia . We have a number of nuclear weapons systems aimed at the country .
 A ship was buzzed to see what kind of ship it was right off their borders . The ship was in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Some of the ships that we have sent there are closer to Russia than Catalina Island is to Los Angeles .
 Russia and the U.S. need to take a deep breath and step back from this whole military operation that is actually making things worse . Both sides need to find out where our differences are, negotiate them, see where we can work together .
 Mr Aron, thank you very much for your wonderful testimony today, which is aimed at where we need to work together, or we are all going to suffer, he says .
I appreciate you focusing on where we could cooperate, which would be better for both of us. And so, I appreciate you focus on where you can cooperate, I say .
 Ambassador McFaul: "I have learned a lot listening to all three of you" McFaul says he has learned a a lot from McFaul . He says McFaul is a good friend of the ambassador .
 Ambassador McFaul has been very ambassador McFaul. As you said in your initial statements, it's been very Ambassador McF Faul Faul Faulk .
 "I consider myself a multilateralist, and I believe that diplomacy is the best way to try to resolve things," he says . "I believe that Diplomatic is the most way to resolve issues," he adds .
President Reagan and Gorbachev have been in touch for years, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have heard the conversations going back and forth about President Reagan"
 Even when we were at the height of this danger of nuclear weapons, the dialogue between them continued .
 President Kennedy also went to the Soviet Union then to meet with Khrushchev . There were telephone calls going back and forth in trying to make sure that we didn’t have a major catastrophic scenario that could have ruined the world .
 "We shouldn’t talk to one country or another just does not make sense in this day and age," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says we shouldn't talk to each other just doesn't make sense .
 It didn't make sense in the 1960s, and it still doesn't make make sense today in 2016 . It still doesn’t make sense.
 "We have to figure out, in my estimation, on how do we do talk and work with one another," he says . "So we have to figures out, and so we have a figure out"
When he initially came into Congress, with him, there were two huge countries that are important. And when he first came in Congress, he was there.
 "We have got to figure this out. Sometimes we get along with them and sometimes we don’t, but we have gotten to figure it out," he says .
 When you talk about the global context, you can't act as though they don't exist because they do, says the author .
 The Russian caucus was trying to establish a Russian caucus, he says . "We were moving a long a long Russian caucus," he adds .
Russian parliamentarian-to-parliamentarian conversation relationships are important, he says . "I think that is a direction that we still need to move in, and I think it is tremendously important"
 Ambassador McFaul: "There is a lot that we have done together, a lot of things" McFaul says .
 Some will tell me that Putin was always in charge, and he was the guy in the background . Now, some will tell him that Putin had always been in charge .
When it ended, and Putin came back in, it seemed to me that there then became some real problems with reference to communication . The reset agreement, whether or not the reset agreement was successful or not, was not .
 Congressman: "If we don’t get the answer right, the prescriptions are going to be wrong. So Congressman, thank you for that great question," he says .
 I just want to remind you that we did have this period of cooperation, and your efforts, and our efforts . I just wants to remind us that we had this time of cooperation. I just wanted to remind me that we didn't do this time in this period
 Even if you disagree, you want to know why you are disagreeing, and somebody . We were talking earlier about cooperation on counterintelligence with terrorists .
 The KGB chief says he spent a really interesting day down at the KGB offices . He says he learned about cooperation in terms of cooperation .
 Let me quote President Medvedev speaking about NATO at the NATO summit in Lisbon . Let us quote him as he talks about NATO .
 This is what he said on the record, and I will tell you what he says after the record later . This isWhat he said. This iswhat he said after the Record, and he said later . He said it was what he was doing when he said
 Russia's President says the declaration was approved at the end of talks . He said, “Incidentally, this is the President of Russia’s President. He said it was “incidentally”
 President of Russia just a few years ago, Mr Meeks. That is the President of Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Putin's return has to do with Putin coming back, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Just to re-underscore it, it has to be done with Putin"
President Obama has a suspicious view of the U.S. and the United States, he says . He says he has a "suspicious view" that we go around the world overthrowing regimes .
There is a lot of data to support his hypothesis about American foreign policy over the last 70 years . There is no evidence to support the hypothesis, but there is plenty to support it .
 The President would sit with Putin and say, "The CIA is not supporting the overthrow of Mubarak," he says . "I was at many of these meetings, and the President would 39 sit withPutin," he adds .
 These Russians, some of them are in the back here actually, they are actually acting on their own . Some of the Russians are actually doing their own.
President Obama decided to discredit his administration, he said, "He needed us as an enemy" Now, whether he knew the truth but didn't want to believe it for political purposes or genuinely didn't believe it, he decided .
 Obama administration made a few mistakes in the Obama administration, he says . He says he is happy to talk about some of the mistakes that we made if I had more time .
 I want to radically reject this moral equivalency that somehow we are all to blame here, and you know, that it is blame on America, blame on the United States . But I want the U.S. not to blame, and I want it to be radically rejected .
 I want to know precisely what the Obama administration did to cause this conflict, because I can tell you precisely what Putin did . I can't tell you exactly how Putin did, but I can also tell you what he did, he says .
 We didn't support any revolution against him, and there has to be a response to that . We didn’t support any Revolution against him. There has been a reaction to that, and we have to respond .
 Europe does not allow annexation to become policy that does not have a response. Thou does not — especially in Europe, we cannot allow annexation, says David Cameron .
 Putin says even during the conflict that we had, we still managed to cooperate with Mr Putin .
 I was there with him when we did the chemical weapons deal between the U.S. and Russia in September 2003 . He was there when the deal was made .
 We managed the P5 h1 negotiations on Iran, even during this time, and some of these other issues, including terrorism . If we can cooperate where it is in our national interest, we should, but we have to respond to these aggressive things when they happen .
 The withdrawal from America’s traditional leadership role has left a power vacuum around the globe, he says . Putin has taken advantage of, as well as other bad actors, he adds .
 China is building islands in the South China Sea, and then militarizing them . ISIS, obviously, comes to mind .
 The West protested Putin's invasion of Crimea, but ultimately did little or nothing, he says . "I think the West lamely protested," he says. "We not forget what has happened there"
Ukraines have fought bravely, but they are just outgunned. But after basically invading and then having a bogus referendum, they have continued with aggression in eastern Ukraine .
 Putin has also been expanding Russia’s military footprint in places like Armenia, which has welcomed thousands of Russian troops and an infusion of advanced weaponry . This has resulted in Putin pressuring NATO's southern flank, just as the alliance is trying to reinforce its eastern flank, and
 Putin continues to hone in on Nagorno-Karabakh, an area that we don’t talk about that much anymore . But Putin still continues to focus on the area, says Putin .
 The region is vulnerable to conflict, and tensions have flared up and deaths are occurring there . We talked about it maybe a couple of decades back, but not much anymore .
 Nagorno-Karabakh hopes this arrangement will shore up his international reputation and pull Armenia and Azerbaijan closer to Russia . There has been military action there in recent months.
 Putin’s engagement in Syria in the Middle East has only complicated matters there . Putin's engagement with Syria in Syria has onlycomplicated matters there, says CNN .
 Putin undermines U.S. efforts by lending support to the Assad regime, Putin says . Putin also continues to test the limits of Turkey, supplying weapons systems to Iran, and on and on .
 "I don't have a huge amount of time, obviously, even less," he says . But let me — and I don’t have a big amount of Time, obviously. But let us — and let me, and IDon't have an huge amount
 The world has accepted this as a fait accompli. I think that, you know, the world, unfortunately, to a considerable degree, has accepted it as afait accompla .
 You don’t hear much in the news about it about, in the press much at all, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is tightening its grip on Crimea, says Dr. John Sutter . It is my understanding that the repression there is worsening, he says . Russia is increasing its campaign against dissents, he adds .
 Well, thank you very much, and I am sure my colleagues could comment, too. Well, thanks you verymuch, and thank your colleagues, too . I'm sure my colleague could comment .
Ukrainian refugee agency is the latest number by the refugee agency, Ukrainian refugee agency . "I think they are being quite honest here," says refugee agency official .
 Many international organizations by Russia are barred from going there, many international organizations . The numbers are staggering. I mean, you know, these numbers, because nobody could get there without being harassed, and many are barred.
 Putin dissolved the self-governing body of the Crimea Tatars in Crimea . Now, this is greatly exacerbated by the fact that he dissolved the body .
 Former Soviet dissident Mosad Jamilif prevented leaders from coming back to their homeland, returning . He prevented their leaders, including MosadJamilif, from returning, returning.
 This all exacerbates the situation, and it, again, feeds into extremism in the case of Crimean Tatars. So this all exacerbate the situation. So all exacerbating the situation in the Crimea, says the author .
 The Islamic militancy that used to be confined largely to North Caucasus is now spreading inside Russia . I spoke about the danger of the Russian jihad, from the inside, from inside .
About 6 million Central Asian Diaspora in Russia . Of course, always the fringes, of about 6 million strong Central AsianDiaspora .
 Crimea is a gross violation of international norms, says CNN's John Sutter . Crimea is also a very dangerous situation where it could lead to the rise of Islamic extremism, he says .
 I really appreciated all the testimony, and I wanted to agree with my colleague here. I really appreciate all the evidence, and wanted to agreed with his colleague here . I really enjoyed all the testified, andI wanted to agreement with my colleagues .
 Rep. Meeks: "I am sure all of us learned a lot from what each of us had to say"
 Ambassador Matlock said he had some additional views on how we could reduce tension . He also said that he had more views on reducing tension .
 You also said that one thing that we shouldn’t do is increase our military involvement, or require payments from NATO countries, and then cautioned on taking on liabilities .
 I think everything said by the others has been correct, but they have taken a lot of things out of context . I think everyone has been wrong, but the others have been correct. I think it has been right.
 I do not agree that our new national security is significantly affected by what happens in Ukraine . And frankly, I don't agree that we are affected by the Ukraine situation .
 There is no way to solve the problem militarily, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I am certain there is no ways to solve it militarily"
 Russia, given its history, is not going to allow the Ukrainian situation to be solved militarily, so giving military aid simply causes more damage to the area, and it isn't going to be solve that way .
 The basic thing we have to bear in mind, and this is unfortunate, but it is reality, and that is reality . You cannot have a united prosperous Ukraine which does not have close relations with Russia .
 Ukraine is better off without Crimea, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine's political history and the economics are the second thing to think about .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of using a U.S. military force to force his country's military to step down . Putin's government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 Putin says it makes it a national issue. However, to think that by bringing pressure to bear on them we can make them change their policy simply plays into Putin's hands .
 Any attempts to use military force or to encourage it will make the situation worse. So any attempts to make it worse will make a situation worse, say experts .
 I think we need to define our aims as to what the ultimate aim is. I think that we need a definition of what we want to do .
 Our aim should be to keep the country from falling apart to keep ISIS out, to keep refugees out of Europe . Our aim is to do what we can to keep our country from becoming part of ISIS .
 Russian opinion has been, you will get more chaos in Syria if you remove the current regime the way we did in Iraq, he says . Now, the Russian Opinion has been.
 I think what we need to do is to concentrate on those areas where our interests are and find better ways to do them . I think that we should focus on the areas where we have our interests and find ways to improve them .
 Russians are going to decide on Russia’s internal government. As far as Russia's internal government, Russians will decide that .
 That's if our democratization efforts are simply in opposition to the current regime . That is if our democracy efforts are just in opposition. That's what we want to do .
 Assistant Secretary of State speaking on a phone. Cell phone could be monitored talking about who should be the Prime Minister of Ukraine .
 Ambassador Matlock made a mistake in the ambassador's office . It was a mistake, but if you want to know the full details, it was the mistake .
 Let me give you the full context of that conversation if you are interested. So let you give you a full context.
 The conversation was about how to get a coalition government together with President Yanukovych . President Yanukovych is a former President of Ukraine .
 Vice President called him about a dozen times to cut a deal between him and the street . The Vice President said he called him several times to make a deal .
 12 hours later, he showed up in Rostov, Russia, for some unexpected reason . We were not trying to overthrow Mr Yanukovych .
 As a social scientist, I study political and economic change around the world, and Russia is a rich country . I can’t predict when and where, and the interregnum, and I have no prediction about, but I, as a social scientists, I
 Most Russians want to be integrated into the 44 world, and yes, Russians should be in charge of their own fate . Most Russians are not interested in being integrated into their own world, they say .
 Russia will be the one country that will not move in this kind of forces for political and economic modernization . But all of them, not just Mr Putin or that regime, is going to become middle income or high .
 I just have met too many young people that are just like my students at Stanford that just want a normal life . I just has met too much young people. I just want to see more normal life, I say .
Russian nuclear cooperation has been inspiring me to promote nuclear cooperation . I have had a number of visits to Russia to promote the nuclear cooperation.
 Columbia is the sister city of Shiabinsk. I have been very grateful that my home community of Columbia is a sister city. I am also grateful that I have a home community in Columbia .
 Russia's culture of Russia is a big part of the country's culture, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Every time I go, I have been so impressed"
 In South Carolina, a large number of very prosperous Russian Americans have been welcomed into the community . South Carolina's midlands of South Carolina also welcomed a large numbers of Russian Americans .
 Petersburg Civic Ballet. Russian Americans have contributed "extraordinary contributions" to our State, says State .
 Georgia's president says growing middle class travel has been crushed by aggression . He says the Republic of Georgia has been a brave ally of Georgia .
 Russian fighter jets flew within 30 feet of the USS Donald Cook, then flew a Russian interceptor within 50 feet of U.S. aircraft .
 100,000 refugees constitutes about 5 percent, not 20 percent, an important correction . So 100,00 refugees constitute about 5% of refugees, not about 20 percent .
 I am a big believer, and I know Jack Matlock may not agree with that, but I think Mike McFaul does . I think McFaul and I think similarly about these things, I think . I'm a big believers. I know — and I'm not
 I think most of these acts are done for domestic 45 political purposes . I think many of the acts are used for domestic political purposes.
 Russia is where the Soviet Union used to be, and Vladimir Putin secured Russia as a great super power again . Russia rose off its knees again, and Russia is now a great power again, according to the Russian media .
We underestimated the appeal that this caused in the hearts and minds of millions of Russians because we underestimated the hurt that occurred when the Soviet Union collapsed. We underestimated the impact of this. We underestimate the appeal, says the author .
 Putin is not intimidated by the U.S. He is ready to take all the necessary means to defend Russia against the danger that may not exist. So these singular facts of bringing it to the brink is to show domestically that Putin isn't intimidated .
 The point is that he is almost forced to act provocatively because that is where his regime support and legitimacy and popularity is. He is almost forcing to act Provocatively.
 The obvious extraordinary loss of life that could occur is so irresponsible, he says . It is not in the interest of the people of Russia, or its foreign policy or its military, he adds .
 Sir, as he said in the concluding remarks to his statement, we are facing an unprecedented danger, a risk-prone, highly personalistic regime .
 It is pushed toward these types of acts, and that is what scares me the most, says CNN's John Sutter . "It is pushing toward these type of acts," Sutter says .
 General Philip Breedlove said America needs to do more to deter the Russian threat . He was the former commander of European commander and NATO supreme allied commander .
I thank you very much for being here today. And so I, again, appreciate all of your service, and I thank youvery much for your service .
 "I can’t help the irony that we are having this hearing, and literally, in the last 5 minutes," he says . "I have several things I want to go over, but first, I can't help this hearing," he adds .
 Russian Government hackers have hacked the Democratic National Committee to find oppo research that the DNC has, according to our own security experts . The Washington Post is reporting that according to security experts, Russian Government hacked the DNC .
 The moral equivalency language that mistakes have been made on both sides has been made by both sides . So spare me the moral equivalence language that makes mistakes on both side .
 Hungary, Hungary, Czechoslovakia would have been Lyndon Johnson, Lyndon Johnson and George W Bush . The invasion of Georgia, when George W. Bush was President, was also in Hungary, 1956 .
 Previous Presidents, both Democrats and Republicans, were unable to prevent a Russian premier, or then chairman of the USSR, from acting .
 Ranking Member Engel has said he is now moving forward to support Ukraine . He wants to associate himself with what Engel said in terms of our response .
 The three Baltic Republics and Poland are in joint operations now with the three Baltic republics .
 I wish that we were doing more, and I am a cosponsor of legislation to do more in Ukraine . I was hoping that possibly Mr McFaul, you could speak to that more specifically what we could be doing now to bolster Ukraine, he says .
I want to associate myself with you in terms of that historical record . I want to associated myself with the historical record.
 I don't see consolidating democracy or strengthening markets in Ukraine as anti-Russian, he says . I think, in terms of Ukraine, I just want to underscore, again, more context, that I don’t see consolidation or strengthening Markets as anti -Russian .
When I was Ambassador, we had this argument frequently with senior members of the Russian Government, he says . When I was ambassador, he said: "You should be able to join whatever trade agreement you want, whatever treaty you want"
 I think the idea of going back to some 19th century idea of spheres of influence makes no sense in the 21st century . I think it would be a bad idea to go back to the 19th Century idea of sphere of influence .
 The idea that somehow borders and geography are what makes countries rich or not is just, says Mr Boyle . The idea is a very outdated Mr Boyle, he says .
Ukrainian government says it is not an anti-Russian policy that supports Ukrainian democracy or Ukrainian markets .
 I think the best investment that you all have supported with your support has been to help develop Ukrainian civil society . I think in that regard, I think it is best investment in the country .
I think it has been a fantastic success story, that it cannot be done in other countries for other circumstances . I think it's been a great success story. I think that it can't be done for other countries.
 Pressure from society to make the government perform is the best way to try to help reform in Ukraine . But I think the pressure from society is the most effective way to reform in the country .
 It is not easy to correct 30 years of oligarchic corrupt capitalism. It is difficult, it is hard, it's not easy, it isn't easy to fix it .
 It is going to take some electoral cycles, in my view, to change that, but I think that is the core of the election, he says . It's going to be hard to change, but that's the core.
 Support society, support independent media, and they will put the pressure on the government . Support society and independent media will put pressure on government .
 Let me — since I have time and now less than, in 50 seconds, let me just shift a bit. Let me, since we have time, let us just shift. Let us just change a bit, says the author .
 The U.S. did or did not do X, he says . "There is something kind of self-centered in a sense that we always think when foreign policy actor does X," he adds .
 Putin’s actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine have less to do with U.S. policy, he says . "I was wondering if any of you would like to speak to that," he adds .
 Ukraine is Ukraine's only country that can solve Ukraine's problems, says former president . Ukraine is one of Ukraine's most important countries to solve its problems .
When I was Ambassador to the Soviet Union, whenever I went to Ukraine, I always gave my speeches in Ukrainian language . When I was ambassador to the USSR, whenever he went to the Ukraine, he gave his speeches in Ukraine .
 I have been following things that happened in Ukraine since I was a high school student and did reporters on the role during the war . I've been following events that happened during the Ukraine war.
 When they got independence, their borders were, to some degree, artificial . And when they gotindependence, their border was, to a degree, Artificial .
 Crimea had only been added by fiat without consulting anybody in the 1950s . Crimea was only added by decree without consulting anyone in the 50s .
Former colleagues from the National Security Council were telling them how we organize our national security . Now, and so Ukraine, the Ukraine is the focus of a new national security initiative .
 The sides of the last election were very evenly divided on the west on one side and on the other side in the east and south .
Also, they had a constitution, which was not a Federal constitution, it was unitary . Also, they were unitary, not Federal constitution .
 A President who won maybe by just 1 percentage of the vote named every governor . The president was named by every governor in the state .
 The corrupt President that they got rid of would never have been elected if Crimea had not been part of Ukraine . The corrupt president would have never been elected in Ukraine if Crimea was not part of the country .
 There are a lot of issues here, a veiy deep history, and the basic problem is Ukraine . There are many issues in Ukraine, and there are many of them in the country .
 I think we need to understand history, especially the way the Russians understand history so that we can move forward . I think the Russians need to be able to move forward, especially in Russia .
 I am just going to make a couple of comments. I am not going to ask you a question, because if I ask you, it is like asking you the time, you will tell me how to make an watch, and so I'm just going for a couple.
 Two former Ambassadors from the same region of the world mix it up together during the committee hearing . I never thought I would see the day that in a committee hearing, we would have two ex-Ambassadors from same region.
 The tanks are still there and they have one-third of Georgia . I happened to be there a week after they invaded, and I saw the tanks up on the hill, and then in the West .
 Crimea, the Russians took Crimea, their little green men, they moved into eastern Ukraine, chairman and I and some others were there right after the Russians came into Ukraine . They are still there, and they're still there .
 The Georgians are going to stay in those enclaves in Georgia, which the Georgians treat it the way the Serbs were treating Kosovo .
 Crimea will become a liability, and there will be incentive to join with Ukraine . In that case, Crimea will be a liability .
 Dr. John Sutter says his hearing is a little impaired . Sutter: "I am not the only one with the difficulty sometimes of hearing"
 I don't assume that he has a grand plan to go into this place and that place and the other . I don’t assume that his grand plan is to go to this place or that place, the other.
 I think it is incumbent upon us to reduce the opportunities for him to do those things . I think he should be allowed to do what he wants, not do anything else .
 What he tried to do in seizing territory in the eastern Ukraine has been a fantastic failure . It is, in part, a failure because there was pushback, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania have commitments to each other to keep the peace . Russia has a very precarious border with Estonia and Latvia . "We need to focus on as a way not because to confront Russia, but toKeep the peace on thatvery precarious border," says
 The most vulnerable is the Baltics, and of them, the most vulnerable, the Narva area between Russia and Estonia . The Narva region is the mostulnerable, the area between the two countries .
Three NATO members are now, and presumably, that is a deterrent, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says, "I agree with Mike, those are three NATO members now" and that's a deterrent .
 Putin may try to expose NATO as a paper tiger, says David Frum . But if the domestic situation requires it, he says, it may be a great upsurge in domestic popularity .
 I had an opportunity to travel with my good friend, Mr Rohrabacher, to Moscow . One of the meetings we had was 50 at the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe .
 The Russian Government, under the leadership of President Putin, had shut down all of the radio stations .
 The Russian Government passed a law that required that it have the majority Russian ownership, so that license was revoked as well . There was one station remaining that had a freestanding license .
State-controlled media spends more than $450 million a year to broadcast to more than 30 million Russian speakers . Ambassador McFaul: "It seems to me that in responding to this very sophisticated and very pervasive state-controlledmedia and propaganda machine, I think, really extraordinary
Leon Aron says he wants to associate himself with what he said earlier in his testimony . Aron: "I do want to just associate myself with what I said earlier"
Russian journalists would say do not do that if they were here today, they would say. I know, you know, all the reporters in Russia, I know . I know. All the reporters, almost all the journalists in Russia.
 We can provide internships in our news organizations with information, we can provide them with information . We can also have strategic alliances with them with them to provide that .
 educational programs need to get much more attention, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "So those kinds of things, educational programs, need to be more attention"
 Thousands of Russians are trying to contribute to their country that are now living in exile . Many of them are in exile in the Russian capital, Moscow .
 "These are the kind of opportunities that we should expand, but what we can do internally, I will let Leon answer that question, if he wants to," he says .
 Social media is more or less free, and this is where the effort is going, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says social media is a generation we will want to affect is the generation of social media .
 BBG and the gruntees, that is the radios, are less of radios. And you know, as far as I know, BBG is less of a radio than a radio . But you know that, as well as BBG, that's the
 There is hope there is hope for more social media platforms. They are more of TVs, they're more of Twitter, they are more Twitter . There are more TVs, more Twitter, more of social media.
 The Kremlin has worked to preempt potential domestic discontent through this distraction of foreign interventions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the Kremlin is working to preempt possible domestic discontent .
Public opinion poll data out of Russia is difficult to get accurate data, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I agree with your analysis, and public opinion polls are very difficult"
I would just say historically and comparatively, we are not very good at predicting when declines and economic growth or depression leads to political change . I would just remind you that I would never try to make a prediction based on that .
 I want to associate myself with that, if and when they do what they have signed up to do and their proxies have signed on to do in Mensk .
 Let’s do partial sanctions for partial implementations. I find it very scary when people say sanctions aren’t working, so let’'s lift them .
 There are a couple of witness statements that I am going to include for the record . We have luncheon with the Dalai Lama, so there is no objection .
 I think Putin wants to be the second Peter the Great, and the plan to make Russia a leading power, if not, the leading power with the world . I think he wants to become Russia's leading power.
 I personally think it would be in our national interest for Russia to be great for Russia, I say . I personally believe Russia would be great if Russia were to be good for Russia .
 I do not believe the strategy he is seeking to achieve that objective is a smart one . I don't believe his strategy is aSmart one, he says .
 The benefits, domestic political benefits, far supersede the 52 price that he had to pay, either economically or militarily . The benefits are more expensive than the political benefits he has to pay .
 I am also for arming Ukraine with strictly defensive weapons, but you’re absolutely right. I'm also for armed Ukraine with defensive weapons .
 The president's political benefits exceed the price that he pays politically and economically for his adventures, he says . He says he will continue to pay the same price as his benefits .
If we confront what he is doing militarily, he can push us into another nuclear arms race, he says . But the danger is, he adds, if we confront him, which he says does not affect our national interest .
 I think that is what we have to watch, because that is going to be very hard to deal with, I think. I think it is what they have to do, because we have a lot of things to do with . It will be hard for us to
 I believe Putin needs to see some credible signs of paying more for his policies . I believe that Putin needs a credible sign that he is paying more.
President Obama says we need to boost our military forces . He says we can credibly threaten Putin to pay a higher price domestically, politically, for his adventures abroad .
 I think perhaps he is one of the most dangerous people in the world, and gentlemen, I would love individually to have dinner with each one of you .
 Mr Marino, and I also want to thank the panel, the witnesses here today . Thank you, Mr Marino.
 The U.S. delegation to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly is the head of the United States delegation . Ambassador Matlock says it would not reflect the reality of our NATO partners across the board .
 The Russians are just buzzing our ships in the Black Sea because we are too close to their littoral, and they are guilty of one thing, sovereign independence .
 They are not doing anything provocative. That is what they are guilty of. That's what they're guilty of . They're not do anything provocative .
 In fact, the very last thing in the world they want to do is anything provocative, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The illegal annexation of the Ukraine, the Crimea, and now the illegal occupation of the Crimea is now illegal .
 Russian subterfuge pretending these are Ukrainian nationalists and patriots who they have no control over . Russian subterFuge pretending to be Ukrainian nationalists, patriots.
 It was almost certainly downed at the loss of terrible civilian life over the sovereign territory of the Ukraine . Russian provocation and Russian provocateurs, not Ukrainians, not Americans hating Russia, says CNN.
 Putin seems to be engaged in some kind of reestablishment of Russian hegemony, and that is very dangerous . He seems to have a delusional longing for some glorious past that really never existed .
 It is also dangerous for Putin to misread U.S. resolve and NATO resolve, says Putin . It's also dangerous to mis read the United States resolve, NATO resolve.
 Ambassador McFaul: "I couldn't agree with you more with what you said earlier. And I couldn’t agree with me more with you"
 There are areas of cooperation we appreciate. And we certainly shouldn’t cloud the fact that there are parts of cooperation, says the author .
 "We cooperated on JCPOA to a great contribution to world peace, as far as I am concerned," he says .
 Putin seems to be pushing all the wrong with respect to the NATO alliance and to the U.S. But Putin is pushing the wrong.
 I do agree that we need to stand with our allies. So thank you for your question, and I'm sorry, I'm not sure what I'm doing .
 I think the idea of four new battalions in the east is the correct thing. I think it is the right thing to have four battalions.
Only fools would think about doing that, and we are not foolish, but they are there in a defensive posture . Only fools would do that, but we're not foolish.
 His own view of why he did what he did is very contingent and circumstantial and emotional. You know, my own view, is very contributantial and emotional .
 It was not, in my view, some grand design to recreate the Soviet Union, and that, therefore, gives me hope that if we Mr. Connolly. It's not a grand design, it was not a great design, says Mr Connolly . It was
 Ukraine, Kurdistan, Mongolia, Kurdistan and Mongolia . I just came back from the Ukraine, but I also was in Kurdistan, I was also in Mongolia .
 There is a sense among those countries that that is precisely what he is up to, that this was not an isolated example. There is also a sense that this is not a isolated example, he says .
 The Georgia caucus is about territorial reengagement and reexpansion after a period of contraction under Yeltsin and that period .
 Former eastern countries are looking to our leadership to respond to it, says David Cameron . There is real anxiety among former eastern countries too, he says .
 Mr Connolly says he wants to thank all the members of the House of Representatives .
 Tom Marino may be following up with you on dinner plans . We may follow up with each of the witnesses .
 If you are in need of special accommodations, please call 202/225-225-502J . At least four business days in advance of the event, whenever practicable .
 Questions with regard to special accommodations in general may he directed to the Committee . Questions with regards to special accommodation in general could he directed.
 The House Committee on Foreign Affairs is on the Foreign Affairs Full Committee . Chris Smith is the chairman of the House Committee .
 PA Jeff Duncan, SC Mo Brooks, AL Paul Cook, CA Randy Weber, TX Scott Peny-, PA Ron DeSantis, FL Mark Meadows, NC Ted Yoho, FL Curt Clawson, FL Scott DesJarlais. Ml X Lee Zeldin, NY
 CA X Gregorv W Meeks, NY Albio Sires, NJ X Gerald E, Connolly, VA Theodore E Deutch, FL Brian Higgins. Brian Higgins .
 NY X Karen Bass, CA William Keating, MA X David Cicillinc, R1 Alan Grayson, FL Ami Bcra, CA Alan S Lowenthal, CA Grace Meng, NY Lois Frankel. NYX Karen Bass: NY X William Bass,CA William Ke
 U.S. POLICY TOWARD PUTIN’S RUSSIA is a documentary director .
 Magnitsky Act was adopted by U.S. Congress in 2012 . The Russian Federation and the United States are divided over the issue of Magnitski Act .
 In his professional capacity as a documentary film maker, 1 made a film examining circumstances of Magnitsky events .
 Tliat episode would be one of the fundamentals of the narrative presenting Sergei Magnitsky as a hero whistleblower who had uncovered a massive fraud and was jailed and killed by police .
 Mr Browder claimed that Magnitky's accusing the officers on Oct. 1, he was arrested and jailed on the orders of the same very officers . He claimed that as a result of Magnitka's accusation he was, one month later, jailed .
 The episode referred by Browder as testifying and accusing the officers, was in fact a police examination of Magnitsky .
 The transcript contains no accusations and not even a mention of the officers names . The transcript has no accusations.
 Theft of Browder's companies were used to apply for and to receive tlie fraudulent tax refund . Browder is accused of using his companies to fraudulently obtain tax refunds .
 The companies, Browder told me and the numerous media, had been stolen before the fraud . The companies and the media, including Browder, told me that the fraud had been done before .
 Mr Browder also claimed that the “company theft’s’ was the subject of another whisleblower testimony by Magnitsky .
 Magnitsky's testimony was in fact a police examination of him as a witness in a criminal investigation . The “company theft’s’ testimony was also a police probe of Magnitskaya, a police investigation .
In this one Magnitsky does mention the names of officers Karpov and Kuznetsov . In this one he mentions the name of two officers .
 This fact has been used by my opponents and some media as an evidence of inaccuracies in my film . This fact is used by some media (in particular Finantial Times and ABC News)
 The “mentioning’ of the names, is being confused, innocently, or on purpose, with accusations of officers . The ‘mentionering” of the name, is not on purpose. The ”mentions of the
 In Browder's narrative only the paper originals, not printouts of files, are necessary to re-register the companies .
 The articles of association, either originals or copies, are not essential in the process of re-registration . As I discovered, and show in my film, the articles of associations are not important in the re- registration process .
 Magnitsky's “mentioning of the names of the officers, during one of the examinations, could have not represented any threat to the police, and a motive for a retaliation, according to the report .
 Media business analyst and organization development expert based in New Britain, CT. 1 has extensive in-country experience in analyzing Russian media organizations from top to bottom .
 The U.S. and Russia have been engaged in a bitter dispute for years . The US-Russia relationship has been strained for years and has been at odds with Russia .
For many, such a redirection may seem as attainable as finding the end of a rainbow . For many, it may be attainable.
Every week a battle rages in the media in which America expresses alarm over Russian international aggression and antidemocratic policies at home .
 Russia expresses alarm over overbearing U.S. role in the world that includes threats to Russia's security .
 Both sides are pursuing policies that contain a strong element of misunderstanding. My own research and analysis has shown that both sides are trying to find out what is wrong .
 The misunderstanding is propagated to a great extent by misinformation found in the media of the respective countries . I've found that this misunderstanding is being propagated by the media .
 T share Heilman’s perception of the dangerous potential of entrenched misunderstanding . T share Hisilman's view of the dangers of the current situation in Russia .
 News stories proliferating that lamented Vladimir Putin's crackdown on Russia's free press . News stories were proliferating in Russia that lamented the Putin crackdown .
 Putin had inherited no free press on which to crack down. The flaw in that story is that Putin knew that from personal experience with indigenous media organizations .
 Putin's regime was frowned upon by Putin. They were engaged in nefarious activities that were frowned on by Putin .
 The White House has been accused of using trumped-up press freedom allegations to compromise him . He is accused of lying to the media about the allegations .
 They were simply seeking an advantage over Putin to protect their own interests . They were just seeking to protect themselves from Putin .
 The truth is that Yeltsin era laws precluded the profitability of media outlets . Yeltsins law precluded media outlets' profitability, according to a report .
 They never had the financial independence to serv'e their audiences honestly and freely . They had to be honest and freely, they say .
 Their bankrupt condition led them into subjugation by oligarchs, state and private enterprises, governors, mayors, legislators and even the Kremlin .
 The 62-year-old media company is one of the most successful media companies in the world . They all put money into the loss-making media enterprises .
 I estimate that at least eighty percent of the media were then under the control of some level of government . I estimate at least 80 percent of media were under control of the government .
 Close to zero percent were free to reliably tell their audiences the truth, according to CNN.com .
 Russia's media were abject failures, says CNN.com . Russia's government is a means for citizens to be informed and exercise vigilance over their government .
 Observers who believed the bogus crack-down story had looked only at surface appearances .
 They seemed oblivious to the fundamental realities, and therefore came to totally unwarranted conclusions . They seem to be unaware of the reality of the world .
 T give greater detail on this consequential problem in my hoo\i Medvedev's Media A ffairs . T give more detail on the problem in his hoo:\i Medvesev's media A ffair .
 The fraudulent tale about press freedom's doom is actually prologue to many stories that were to afterwards . The fraudulent story about press Freedom is actually a prologue.
 In early 2007 the International Federation of Journalists commissioned me to study and report on media coverage of the 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko . In 2007 I was commissioned to report on the incident .
 My report to the organization's World Congress documented that the mainstream story accusing Putin of culpability was another fabrication . The mainstream story of Putin's culpability is another fabrication.
 Their aim was to destabilize Russia, foment a violent revolution, and institute a monarchy . Their admitted ultimate aim is to destabilizing Russia, and instating a monarchy, they said .
 The fabrication is regarded as proof positive of Putin's criminal modus operandi . Yet still today, after all the foregoing has been publically revealed.
 This is a very massive and sophisticated scheme that successfully bamboozled the world . But I have proved that those who concocted and advanced that story were lying, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They are titled The Phony LUvinenko Murder, Litvinenko murder case Solved . They are called The Phonies LUvinko Murder, The PhONY LUvinchenko Murder, Litvinenko Murd Case Solved.
 The widespread misunderstanding created by these misinformation campaigns has led to a serious and untoward consequence . The widespread misunderstandings have led to serious andUntoward consequence, says author .
 Tt is a psychological term for people's tendency to interpret information in ways that are in harmony with their existing beliefs, expectations, or hypotheses . The phenomenon is known as "confirmation bias"
 What this means is when information confirms existing beliefs, it results in assigning credibility to that information, even if there is no apparent substantiation . This means when information is confirmed, it can be used to assign credibility to existing beliefs .
Things that fly in the face of preexisting expectations tend to be disbelieved . Things that fly are disbelieved.
 Lamentably the information pool about Russia has become so polluted by maliciously-inspired misinformation that we need to start anew in our understanding of the country and its leadership .
 Congress needs information on current events that is devoid of confirmation bias . Congress needs and deserves information onCurrent events that are devoid of bias .
 It's been demonstrated that it cannot get that from the Western media, or from governmental, partisan, or commercial sources that have anxe to grind and benefactors to please .
 1. 1 recommend establishing a commission comprised exclusively of citizen members that have the skill and expertise to validate or discredit news reports . The commission will supply Congress with authoritative and confidential disclosures .
 The commission would function in the realm of observable facts and realism, and not in the domain of ideology . The commission will be based on facts, not ideology .
 It would be precluded from offering policy advice, and mandated to deal with just the facts on which members of Congress can base their own judgments .
 Congress should invite Russia as well to set up a counterpart commission so that Russian leaders can have the benefit of their own reality-based infonnation . T realize that such a commission would face some critical obstacles .
 One of the issues involves the need to avoid politicization and loading the commission with ideologues . One for instance involves avoiding politicization of the commission .
 I'd be pleased to work with Congressional representatives in structuring the commission appropriately . I'd been pleased with the commission's structure. I would be pleased with Congress to work on the commission .
 The United States and Russia are the two nuclear superpowers that possess the capability to pose an existential threat to human civilization as we know it . The U.S. and Russia have the ability to pose a threat to humans as well as humans .
 This is far too serious a matter to abandon sensibility to reckless partisan or ideological differences. This is too serious to abandon the sensibility of partisan differences, writes David Frum .
 The proposed commission will serve to weed through deceptive media rhetoric, thus avoiding false points of contention .
 It is our best bet for disrupting the desperate course of deteriorating relations. urge prompt action on this important matter before it's too late .
 The report said that Litvinenko, who died from radioactive poisoning, was killed by two Russian agents, Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun, who were most likely acting on behalf of the Russian FSB secret service .
 The head of the inquiry, Sir Robert Owen, also came to the conclusion that there was sufficient evidence heard in open court to build a "strong circumstantial case" against Russia .
Russian oligarch Boris Berezovsky was living in London waging a campaign against Putin before his own death in 2013 . His conclusions mirror those of the late Russian oligarch, who had been living in the capital for years .
Don't know whether or not Litvinenko's murder was ordered by the Russian president or anyone in the Kremlin .
 Owen's findings are not supported by reliable evidence, says John Sutter . Sutter: "I do know that Owen's found out that he is wrong"
 Tt offers no factual insights into what really happened to Litvinenlco, yet has been tdeen as gospel truth by governments and pundits across the west .
 The inquiry failed to take into account the massive misinformation campaign initiated by Berezovsky .
 Berezovsky, an arch-enemy of Putin, put forward the narrative that the Russian president was behind the poisoning of Litvinenko and fed this to a gullible western media . The PR firm Bell Pottinger helped to put the narrative forward with the help of
 A typical headline of the day was something like "Ex-KGB Spy Murdered on Orders of Putin" No facts were presented, just unsupported allegations .
 Berezovsky's well-funded management of 65 public discourse set the tone for everything that was to come . Berezovski's well funded management of the public discourse sets the tone.
 If this had been a jury trial, the media coverage would have prejudiced the case . The jury trial would have been held in New York .
 In die absence of a jury Berezovsky's targets included the public, journalists, police, and government officials .
 There was no consideration of the impact of this wide-reaching influence in the report . The report was published by the World Health Organisation .
 The inquiry appears to use different evidentiary standards for different witnesses. Inconsistent The inquiry uses different evidentiaries standards for each witness .
 Owen claims he considers some of the evidence submitted by the two alleged assassins, Lugovoi and Kovtun, to be deficient . On the one hand Owen claims that some evidence submitted to the alleged assassins is deficient .
 As a result, he won't regard as credible any parts of their accounts, he says .
 A polonium sample contains a characteristic fingerprint that allows it to be traced back to its source . For example, a retired physics professor named Nonnan Dombey testified .
 Dombey does not react to problems with some of Dombey's testimony by dismissing all of it . He doesn't react to some of his testimony.
Early media reports suggest the statement was composed by Litvinenko himself and dictated to his associate, Alexander Goldfarb .
 The inquiry report describes Goldfarb as the co-author of the book Death of a Dissident with Marina Litvinenko . The book was co-authored by the author and co-written by Marina Litvenko .
 Goldfarb said that he wrote the statement himself and checked it with Litvinenko . Later media reports quote him as saying he wrote it himself .
 Another account suggests the statement was drafted by the family lawyer, George Menzies, and discussed with the PR firm Bell Pottinger, acting for Berezovsky .
 The statement does not explain how Litvinenko could possibly have known of the Russian president's culpability, nor does it offer evidence to back up the allegation .
 Bins The report fails to acknowledge that Goldfarb is not an objective observer in this case .
 He was also involved in promoting the anti-Putin protests of the punk rock group Pussy Riot . For instance, he also was involved in promote anti- Putin protests .
 The accusations against Putin form part of a longrunning campaign stretching over his entire tenure in the Kremlin. This is important because it suggests that the accusations against him are part of an ongoing campaign .
 The report recounts many allegations against him as if they were discrete events rather than seeing them as part of a continuous process .
 The inquiry should have considered Goldfarb's testimony within a context of a systematic anti-Putin agenda . The point here is that the inquiry should be considered GoldFarb's evidence .
 Owen admits to being influenced by unproven cases in his consideration of culpability in Litvinenko's death .
 The role of Mario Scaramella, an Italian sometimes described as an academic, presented a dilemma for the inquiry .
 At first Litvinenko publically accused Scaramella of poisoning him to stop him disclosing information about Russia's culpability in Politkovskaya's death .
 Berezovsky visited Litvinenko in hospital after his people said he had blamed Putin . But the story seems to have changed after Berezovovsky visited him in hospital .
 There is no evidence that Scaramella was responsible, but the inquiry accepted a strange reasoning for him .
 The former spy was embarrassed to admit that he hadn't seen Lugovoi and Kovtun as threats . He initially concocted the allegations against Scaramella to salvage his professional pride .
 Analysis points to serious flaws in the report, but does not present evidence to exonerate Putin . The report does not provide evidence to accuse Putin of wrongdoing .
 Those behind claims against Russian president are using wealth of means to convince others . It is clear that those behind these claims have an agenda, and are using a wealth of Means .
 The public inquiry's acceptance of so many of their questionable allegations casts a pall over Owen's efforts and renders his report practically useless . Owen's report is almost useless, says the public inquiry .
 The hearing will examine U.S. policy approaches to Russia and Putinism . Chris Smith is the chairman of the United States House of Representatives .
 T also want to welcome our witnesses, and I look forward to their insights on how the U.S. can most effectively engage with Russia .
 The only ‘universal’ value we can all agree on is that the security of our own citizens is paramount . When it comes to values and national security, one is often forced to strike a compromise when it comes.
 We engage in diplomacy in an effort to find that overlap in common interest that allows us at a minimum to peacefully coexist .
 Putin's Russia is a country guided by leaders who perhaps have more in common with the mob than their Soviet predecessors . This is of course a gross simplification, but I make it to emphasize the challenge we face in Putin’s Russia .
 They are as unlikely to respond to either modem levers of national power or the old Cold War playbook .
 U.S. policy towards Russia is an enormous one, and therefore a challenge to wrap one’s arms around it all at once .
 I find it easier when 1 personalize it by focusing on my own experience and issues I hold dear . I find this easier when I focus on myself and my own issues .
 As the Special Representative for Human Trafficking in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, I vividly recall raising the trafficking issue at a gathering of parliamentarians meeting in St. Petersburg .
 Russia's interests to protect its own women and children from such crimes were incorporated into the OSCE’s St. St. St. Cevallos' St.Cevallo's St. Cvallos: We ultimately found common ground with Russia’
 Russia has banned adoptions of children, which fails to abide by the Hague Convention on Child Abduction . It has fallen to the third and lowest tier in the annual State Department's Trafficking in Person’s report after sitting on the Tier 2 Watch List for nine years .