 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy calls for “maximum’s sanctions against Russia, including an oil embargo .
 A Kyiv court sentences a Russian soldier to life in prison for killing an unarmed civilian . It is the first war crimes trial since Moscow’s invasion began .
 Russian Abramovich put the club up for sale in early March following his country’s invasion of Ukraine . The club was put on the market after the country's invasion of the Ukraine .
 The British government demanded assurances that Abramovich, who was sanctioned following the invasion, will not benefit from the sale . Moscow calls the sale a special operation .
 Habeck warned that an embargo would not automatically weaken the Kremlin as rising prices were enabling it to rake in more income while selling lower volumes of oil . He said that the embargo will not automatically weakening the Kremlin .
 One consideration was to no longer pay “any price for oil, but to agree on upper limits, he said .
 Russian soldiers and Ukrainian authorities both have said they will clear landmines from various locations in Ukraine . The ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine is ongoing .
 The experts from Colombia were invited to give the training by the US, Colombian defense minister Diego Molano says . Colombia is a NATO partner .
 Zelenskyy said arranging any sort of talks with Russia was becoming more difficult in the light of what he said was evidence Russian actions against civilians under occupation . Zelensyy also said that arranging any kind of talks was more difficult .
 Crimea peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014 would cause hundreds of thousands of casualties, he said . He also said that any notion of recovering by force by force the Crimea peninsula would cause thousands of deaths .
 The agreement, widely known in Ukraine as the Kharkiv Pact, allowed Russia to keep its Black Sea Fleet in the Crimean port of Sevastopol . The agreement is widely known.
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in 2014 after mass protests . He has already received a 13-year jail sentence in absentia for treason .
 The case was related to a letter he sent to Russian President Vladimir Putin on March 1, 2014, asking him to use Russian army and police forces to restore order in Ukraine .
 Kyiv court had ordered Yanukovych’s arrest because the Kharkiv Pact had enabled Russia to increase the number of troops it had in Ukraine and to seize and annex Crimea in 2014 .
 He said, “We are fighting, first of all, for values’ and to be part of the democratic world. He said: ‘We are Fighting, first, forvalues’
 The United Nations estimates that some 6. million Ukrainians have left their country since the Russian invasion started on February 24th . The U.N. estimates that 6.000 people have left the country since then .
 Most of them, some 3. million, have entered Poland, and almost a million went to Romania . Most of the 3 million entered Poland.
 "We are asking for some additional funds, which would be helpful in this situation," she said .
 The virtual meeting was attended by officials from 40 countries . It is set to reconvene in June on the sidelines of a NATO defence summit in Brussels .
 Those who announced new packages included Italy, Denmark, Greece, Norway and Poland, Austin told reporters .
 Denmark would provide a harpoon launcher and missiles to defend Ukraine’s coast . Denmark would also provide a missile launcher and missile launcher .
 The rouble has surged about 30 percent against the dollar this year, and on Monday hit a near seven-year high against the euro . Despite an economic crisis prompted by the conflict in Ukraine, the rouble is up 30 percent this year .
Strong currency could hurt Russia’s budget revenues from exports. That has raised concerns the strong currency could harm Russia's budget revenues .
 Baltic country's move comes after it expelled Russia's envoy on April 4 . The Baltic country’s move follows the expulsion of its envoy in April .
 The Lithuanian government said at that time it intended to lower the level of diplomatic representation between the two countries . The Lithuania government said it wanted to lower diplomatic representation .
 Many Republicans have been following the lead of former President Donald Trump toward a more nationalist foreign policy .
 Trump accused NATO allies of not spending enough on their own defence and excessively burdening the U.S.
 In the Senate, 11 Republicans voted ‘no’ against legislation providing $40bn to help Ukraine . Some said they wanted the funds directed to Americans .
 Russia has repeatedly denied targeting civilians and accusations its forces have carried out war crimes during what it calls a ‘special military operation’ in Ukraine . Russia has accused its forces of targeting civilians.
 rouble had gained 6. percent to trade at 58.75 versus the euro, its strongest point since early June 2015 . By 13.38 GMT, the rouble has gained 6%.
 It was also 4. percent stronger against the U.S. dollar at 57.47, not far from 57.0750, hit on Friday . It is the strongest mark since late March 2018, hitting on Friday.
 The rouble has firmed about 30 percent against the dollar this year despite a full-scale economic crisis in Russia . Overall, the rouble is up about 30% against thedollar this year .
 Russia's currency is the world's best-performing currency . But controls imposed in late February to shield Russia's financial sector from sweeping sanctions imposed by Western powers .
 The declaration would build on the defence cooperation the countries share as NATO allies . It would increase resistance to threats, including from Russia and China .
 Since Russia launched its invasion in late February, Baltic countries such as Lithuania have become increasingly concerned they could be next to face aggression from Moscow .
 Zelenska warned the ‘consequences’ of Russia’s war would last for ‘decades’ 23 May 2022 13:50 GMT Starbucks said it will exit Russia after nearly 15 years .
 The company in early March shuttered its stores and suspended all business activity in Russia . The company did not provide details on the financial effect of the exit .
 It said it would continue to support its employees in the country, including paying them for six months . However, it said it will continue to help its employees, including pay them for 6 months .
 Boris Bondarev, 41, confirmed his resignation in a letter delivered Monday morning at the Russian diplomatic mission . A diplomatic official passed on his English-language statement to The Associated Press news agency .
 The resignation amounts to a rare public admission of disgruntlement about Russia's war among Russian diplomatic corps . Putin's government has sought to crack down on dissent.
 The yellow arches stood on the ground outside the restaurant in Khimki, a town near Moscow .
 It is not clear if work to remove the logo from other branches across the country was already under way .
 The world’s largest burger chain is selling its restaurants in Russia to one of its local licensees . The new name has yet to be announced, ending more than 30 years in the country .
 AJE correspondent Dorsa Jabbari says there are “conflicting reports’ over the fate of Ukrainian fighters who surrendered at the Azovstal steelworks .
 Jabbari said it was also unclear how many of the 2,478 fighters reportedly evacuated from the steel plant were members of the Azov Battalion . The Azov battalion is a fighting force whose far-right origins have been seized on by the Kremlin .
 Lukashenko says Kyiv will eventually have to ask for help in preventing the seizure of western Ukraine . He says he would have to call for help to prevent the seizure .
 Moscow has in the past suggested that Poland seeks to establish control over historical Polish lands in Ukraine . Warsaw denies the claim as disinformation .
 Poland is one of Ukraine’s firmest supporters, having sent weapons to its neighbour . Poland has taken in more than three million Ukrainian refugees .
 Germany announces currency conversion scheme for Ukrainian refugees . Refugees who have fled the war in Ukraine can change their Ukrainian hryvnia into euros . Lukashenko has publicly supported Putin during Russia’s offensive 23 May 2022 .
 The ministry agreed to the exchange programme with the central banks of Germany and Ukraine as well as the German Banking Industry Committee . The organisations said in a joint statement .
 The agreed exchange volume has been initially set at 1. billion hryvnia . The scheme is to stay in place for at least three months .
 refugees can exchange up to 10,000 hryvnia into euros into euros at participating German banks at current exchange rates . Under the agreement, refugees can Exchange up to ten,000hryvnian into euros.
 The conversion, which can be made in several instalments, is to be free of charge . The conversion is available for free .
 Ukrainian leader's claim came after local authorities said last week that eight people were killed in the strike in the northern Ukrainian region of Chernihiv .
 German economy minister Robert Habeck has warned Hungary against blocking efforts to impose a European Union-wide embargo on Russian oil imports . He has warned against blocking EU-wide sanctions on Russia .
 Budapest, Moscow's closest ally in the EU, wants compensation from the bloc to mitigate the cost of ditching Russian crude or some exemptions from the suggested embargo .
 The EU needs all 27 states to agree to the measure for it to take effect . The measure will take effect if it takes effect in 2015 .
 Shishimarin, 21, pleaded guilty last week to killing the 62-year-old man in the northeastern Ukrainian village of Chupakhivka . He had been ordered to shoot at him from a car.
 Zelenskyy said the international community needed to go further yet to stop the Kremlin’s aggression by cutting off all trade with Moscow .
 Kyiv needs at least $5bn of financial support per month as it attempts to defy Moscow’s offensive and rebuild Ukraine . He called for all Russian banks to be blocked as well as the complete withdrawal of foreign companies from Russia .
 The leader of eastern Ukraine's self-declared Donetsk People's Republic has been quoted as saying the Ukrainian fighters who surrendered at the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol will face trial in the breakaway region .
 Russia’s air force hit four command centres, a communications point, an anti-aircraft missile system and 87 areas where troops and Ukrainian military equipment amassed .
 Russian forces also shot down three Ukrainian Su-25 jets and struck military supplies headed for eastern Ukraine at the Malin railway station in the west .
 Kyiv and Al Jazeera could not independently verify the Russian defence ministry’s report . There was no immediate response to the claims .
 The EU suspended its public spending rules for national governments in March 2020 . The 27-nation bloc sank into its deepest recession since World War II because of COVID-19 restrictions .
 EU rules limit deficit spending to three percent of a country’s overall economy and debt to 60 percent . Known as the Stability and Growth Pact, the EU rules limits deficit spending.
 UN's High Commissioner for Refugees says record should never have been set . Filippo Grandi: "It's a record that should never be set"
 A milestone we hoped we'd never have to mark. million people have now fled their homes . A milestone. We hoped we’d never had to mark it .
 Anna Moskwa tweeted: "We always knew that Gazprom was not a reliable partner"
 Russia’s defence ministry has claimed its forces destroyed a Ukrainian unit of US-produced M777 howitzers .
 Ukraine has deployed many of the M-777 howitzers supplied by Washington at the front lines . U.S. claims to have delivered all but one of the 90 artillery pieces they were due to send to Kyiv .
 The M-777 howitzer consignment is part of a huge outlay of weapons from the White House to help Ukraine fend off Russia’s invasion . It is seen as particularly significant because of its range and accuracy .
 Al Jazeera could not independently verify the Russian defence ministry’s report . Al Jazeera has not been able to independently confirm the report .
 President Joe Biden said Russia must pay a long-term price for its “barbarism in Ukraine” in terms of sanctions imposed on Moscow by the United States and its allies .
 Governor Russian shells hit more than 70 residential buildings in the Luhansk region on Sunday . One person was killed in Lysychansk, the region's governor has said .
 Serhiy Haidai said the person died when their apartment was hit by a shell in the evening .
 A child injured in the town of Pryvillya died in intensive care, he said . He added that a child injured when it came under fire on May 7, died inintensive care .
 Ukraine’s forces are still holding Severodonetsk and Lysychansk, the Zvezda TV channel said on Sunday .
 Russia has suffered a similar death toll as the Soviet Union did in nine years of war in Afghanistan . In three months of the war in Ukraine, the UK has said .
 The Russian public has been sensitive to casualties suffered in “wars of choice” in the past, ministry says . The rising death toll in Ukraine may “fuel public dissatisfaction with the war” and a willingness to speak out.
 Serhiy Haidai said on Sunday that the Russians were “engaging in a scorched-earth approach’ in Severodonetsk . The sole working hospital has only three doctors and supplies for 10 days .
 Russia has occupied several towns and cities in Luhansk after indiscriminate, 24-hour shelling . He said Moscow was concentrating forces and weaponry there, bringing in forces .
 Doctor Ivan Mozhaiev attends to a patient during morning rounds at Pokrovsk hospital in eastern Ukraine, Sunday, May 22, 2022 .
 Oleksandr Sytaylo also said another four people had been injured and were in hospital . He also said four people were injured in the incident .
 Ukraine army says Russia is strengthening its position in the Black Sea with a new addition to its fleet . The Admiral Makarov frigate is the latest addition to Ukraine's fleet .
 Ukraine says the ship has left the Crimean port of Sevastopol and is heading towards Odesa . The ship is now heading towards the city of OdesA .
 Russia’s news agency TASS had previously reported the Admiral Makarov would be the new flagship of the Black Sea Fleet . The Moskva sank in mid-April after Ukraine hit it with two missiles .
 Ukraine’s army said with the Makarov entering the fold, the risk of missile attacks from the Black Sea had increased . The Makarov entered the fold.
 Ukraine’s Operational Command ‘South’ said on May 22 that the warship made its way to Russian positions in the Black Sea, increasing the probability of missile strikes on Ukraine . Biden has assured his “good friend” Prime Minister Fumio Kish
 Soldiers walked through the compound and swung mine detectors over roads littered with debris . Others checked under objects for explosive devices, video footage showed .
 A Russian soldier who only gave his nom de guerre, Babai, says he has two weeks of work ahead of him .
 The war in Ukraine is expected to be a prominent topic in this year’s Davos discussions . Russian companies and representatives have not received invitations from Russian companies .
 Indonesia's Zelenskyy is known for his nighttime address . He has a special format of communication with Indonesia's political and expert communities .
 Official Imports into Russia have fallen to 2020 levels due to “measures from unfriendly states’s’S’
 deliveries from the northwest have seen the highest decrease due to port closures and bans on Russian ships . imports had increased from countries to Russia’s east and south, in particular China and Kazakhstan .
 Ukraine's parliament has voted to end a double taxation agreement with Russia . It had been in place since 1995 and in which Russian residents operating in Ukraine were exempt from paying Kyiv’s taxes .
 Ukraine’s finance ministry said now “all income of Russian Federation received from sources in Ukraine will be subject to a general tax rate of 15% established by the Tax Code of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian residents operating in Russia will equally no longer be able to pay Moscow's taxes . The ministry also said Ukrainian residents in Russia would also no longer pay Moscow’s taxes .
 Toryanik said the Kharkiv suburbs of Severnaya Saltovka, Pyatikhatki and Gorizont were subject to the most severe shelling .
 Representatives of seven nations walked out of APEC meeting in Bangkok to protest Russia's invasion of Ukraine . They say they support the organisation and host nation Thailand .
 Representatives from Australia, Canada, Japan and New Zealand walked out of the meeting on Saturday . Russian economy minister Maxim Reshetnikov was speaking .
 "All this will not stop the conflict but intensify and prolong it," one protestor says . "This will not end the conflict," Ota says .
 Biden is set to attend a summit on Tuesday where he will meet Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese to promote the ‘Quad’ mechanism .
 Think-tank Russian forces continued ground assaults around the major Luhansk city of Severodonetsk on Sunday . But they made only minimal gains in the east of the country .
 Russia seems to have broken through Ukrainian defences around Popasna, it has been confirmed . But it added that there had been confirmed reports Russia seemed to be breaking into Ukrainian defences .
 Russian forces have secured advances to the north and west of Popasna since at least May 20 . Russia has secured advances in the area since the start of the year .
 Russian forces likely seek to push further west toward Bakhmut and north to support the encirclement of Severodonetsk . Russian forces may also push further east toward the BakhMut region .
 The 21-year-old sergeant could get life in prison if convicted . He shot a Ukrainian man in the head in a village in the northeastern Sumy region on February 28 .
 Ukrainian Prosecutor-General Iryna Venediktova said her office was prosecuting war crimes cases against 41 Russian soldiers for offences that included bombing civilian infrastructure, killing civilians, rape and looting .
 UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson discussed Russia’s blockade of Odesa with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy . UK PM also discussed Russia's blockade of Ukraine's shipping port.
 Johnson resolved to redouble efforts to provide vital food and humanitarian aid to Ukraine . The country was able to export to the rest of the world .
 Zelenskyy had vetoed an earlier version of the bill and called for the two symbols to be allowed in displays in museums, libraries, libraries and scientific works .
 Russian military vehicles and equipment have been widely used to promote the aims of the conflict . They are widely used, particularly on Russian military Vehicles and equipment .
 Kyiv’s stance has become increasingly uncompromising in recent weeks as Russia experienced military setbacks . Ukrainian officials worried they might be pressured to sacrifice land for a peace deal .
 Al Jazeera's continuing coverage of the Ukraine war in Ukraine is continuing .