 The United States and Russia have descended to a new low point in relations . The U.S. and Russia are facing waves of sanctions and escalating retaliation .
 Twenty-five years after the Cold War ended, relations are back in a deep freeze .
 The current tension did not come about because the U.S. suddenly wanted its old adversary back . The United States suddenly wanted it back .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin has been accused of making bad choices by his country's leaders . Putin's actions are a response to bad choices taken by Putin of Russia, according to a report .
 The choices were made deliberately in Moscow, perhaps for Mr Putin’s own reasons of domestic politics and foreign policy .
 Mr Putin chose to seize Crimea from Ukraine, annex it and then instigate an armed insurrection in southeastern Ukraine in 2014 . The annexation violated all post-World War II norms of national sovereignty .
 The war in the Donbas region was a tactic by Mr Putin to inject further instability into Ukraine . Ukraine's president Viktor Yanukovych fled his palace in the face of mass protest .
 Mr Putin was aggrieved at Ukraine’s decision to sign a pact with the European Union . But Ukraine is not a vassal of Russia, and Mr Putin's claims to a sphere of influence are untenable .
 The sanctions were a response to Mr Putin’s ill-considered impulse to use violence as a tool of intimidation and coercion .
 Another poor choice was to interfere with the U.S. election campaign . Another poor and deliberate choice was not to interfere in the campaign .
 Mr Putin cannot escape responsibility for Russian attempts to damage Hillary Clinton's candidacy . Mr Putin can't escape responsibility.
 Clinton’s outspoken support for the principle of free speech during the 2011-2013 protests against him . He is altogether wrong to think the United States engineered the unrest, he says .
 Mr Putin and his aides cynically deny they attempted to interfere in the U.S. election . But surely they know exactly what occurred and how .
 The sanctions imposed by President Barack Obama last December and recently tightened by Congress did not appear out of thin air . The sanctions were imposed by Obama last year and were recently tightened .
 They are a logical response to Mr Putin’s attempt to meddle in U.S. democracy, they say . They say they are a response to the Russian president's attempt to interfere in American democracy .
 Ukraine and U.S. politics have backfired badly in both Ukraine and the United States . Ukraine's President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of the crisis .
 Putin’s choices have been costly for Russia, its economy and its people, says Mr Putin .
 We have long believed that U.S.-Russian engagement is essential to avert miscalculation, and it remains important for both Washington and Moscow to keep talking .
 Mr Putin should not expect the West to suddenly forgive or forget his bad choices, says Mr Putin . But Mr Putin is not expected to be forgiven by the West .
 He would be wiser to deal with the underlying source of tension than to sit around plotting new ways to escalate it .