What happened in Ukraine in 2014 is one of the few worthy of the label. What happened in 2014 in Ukraine was one of a few worthy to the label .
 It ushered in a transformation of Ukraine’s society and state that is both deeply ambitious and tragically incomplete . Ukraine's state and society are both deeplybitious and tragically unfinished .
 It is a national project that continues to this day, and though its imperfections leave many Ukrainians disillusioned, its successes frighten Vladimir Putin . The project continues to be successful, but many Ukrainians are disillusioned .
 Russian president ponders an invasion of Ukraine . He threatens gains made by Ukraine over past eight years .
 In four years Mr Yanukovych and his friends looted around $100bn from a country with an economy the size of Nebraska's .
 Mr Yanukovych abandoned Ukraine’s Association Agreement with the EU in 2013 . Mr Yanukovych moved to join its Russian-led rival .
 For the first time at Maidan “a huge number of people learned to trust each other’s, says Kebuladze Vakhtang, a philosopher .
 Ukraine gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . Since it gained independence in 1991 Ukraine had played Russia and West off against one another .
 Mr Putin seized Crimea and backed separatists in the Donbas region in 2014 . He redrew Ukraine’s political map, too.
 Most pro-Russian areas of the country could no longer vote in elections . The most pro- Russian areas could not vote in the elections .
 Most Ukrainians grew convinced that Russia was Ukraine’s enemy. And elsewhere most grew convinced.
An ascendant civil society of activists, journalists and thinkers urged on efforts to reform . That paved the way for the country's first uninterrupted pro-Western tilt .
 Parliament changed the constitution to hobble the presidency and empower lawmakers . The new constitution was changed to empower lawmakers.
 Western donors such as America, and institutions such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, boosted them directly and issued loans to the government contingent on reforms .
 Regulators abolished more than half of Ukraine’s banks . A scheme to funnel state money to bank owners had persisted for a decade .
 Tax collection, industry regulation and digital government all improved . Tax collection and industry regulation also improved .
These technocratic changes took place alongside a deeper transformation of national identity . Together these reforms save Ukraine billions of dollars a year .
 Citizens increasingly declare their “primary identity to be Ukrainian, rather than that of their village, town or region .
Campaign to boost Ukrainian language at expense of Russian is in full swing . Campaign to boost the Ukrainian language is in a full swing.
 Visa-free travel to the EU, introduced in 2017, allows millions more Ukrainians to make friends and memories in the West .
 Ukraine has spent billions on fixing up its armed forces so that it might one day join NATO . Ukraine has enthusiastically increased military co-operation with NATO .
Volodymyr Zelensky is a political novice and former comedian . He was elected as president in 2019 . He is a former comedian.
Corrupt courts with biddable judges are the weakest point in efforts to bolster the rule of law . Corrupt courts are the weakest point in attempts to bolster law enforcement, according to experts .
 Reforms require patience, and gains can accumulate impressively with time . But reforms require patience and progress can be made quickly .
 Ukraine will soon become a trojan horse for NATO and America to place their missiles closer to Moscow .
 Ukraine provides strongest evidence that progress towards democracy is an option for Russia, too . Ukraine also provides the strongest evidence of progress towards Russia's democracy .
 The first victory came when protesters at Maidan square ousted a thuggish Russian-backed president, Viktor Yanukovych .
 Ukraine gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . Since it gained independence in 1991 Ukraine had played Russia and the West off against one another .
An ascendant civil society of activists, journalists and thinkers urged on efforts to reform . That paved the way for the country’s first uninterrupted pro-Western tilt .
 The reforms save Ukraine billions of dollars a year, even if corruption remains rampant in other areas . Together, these reforms will save the country's economy billions a year .
 These technocratic changes took place alongside a deeper transformation of national identity . The change took place in the UK as part of a national identity transformation .
 Ukraine has spent billions on fixing up its armed forces so that it might one day join NATO . Meanwhile, Ukraine has enthusiastically increased co-operation with NATO .
 Ukrainians regard the past eight years as a golden age. None of this means that Ukrainians regard this year's past 8 years as golden age .
 Putin would like Ukraine’s revolution to fail, one way or another, he says . That is why he would like the Ukraine's revolution to failed, he adds .
 The Maidan revolution that led to the ouster of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich one year ago at Maidan Independence Square on February 22, 2015 in Kiev .
 In 2014, he redrew Ukraine’s political map, too . He redrew Ukrainian political map .