 The Ukraine Crisis is the West’s Fault The Liberal Delusions That Provoked Putin, says John J Mearsheimer .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin, the argument goes, annexed Crimea out of a long-standing desire to resuscitate the Soviet empire . He may eventually go after the rest of Ukraine, as well as other countries in eastern Europe .
 Putin's ouster of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014 merely provided a pretext for Putin’s decision to order Russian forces to seize part of Ukraine . In this view, the ousting of Yanukovych was merely a pretext.
 Crimea is a peninsula he feared would host a NATO naval base . He responded by taking Crimea and working to destabilize Ukraine until it abandoned its efforts to join the West .
 The West had been moving into Russia’s backyard and threatening its core strategic interests, Putin made emphatically and repeatedly .
 Elites in the U.S. and Europe have been blindsided by events only because they subscribe to a flawed view of international politics . The United States, Europe and the United States have been blinded by events.
 Europe can be kept whole and free on the basis of liberal principles, such as rule of law, economic interdependence, and democracy .
 The crisis there shows that realpolitik remains relevant - and states that ignore it do so at their own peril . The crisis in the U.S. shows thatrealpolitik is relevant -and states who ignore it are in danger .
 U.S. and European leaders blundered in attempting to turn Ukraine into a Western stronghold on Russia's border .
 It would be an even greater mistake to continue this misbegotten policy. Now that the consequences have been laid bare, it would be a great mistake to do so .
 As the Cold War came to a close, Soviet leaders preferred that United States forces remain in Europe and NATO stay intact . An arrangement they thought would keep a reunified Germany pacified .
 NATO did not want NATO to grow any larger and assumed that Western diplomats understood their concerns . But they and their Russian successors did not wants NATO to growing any larger .
 The Clinton administration evidently thought otherwise, and in the mid-1990s, it began pushing for NATO to expand . In the 1990s, the Clinton administration thought otherwise .
 The first round of enlargement took place in 1999 and brought in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland . The second round was brought in in 1999 .
 The second occurred in 2004; it included Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia . The second happened in 2004 .
 None of the new members shared a border with Russia, save for the tiny Baltic countries . The Russians were too weak at the time to derail NATO’s eastward movement .
 At its April 2008 summit in Bucharest, the alliance considered admitting Georgia and Ukraine .
 France and Germany opposed the move for fear that it would unduly antagonize Russia . The George W Bush administration supported doing so .
 Putin maintained that admitting those two countries to NATO would represent a “direct threat to Russia’s Vladimir Putin . Putin said admitting those countries would be a ‘direct threat’ to Russia .
 Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili had decided in the summer of 2008 to reincorporate two separatist regions, Abkhazia and South Ossetia . He was deeply committed to bringing his country into NATO .
Fighting broke out between the Georgian government and South Ossetian separatists . Russian forces took control of Abkhazia and S. Ossetia .
 NATO never publicly abandoned its goal of bringing Georgia and Ukraine into the alliance . Yet despite this clear warning, NATO never abandoned its aim of bringing Ukraine and Georgia into the Alliance .
 Albania and Croatia became members of NATO in 2009 . Albania, Croatia and Albania became members in 2009. And NATO expansion continued marching forward .
 Not surprisingly, Russian leaders view the plan as hostile to their country’s interests .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov accused the EU of trying to create a “sphere of influence’ in eastern Europe .
 In the eyes of Russian leaders, EU expansion is a stalking horse for NATO expansion . The EU has been criticized by Russian leaders for not expanding in the past .
 The West's final tool for peeling Kiev away from Moscow has been its efforts to spread Western values and promote democracy in Ukraine and other post-Soviet states . The West often entails funding pro-Western individuals and organizations .
 The U.S. government has bankrolled the National Endowment for Democracy . As part of that effort, the United States government has been bankrolled .
After Yanukovych won Ukraine’s presidential election in February 2010, the NED stepped up its efforts to support the opposition and strengthen the country's democratic institutions .
When Russian leaders look at Western social engineering in Ukraine, they worry that their country might be next .
 Imagine the American outrage if China built an impressive military alliance and tried to include Canada and Mexico .
 The West’s triple package of policies -NATO enlargement, EU expansion, and democracy promotion -added fuel to a fire waiting to ignite .
 Yanukovych rejected a major economic deal he had been negotiating with the EU in November 2013 . He decided to accept a $15 billion Russian counteroffer instead .
 By mid-February, some one hundred protesters had died. That decision gave rise to antigovernment demonstrations that escalated over the following three months .
 On February 21, the government and the opposition struck a deal that allowed Yanukovych to stay in power until new elections were held . The deal allows Yanukovych to remain in power.
 Yanukovych fled to Russia the next day . But it immediately fell apart, and Yanukovych fled .
 The new government in Kiev was pro-Western and anti-Russian to the core . It contained four high-ranking members who could legitimately be labeled neofascists .
 The full extent of U.S. involvement has not yet come to light . It is clear that Washington backed the coup .
 Nuland had advocated regime change and wanted the Ukrainian politician Arseniy Yatsenyuk to become prime minister . He did .
 No wonder Russians of all persuasions think the West played a role in Yanukovych’s ouster .
 Russian forces have taken Crimea from Ukraine, and soon after that, he incorporated it into Russia . Shortly after February 22, he ordered Russian forces to take Crimea from Crimea .
 Thousands of Russian troops already stationed at a naval base in the Crimean port of Sevastopol .
 Crimea also made for an easy target since ethnic Russians compose roughly 60 percent of its population . Crimea also makes for a easy target because ethnic Russians make up roughly 60% of the population .
 Putin put massive pressure on the new government in Kiev to discourage it from siding with the West against Moscow . Next, Putin would allow it to become a Western stronghold on Russia’s doorstep .
Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine are pushing the country toward civil war . Toward that end, he has provided advisers, arms, and diplomatic support to the separatists in Ukraine .
 He has massed a large army on the Ukrainian border, threatening to invade if the government cracks down on the rebels . He has been massing a largeArmy on the border .
 Russia has sharply raised the price of the natural gas Russia sells to Ukraine . He has demanded payment for past exports .
Napoleonic France, imperial Germany, and Nazi Germany all crossed to strike at Russia itself . Ukraine serves as a buffer state of enormous strategic importance to Russia .
 No Russian leader would tolerate a military alliance that was Moscow’s mortal enemy until recently moving into Ukraine .
 The West helped install a government in Ukraine that was determined to integrate Ukraine into the West . Russia's President Vladimir Putin would not stand idly by.
 Washington may not like Moscow’s position, but it should understand the logic behind it .
 The U.S. does not tolerate distant great powers deploying military forces anywhere in the Western Hemisphere . The United States does not allow such forces to be deployed anywhere on its borders .
 China built an impressive military alliance and tried to include Canada and Mexico in it. Imagine the outrage in Washington if China built a military alliance .
 Russian leaders have told their Western counterparts that they consider NATO expansion into Georgia and Ukraine unacceptable . The 2008 Russian-Georgian war also made crystal clear .
 Officials from the U.S. and its European allies contend that they tried hard to assuage Russian fears . Moscow should understand that NATO has no designs on Russia, they say .
 The alliance has never permanently deployed military forces in its new member states . In addition to continually denying that its expansion was aimed at containing Russia.
 In 2002, it even created a body called the NATO-Russia Council in an effort to foster cooperation . The council was called NATO- Russia Council .
 The U.S. announced in 2009 that it would deploy its new missile defense system on warships in European waters, rather than on Czech or Polish territory . To further mollify Russia, the United States said in 2009 it would deployed its new missiles on warships.
 The Russians remained steadfastly opposed to NATO enlargement, especially into Georgia and Ukraine . But none of these measures worked, and none of them worked .
 The Russians, not the West, get to decide what counts as a threat to them . It is the Russians. And it is the West who ultimately gets to decide. It's the Russians .
 The U.S. failed to understand that its Ukraine policy was laying the groundwork for a major clash with Russia . The Clinton administration began advocating NATO expansion in the 1990s .
 Pundits advanced a variety of arguments for and against enlargement, but there was no consensus on what to do . Pundit: "There is no consensus"
 Most eastern European émigrés in the United States and their relatives strongly supported expansion of NATO . They wanted NATO to protect such countries as Hungary and Poland . Most eastern Europeans in the U.S. supported expansion .
 A few realists also favored the policy because they thought Russia still needed to be contained . Some realists said Russia still needs to becontained .
 Most realists opposed expansion, in the belief that a declining great power with an aging population and a one-dimensional economy did not need to be contained . But most realists oppose expansion, saying that a decline of great power and one- dimensional economy does not need it .
 Moscow feared enlargement would only give Moscow an incentive to cause trouble in eastern Europe . And they feared it would only be an incentive for trouble in Europe .
 The United States diplomat George Kennan articulated this perspective in a 1998 interview . The U.S. Senate approved the first round of NATO expansion .
 The United States and its allies should abandon their plan to westernize Ukraine and instead aim to make it a neutral buffer . The U.S. should abandon its plan to westize Ukraine.
 Most liberals, on the other hand, favored enlargement, including many key members of the Clinton administration . Most liberals favored enlargements, including members of Clinton administration.
 The Cold War had fundamentally transformed international politics. They believed that a new, postnational order had replaced the realist logic that used to govern Europe .
 The United States was not only the “indispensable nation,” as Secretary of State Madeleine Albright put it . It was also a benign hegemon and thus unlikely to be viewed as a threat in Moscow .
 The aim, in essence, was to make the entire continent look like western Europe . The aim was to create the entire European continent.
 The United States and its allies sought to promote democracy in eastern Europe . The U.S. sought to increase economic interdependence among the countries of eastern Europe.
 liberals had little difficulty convincing their European allies to support NATO enlargement .
 Europeans were more wedded than Americans to the idea that geopolitics no longer mattered . Europe's past achievements have led to an all-inclusive liberal order .
 liberals came to dominate the discourse about European security during the first decade of this century . Even as NATO adopted an open-door policy of growth, it faced little realist opposition .
The liberal worldview is now accepted dogma among U.S. officials . The liberal worldview has now been accepted by many officials .
 Putin and his compatriots have been thinking and acting according to realist dictates . Western counterparts have been adhering to liberal ideas about international politics .
 The United States and its allies unknowingly provoked a major crisis over Ukraine . The result is that the U.S. and its ally inadvertently provoked the crisis over the Ukraine .
 Most Western officials have portrayed Putin as the real culprit in the Ukraine predicament .
 Putin no doubt has autocratic tendencies, but no evidence supports the charge that he is mentally unbalanced .
 Other analysts allege Putin regrets the demise of the Soviet Union and is determined to reverse it by expanding Russia’s borders .
 According to this interpretation, Putin is now testing the waters to see if the time is right to conquer Ukraine . He will eventually behave aggressively toward other countries in Russia's neighborhood .
 Putin represents a modern-day Adolf Hitler, and striking any kind of deal with him would repeat the mistake of Munich . For some in this camp, Putin represents the modern day Adolf Hitler .
 NATO must admit Georgia and Ukraine to contain Russia before it dominates its neighbors . Russia threatens western Europe and threatens Europe .
 If Putin were committed to creating a greater Russia, signs of his intentions would almost certainly have arisen before February 22 .
 There is virtually no evidence that he was bent on taking Crimea before that date . But there is much less than any other territory in Ukraine .
 Even Western leaders who supported NATO expansion were not doing so out of a fear that Russia was about to use military force .
 Putin's actions in Crimea took them by complete surprise and appear to have been a spontaneous reaction to Yanukovych's ouster . Putin’s actions were a spontaneous response to the ouster of Yanukovych.
 Right afterward, even Putin said he opposed Crimean secession, before quickly changing his mind . Right after, he changed his mind, saying he opposed Crimea's secession .
 Russia lacks the capability to easily conquer and annex eastern Ukraine, much less the entire country . Besides, even if it wanted to, Russia doesn't have the ability to easily annex and conquer eastern Ukraine .
 Roughly 15 million people - one-third of Ukraine’s population - live between the Dnieper River, which bisects the country and the Russian border .
 An overwhelming majority of those people want to remain part of Ukraine and would surely resist a Russian occupation .
 Russia’s mediocre army would have little chance of pacifying all of Ukraine . Russia's mediocre army, which shows few signs of turning into a modern Wehrmacht.
 Moscow is also poorly positioned to pay for a costly occupation . Moscow's weak economy would suffer even more in the face of the resulting sanctions .
 Russia has a powerful military machine and an impressive economy . But even if Russia did boast a powerful army, it would still be unable to successfully occupy Ukraine .
 The Soviet and U.S. experiences in Afghanistan, the United States experiences in Vietnam and Iraq, and the Russian experience in Chechnya to be reminded that military occupations usually end badly .
 Putin understands that trying to subdue Ukraine would be like swallowing a porcupine . Putin surely understands that he would like to swallow a por cupine .
 Most Western leaders continue to deny that Putin’s behavior might be motivated by legitimate security concerns . It is unsurprising that they have tried to modify it by doubling down on their existing policies .
 Neither the U.S. nor its NATO allies are prepared to use force to defend Ukraine . Kerry has maintained that “all options are on the table,” neither the United States nor its allies are ready to use forces .
 The West is relying on economic sanctions to coerce Russia into ending its support for the insurrection in eastern Ukraine . The West wants Russia to end its support.
 The U.S. and the EU put in place their third round of limited sanctions in July . The sanctions target mainly high-level individuals closely tied to the Russian government and some high-profile banks .
 The Russian government has threatened another, tougher round of sanctions, aimed at whole sectors of the Russian economy . They also threatened to unleash another, harsher round of penalties .
 Putin would probably not alter his decision-making. But even if the U.S. could convince its allies to enact tough measures, Putin wouldn't change his decision .
 History shows that countries will absorb enormous amounts of punishment in order to protect their core strategic interests .
There is no reason to think Russia represents an exception to this rule. There is no evidence Russia represents a different country .
 Western leaders have also clung to the provocative policies that precipitated the crisis in the first place . Western leaders are also trying to avoid the crisis.
 John Brennan did not help things when he visited Kiev on a trip the White House said was aimed at improving security cooperation with the Ukrainian government .
 The EU and Ukraine signed the economic agreement that Yanukovych had fatefully rejected seven months earlier . The agreement was signed on June 27 .
 NATO members' foreign ministers agreed in June that the alliance would remain open to new members . The foreign ministers refrained from mentioning Ukraine by name .
 The foreign ministers also agreed to support various measures to improve Ukraine’s military capabilities in such areas as command and control, logistics, and cyberdefense .
 Russian leaders have naturally recoiled at the West's response to the crisis . The West’s response to these actions will only make a bad situation worse, says the Russian leader .
 There is a solution to the crisis in Ukraine, however, it would require the West to think about the country in a fundamentally new way .
 The U.S. and its allies should abandon their plan to westernize Ukraine and instead aim to make it a neutral buffer between NATO and Russia . Austria's position during the Cold War was akin to Austria’s position in Austria .
 Western leaders should acknowledge that Ukraine matters so much to Putin that they cannot support an anti-Russian regime there, they should acknowledge .
 On the contrary, the goal should be a sovereign Ukraine that falls in neither the Russian nor the Western camp .
 To achieve this end, the U.S. and its allies should publicly rule out NATO’s expansion into both Georgia and Ukraine .
 The West should also help fashion an economic rescue plan for Ukraine funded jointly by the EU, the International Monetary Fund, Russia, and the United States . Moscow should welcome the proposal, given its interest in having a prosperous and stable Ukraine on its western flank .
 And the West should considerably limit its social-engineering efforts inside Ukraine, says the U.S.
 It is time to put an end to Western support for another Orange Revolution. It's time to end Western support of the Orange Revolution .
 U.S. and European leaders should encourage Ukraine to respect minority rights, especially the language rights of its Russian speakers . The language rights in Ukraine are the language of its speakers .
 Some may argue that changing policy toward Ukraine at this late date would seriously damage U.S. credibility around world .
 There would be certain costs, but the costs of continuing a misguided strategy would be much greater . There would undoubtedly be certain cost, but there would be some costs .
 Other countries are likely to respect a state that learns from its mistakes and ultimately devises a policy that deals effectively with the problem at hand .
 Ukraine has the right to determine whom it wants to ally with and the Russians have no right to prevent Kiev from joining the West . One also hears the claim that Ukraine has a right to decide whom it is ally with .
 This is a dangerous way for Ukraine to think about its foreign policy choices, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Ukraine's foreign policy decisions are dangerous and dangerous . He says Ukraine should be careful to consider its foreign policies.
 The sad truth is that great-power politics might often make right when great- power politics are at play .
 Abstract rights such as self-determination are largely meaningless when powerful states get into brawls with weaker states .
 The U.S. did not think so, and the Russians think the same way about Ukraine joining the West . The United States did not.
 It is in Ukraine’s interest to understand these facts of life and tread carefully when dealing with its more powerful neighbor . Ukraine is in the interest to know these facts.
 The U.S. and its European allies have the right to reject requests for Ukraine to join the EU and NATO . The United States and its allies are allowed to reject these requests, according to an analysis .
 There is no reason that the West has to accommodate Ukraine if it is bent on pursuing a wrong-headed foreign policy, especially if its defense is not a vital interest .
 Indulging the dreams of some Ukrainians is not worth the animosity and strife it will cause, especially for the Ukrainian people .
 The West has no choice but to continue its present policy. Some analysts might concede that NATO handled relations with Ukraine poorly . But still maintain that Russia constitutes an enemy that will only grow more formidable over time .
 It would therefore be the height of folly to create a new NATO member that the other members have no intention of defending .
 Russia's recent power play shows that granting Ukraine NATO membership could put Russia and the West on a collision course . NATO has expanded in the past because liberals assumed the alliance would never have to honor its new security guarantees .
 Sticking with the current policy would also complicate Western relations with Moscow on other issues .
 The United States needs Russia's assistance to withdraw U.S. equipment from Afghanistan through Russian territory, reach a nuclear agreement with Iran, and stabilize the situation in Syria .
 Moscow has helped Washington on all three of these issues in the past . In 2013, it was Putin who pulled Obama’s chestnuts out of the fire by forging the deal under which Syria agreed to relinquish its chemical weapons .
 The United States will also someday need Russia’s help containing a rising China .
 Current U.S. policy, however, is only driving Moscow and Beijing closer together . Current United States policy, though, is driving Moscow closer together.
 The United States and its European allies now face a choice on Ukraine . The U.S. and European allies face a decision on Ukraine.
 Russia can continue their current policy, which will exacerbate hostilities with Russia and devastate Ukraine in the process . It would be a scenario in which everyone would come out a loser .
 Ukraine is a neutral Ukraine, one that does not threaten Russia and allows the West to repair its relations with Moscow . Or they can switch gears and work to create a prosperous but neutral Ukraine .
 Mearsheimer argues in the September/October 2014 issue of Foreign Affairs that the West is to blame for Ukraine crisis .
 John, of course, is not just a leading IR theorist, but also a noted controversialist . He always follows his extremely agile mind wherever it goes, which makes him a notorious bull in a china shop .
 John, of course, is a little bit puzzled by the controversies he creates, because he just thinks that what he's doing is following logic where it goes and rarely is .
 His latest argument has caused a stir. So with that, let's get to his latest argument, I think it's fair to say quite a stir . It's not the first time he's been accused of being wrong .
 Ukraine crisis links the current Ukraine crisis to Western policy towards NATO and Russia since the end of the Cold War .
 NATO meeting right now to discuss what its future is, what it should respond to Russia and deal with the Ukraine situation . Now, John, NATO is meeting to discuss its future in Ukraine .
Conventional wisdom has it that Putin is just an aggressive tyrant and that he has decided to sort of seize Ukraine . Conventional wisdom is that he is just a tyrant .
 NATO expansion is part of a broader strategy on the part of the West, which is designed to peel Ukraine away from Russia's orbit . The West is also trying to peel the Ukraine from Russia.
 It's designed to make Ukraine a Western bastion right on Russia's doorstep . It's also designed to be right on the doorstep of Russia .
 NATO expansion is really one of three elements in the West's strategy, says CNN's John Sutter . NATO expansion has been a key part of the U.S. strategy, he says .
 Ukraine is a pro-Western country, but it's also a part of the West . In promoting democracy, basically what we're trying to do is put in place leaders in countries like Ukraine who are pro-West .
 The Russians have said from the very beginning that NATO expansion was unacceptable . The Russians, on the other hand, have said it was unacceptable.
 The Russians made it clear that this was unacceptable and that they would not tolerate it . They couldn't stop the first two tranches after 2008, when it became clear that NATO had its eyes on Ukraine .
 The West, of course, refused to hear what the Russians had to say and insisted that NATO expansion was a benign move on the part of the West . The West was not directed at Russia .
 February 22nd coup earlier this year was the straw that broke the camel's back .
 Ukraine has a policy of aggressive attempts to take Ukraine in, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I can imagine a lot of people responding to your comments there by saying, if only we had a policy"
 Ukrainians are interested in becoming part of NATO and being protected by the U.S. and the West more generally . There's no question that the Ukrainians want to become part of the NATO .
 Poland and the Baltic states were possible to incorporate Ukraine and Georgia into NATO . The West should have told the Ukrainians that incorporating Poland or Baltic states into NATO was possible . But the West would be a bridge too far, says Peter Bergen .
We would end up precipitating the crisis, and that crisis would lead to the destruction of Ukraine. And what would happen is we would endup precipitating it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 NATO expansion should have stopped with NATO expansion and given up on the idea of incorporating Ukraine into the West . Instead we're interested in maintaining a neutral Ukraine that effectively serves as a buffer state between NATO and Russia on the other side .
Gideon says states like Ukraine are living in a fool's paradise . "I think the truth is, Gideon, that went people talk about states having rights," he says .
 If you're a state that happens to be in the neighborhood of a great power, it is imperative that you pay very careful attention to what that great power's interests are and how your behavior affects it .
 Monroe Doctrine says no country in our hemisphere can form a close military alliance with a distant country . The Monroe Doctrine is called the Monroe Doctrine .
 Russia is basically saying that Ukraine and Georgia are on our border . There's no way we're going to allow an alliance that was once a formidable foe of ours to move up into those countries and threaten us .
 If China becomes powerful and threatens to form an alliance with Canada and Mexico, it would drive the United States crazy . If China became really powerful, it could drive the U.S. crazy .
 Taiwan is not an independent country and in no way shape or form are we going to promote Taiwan -Taiwanese independence . We know full well what the consequences would be with regard to China. We make it very clear that Taiwan isn't an independent nation .
 China has made it very clear that if Taiwan is to declare its own independence, China will go to war against Taiwan immediately . This will have severe economic consequences for China .
 The U.S. walks on eggshells when it deals with this very issue . The United States fully understands that, and therefore, the United States walks on eggs .
 Ukraine is a potential Chinese alliance down the road . The same basic logic applies to Ukraine, as it does to Canada and Mexico .
 Ukraine should be allowed to keep nuclear weapons to ensure peace and stability, Foreign Affairs says . "Some kind of Russo-Ukrainian rivalry was kind of inevitable and would be dangerous if they didn't have a nuclear deterrent"
 There's no question if Ukraine had nuclear weapons the Russians would not be sending ground forces into eastern Ukraine. Well, I think there's no issue if Ukraine has nuclear weapons .
 I think the nuclear weapons would not have prevented Russia from taking Crimea, in large part because the Russians were already there . I think it would have not stopped Russia fromtaking Crimea .
 Ukraine had an agreement with Ukraine that they could station up to 25,000 troops in Crimea . They had agreed to station the troops in the Crimea .
Nuclear weapons would not have prevented Ukraine from losing Crimea. And nuclear weapons wouldn't have prevented Crimea losing Crimea, say experts .
 Ukraine has nuclear weapons, but it's unlikely they would have done that if Ukraine had nuclear weapons . When a state's survival is at stake, that's the one circumstance under which it might use its nuclear weapons.
 One might say the likelihood of Ukraine using nuclear weapons if Russia invaded eastern Ukraine is not very great . But it doesn't have to be very great, he says .
 The likelihood can be quite small, but given the consequences, the Russians would have stayed out . The likelihood of the Russians staying out is quite small.
 Ukraine would have been in Ukraine's interest over the long term to have nuclear weapons, says U.S. President Obama .
I understand why people would like to punish Russia, given what's happened . I understand why we would want Russia to be punished, but I don't think it's right .
 It's going to cause further trouble in Ukraine itself. It's not the first time Ukraine has been hit by violence .
 Russia will give the Russians added incentives to wreck that country . It's going to give them an incentive to wreck the country .
 Russia needs Russian help with regard to Iran's nuclear issue and Syria's movement of troops out of Afghanistan, says U.S. official .
 It's in our interest to have good relations with Russia, not to have bad relations. So it's in the interest of having good relations, not having bad relations .
 It's in the Russians' interests to have good relations with us and with Ukraine, it's in their interests .
 If we continue to pursue the present policy, things are just going to get worse and worse, and it's going to be a lose-lose situation . The current policy is being pursued by the U.S.
People want to punish the Russians for what happened, it makes no sense . So even though it's understandable that people want to punished the Russians, it doesn't make sense .
 Ukraine is a neutral Ukraine, but it's a neutral country . I think we have to drastically change course and stop thinking about punishing the Russians and working out some sort of diplomatic deal .
 Ukraine is a buffer state that sits between NATO on one side and Russia on the other side . It is not aligned in any meaningful way with either Russia or the West .
 The first thing we have to do is take NATO expansion off the table in a very public way, says President Obama .
 The IMF should work with the Russians, with the IMF, and with the West Europeans, to help Ukraine's economy, he says . The West should do everything we can to facilitate the rescue of Ukraine, he adds .
 We don't want to promote democracy so that it leads to a state that views itself as part of the West and anti-Russian . Of course, we don't wants to promotedemocracy, we do not want it to promote it .
 There's no reason, once it's clear that this is going to be a neutral state, that that state can't prosper . But there is no reason for that state to be neutral, and that state will prosper .
 The Russians have a vested interest in having a prosperous Ukraine on their border, and the Ukrainians themselves do .
 Ukrainians are insistent on continuing to pursue a policy that leads to them becoming part of the West when the end result is they're going to be destroyed as a functioning society . I don't understand why the Ukrainians are so insistent that they continue to pursue the policy .
 Many people say that Putin is a bully, he's evil, and he's willing to do terrible things . Many say Putin is evil, but he's not evil, they say .
 The last thing you want to do is provoke him, he says. Well, if that's all true, he has the levers to wreck Ukraine, he adds .
 Well, I've not heard anybody use the word appeasement up to this juncture . Well, he's not heard anyone use it up to a juncture. Well, it's not a good idea, he says .
 It is a loaded term, because it's associated with Munich and what we did with Hitler. And it's linked to Munich, which is associated with Hitler, he says .
 The West made a huge mistake in the fall of 1938 in appeasing Hitler . The West was appeasing Adolf Hitler .
 If you use the word appeasement in this context, it implies that Putin is the second coming of Adolf Hitler and Russia is the Second coming of Nazi Germany . You're appeasing someone who should not be appeased.
 Putin is not a serious threat to conquer more territory in Eastern Europe, says the Russian leader .
 In fact, if you really wanted to wreck Russia, what you would do is invite it into Ukraine and let it try and conquer the whole country and swallow it .
 The Russians surely know from their experience in Afghanistan, from watching us in Iraq, that the last thing they want to do is conquer and absorb Ukraine .
 This is a country that's going to decline in terms of relative power over time, largely for demographic reasons . This is the country that is going to be in decline, mostly for demographic Reasons .
 Ukraine will be good for Ukraine, good for the Russians, and good for us. What we ought to do is just back off and try to create a neutral Ukraine, which is good for Russia, and for us .
 The U.S. is fully committed to defending them if they're attacked, he says . "You have to make it very clear to the Russians and to the Eastern European countries"
 You may want to increase the number of exercises you have there and do a number of other small steps to reassure them .
 Putin is not seriously interested in threatening any of those countries, he says . But I don't think you have to do much more than that, he adds . He says he doesn't think Putin is seriously interested.
 The idea that Putin was planning to go on a rampage for a long period of time is belied by the facts . Putin's idea that NATO expansion was designed to contain him is not true .
 Before the February 22nd coup, there was no evidence that anyone thought that Putin was going to take Crimea .
 There's no evidence that anyone thought that he had imperial ambitions in terms of conquering territory on his borders .
 It was not until after the February 22nd coup earlier this year that that all happened . The coup took place in February .
 The rationale for NATO expansion was never phrased in terms of containing the Russians . Up until very recently, the rationale for the expansion was not mentioned .
 He was speaking the truth in terms of how he and his colleagues thought about NATO expansion . He was talking about how he thought about the expansion of NATO .
 The European security community thought that they were expanding eastward . They thought that it was expanding this security community eastward. They thought it would expand further .
 Nobody thought that Putin was going to go on a rampage, up until February 22nd .
 It was only after that that we changed our rhetoric and began to portray him as the second coming of Adolf Hitler . It was after that we started portraying him as a secondComing Hitler .
 The -in Western Europe, it seems like we've been able to get past the sort of zero-sum traditional offensive realist logic and create, as you say, a security community .
 The U.S. military presence in Western Europe and now in Central Europe is said to be because of its presence in the region .
 There's no way that any of the European countries can end up fighting wars against each other . As long as we are there, there is no way to end the war, says CNN.
 The U.S. was trying to put the American security umbrella over more and more countries so that in the end that security community would grow .
 The problem that we ran into was that from a Russian point of view, this was unacceptable . The Russians did not think that they would ultimately be in that security community, and because that Security community was run by NATO and really run by the United States, they viewed it as a threat
 In 1999, we took the first big step eastward and included countries like Poland and Hungary and the Czech Republic in NATO . In 2007, we included a handful of other states, including the Baltic states, and we got away with that, in part because Russia was very weak, but
In 2008, when we began to talk about expanding NATO further east, the Russians put their foot down . In 2008, we began talking about expanding the security community further east and in effect, expanding that security community .
Georgia and Ukraine will become part of NATO in April 2008 at the Bucharest summit . Georgia and Ukraine would be part of the NATO alliance at the summit .
 In August 2008, Georgia and Russia had a war over this very issue . It's not surprising that in August 2008.
 The Russians early on sent a signal, a very clear signal to us with this conflict, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says the incorporation of Georgia and Ukraine into NATO was unacceptable .
 I've got lots more questions that I could ask, but we have a large and passionate audience that would love to get in on this discussion, as well . We have lots of questions to ask, and we have lots more to ask .
 I'm going to turn it over at this point to Q&A with our participants. So I'll turn itover at the point to our participants . We'll be able to answer questions and answer questions about our questions .
 NATO leaders are going to be doing this week in Wales. They are articulating that a cyber attack could invoke Article 5 under certain circumstances .
 cyber attacks are happening at a comparably low level right now in the Ukraine conflict . Cyber attacks are being carried out at a low level in the conflict, according to experts .
 The key is to make sure that when we retaliate, it doesn't escalate, he says . His view is that if there are cyber attacks on NATO members and they come from the Russians, the key is not to escalate .
 The key point is that Russia has nuclear weapons, and the U.S. hasnuclear weapons . It's very important that any form of cyber war remain a cyber war and not turn into a conventional war that might ultimately lead to nuclear escalation .
 We have to be smart about cyber warfare, says John Sutter . We want that retaliation to be measured because of the dangers of escalation, he says .
 Andrei Sitov with TASS Russian News Agency. Our next question comes from Andrei sitov with the TASS Russia News Agency .
 The arguments that you are making are eminently reasonable, according to the Russian government .
 Russians have been making similar arguments over a long time and never got any real response . And the Russians themselves have also been making those similar arguments.
 The two sides were operating according to very different logics, according to Russian officials . The key to understanding why Western policymakers did not listen to the Russians is that the two sides had very differentLogics .
 NATO enlargement in terms of what I would call a liberal worldview, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "They thought about NATO enlargements in Terms of what he would call liberal worldview" Bergen says .
 Mike McFaul believes NATO expansion was a benign form of behavior . McFaul was the ambassador to Russia . He was also an ambassador to the United States .
 He believes that the United States is a benign hegemon and that moving the alliance eastward is not directed at Russia and it is not at all linked to sort of geopolitical thinking .
 The Russians, on the other hand, approach this issue in a completely different way . The Russians approach it in a totally different way, according to CNN .
 The Americans and Europeans operating according to this liberal playbook simply didn't hear what the Russians were saying . But the Americans and the Europeans operate according to the liberal playbook .
 They thought geopolitics was something that had been killed and buried with the end of the Cold War . They thought it had been something that would have been killed.
 Putin and other Russians ignored what Putin and others said, which I find quite remarkable . So they, therefore, ignored what they said, he says, which he finds quite remarkable.
People in the White House were shocked by what happened after February 22nd . People in the West were shocked.
 According to the liberal playbook, this should have never happened . The reason that they were shocked was because they were playing by this liberal playbook .
 George Kennan, who was a realist par excellence, said in 1999 that this would happen .
 Putin's peace plan doesn't address in detail all of the big issues that have to be ironed out here, says CNN's John Sutter .
Many more meetings and many more discussions before we work out a viable solution. So I think there are going to have to be many more meetings, many more talks before we can find a solution .
 I think all of the evidence is that they did not change their thinking at all . I think that all the evidence was that they didn't change their thoughts at all. I think they did.
 The West has been pursuing the policy since the February 2014 coup, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "What we are, in effect, doing is just doubling down"
 There's no evidence leaders in the U.S. or in Western Europe have changed their thinking, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I think that it's going to be extremely difficult for us to reverse gears at this point in time, for the reasons that you just stated . I think it'sGoing to be very difficult for them to reverse Gears at this time, I think. I think the
 I think that any Western leader, especially Obama, is going to pay a significant cost, political cost, he says . "Any Western leader," he says, "is going to paid a significant costs, political costs," he adds .
 As you point out, the sunk costs are great at this point in time, says the author . "Sunk costs are good at this time," he says .
 I often say that when you change foreign policy on a big issue, it's like turning an oil tanker around in the water . I often said that when we change foreignpolicy on a major issue, we often turn an oil tank around in water .
 The Germans are the only country that holds out the prospect of understanding the basic logic I laid out, it's the Germans. And my great hope is that the Germans see the light on this one, I think .
 NATO did not move forward on NATO expansion into Georgia and into Ukraine at that point in 2008 . German and French resistance was the reason that NATO didn't move forward in that time, he says .
 The Germans kind of understand the basic logic that I'm laying out, he says . So I think the Germans sort of understand what I'm talking about .
 The oil tanker was carrying a cargo of crude oil from a tanker in the Gulf of Mexico . The tanker is carrying an oil cargo of more than 1,000 tonnes of oil . It is believed that the tanker will be used to turn the tanker around .
 Russia wants not to disrupt relations with Russia for purely self-interested economic reasons . Russia has economic-based interests in its foreign policy .
 Ukraine is in the interests of Russia, it's in the interest of Ukraine, and it's also in West's interests, including Germany . And my argument is that creating a neutral Ukraine was in Russia's interests .
 Germany has no interest in getting involved in a game of sanctions versus counter-sanctions and then escalating up the ladder . Germany has not been involved in such a game .
Everybody has an interest in trying to figure out how to get out of this mess. So everybody has aninterest in trying. So everyone has an Interest in trying and trying to find a solution to this mess .
 If you double-down on the policy that got us into this situation, you're only going to make a bad situation worse, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he's trying to make the point that if you double down, you'll make a
 Gideon: "There are sunk costs here. And, of course, I fully understand your point, Gideon," he says .
 President Obama is facing a difficult task to reverse direction at this point in time .
 I think it's easier for Merkel to do this than it is for Obama, says Obama .
 The Germans have been smarter on this issue than the Americans have been since 2008, I think . And I also think that the Germans are smarter than Americans, as well .
 NATO is in existence or as long as the United States is in Europe with its military forces, U.S. says . Poland and the Baltic states have been expanded to include countries like Poland and Baltic states .
 When we thought about incorporating Ukraine and Georgia, we went too far. The problem is that when we thought of incorporating Ukraine, we didn't go too far .
 We should have stopped after the 2007 expansion into Eastern Europe and just left Ukraine and Georgia alone . We shouldn't have stopped in 2007 after the expansion into the Eastern Europe .
Trying to incorporate Georgians and Ukrainians into NATO is just going to end up doing egregious damage to each of them, he says . "This would not have been a case of selling theGeorgians and the Ukrainians out," he adds .
 Ukraine and Georgia not to flirt with NATO and E.U. admission and not to become part of the West . It would have been in their interest and the interest of Ukraine .
 NATO is expected to announce during this summit the increase of NATO presence in Eastern countries . Professor, the NATO professor, will announce during the summit .
 The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in recent years . It has been blamed for the deaths of more than 1,000 people in Ukraine .
 I think that the key is for NATO not to permanently station troops in Eastern Europe . Poland and the Baltic states should not be permanently stationed in the region, he says .
 I think that we've not done that up to this point in time, in large part, because we understood full well that it would antagonize the Russians and it would damage relations between Russia and the West . I think we have not done it up to the point.
 Nobody's talking at this point in time about permanently stationing NATO troops in the East .
 There's going to be an increased presence for a temporary period of time. There will be an increase in the presence of people in the future .
I think that makes perfect sense, because it reassures the countries in NATO that are in the eastern part of Europe . I think that make perfect sense. I think it makes perfectsense, because that makes it reassure the countries.
 But I don't think the Russians will be bothered by that. But IDon't think they will - and I don’t think the Russian will - but I do not think they won't .
 As long as our presence isn't permanent, they'll have no problem with it, says John Sutter . Sutter: "As long as we're there, there'll be no problem"
 The Russian military is conducting exercises in the east of the country . It has been 'quite measured in' with regard to moving troops and conducting exercises .
 NATO made promise that there won't be any permanent bases in eastern countries . You know, where NATO made promises that there will be no permanent bases .
 Poland is to provoke the Russians and to poison relations over the long term between Russia and the West, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he doesn't think it's in NATO's interest .
 No good will come from that, and I think it's going to be difficult to walk the dog back, says Gideon . Gideon pointed out that it will be difficult for the dog to walk back .
 I think we should go to enormous lengths to defuse this crisis, because it's good to no one . But nevertheless, he says, we shouldn't go to huge lengths todefuse this problem .
 Ukraine summit is not about enlargement anymore. You said yourself in 2009 they didn't the map, the road map, and Ukraine if you talk to diplomats in the West .
 The key point here is to remember that it's really what the Russians think. Well, the key point is toRemember that it is really what they think .
Mike McFaul's point is that the Russians should have understood that NATO expansion was not directed at them . I mean, again, to go back to Mike McFaul, he says . McFaul: Russia should have known NATO expansion wasn't aimed at them.
 Mike McFaul thinks what he thinks is largely irrelevant. And his response to McFaul's comments is that what McFaul says is mostly irrelevant .
 The Russians thought that NATO expansion into Ukraine and into Georgia was going to happen, maybe not right away, but over the long term . They were deeply concerned about that .
 Germans and French were a break on NATO expansion into Ukraine and Georgia at the Bucharest summit in April 2008 .
 Russians had good reason to believe that it would eventually happen. So the Russians believed it would happen, they said .
 NATO -that Ukraine and Georgia becoming part of NATO is not a serious issue is not the way the Russians see it. So the idea that NATO - that Ukraine andGeorgia becomingpart of NATO - is not an issue .
 The mere fact that the United States of America remains committed to NATO expansion would scare me greatly . The merefact that the U.S. remains committed. would scare him greatly.
 A lot of Western Europeans would agree with Professor Mearsheimer's view that a political settlement is needed . There needs to be a clear line drawn in the sand about NATO membership and expansion, he says .
 The way you have approached your analysis of what happened in Ukraine would not be shared by a lot of Western Europeans . But I also think that the way you've approached the Ukraine incident would not have been shared by quite a few Western Europeans.
 Yanukovych left on his own volition the country, and the parliament that had remained there actually voted in favor of the new government . So calling it a coup is a little beyond what I think realistically happened, he says .
 Putin would ever accept a democratic Ukraine, if it were to become prosperous and successful, because it would reflect badly on his rule, which is turning out to be more authoritarian .
 Ukraine is not just about renouncing the idea of NATO membership for Ukraine . In other words, it is about renunciation of the idea.
 Putin feels the relationship between the two countries is a threat to his own rule . It is really about this relationship between Russia and Russia, and what Putin feels, perhaps, is the threat he feels .
 I think that there's no question that Putin feels a threat to his own rule. I think there is no question he feels a risk to his rule . I think it's a good thing that Putin doesn't feel a threat.
 Ukraine has made it clear to him with our promotion of democracy in Ukraine that we may ultimately topple him from power, as well .
 The leader of the National Endowment for Democracy said as much last November in an op-ed in the Washington Post .
 Putin has good reason to think that, if we can do social engineering in Ukraine, we will ultimately do socialengineering in Russia. So I think Putin has a good reason.
 The U.S. should get out of the business of doing social engineering and promoting democracy in countries like Ukraine and in Russia. This is why I'm saying that the United States should do social engineering .
 Ukraine is part of the West. It just doesn't make good strategic sense, as long as that's all part of making a country like Ukraine part of West . Ukraine is now part of Europe's West .
 The possibility of Ukraine becoming part of the West is taken off the table, says David Frum . But he says it's possible to think about promoting democracy in Ukraine .
 Putin is fully capable of maintaining power in Russia and wouldn't view that as a great threat, he says . He says if you had a democracy and a prosperous democracy in Ukraine, it would not be a major problem for Putin .
 Yanukovych left the country because he feared for his life, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says Yanukovych left after he was forced to leave the country . He says Yanukovych worked out an agreement to have an election that would replace him .
 The parliament voted -approved the new government. Yeah, but he left on his own volition, and the parliament voted .
 You can easily stay and fight for your country and what you believe is a democracy and your right - your legitimate position as the president . You can also fight for the president's right to be a president .
 The E.U. has never offered membership and not interested in that at all, says the U.S. The U.N. has not offered membership to the E. U.K.
 Ukraine was held out as a promise for Ukraine. I mean, it wasn't going to happen right away, but over the long term, this was holding out . I'm not sure what happened, but I'm sure it will happen over the next few years .
 The U.S. and Russian perspective is different from that of the United States and Russia . The two countries have been involved in NATO expansion .
CNN's John Sutter tries to get you to expand a little bit on the Russian perspective . He asks whether what we're talking about is Russian perspective, per se, or whether it is the Putin perspective .
 Putin says he is going to invest his time and energy to build a 21st century economy . He says he will try to find ways to make us a center for technology in the way that the Israelis have done it .
After making the huge investment in the Olympics, he turns around and does something that is guaranteed to be costly to him politically, economically, and in all other ways . Instead, it seems to me, after having made the huge invest in the Games, he seems to
 Putin's thinking and the thinking of most members of the Russian foreign policy elite on Ukraine, he says . Well, I would argue that there's hardly any daylight between Putin's Thinking and his thinking on this issue .
 geopolitics still matters, says CNN's John Sutter . "I think what your analysis misses is the fact that geop Politics still matters," he says .
 You were saying that we're now in the 21st century, and you were implying that all that matters is economic considerations and technical considerations . You were suggesting that in the 20th century that all matters are economic considerations .
 There's no question that that's an important dimension of any state's foreign policy. There is no question about the role of foreign policy in the United States .
 The U.S. and Western Europeans got themselves into so much trouble on this issue is that they forgot that geopolitics still matters, he says .
 The Russians think very much in geopolitical terms and view NATO expansion and E.U. expansion in exactly those terms . They forgot the fact that the Russians thought very much of geopolitical terms .
International politics has changed in the 21st century and economics completely dominate security issues. So I would say that the argument that politics is wrong is wrong .
Your description of their economic miracle over the past decade or so is correct . Your description of the economic miracle is correct.
 Security and economics matter to the Russians, as they do to most powers in the system . The Russian government says security and economics are important to them .
 I just wanted to get your take on whether or not you think the allies will move forward with lethal aid . I want to know if you think allies will go forward withlethal aid .
 I think it would be a major mistake to provide the Ukrainians with lethal aid . I think the Ukrainians would have to be killed if they were given lethal aid.
Russian-Ukrainian conflict in eastern Ukraine has been raging for more than a year . Russia and Ukraine have been fighting each other for months . Ukraine is now a buffer state in the east .
 If we give lethal aid to the Ukrainians, that's just going to cause the Russians to increase their military involvement in eastern Ukraine. If we do so, that will just cause the Russian military to increase its military involvement .
 Russia is trying to poison relations between Russia and the West. It's going to do more to poison ties between the West and Russia, it's said .
 There's no movement to give Ukraine lethal aid. So I hope there'sno movement to move - there's no move to give lethal aid to Ukraine .
 The February 22nd coup is the February 22th coup . The coup took place in the country's capital, the capital city of San Francisco .
 Russian media has been emphasizing the role of fascist and extreme right-wing groups in the Ukrainian government .
 Building democracy and promoting the Orange Revolution in Ukraine were all designed not to make Ukraine democratic, but to bring into power leaders who were pro-Western .
 Pro-Western leaders would be well-positioned to help drive Ukraine into the West, says one analyst .
 Ukraine was deeply committed to becoming part of the West, and that meant becoming embedded in NATO and being embedded in the European Union . In other words, what we wanted were people in charge in Ukraine who were in charge of Ukraine .
 NATO and the E.U. eastward would help facilitate the rise of politicians who are pro-West . Ukraine someday would end up looking like Poland or look like Germany .
 The Russians will continue to wreck the country, he says . His argument is that what the Russians will do is they will be wrecking the country .
 I don't think we' re going to get away with it with regard to Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he doesn't think he'll be able to work with Ukraine.
 I think that continuing to pursue that policy would be a big mistake, he says . And I think continuing to pursued that policy is a big error, he adds .
 John, John, you can -you can -and we'll finish this off and then you can have one more, John . OK, John. OK, you -you -you could - and we'll finished this off . Then you can.
 fascist groups played a key role in the uprising between November 2013 and February 22, 2014 . The uprising took place between November and November 2014 .
 The new government included four individuals who could legitimately be called fascists . It's clear that when the new government took over after Yanukovych left, that four individuals could be called fascist .
 There's no question what scared Yanukovych and played a key role in his leaving the country, he says . "There is no question this is what scared him," he adds .
 Professor Mearsheimer: Stick to your guns on this. It's great to hear you, Professor Mearheimer, stick to your gun .
 At this point, we don't have the time for the broader context, says CNN's John Sutter .
 World War I, World War II, Cold War, perpetual war system began with the dumping of Bismarck . We're at the fag-end of the World War III and the end of the Cold War .
 The Brits met with Brazil with all the heads of state of South America toward a new system . It resembles what Franklin Roosevelt was planning for the post-World War II system, rather than the Wall Street system .
 The balance of power among various actors has shifted. The point I would make is, there's no question that you have new actors on the scene, he says .
 The idea that this is sort of a new era of international politics and the world works in different ways is simply wrong. But the idea is just wrong, he says .
 The fact of the matter is that we still live in a world where realpolitik really matters, and it really matters when you're dealing with great powers . The fact that we are still living in the world is the reason why we need to be careful .
 We're going to get ourselves into a whole lot of trouble with Russia over Ukraine, he says . And if people forget this when we deal with China, we'll get ourselves in a whole heck of trouble .
 The world has not changed in fundamental ways as a result of the end of the Cold War. This is not to say that economics doesn't matter, but you want to understand that the world hasn't changed as result of Cold War .
John Sutter: "I want to thank all of you. Well, with that, we're going to wrap this one up, but I want to wrap it up" Sutter says he wants to thank John, but he's not sure what he's doing .
 Foreign Affairs is the cheapest and around . We look forward to continuing to discuss this and other topics down the road .
 Foreign Affairs' Brain Trust Weighs In We at Foreign Affairs have published a number of articles examining the extent to which the Ukraine crisis is the West's fault .
Experts are asked to rate their confidence level on whether they agree or disagree with the following statement . The question was asked by a broader pool of experts to state whether they agreed or disagreed .
 The West provoked Russian President Vladimir Putin's aggression in Russia's near abroad by expanding NATO and the EU after the Cold War .
 Russia’s war on Ukraine is no exception. Leon Aron Strongly Disagree, Confidence Level 10 War is a continuation of politics by other means .
 It is hard for anyone closely watching Russia’s domestic political and economic dynamics in the past few years . The Ukrainian escapade was an epiphenomenon of the regime's domestic strategic direction, says Alexander Vatkov .
 It is difficult to see how the Kremlin could have tolerated a Europebound Ukraine . Russia's great power status increasingly key to Putin’s popularity .
 I was on record as opposing the NATO expansion at the time as unnecessary and divisive given what seemed to be Russia’s trajectory in the early 1990s .
 Russia was threatened by the possible “defection’ of a major state in what Russia defines as its zone of influence . Russia was also afraid of the diffusion of popular protests from Ukraine to Russia .
 anger about EU and NATO expansion and Kosovo precedent do not by any means justify Russia's violation of Ukraine's territorial sovereignty . However, anger over EU expansion and the Kosovo precedent, together with fears about diffusion, does not justify Russia’s violation.
 In the 1990 Charter of Paris, Russia accepted that all European nations are free to choose their alliances . Ivo H Daalder Strongly Disagree, Confidence Level 10 .
 Russia is concerned about the extension of U.S. power and influence to its immediate borders . It is also concerned about areas that it considers historically Russian .
 Even if NATO and the EU did not exist, the presence of anti-Russian governments would be considered a threat . Russian policymakers would work to counter through economic pressure, covert action, and direct military confrontation .
 Masha Gessen Disagree, Confidence Level 10, is taken aback by the question, which uses Kremlin terminology .
 Ukraine is a sovereign country, as separate from Russia as Finland as, say, Finland . Ukraine is the largest country in the world .
 Finland's choice to join NATO is not NATO's expansionism, says CNN's John Sutter . If Finland chose to join, we would be talking about it in terms of Finland’s choice, he says .
 45 million people of Ukraine sought the support of Western powers, which have failed to protect them from Russian aggression . They sought the protection of the sovereign state of Ukraine, which has been attacked by Russia .
 Strongly Disagree, Confidence Level 10: This is the wrong question to ask . Stronglydisagree,Confidence level 10: "This is the right question to question"
 Expansion of NATO and the EU would not have been a problem if Russia were on track to join both organizations . Russia would have been able to join NATO and EU, for instance .
 The problems arise from the incompatibility of promising Russia a substantive “voice’ in both organizations . Russia would have no effective influence and certainly no “veto” over them, says CNN.
 The expansion of NATO was a factor shaping Putin’s views of the West and its intentions, says Fiona Hill Disagree . But there were many other factors at play, she says .
 NATO bombing of Belgrade in 1999 played more of a role in shaping Putin’s views than the expansion did. NATO bombing played more role than expansion did, according to Putin .
 The so-called color revolutions, Western support for regime change during the Arab Spring, and Putin’s perceptions of Western involvement in fueling the protests in Russia in 2011–12 as well as in Ukraine in 2013 were also key factors .
 Putin's actions in the near abroad are the result of a complex set of foreign policy and domestic drivers . Putin’s actions are the results of a Complex set of Foreign policy and Domestic drivers .
 Most IR experts opposed NATO expansion at the time . Putin surely had multiple motives, but had multiple reasons .
 Russian revision of the 1991 settlement would likely have happened even without extreme NATO expansion . Stephen Kotkin Strongly Agree, Confidence Level 9 Russian.
 Ivan Krastev Disagree, Confidence Level 8 NATO and EU expansion probably contributed to Russia’s aggression in its neighborhood . He says Russia would have respected the sovereignty of its neighbors in the absence of NATO's expansion .
 Robert Legvold Agree, Confidence Level 7, says this is a more complex issue than the question implies . The question is more complex than the answer implies .
 NATO enlargement stimulated a basic mistrust of the U.S. and NATO allies . The United States, NATO allies were distrusting of each other .
 It was not the proximate cause for Russia’s aggressive actions in Ukraine, but an important part of the context . Russia's aggressive actions were not the cause for the actions, but the context was important .
 The cause was a combination of U.S. and EU actions in the February phase of the Ukrainian crisis . Putin's miscalculations about the opportunity that the rebellion in the Eastern Ukrainian provinces represented for Russia .
 Michael Mandelbaum Strongly Agree, Confidence Level 10, says NATO expansion provoked Russian aggression against Ukraine indirectly .
 NATO expansion did a great deal to foster a sense of hostility to the West in Russia . By excluding Russia from the Western-designed European security system, the Russians had every reason to believe was a promise.
 Putin has exploited and capitalized on that sense to justify his aggressive foreign policies toward the near abroad . Putin has used that sense for his aggressive policies toward his near abroad.
 The default option for Russian foreign policy would not be anti-Western and anti-American . Even without NATO expansion, Russia wouldn't be a model democracy, says the author .
 Putin or whoever was leading Russia would find it much more difficult to whip up popular support for his policy in Ukraine .
 The Russian public accepts Putin's actions. This background mood explains why the Russian public accept Putin’s actions .
Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin and former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov explicitly accepted expansion in signing NATO-Russia Founding Act . There is no evidence that Russian political leaders have actually believed that Russian security is threatened by NATO or EU expansion .
 Putin has used NATO expansion as an excuse for actions that have bolstered his own goals of making Russia a great military power once more .
 Michael McFaul Strongly Disagree, Confidence Level 10 John Mearsheimer Strongly Agree, Confident Level 9 Russian leaders and elites made it clear from the mid1990s forward that they viewed NATO expansion as a serious threat . McFaul: NATO expansion was a violation of
 Putin and other Russian leaders were especially exercised when NATO announced in April 2008 that Ukraine and Georgia would eventually join NATO . They warned it would lead to a crisis.
 Western leaders foolishly continued to pursue NATO and EU expansion, and that eventually led to the present crisis . Yet Western leaders continue to pursue the EU and NATO expansion .
 Alexander J Motyl Strongly Disagree, Confidence Level 10 . All such claims are based on the usually implicit assumption that Putin was paranoid, aggressive, and imperialist .
 Russia seeks to be the regional hegemon and is willing to use its partially modernized military to assert its claims . Russia wants to be a regional heGemon and use its military toassert its claims.
 A significant portion of recent developments in Ukraine and U.S. relations in general may be the result of a spiral .
 Major states prefer to keep other major states at arms-length . They prefer not to have other major players on or near their borders .
 NATO expansion since the mid-1990s may have left Russia feeling betrayed and isolated writ large . Russia may have been feeling betrayed by NATO expansion .
 Ukraine's loss would have left Russia even more isolated and confronted with Western power at its front door . Russia already fearing encirclement, Ukraine’s loss would leave Russia more isolated .
 Putin deemed action in Ukraine reasonable and in its self-interest . Western actions since the mid1990s may not have provoked Russian actions, but they helped set the stage .
 Putin would probably have chosen to continue to manipulate and dominate Ukraine without a military invasion . Without NATO/EU expansion, Putin would have been able to dominate the country .
 The West should have worked harder in the 1990s to create a Euro-Atlantic security architecture in which Russia had a stake, says Angela Stent Disagree .
 Central and Eastern Europe had every right to join NATO and the EU after being under Russian/Soviet domination for decades or even centuries .
 The EU is not a military alliance and Ukraine was merely pursuing closer trade ties . The EU and Ukraine are not a political alliance and the Ukraine is not an alliance .
 NATO expansion took place 20 years ago and it is hard to argue this is a clear trigger for Russia’s actions .
 Putin has a vision of Russia as a rising superpower. He wants to assert Russian dominance in this sphere of influence .
 He overlooks the fact that his neighbors are sovereign states and have been so for two decades . He says his neighbors have been sovereign states for decades .
 Daniel Treisman Neutral, Confidence Level 1 NATO expansion did not make Putin’s actions inevitable . Treisman says Putin's actions not inevitable .
 Noting this does not in any way justify Putin’s actions, as is sometimes implied . Noting that does not justify Putin's actions does not, however, in anyway justify Putin.
 The West does not make the West in any way responsible or to blame for Putin’s actions . It doesn't make theWest in anyway responsible for Putin's actions .
 Given the question’s actual wording, I agree with some of the implications of the sentence and disagree with others, so I choose “neutral” and low confidence . The question's actual wording is "neutral" and "low confidence"
 The root cause of the present crisis is the failure of the West to integrate Russia into a common security system, says Dmitri Trenin Agree . The West has failed to integrate Russian security systems, he says .
 The mistake was made after World War I and avoided after WWII with regard to Germany . It was made again in the aftermath of World War II .
 Russia's harsh reaction to NATO expansion is not the only reason for Russia’s harsh reaction, nor is it a justification for some of what Russia has done .
 The decision to move NATO eastward helped poison relations between Moscow and the U.S. It made Russian leaders more sensitive about subsequent Western efforts to strengthen ties with Ukraine .
 NATO increased the alliance’s defense burden without making it stronger, and made friction between East and West more likely . Expanding NATO increased NATO's defense burden.
 Russia moved so dramatically was potential expansion to Ukraine rather than the earlier expansion as implied by the question . William C Wohlforth Neutral, Confidence Level 8 .
 Russia is interested in the Donbas area remaining a formal part of Ukraine, says Motyl . Motyl says Russia wants to shape Kyiv’s internal and external policies .
 His work primarily focuses on security and conflict in the post-Soviet area . His work mainly focuses on the area's post- Soviet area .
 Motyl’s argument certainly has its strengths, particularly given that the Kremlin has thus far demonstrated reluctance to militarily invade southeastern Ukraine and annex the Donbas area .
 Ukraine's most pro-Ukrainian areas are losing Crimea and Donbas, Ukraine’s historically most proRussian areas . The loss of Crimea may help cement the notion of Ukrainian statehood in the rest of the country .
 Russia-backed expansion into Ukraine's other provinces would not be a solution to the current crisis, according to Moscow's goals .
 The effects of losing Donbas could be devastating for Ukraine, according to the U.S. State Department . The loss of Donbas would have a psychological impact on Ukraine's society .
 A withdrawal from Donbas would not stop the territorial expansion of the pro-Russian separatists . Instead, it would rather encourage further expansion of separatists .
 Donbas will likely become a breeding ground for Moscow-orchestrated efforts to destabilize the neighboring areas of southern and eastern Ukraine, with the aim of expanding into them .
 Donbas, comprised of two provinces, Luhansk and Donetsk, is just a tiny portion of what Russian strategists have recently come to designate as ‘Novorossia’ or “New Russia’ Donbas is a vast area of southern Ukraine stretching from the
 A number of Russian ideologists and politicians with close ties to the Kremlin have in recent months openly and consistently laid claim to ‘New Russia’ as a historical part of Russia .
 ‘New Russia’ is believed to form an integral part of the ‘Russian world’ It is used to legitimize Moscow’s current and potential territorial claims in the post-Soviet space .
 Ukraine's withdrawal from Donbas as a consequence of the Kremlin’s failure to impose its will on Kyiv . Donbas will be little consolation for Moscow, which is interested more than this tiny area .
 Russia’s key priority in Ukraine is to control the country as a whole, Motyl and others have acknowledged . Motyl says Russia's key priority is to take control of Ukraine .
 Ukraine will appear as an increasingly unified country in terms of its pro-Western orientation . It would translate into the ultimate failure of Russia’s policy in and toward Ukraine .
 Moscow needs to either control Kyiv politically or to undermine Ukrainian statehood . Moscow therefore needs to control the Ukrainian government politically or undermine Ukraine's statehood.
 Kyiv would likely seek to attain the latter goal, effectively relaunching the “New Russia’s’ project, according to a report .
 A withdrawal from Donbas would be vastly problematic for Ukraine’s security, says Motyl . The withdrawal would ultimately trumps any possible benefits resulting from a potential withdrawal. This is why, and herein lies my primary disagreement with Motyl, I say .
 Moscow may use its experience with hybrid or non-linear warfare to destabilize neighboring areas to the east of Luhansk and Donetsk provinces . The aim of establishing allied separatist “republics’ or carrying out provocations in an effort to legitimize incursions into mainland Ukraine
 separatist “republics’ may declare independence from Kyiv, seeking closer ties with and patronage of Russia . Over time, these separatist ‘republic’s” may declaring independence fromKyiv .
 Moscow would refrain from annexing the Donetsk and Luhansk ‘people's republics’ and possibly other self-styled entities, established within Ukraine’s newly occupied provinces .
 Moscow may or may not recognize Georgia's independence formally, but it will provide security guarantees to them . Georgia's occupied territories of South Ossetia and Abkhazia will be given security guarantees .
 A minority of Ukrainians in the country's southern and eastern provinces is still sympathetic to Russia’s advances . The majority of Ukrainians are sympathetic to the Russian government .
 This crucial minority could be used by Russian-backed separatists as their power base in the country .
 Ukraine’s unwillingness or inability to fight for Donbas, resulting in its de facto withdrawal from the area, would be considered a sign of weakness . It would only strengthen the impression of Ukraine as a failed state in the minds of some citizens .
 Moscow-backed Donbas separatists may with relative ease push as far westward as the Dnieper River . Lacking natural frontiers and terrain that disables effective guerilla tactics (Ukraine’s southeastern provinces are flat and sparsely wooded), the Donbas separatist may
 Ukraine's central government lacks economic and military support from the West . Russian army units would have the potential to threaten Ukraine’s central areas as well as Kyiv itself .
 Crimean peninsula is connected to mainland Ukraine through a narrow strip of land that is much easier to defend . For purposes of further territorial expansion, control over Donbas is more important .
 Kyiv should not abandon Donbas as it would likely impose a demoralizing effect on Ukrainian society . Another reason why Kyiv shouldn't abandon the region is the enormous demoralizing impact that such a move would probably impose on Ukrainian Society .
 A withdrawal from Donbas would dramatically weaken the Ukrainians’ key commitment to defending their country against all odds . A withdrawal would significantly weaken the Ukrainian commitment to defend their country .
 Kyiv's surrender of Crimea without firing a single shot months ago seems to have caused more distress and humiliation to ordinary Ukrainians than the Ukrainian military’s recent failures in Donbas .
 Ukrainians are determined to sacrifice for the sake of defending the rest of their country . Given the Kremlin's far-reaching goals in Ukraine, such demoralization would have devastating consequences .
 The risk of a central government accepting any Moscow-imposed conditions would be much higher than it is currently . Under such dramatic circumstances, the risk of such a situation would be higher than currently .
 Ukraine, as the weaker side of the conflict, may only win a war with Russia by making the cost of war unbearable for the latter's public opinion . Ukrainians would risk losing all chances to defend their statehood .
 Facing a military confrontation with its much stronger neighbor, Ukraine has no easy options on the table . Ukraine has a strong military presence in Ukraine .
 In spite of the challenges, abandoning Donbas is neither the best option for the future of Ukrainian territorial integrity and statehood nor for enduring peace .