Russian Orthodox Church is a soft power tool of the Kremlin, says Joseph Nye . Nye's article seeks to examine Russian Orthodox Church as a softPower tool of Kremlin .
 The consequences of autocephaly for Russia and ROC are analyzed . In addition, the consequences ofAutocephalia for Russia are analyzed.
 The article argues that annexation of Crimea by Russia and the war in Eastern Ukraine facilitated nationalistic mobilization in the country that resulted in an anti-Russian candidate Poroshenko's election .
 Poroshenko was the one who promoted establishment of an independent Church despite his political interests . He was one of those who promoted the establishment of the independent Church .
 The article argues that tomos seriously undermines the stability of the Russian World . The article also argues the tomos undermine the position of ROC.
 The method of content-analysis is used to examine legislation, official speeches on religious issues in Russia and Ukraine . The method is also used for media coverage of the issue in both countries .
Rusya ve Ukrayna’nın iç ve dış politikalarındaki rolü hakkışmaların önünü açmıştır .
Kullanarak Rus Ortodoks Kilisesi'ni Kremlin'in yumuşak güç aracı olarak incelemeyi ve Rusya'da muhafazakâr ideolojiyi tartışmayı ama
Ayrıca, otosefalinin Rusya ve ROK için doğuracağı sonuçlar analiz edilmiştir. Ayrıc,    ayrıcu,  is ayrı
 Makale, Rusya’nın Kırım’ı ilhakı ve Doğu Ukrayna’daki savaşın milli seferberliği kolaylaştırdığığ
 Poroşenko, her ne kadar siyasi, is known as the 'Kadar Siyasi için' She is the daughter of Porošenko, who is also known for her work in Turkey .
 Makale ayrıca, tomosun eğitim ve kültür kurumları tarafından tesis edilen Rus Dünyası istikrarını ciddi şekilde sarstı
 Makale, mevzuatı, Rusya ve Ukrayna'daki dini meselelerle ilgili resmi açıklamaları, kiliselerin temsilcilerin beyanlarını ve konun
 The year 2018 was marked with the escalation of tensions between Russia and Ukraine . The year was marked by the increase of tensions in Ukraine .
 The first crisis stemmed from the decision of Constantinople Patriarch to grant Asst. asst. Asst .
 This conflict resulted in Russia's break-up with the Constantinople Patriarchate in October . This conflict was the result of Russia's breakup with the Patriarchate .
 The second crisis was the seizure of Ukrainian ships in the Kerch Strait illegally controlled by Russia . The incident follows the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . The Ukrainian ships were seized by Russia following the annexation.
Russian Orthodox Church in Russia's domestic affairs, its institutions abroad as well as Kremlin's use of ROC as soft power leverage . This article aims to discuss the role of the Russian Orthodox Church.
 The article seeks to examine the meaning of the Ukrainian Church’s autocephaly for Russia . The article is published in the Russian Orthodox Church of Ukraine .
 ROC is a tool of Russian soft power along with the Russian-speakers abroad . It is argued in this paper that ROC has been used as a tool for soft power .
 Loss of Ukrainian laity and attractiveness is a logical outcome of the Russian aggression. Loss of Ukraine's attractiveness is the result of Russian aggression, says Russian official .
 Petro Poroshenko used mobilization and anti-Russian mood of Ukrainians to promote new Church . Poroshenko is seeking for second presidential term .
 The autocephaly undermines the Russian World established in the post-Soviet space through the institutions of education and culture . The author also argues that the autocephyaly undermines Russian World .
 ROC appears to be a victim of Kremlin’s policies since it loses the communities as well as properties in Ukraine .
Ukrainian president Poroshenko is seeking to secure his victory in 2019 electoral campaign . The establishment of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was an effort to secure the president's victory . The Orthodox Church is the main church in Ukraine .
 election of Vladimir Zelensky creates the situation of uncertainty for Kremlin . However, the election of Putin's successor creates the possibility of a new president .
For the analysis of ROC, author embraces the soft power theory of Joseph Nye as a framework . For the analysis, author embraced the softPower theory of Nye.
 Author uses method of content-analysis to analyze official documents of the Russian Federation and Ukraine related to Church, speeches of the leadership, and statements of the clergy . Author also analyzes official documents from Russia, Ukraine and Russia related to the Church .
 content-analysis of the media content related to Orthodoxy is used in Orthodoxy . The Orthodoxy's media content is also used to analyze media content .
 The focus is on the post-annexation policies since the sanctions imposed on Russia determined the need for more active use of the soft power tools .
 The article starts with the introduction of the soft power theory and review of the literature on the Russian Orthodox Church .
 It proceeds with the discussion of the conservative ideology in Russia, particularly the role of Church in its establishment and development . The discussion of conservative ideology is also discussed .
 The discussion of the soft power of ROC is followed by the analysis of the Orthodoxy in Ukraine and its lust for an independent Church . ROC's soft power is also followed by its desire for independent Church.
 Russia uses her soft power tools in the post-Soviet republics and in the countries of the West . Russia also uses soft power in post- Soviet republics.
 Russia's soft power includes Russian language and Orthodox Christianity that secure the support from abroad . The soft power of Russia includes Russianlanguage and Orthodox Christian Christianity .
 Fiona Hill argues that the soft power of Russia goes far beyond the energy, but includes culture, consumer goods and job opportunities . Hill says that Russia's soft power goes beyond energy and includes culture and consumer goods .
 He accuses Putin who knows nothing about soft power and fails to attract rather than coerce . He is trying to compare Russia to the U.S. and accuses Putin of being soft .
At the same time, he stresses that grassroots soft power should be preferred to the state-led soft power .
 Comparison itself does not seem correct if the only standard is the Western liberal model . Comparison itself doesn't seem correct.
 Nye fails to take into consideration the securitization rhetoric as to terrorism and extremism in the U.S. in early 2000s, for instance .
 The soft power of Russia is an attempt to impede and weaken the Western discourses on democratization, says Jeanne L Wilson . It is a response to the new challenges, she says .
 Both states are preoccupied with the establishment of the soft power that will express their national identity that is 'enlightened conservatism' in case of Russia .
 Russia's budget allocated for soft power is limited, while its programs are regional . In comparison with China, Russia's spending is limited .
 ROC as a soft power tool and its role in Russian foreign policies is accomplished in the empirical studies presented below . More detailed analysis of ROC is presented below.
 The literature on contemporary Russian Orthodoxy in political space is represented by three broad approaches . The literature is also represented by a number of broad approaches.
 sociological analysis of the laity and attitudes of the citizens towards religion and Church constitute the third group of the works on the topic . The study of the attitudes of citizens towards the church and religion is part of the work on the subject .
 It is anti-global and critical as to contemporary Russian society and reforms . It's anti- global and critical. It is also critical of contemporary Russian culture and reforms.
 Mihajlov, in his turn, stands against the general idea that the Orthodox Church is homogenous .
 According to him, there are different groups in it, represented by, first of all, conservative and modernist wings .
Papkova argues that the position of ROC in Russian politics has changed since 1991 .
 Kathy Rousselet examined the Christianity in Russia as the soil for the daily patriotism of Russians . She noted that the Church and believers are in the service of the country .
 Her analysis of the Church publications, interviews with priests and laity allows her to conclude that the Church and Laity are in the state of combat . Her analysis is accompanied by the observation of religious events .
 In the foreign policies, ROC is acting to support a construct defined as a Russian World by Patriarch Kirill .
 Blitt discusses the role of ROC in the foreign policy distinguishing between ideological and practical components of it . Blitt says ROC's role in foreign policy is to be seen as an important part of the global community .
 Suslov says it has an appeal to Messianism and fundamentalism . It proposes criticism of the existing social order along with revolutionary instruments for its change .
 It is hard to agree with the author on the fact of rejection of the rational dialogue with the secular power by ROC as well as the proposed radical changes .
 Fundamentalism is not also a very pragmatic position as soon as Russians are not familiar with the dogmas of the Church . Russia is still a secular state, and Russia is not very pragmatic .
 Russia is seen as a leader or messiah. It is actually the basis for the idea of the Moscow – Third Rome and the Russian World .
 The Orthodox Church is an instrument of Kremlin, therefore, ideologically and rationally accepts the existing authority . The Orthodox church is an instruments of Kremlin .
 Vladimir Putin occupied the post of the President for the first time . His primary task was to restore sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country .
 Chechen extremism, re-election and the rise of the oil prices in the end of 2000s allowed him to promote new nationalist policies . He also introduced new conservative ideology .
 This ‘practical’ or populist ideology is based on respect to the statehood, authority, order, traditions and Orthodox Christianity .
 At the same time, the religiosity of Russians is superficial, not supported by knowledge of the holy texts and dogmas .
 Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine. Instead, cultural rituals are in priority . Russia is losing its soft power tool in Ukraine .
 The lack of professional clergy and theology academicians during the Soviet years accompanied by the weak institutions of the Church . It can be explained by the lack of clergy and theologians during theSoviet years .
 Russian constitution declares separation of state from Church . This article seeks to show how Putin deliberately used the Orthodox Church, especially following opposition rallies of 2011 – 2012 .
 Following the Ukrainian crisis Russia feels the need to use the Orthodoxy as a unifying factor for the Russian World . The Orthodoxy is a tool to cushion the West and decrease the isolation of Russia .
 He called for the greater role of the ROC in promotion of the institution of family, in education and in social care for the insecure Russian citizens .
 An elective course titled ‘Basics of the Religious Cultures and Secular Ethics’ has been introduced into the syllabi .
 The role of the ROC in social politics and family issues can be seen through the prism of its attempts to criminalize abortions . The ROC has been trying to criminalise abortions for years .
 ROC representatives believe they can at least achieve the exclusion of the abortions from the social security system . The government is to keep the procedure legal .
 activists of ROC prepared a document that provided a list of social indications for abortion in the context of compulsory health insurance for up to the 12th week .
 Ministry of Health was in no hurry to agree with the position of the Church on this issue . However, the Church was not in a hurry.
 Activists are founders and volunteers of the organizations providing support and consultancy for women .
 In 1991, Patriarch Alexiy II blessed the creation of the Holy Dimitriy sisterhood .
 The traditional family values are represented in ROC's position on homosexuality . ROC has been criticized for its stance on homosexuality.
 Mihajlov says the position of the Church on the issue is not homogeneous . He analyzed different streams within ROC, and said the Church's position is nothomogeneous .
 ROC is also active in securing the 'official' version of history . ROC has also been trying to safeguard traditional Russian values .
 2017 movie Matilda presented the love story of the last Emperor Nicholas II and ballet dancer Matilda Kshesinka . The Church was criticized by the representatives of the Church .
 In 1981, Tsar Nicholas II as well as his wife and five children assassinated by the Bolsheviks were canonized as martyrs . The Bolsheviks also canonized his wife.
 The story of an affair between the Saint Tsar and catholic ballet dancer undermines the authority and innocence of the Church, while questioning the significance of Romanovs' contribution to the Orthodoxy .
 Nicholas II is known as the Emperor who facilitated the canonization of some activists of ROC . He donated significant amount of money for the construction of churches and monasteries .
 Andrey Uchitel accused of manipulating history, insulting religious feelings of Russians and undermining family values . Film's producer and producer accused of insulting Russian religious feelings .
Representatives of the Moscow Patriarchate spoke against the film . They abstained from the demands to ban it, suggesting that the ban would only raise the popularity of the movie .
 In accordance with the law, by 2018, approximately one thousand buildings were transferred to the Russian Orthodox Church . By 2018, about 1,000 buildings were moved to the Orthodox Church.
About 80% of the remaining religious monuments nationalized during the Soviet period remain the state property . The state property is the most important state property.
 Property transfer is carried out exclusively by the Federal Agency for State Property Management . The agency is responsible for property transfer .
 If the object is a historical and cultural monument the consent of the Ministry of Culture should be obtained . The object is an object that should be considered a cultural monument .
 2010 Law provoked negative responses of different groups within the Russian society, including Communists and Ministry of Culture .
 ROC demonstrates its loyalty to Kremlin . In its turn, it is stated in the Fundamentals of the Social Concept of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 Pussy Riot used the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow for their live performance in 2012 . Five members of the band were sentenced to 2 years in colony .
 Between 1997 and 2013, insulting religious feelings was an administrative offense . The offense was an Administrative offense .
 ROC in Russia has a significant role in Russia's politics . Despite the significant role of ROC, one should not overestimate the influence of the Church on politics .
 The firm position of the government as to the abortions shows the limits in the influence of the Church on the Russian leadership .
 At the same time, the bigger part of the property remains a property of the state that prevents ROC from the financial growth .
 Petersburg the transfer of which from the ministry of culture to ROC is still unclear . The transfer of the government's culture to the ROC has not been announced .
 The cathedral is one of the biggest museums of Russia and attracts significant number of tourists . Since 1928 the cathedral has been one of Russia's biggest museums .
 The transfer of it to ROC may result in closure of it for tourists and loss of the museum . The museum may also be closed for the tourists .
 Russians in general support the role of the Church in the society . As to the position of people towards Church and its role in politics, Russians, in general, support the Church .
 More than 56% of Russians approve the size of impact of ROC on politics, according to Levada Center surveys . More than 50% approve of the impact on politics.
 The share of those who stand against the intrusion of Church into the public affairs is steadily growing from 11% in 2013 to 15% in 2015 .
 Russians positively evaluate the contribution of the religious institutions in promoting moral values and educating the youth . At the same time, Russian religious institutions are considered to have a positive role in educating the young .
 Russian Orthodox Church aims to serve the goals of Kremlin that is the control over the area of primary importance . The former Soviet republics are softening the Western countries’ position towards Russia .
 Putin managed to plait the religious ingredient of the Russian ideology into the foreign policy, along with the emphasis on Russian-speakers abroad .
 The Russkiy Mir, its spiritual and cultural content, opposes the Western liberalism and unilateralism . The Eurasian economic cooperation projects oppose Western liberalism .
 If the former deals with the political and economic institutions, the former seeks to facilitate cooperation in the cultural and spiritual spheres under the guidance of Moscow .
 It covers the post-Soviet space including the Baltic countries, except the Caucasus and even has institution in the Western Hemisphere . So it covers the Baltic and the Caucasus, including the Caucasus .
 The working group meets annually to discuss the most important issues of the Russian foreign policy and international relations . The meeting is held in Moscow every year .
 Establishment of relations with the ROCOR is a tool of influence on the Russians living in traditional Catholic and Protestant countries . The US is headquartered in the Western Hemisphere .
 Putin was positioned as a unifier of the churches that reinforce his image in the eyes of the Russians . Putin is positioned as an unifier.
 ROCOR released a statement about the break-up of the relations with Fener . Fener has been in talks with the company for years .
 Hilarion, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and Chairman of the Department for External Church Relations of the Moscow Patriarchate, is the member of the Board of Directors .
Russkiy Mir foundation focuses on youth exchanges and promotion of academic ties with Western universities . The RusskiyMir foundation is based in Moscow, Russia .
 The place and role of the Orthodoxy in the foreign policies of Kremlin were evaluated by the Russian leadership repeatedly . The Orthodoxy's role in the Russian foreign policies was evaluated by Russian leadership .
 Putin elaborated on complexity of Russian civilization-state and underlined the role of the Orthodoxy in it .
 Military, technological and economic strength of the state stems from moral and spiritual strength of society, he said . He said the priority of spirituality before the materialistic issues was spirituality .
 Russian President referred to the civilization based on the Orthodox religion . During the same discussion, he mentioned the multicultural nature of Russia .
Bringing spiritual and moral component to realpolitik is a very pragmatic step of justification of numerous acts of aggression .
 The Kievan Rus' Prince Vladimir was baptized in Crimean city of Khersones near Sevastopol .
 The adoption of Crimea and Sevastopol into the RF was not only a strategic and 2 Important decision in the Orthodox Church . The adoption was not just a strategic, 2 Important decisions in the Church .
 Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine security act but a spiritual move that raise the importance of Russia in establishing leadership in the Orthodox world .
 Putin's speech, among others, characterized Prince Vladimir as a warrior that probably had a goal of justifying Russian policies in Georgia, Ukraine and Syria .
 ROC not only approves but also actively contributes to the Kremlin’s policies . ROC has been in charge of the Russian government for years .
 Patriarch Kirill attends the headquarters of the Russian army on different occasions (Russkaja Pravoslavnaja Tserkov' 2019c)
 Russian Orthodox Church enjoys active support in the post-Soviet states . Russian Orthodox church enjoys support in post- Soviet states .
 Belarusian Orthodox Church calls on Patriarch of Constantinople Bartholomew to 'rethink' process of granting tomos to Ukraine .
 ROC and its affiliate in Ukraine, Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate, was modest . During the Ukrainian crisis of 2013 2014, ROC was modest.
 The UOC MP criticized the Euro-Maidan and the Kyiv Patriarch for his support of mass rallies in Kyiv and biggest cities of Ukraine .
 The leaders of the UOC MP even announced their acceptance of Crimea as a part of Ukraine . They even announced the acceptance of the Crimea as part of the Ukraine .
 Moscow Patriarch was also afraid of losing Ukrainian laity and abstained from active engagement into the conflict . Moscow Patriarch also abstained.
 The Church did not attend the ceremony of signing agreement between Crimea and Moscow in March 2018 . The representatives of the Church didn't attend the event .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church in Crimea reregistered itself in accordance with the Russian legislation . In fact, the Ukrainian Orthodox church in Crimea has been reregistered .
 Following the autocephaly, anti-Ukrainian stance of the Crimean leadership became even stronger and led to the cleansings against the Ukrainian priests .
 Russian Orthodox Church is active not only in neighboring countries . However, it is active in other countries .
 In Europe and the US, the main goal of the Russian soft power is to cushion position of the Western countries and decrease Russia’s isolation by means of educational and cultural institutions .
 This function of the Church has been particularly important after Crimea's annexation of Crimea .
 Russian bilateral relations are quite strong, including cultural relations with France . As Marlene Laruelle admits, French bilateral relations with Russia are very strong .
 She points out the strong position of the Orthodoxy in France that can be used by Putin in his relations with Macron who is not as Russiafriendly as Sarkozy .
 No less important is the proximity of ROC to Papacy in the process of softening of the West .
 Patriarch Kirill met with Pope Francis on 12 February 2016, during his visit to Latin American countries . Kirill visited Cuba, where he met with the Pope.
 Russian side that initiated the meeting was a chance to demonstrate that Russia is not isolated from the West . For Russian side, it was an opportunity to show that Russia was not isolated.
 Pope Francis is sympathetic to Kirill because of his Argentinean origin and young years spent in an authoritarian state . Pope Francis has been in Argentina for more than a decade .
Relations between the Holy See and Moscow have not always been void of tensions .
 The main problems were the Catholic proselytism in Russia and other CIS countries, as well as the conflict of the Orthodox and Greek Catholics in the Western Ukraine . The main problem was the Catholicism in Russia.
 New escalation of the conflict between the two confessions occurred in 2002 . The two confessions were made in 2002.
 Pope John Paul II raised the status of the Roman Catholic Church in Russia to the level of dioceses . The main reason was the decision of the Pope JohnPaul II.
 The unfriendly to Russia demarche caused a corresponding reaction of the state, the church and the public . Russia's attitude to Russia has caused a similar reaction to the state.
 A statement was made by Alexiy II and the Holy Synod, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . A number of influential public organizations, politicians, public and religious figures.
 The position of the Orthodox Church was supported by representatives of other religions for Russia .
 Kirill I also visited Paraguay and Brazil, followed by the Antarctica Waterloo Island's visit where he prayed .
 In October 2016, Kirill met Her Majesty Elizabeth II as a part of his journey of commemoration of Christianity on British Islands .
 The British monarchy positively reviews the development of the conservative values in Russia . British monarchy has been criticised for its conservative values .
 ROC has been very active in the foreign affairs. But it could not impede the anti-Russian mood growing in the closest neighbor .
 The nationalistic mobilization determined the negative outcome for Russian religious institutions in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian president's aspirations have historical roots as well as pragmatic aspirations . However, this process has been affected by the pragmatic aspirations of the Ukrainian president .
 The Orthodox Kyiv Metropolis was transferred to the Moscow Patriarchate through a charter issued by the Ecumenical Patriarch Dionysius and his synod in June 1686 .
 Prince Gideon Chetvertinsky was first Kiev Metropolitan of the Moscow Patriarchate . He was the first Kievropolitan of the Russian Patriarchate.
 In 1688, his title was changed to Metropolitan of Kyiv, Galician and Malorossiya3.3. In 1687, he was named Metropolitan ofKyiv, Kyiv and Galician .
Little Russian eparchies were directly subordinated to the Russian Synod . Kiev metropolitans became ordinary diocesan bishops, who nevertheless had the title of Metropolitan .
 After 1991, Orthodoxy in Ukraine has been represented by three institutions . Orthodoxy is represented by two institutions .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate is a self-governing body within the Russian Orthodox Church . It operates in Ukraine, including the Crimea . The first one is the Ukrainian Orthodox church of Moscow.
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate was self-proclaimed in 1992 acting under the jurisdiction of Constantinople Patriarchate . The second one is the Ukrainian Orthodox church of Kyv Patriarchate , institution self- proclaimed in 1992 .
 The third one is the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, a non-canonical church established in 1917 following the October Revolution . It accounts for 0.4% of the Orthodox of Ukraine .
 Some measures for gaining autocephaly were undertaken during the presidency of Viktor Yushchenko that came to office as a result of the Orange Revolution .
 Orange Revolution itself was a significant contribution to the mobilization process in Ukraine . It became an impetus for changes in national policies in Ukraine. Orange Revolution was a key part of Ukraine's mobilization process .
 The efforts of Yushchenko regarding Orthodoxy in Ukraine appeared to be ineffective . However, the efforts of the Ukrainian government appeared to have failed .
 In 2005, he initiated a dialogue between UOC KP and Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church that failed . In 2005 he initiated the dialogue between the church and the UOC.
Ukrainian president's omissions were the identification of the Church unification idea with himself and Orange Revolution . One of the main omissions of the Ukrainian president was the identification.
 Petro Yushchenko is the chairman of the organization For Manorial Ukraine . The appointment of his elder brother Petro YUSHchenko was very promising .
 Ukrainian Church did nothing to facilitate the independence of the Ukrainian Church . But the organization did nothing.
 Petro Poroshenko, former president of Ukraine, facilitated the process . Poroshenko is a former President of Ukraine .
 conflict between Ukrainian church and ROC reached its culmination in late 2018 . This provoked a conflict between the church and the ROC that reached its climax in 2018 .
 The formation of the separate church was an important step insofar as starting from the 17th century . The Ukrainian Church was controlled by the Russian Empire .
 In the 19th and 20th centuries when Ukraine was divided between Austro-Hungarian Empire and Russia the differences in the nature of Orthodoxy in two different parts of Ukraine started to form .
Civil society was more active and developed in the Western Ukraine that defined the nature of political activism in these regions even in the independence period .
 The establishment of the independent Ukrainian Church was the result of Russia’s invasion into Ukraine in 2014 . It is also important to understand that the establishment of an independent Ukrainian church was a result of the Russian invasion .
 Russia's imperialist policies determined the outcome of the 2014 presidential election, first of all . Russia’s imperialist policies decided the outcome.
 Poroshenko stood for closer relations with NATO and EU and the EU, strong army, diversification of the energy supplies and return of Crimea .
 Ukraine's pro-Western course has been declared pro-West by Ukraine's president . Among his main achievements were the visa-free travel to Schengen countries, stronger army and amendments to the Constitution .
 corruption, high inflation rates, longlasting war in Eastern Ukraine and huge emigration were the obvious impediments for the second presidential terms . Nevertheless, corruption, inflation rates and long lasting war in eastern Ukraine were the main impediments to the second term .
 The only trump card could be gaining more independence from Russia and laying down the basis for new pro-European Ukrainian identity .
 The support of Poroshenko in Ukraine shortly before the election was low . The support for Poroshenko was low before the elections .
 Poroshenko appeared to be a very convenient figure due to his nationalist anti-Russian stance . Russian policy-makers developed discourse on ‘illegal revolution’ and ‘Nazi regime’ in Ukraine .
 Under such conditions, Ukraine and Russia have been mutually constituting countries . Under such circumstances, Ukraine, Russia and Ukraine have been partners .
 Newly elected president Zelensky may not be that radical so would complicate Russia's propaganda on the issue .
 Zelensky has been ironic on the issue of the independent Church comparing tomos to thermos in his speeches . The independent Church is an independent church .
 Zelensky avoids discussions on religious issues that make him difficult to predict . He also avoids discussions about religious issues .
 He will definitely pay less attention to the issues of Church since parliamentary election and formation of pro-president majority will be the most important tasks of the president .
 Zelensky seems to be modern and pro-European young man in comparison with Poroshenko . He will probably diminish the role of Church in the politics .
 Establishment of an independent Church is still an important stage of the self-determination for Ukraine .
 Russia is considering the threat to the Russian World and growing isolation of the country . But it is no less important for Russia considering the threats to the world .
 Russian Church itself, and more importantly, its Ukrainian affiliate, appears to be a victim of Kremlin’s policies . The Ukrainian Church appears to have been a victim.
For Russia, tomos, first of all, means the failure to play a leading role in the restoration of the 'Holy Rome' by means of the Moscow Patriarchate .
 Since 1453 when Constantinople was seized by the Ottomans, the competition between Moscow and Constantinople for leadership in the Orthodox world has been going on .
 Independence of the UOC is a failure of Russia to secure succession of the Byzantium heritage . The UOC has not been able to secure moral rebirth of the Orthodox Christians .
 Russia has understood its deficiency in the spread of moral and cultural values over the closest neighbor and another biggest Eastern Slavic country, Ukraine .
 Before, Russia's decisiveness to protect Russians abroad was based only on the factor of language . Before, it was based on language .
 Threat to Russophones in the near abroad provoked invasion into Georgia and Ukraine . But the threat toRussophones was not a threat to Russia.
Ukrainian Church is not the first religious institution that has achieved independence from Moscow . The Ukrainian Church has been in charge of the Ukrainian Church for decades .
 In 1996, Estonian Autonomous Orthodox Church was established upon the decision of Constantinople as the exiled Orthodox clergy had come back to the country . The church was established in 1996 .
 The patriarchs managed to settle down the conflict through the lease agreement over the properties . But the patriarchs were not happy with the lease deal .
 Unlike in case of Estonia, in Ukraine, Orthodoxy is dominating religion and its independence is much more significant . In Estonia, the Orthodoxy has been in control of religion for years .
 Tomos emphasized and increased the level of Russia’s isolation, political, economic, and now spiritual. Tomos said Russia is now spiritual . Tomos: Russia's isolation and political, political and economic and spiritual.
 Eurasian civilization theorized and designed by Dugin and constructed through the EurAsEc and Customs Union as well as Russkiy Mir . Western liberalism and unilateralism is now falling apart .
 After the annexation of Crimea, Russia is losing Ukraine not only politically and economically, but politically .
 In 2017, Ukraine passed a law that banned teaching in languages other than Ukrainian beyond the primary school level .
Ukrainian nationalistic euphoria can be traced in mass culture and everyday life . The Ukrainian nationalist euphoria is a form of nationalism .
 The Constantinople Patriarchate is a religious institution with the support of the Patriarchate . It is a step that followed rally-round-the-flag. Establishing its own religious institution.
 Belarus is willing to use this historical chance in order to get more through the bargains . On the other hand, Belarus wants to use the historical chance to use it to gain more money .
 Annexation of Belarus, would create a serious threat to the Northern border of Ukraine .
 Russia prefers to reinforce the former with the tanks. This exceeds the framework of the soft power proving the fact that Russia prefers the former .
Under these conditions, ROC should not be treated as an institution identical to the Russian government . Under these conditions. Under these Conditions, R OC should not have been treated as a Russian government.
 ROC is used by government wisely and deliberately, but they both have their own interests . As it was shown in the previous parts of this article, ROC was used by the government wisely .
 Moscow Patriarchate loses the believers from Ukraine, but also breaks the relations with Constantinople that increases isolation of Russia .
 ROC MP has already been losing its adherents because of the war in Eastern Ukraine . ROCMP has already lost its adherents due to the conflict in Ukraine .
 Moscow Patriarchate, very popular during the Presidency of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych, loses supporters .
 New Church is very much pro-European that will become a basis for a new identity of the Ukrainians . New Church will become the basis for the new identity.
 ROC is no longer attractive for Ukrainians since it supports the ‘aggressor state’ and gives motivation to its army fighting in Donbass and Syria .
 ROC itself, and first of all its affiliate in Ukraine, is a victim of the aggressive Russian policies . ROC is the first of the Russian state-run ROC in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian parliament voted for the law that obliges the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate to change its name . The law requires the Orthodox Church to become a self-governing part of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 The location of the religious center on the territory of the 'aggressor state' would be clearly represented in the title .
 UOC MP says they consider their Church to be independent from Moscow but connected spiritually . Such decision provoked negative response of the MP from the UOC .
 The protests of the believers proved the reluctance of the Russian Church to deal with the consequences of the Kremlin’s policies in Ukraine .
 Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine law on religious communities . Russia is losing its soft power tool in Ukraine to religious communities.
 A number of monasteries and churches which were either leased to UOC MP or belonged to it are to be transferred to Constantinople .
 The transfer was a condition of the agreement between Poroshenko and Bartholomew . Such transfer was the condition of a deal between the two sides .
 One of them is the monastery in Mezhigor’ye, the residence of former president Yanukovych .
Official list of buildings has not been published though and bears the declarative character . The official list of the buildings is not published though .
New President Zelensky may not be as radical as his predecessor on the issue of property . New President Zelenky is not as radical on property issues .
 Russia did not leave the decision of the Constantinople Patriarch without response to the decision .
 Russia broke up relations with Patriarch of Constantinople . Russian believers can no longer pray at Mount Athos .
 The incident occurred when the crews of the Ukrainian boats were arrested and accused of violating Russia's territorial waters .
 Russia stopped supplies of coal, crude oil and oil products to Ukraine in April . Additionally, recently Russia stopped supply of coal and crude oil to Ukraine .
 As to the Catholic Church, Vatican preferred to stay neutral during the conflict . The Vatican prefers to remain neutral during conflict .
 The Vatican did not want to provoke a conflict with Moscow . At the same time, the relations with the Moscow Patriarchate had taken time and effort .
 Russia is trying to impose the responsibility for the schism in the Orthodox world on the ‘Nazi regime’ of Poroshenko, accuse him of manipulating the religious issues and undermining the legality of Constantinople’s decision .
 Zelensky most probably will not be a suitable figure for such manipulations and totally new image of Ukraine would be worked out by Kremlin .
 Russia loses soft power over Ukraine since its institutions and values are no longer attractive . To sum up, Russia loses its soft power in Ukraine since it's not attractive .
 Church, instead of dealing with spiritual and moral values, has sunk deeply in politics and conflicts . Church has been criticized for its lack of spiritual values, rather than spiritual values .
 Soft power here is rather a zero-sum that contradicts to Nye’s definition of it, says Nye . Nye: Soft power is not soft power .
For Kremlin, only one ideology can exist in Ukraine, so it should be Kremlin’s ideology . For Kremlin, just one ideology is possible .
 The analysis of the Church proves that it bears state-led character and has a propaganda goal, rather than desire to attract people . The analysis shows that the Church is not interested in attracting people .
 The clergy abstains from direct involvement into the conflicts, like one can see in the case of Crimea . Churchmen and media narratives of Kremlin show that Church is a tool of the government .
 Moscow has been using religion for the sake of political decisions for centuries . Moscow, for centuries, has used religion to make political decisions .
 The activation of the role of ROC can be seen during Medvedev's presidency due to the change of the Patriarch and necessity to establish a dialogue with the people .
 The standoff of ROC is populist, since it acts in different spheres, including political and economic, but lacks professional cadres and educated laity . ROC's stance is populist.
 ROC is dealing not only with spiritual matters, but education, culture, politics . As to the foreign policy, ROC also deals with culture, culture and politics .
 Church exceeds the borders of the former USSR, especially following the imposition of sanctions against Russia . Church exceeds borders of former USSR .
 ROC cannot be treated as a regional soft power, despite the discussion of Wilson about its regional character . ROC has been described as a "regional soft power"
 Russia faced the need to move beyond the Soviet Union’s practices of the sport or youth events . Russia faced a need to appeal to traditional conservative values of family, social responsibility, respect for authority .
 Discourse of the Church contains mystical and utopian component, as Suslov notes . Messianism pragmatically used by Kremlin as a smokescreen .
 Annexation of Crimea by Russia and the war in Eastern Ukraine facilitated nationalistic mobilization in Ukraine . The election of an anti-Russian candidate Poroshenko in 2014 resulted in the election of a anti-Russia candidate .
 Poroshenko was the one who promoted establishment of the independent Church although for his political interests . He was one of the ones who promoted creation of independent Church .
 The article also proved that tomos seriously undermined the stability of the Russian World, erected by means of the educational and cultural institutions and deteriorated the position of ROC in Ukraine .
 The Growing Influence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Shaping Russia's Policies Abroad . The growing influence of the Orthodox Church is seen in the country's policies.
Problemy I Perspektivy Razvitija Religioznogo Turizma V Regionah Juga Zapadnoj Sibiri . Problemy is a former member of the National Football Association .
 Russian Orthodox Christians and their orientation toward the Church and state . The Orthodox Christians are more conservative than traditional Christians .
 Structural problems and contradictory relations with the Government, 2000-2008 .
 Beijing and Moscow are trying their hands at attraction, and failing. Beijing and Russia are failing to attract visitors .
 Zakon ob ugolovnoj otvetstvennosti za  za oskorblenie religioznyh chuvstv verujushhih . Zakon is a religious group that has its roots in Russia .
 Svjashhennyj Sinod Russkoj Pravoslavnoj Cerkvi priznal nevozmozhnym dal'nejshee prebyvanie v evharisticheskom obshhenii s Konstantinopol's
 Svjatejshij Patriarh Kirill provel tradicionnuju vstrechu so slushateljami Vysshih diplomaticheskih kursov. Svjateshih diplomats.
 Prinesenie glavnoj ikony Vooruzhennyh sil Rossijskoj Federacii v voinskie chasti i soedinenija voennyh okrugov nachalos' s Juzhnogo voennogo okrug
 The Geopolitical Imagination in the Contemporary Russian Orthodox Church is published in Russia's Orthodox Church . It is the latest in a series of works by the Orthodox Church.