 The undersigned certify that this thesis meets the masters-level standard of research, argumentation, and expression .
 He is a space officer with assignments as a passive and active space control weapon-system flight commander, crew-commander, instructor, evaluator, and tactician . He is also a tactician.
 Major Hoagland deployed in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in 2007 as a Deputy Commander of an Embedded Training Team in Gardez, Afghanistan and 2012 as a Strategy Planning Team Deputy Chief in the Strategy Division at the 609th Air Operations Center.
 This year has been one of the most challenging and rewarding experiences of my career . He is married with children and is from Georgia .
 I am humbled to call them friends and colleagues. I am very appreciative of the School of Advanced Air and Space Studies XXVII classmates . I am also very grateful for the school's students and colleagues .
 Department of Defense faculty and staff are "incredibly grateful" for their work, says Pentagon chief . "I am incredibly grateful for the faculty," he says . "It is awe inspiring," he adds .
 Melia Pfannenstiel deserves special recognition for her vital contributions to this thesis . I am forever indebted to her, says author of the book .
 Dr. John Sutter is one of the foremost experts in Eastern European geopolitical affairs . He says he would be remiss if he did not thank his thesis reader for his work .
 I am deeply indebted to the many leaders and mentors who guided my development over the years . I am also deeply owed to many leaders, mentors who helped my development .
 Major General Nina Armagno, Major General Stephen Whiting, and General John Raymond are all responsible for providing me with the guidance necessary to succeed in my career and life. Major Jason Waldman, Lt Col Joseph Tobin and Lt Col Joel Bierberle are responsible for giving
 I would like to thank my family for whom I am forever indebted to for their unwavering love and support . I would also like to thanks my family. I am always indebted to them for their support .
 To my amazing children, who bring more joy to my life than I ever envisioned was possible, I love you. To my daughter, I am proud of you, my children .
Most importantly, to my wife, I dedicate my studies and this thesis to her . Most importantly, he dedicate his studies to his wife .
 The study seeks to build a more complete perspective on the reasons for Russian aggression in its geopolitical region .
 Russia’s cultural propensities, the worsening relations with the West, and the rise of Russian nationalism, are all blamed for Russia's rise .
 Russian Mind as messianism, universalism, and the juxtaposition of Western and Russian values . They emphasize the tradition of suffering in the hands of Western powers .
 Russia’s cultural propensities are that of a superpower, an independent player, a leader – not a follower . Russia's culture is that of the superpower.
 Russia lost its superpower status after the Cold War . The attempts to convert Russia to liberal hegemony resulted in a backlash of the resurgent nationalism .
 Russia's failure to enforce its status on the world stage after the collapse of the Soviet Union is the result of a nationalistic narrative . The ensuing tacit approval of authoritarianism under the conditions of a perceived war, domestic opposition vilification as the enemy .
 The offshore balancing strategy is the most appropriate U.S. response, says Churchill . The Cold War is back – with a vengeance but with a difference, he says .
 The mechanisms and safeguards to manage the risks of escalation that existed in the past, no longer seem to be present . Few countries consider themselves fortunate to be Russia's neighbors .
 Russia's leaders have historically endeavored to expand territory and enlarge its regional sphere of influence . Not unlike other European countries, Russia has historically endeavoured to expand its region .
 Russia’s rampant expansionism was made especially repugnant by its authoritarian and repressive domestic regime. Nevertheless, Russia's rampant expansionists were made especially Repugnant.
 By the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917, Russia had subjugated a number of its neighbors . Russia became Soviet Republics, nominally sovereign but de facto ruled from Moscow .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics continued its quest for enlargement while on the march to Berlin at the end of the Second World War .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, many of its former citizens became independent . Some of them became independent for the first time in generations .
 Russia seems to be returning to its imperial territorial ambitions . However, unlike other European countries of the twenty-first century, it seems to have returned to imperial ambitions .
 Russia invaded the Russian North Caucuses, Russia invaded, 1.2 million people have been killed in the past year .
 Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania are among the countries in the Middle East . Albania, Poland and Albania are also in the region .
 2 occupied, or annexed parts of its neighboring states of Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Armenia, and Azerbaijan, are heavily influenced, nominally independent while de-facto subjugated to Russia’s interests .
 Russia’s cultural propensity toward universalism and messianism . On the defensive side: worsening relations with the West, especially 3.3.2 .
 Even though these variables are distinct enough to be differentiated, they do not occur in isolation, they are not in isolation .
 The United States neglected to understand the importance of those very cultural distinctions while attempting to implement various reforms in post-Soviet Russia .
 Putin has been able to rally popular support by appealing to Russian cultural propensities . He is continuously channeling them into the nationalistic narrative .
 Russian philosophers Nicolai Berdyaev, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn write the thesis . They say cultural propensity toward universalism and messianism unfolds through the eyes of Russian philosophers .
 Russia’s inclination to assume a messianic role in the lives of other nations. Their literary works explain the cultural component behind recurring EastWest confrontations .
 The messianic conception exalts Russia as a country that “would help to solve the problems of humanity and would accept a place in the service of 4.4.
 It consists of 28 member states and serves as a collective security organization for its members . It is based in the U.S. and has a total of 8,000 members .
 The NATO summit is scheduled to take place on March 7 .
 Since the turn of the century, Russian administrations routinely used many of the cultural features above, like foreignness of Western values and Russian universalism, to justify aggressive rhetoric, policies and actions .
 Worsening relations with the West at various points since the collapse of the Soviet Union make it possible for Moscow to blame the US and its allies whenever Russia meets any opposition .
 The US’ failure to devise a coherent strategy towards the East after the collapse of the Soviet Union exacerbates Russia’s cultural and nationalistic propensities .
 A brief improvement in US-Russian relations during the Yeltsin presidency is now seen as the time of humiliation and betrayal of Russia's national interests .
 Russia’s Soft Power and Geopolitical Imagination,” PONARS Eurasia, 27 May 2015, .
 The “near abroad’ is the term Russia uses to refer to former Soviet republics . The term is used in Russia as a reference to former republics.
 The U.S. was not able to foresee how its interference would be interpreted as an intrusion and even a security breach in the future .
 The lack of an informed U.S. strategy for Russia would eventually lead to backlash and the rise of anti-Western sentiments .
 Putin’s Kremlin harnessed these sentiments in their effort to build nationalist feeling at home, especially during the recession and deflated oil prices of 2008 . The Kremlin used these sentiments to build a nationalist feel at home .
 NATO encroachment in Russia’s Near Abroad did little to alleviate the rising anti-Western attitudes . The Russian government has legitimate security concerns for the Russian government .
 These concerns legitimized many Russian acts of aggression, active or latent, in the eyes of Russian citizens .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin used the above cultural propensities to ease the rise of Russian nationalism through government-sponsored propaganda . During the 2004-2008 period of increasing oil prices, Russian President Putin used to ease Russian nationalism .
Nationalism would keep Putin in power and justify Russia’s quest for former territorial possessions . Nationalism would help Putin keep Russia in power .
 Putin brought about a sense of order and stability after the “wild nineties,’s Putin. Gaining power after the "wild ninies,” Putin brought on asense of order.
 The ensuing nationalization of key industries, along with steady cash flow from oil and gas, helped transition from the extremes of wild capitalism to more evenly distributed relative prosperity .
 Putin created a powerful propaganda machine to cultivate Russian cultural propensities to messianism . By nationalizing the leading media outlets, he encouraged the rise of nationalism, he said .
 A rising nationalism promoted Putin’s continued rule as a strong leader destined to restore Russia to its former glory . In its turn, a rising nationalist promoted Putin's continued rule .
 Putin enjoys a continuing political dominance in the tight inner circle of loyalists . By bolstering nationalism and concentrating power, Putin enjoys its benefits .
 The case studies of Ukraine and Belarus illustrate the above concepts and varying forms of aggression Russia uses against its neighbors .
 The Ukraine and Belarus examples were chosen due to these countries’ special significance to Russia . The Ukraine, Belarus and Ukraine are examples of Russia's special significance .
 Culturally, they are the closest to Russia out of all former Soviet republics . They are the most populous country in the world .
 Armenia and Georgia were considered because they are culturally closer than other Soviet republics and have a predominately Christian Orthodox population . Georgia and Armenia were considered as culturally closer to other Soviet Republics .
At the beginning of the Soviet era, these nations still lacked the tools of statehood to make Sovietization possible . However, they were not selected because at the start of theSoviet era, they weren't selected because of the lack of state-hood .
 Both Georgians and Armenians were under regional influences such as Ottoman Empire, Dynasties of Iran or Russian Empire . They were without a formal state at the time of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet authorities delayed the project of Russification in Georgia and Armenia . The project was delayed by Soviet authorities .
 Most of Moscow's citizens remained hostile towards Moscow, which led to over 10 percent of their entire adult population being executed, deported, or sent to labor camps . Most of their citizens remain hostile to Moscow .
 ethnic Russians who moved to Latvia and Estonia after 1940 were not automatically granted citizenship . After the collapse of the Soviet Union, ethnic Russians moved to Estonia and Latvia after 1940 .
 Lithuania granted citizenship to Russian residents since they formed a much smaller minority . Lithuania did not grant citizenship to the Russian residents . Lithuania is politically powerless .
 Muslim-majority counties like Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan have less cultural or strategic significance to Russia . Uzbekistan, Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan are among the countries with less cultural significance .
 Belarus and Ukraine, on the other hand, came from the same Kievan Rus’ cradle of civilization as Russia .
 Kievan Rus’ was the first East Slavic state . He represented the earliest beginnings of the Russian Empire and served as the ancestor of Belarus and Ukraine .
 Modernization requires the development of bureaucracy in the civilian, military, and economic spheres, and bureaucracy functions best in common language .
 Asya Pereltsvaig: "Stalin’s Ethnic Deportations -- and the Gerrymandered Ethnic Map,” Languages of the World, 8 October 2014 .
 Kievan Rus' remained until the thirteenth century when the Mongols invaded the land and brought an end to the empire . The Mongols' invasion of the land in the 13th century ended the empire.
 8 populations share the Orthodox religion. See "Kievan Rus,’ Historical State" for more information .
 Belarus and Ukraine drifted away from Russia and formed their own identities . Russia annexed Belarus by the end of the eighteenth century, long before the formation of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet leaders continued the Russification policies of Imperial Russia in its Western borderlands . Soviet leaders continue theRussification policies in the West .
 The Soviet Union's efforts to build nations within the Soviet Union were some of its most Russifying policies . In some cases, it solidified or even forged national identification .
 Russia's desire to assimilate lands on its Western border is not the purpose of this thesis, it seems . It seems likely the common origin, cultural closeness, which forms a unity of Eastern Slavs, played a role in Russia’s desire toimilationate lands .
 It transpires that the countries that faced the most intense Russification efforts tended to have highly developed national and ethnic identities . In addition, it transpires.
 majority of Belarusian and Ukrainian population would adopt Russian as their first language . As a result of Russification policies, as Moscow sees it, it is reRussification of the russkie who had been Polish-Lithuanian .
Russkie is the classic adjective used to describe all messianic ideological trends developed in Russia . Today the flagship of conservative values and the 9 Soviet era, these countries' linguistic malleability would attract many ethnic Russians .
 Belarus is comprised of approximately 10 percent of ethnic Russians . Ukraine is between 8 and 18 percent, while Belarus is between 10 and 10 percent .
 Putin has reintroduce the notion of the Russian World. Such a high number of Russians abroad allows Putin to reintroduce Russian World .
 Ethnic Russians, along with a Russified local population, constitute a solid foundation for Moscow’s strategy of territorial control in the Belt of Contention .
 Luhansk, Donetsk, and Crimea were excluded from the survey for security reasons . This number could be as high as 18 percent given Luhans, Donetsk and Crimea .
 The author derived term Belt of Contention is used to describe former Soviet states on Russia’s Western border – Ukraine, Belarus, and Baltics .
 Russia has remained continually at war to prevent the erosion of its borders and the loss of a sizable percentage of its natural resources . I Tyutchev, 1866 The Role of Culture, is the role of Culture .
 Most of these conflicts take place around Russia’s southern border, such as Chechnya and Dagestan . conflicts with Georgia over the territories of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 The current war in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea seems to resemble the pattern. Even though these conflicts cannot be broadly generalized, these conflicts seem to resemble that pattern .
 Belarus is not formally at war with Russia. Other countries, like Belarus, must align their policies with Moscow's interests .
 Territorial integrity of the Russian World is a geopolitical concept that formalizes Russia’s influence in the post-Soviet space .
 Some aspects of the Russian culture, such as EastWest confrontation, remain the principal motivation behind this behavior . The tradition of suffering (especially in the hands of the Western powers), messianism, and universalism, remain a principal motivation .
 The Unwinding of the Post-Cold War Order, 97; Aschot Manutscharjan, “Abkhazia and South Ossetia: Russia’s Intervention in Georgia,” Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, August 2008
 Tyutchev suggested, the Russian Idea resembles what sociologists and political scientists call nationalism .
Like faith, it is based on strong spiritual apprehension rather than intellectual understanding . Like faith, faith is based upon strong spiritual apprehensions rather than Intellectual understanding .
 Russian history is deeply rooted in Russian history . The faith found its incarnation as a multifaceted philosophical concept .
 Dostoyevsky, Berdyaev, and Solzhenitsyn are Russian philosophers and authors . To gain an insight into the variety of ideas and principles, one must turn to them .
 The most fundamental traits of the Russian mind are profound contradictions that exist due to a volatile clash between East and West . According to these philosophers, these contradictions are due to the clash between the East and the West .
 The above principles and ideas continue to profoundly affect, if not define, contemporary Russian policy and behavior . The above principle and ideas are profoundly affected.
 Russia's history of volatile clashes with Western values and its tradition of suffering exerts a great influence . Russia’s history of violent clashes with the West exerts great influence.
 Berdyaev is best known for emphasizing the spiritual significance of freedom and the individual . His literary works explore the troubled political, social, and spiritual times in Russia .
 He bridged the gap between religious thought in Russia and the West . He is a leading proponent of the Orthodox Church .
 Berdyaev departed from Marxism beliefs and was expelled from Russia for taking part in a conspiracy against the government . He never returned to Russia .
 He was an outspoken critic of the Soviet Union and communism . He was arrested and exiled for disparaging comments against Russia’s conduct during the Second World War .
 Solzhenitsyn continued to write after his exile . One of his most famous works was on the Gulag (forced labor camp system), which raised global awareness of the wrongdoings .
 Russia's universalism is responsible for Russia’s attempts to influence and even annex neighboring territories . Its universalism manifests itself in the propensity to empire building .
 Russia's messianic aspirations call for Russia to become Europe’s new hegemon . Russia's ambitions call for Europe to be Europe's new Hegemon.
 At the beginning of the 20th century, many were as surprised by the rapidly deteriorating Russia-West relationship as they were by the collapse of the Soviet Union .
After Moscow's abandonment of the communist ideology, there seemed to be no further obstacle to Russian-European integration . After Moscow's Abandoned Communist ideology, Moscow seems to have no further obstacles to integration .
 philosophers like Berdyaev note the East-West differences run deeper than communism . However, they also note that East- West differences run longer than Communism .
 Berdyaev often describes the Russian Idea through the juxtaposition of Russian and Western mentalities . In his book The Russian Idea, Berdyev describes the Russians as the Russians .
 He points out that even though Russians have deep ties to Europe, they are different and even antipodal to the peoples of the West .
 Berdyaev insists that Russians remain people of elemental forces, revelation, and inspiration with no affinity for the Western way of life . He insists that Russian people are people who have no affinity with Western way.
 He repeatedly stated that Russia was neither an aristocratic country in the Western sense nor did a Russian bourgeoisie exist . He also said Russia was not an aristocrat in the West or a Russian bourgeois in the United States .
 The Macmillan Company, 1948, 2. 13 humility and arrogance: slavery and revolt . The MacMillan Company: 2.13 humility, arrogance and arrogance .
 Russians have a different ethical idea, a sense of family and community, and even a different essence of Christian faith than Westerners .
 The Western culture of Russia was superficial borrowing and imitation, and especially active Western sympathizers like Peter the Great were at risk to be called an antichrist .
 East-West differences grew immeasurably deeper after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 . The Bolshevik Revolution was the most significant change in the West's history .
 The bourgeoisie of the West became the class enemy, followed by two World Wars, the creation of NATO, and the Cold War . The class enemy was the West's class enemy .
 The divide between the East and West grew ever deeper as the twentieth century progressed . Many concluded communism was to blame for the growing divide .
 He explains communism is a symptom of the Russian Idea, not the source of the East-West confrontation . However, he says communism is not a source of East- West confrontation .
 Russian communism is a distortion of the Russian messianic idea; it proclaims light from the East which is destined to enlighten the bourgeois darkness of the West .
 Communism is the Russian destiny; it is a moment in the inner destiny of the Russian people . It must be lived through by the inward strength of the Russia people, says author .
 Russia survived its communist era, but its relations with the West remained dubious . Russia's relations with West remain dubious. Russia's relationship with West remains dubious .
 Lenin, Wilson and Wilson, and the Birth of the New World Disorder, 1-9; Michael Jabara Carley, Silent Conflict, 6-10 .
 Russia ran into a confrontation with the West over military actions in Georgia during the Rose Revolution in 2008 . Subsequently, adverse sentiments deepened during the 2014 conflict in Ukraine .
 Russia did not anticipate its neighbors turning to the West on their own free will and accord . On the cultural level, in both confrontations, Russia didn't anticipate the West turning to its neighbors .
 Moscow sees Western conspiracy as a mission to prevent the West from taking advantage of weaker Eastern European countries .
 Russia asserts authority by increasing military activities along NATO's borders . Russia routinely sends Tu-95MS ‘Bear’ bombers into U.S. allies’ airspace in the Western Pacific .
 Another element of the Russian Idea – ascent through suffering – is at the root of Russia’s embrace of U.S. and EU-imposed economic 11.
 Finian Cunningham, “Western amnesia on WWII as NATO replicates Nazi Germany’s Nazi Germany,’ he says .
 Admiral Samuel J Locklear testified before the Armed Services Committee, 114th Cong.
 In Dostoyevsky's view, man is not a reasonable being who strives after happiness, but an irrational creature who stands in need of suffering, and suffering is the only cause of the awakening of thought .
 Solzhenitsyn draws inspiration from his time in the labor camp system which resulted in his many philosophical and literary pieces . Solzhenityn, likewise, drew inspiration from the time in labor camp systems .
 The sanctions caused the collapse of the ruble and the fiscal crisis that began in 2014 and continues to this day . The sanctions were caused by the sanctions.
 Western governments sought to create pressure on Russia directly and indirectly through the population backlash against Russian government involvement in Ukraine . By imposing sanctions, Western governments seek to create Pressure on Russia indirectly .
 Putin's approval ratings soared to 89 percent in June 2015 regardless of the economic recession . However, President Putin’s approval ratings remained high despite the recession .
 Putin’s approval ratings are misleading due to wide-spread voter fraud, and those surveyed were too scared to speak truthfully .
 70 percent of Russians embrace their suffering through high inflation and economic recession . Only 20 percent say they would rather make concessions to avoid sanctions .
 Russian Prime Minister on U.S. Sanctions. Russian PM on United States.
 The Russian tradition of universalism contributes to an understanding of Russian aggression abroad . In addition to the propensity of suffering at the hands of Western powers, the Russian tradition contributes to a greater understanding of aggression abroad.
 Dostoyevsky was the leading proponent of universalism in Russia . In nineteenth century Russia, he was the leader of universalists .
 He despised bourgeois individualism and dreamt of an ‘authentic fraternal community’ inspired by Orthodoxy and Russian folk tradition . He despised the bourgeois individualist and dreamed of a ‘fraternal community'
 According to Putin, this unity of nations is in Russians' very blood and genes .
 Ukraine decided to join the EU, which is universally considered a path towards NATO . Russia rejected to see this treacherous decision as legitimate .
 Crimea's high percentage of Russians belonged to the geopolitical equivalent of Dostoyevsky’s fraternal community . Putin called the Russian World and thus had to be reunited with Russian Federation .
 Crimea is also a strategically important region that was once a part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until Khrushchev transferred it to Ukraine in 1954 . The elements of Russian universalism, the tradition of suffering and mistrust of the West, are closely connected to the
Russian messianism began with an eschatological interpretation of Christianity as the Kingdom of God or Kingdom of Right . Berdyaev is described as a Russian messianist .
 communism reinterpreted the messianic idea in non-religious and antireligious form as the ideal of social right . In its turn, communism re-interpreted it as the perfect social right.
 Dostoyevsky believed the Russian people have a unique calling to solve the social 23.
 Dostoyevsky's fraternal community theme and Laruelle’s description of the Russian World . The Russian World is a Russian World.
 Solzhenitsyn also observed the propensity of Russian people to answer the call of all men . She suggested directing Russia's energy towards self-limitation and introspection instead .
 Solzhenitsyn’s 1974 essay “Repentance and SelfLimitation in the Life of Nations,’ in which he discussed the expansionist politics of the Soviet Union .
 The reason for such modern-day relevance is the evolution of Russian messianism from one political regime to another . The reason is not abolition, but evolution, not abolition.
 Many of Solzhenitsyn’s passages describe the parochial ‘outwardness’ of the Russian World . Many of the passages describe a parochian “outward’ness of the Russians .
 Putin's essay encapsulates the reasoning behind Putin’s actions in the Ukrainian conflict . He calls attention to the very nature of Russia's appetite for messianic expansion .
 Putin embraces the messianic idea. Observing Russia’s current policy and behavior, it is clear Putin embraces it .
 Crimea may be only the beginning of the re-ignition of Russian messianism . Crimea may have been only the start of Russia's messianist movement .
 Moscow sees it as its sacred duty, and a matter of national security, to assemble under former Soviet republics .
 Many of the former Soviet republics were part of the Russian Empire before the rise of the Soviet Union . Many among their populations still speak Russian .
 The main elements of the Russian Idea – its tradition of suffering, its universalism, and messianism – are discussed in the works of Berdyaev, Dostoevsky, and Solzhenitsyn .
 Originally, Solzhenitsyn criticized Soviet communist expansion and aggression . Now, he criticizes Soviet Communist expansion .
 He prioritizes Russia's interdevelopment over territorial expansion . Even though his pronouncements on Ukraine do not defend Ukrainian territorial integrity, he does not defend Ukraine .
 Menon and Rumor, Conflict in Ukraine, 95. 20 confrontational behavior towards its neighbors and NATO alike even in the face of economic sanctions .
 Washington, with its prodding other NATO governments, succumbed to victory and kept kicking Russia while it was down . Washington, and with its Prodding other countries, succumbed.
 The tremendous, if gradual, worsening of USRussian relations prompted many academics and policy experts to question whether relations are moving toward another Cold War . The tremendous worsening of U.S. relations has prompted many to ask whether it is moving toward a Cold War.
 For a Cold War to reignite, the competing powers should be equal in strength and fear each other .
 Robert Legvold, an expert on Soviet and Russian foreign policy, asserts that the recent deterioration of Russia-US relations deserves to be understood as a return to Cold War with great and lasting consequences . He says Russia-U.S. relations deserve to be seen as a returning to
 In his book, Return to Cold War, he sees as the commonalities between the original cold war and the current 37 . He sees as a commonality between the old and current cold war .
International relations theory provides a way to understand the divergent worldviews that often drive foreign policymaking . In discussing the role of the West in the current tensions, the author says .
 The U.S. views the international system as being closer to John Ikenberry’s Liberal Leviathan . Russia, on the other hand, struggles to resign its desire or self-perception and voluntarily take its place under United States.
 Russian President on NATO Expansion Twitter Account, 1 March 2018 . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in charge of NATO expansion .
 Moscow found itself in a world where the United States operates from a position of power, neglecting Russia’s interests, isolating, and encircling it through NATO enlargement, and threatening its survival .
 Russia’s dissatisfaction with its position in the US-led hierarchy was a key factor in the revival of its revisionist, hegemonic ambitions and distrust of U.S-led international security institutions .
 There is a tendency to view otherwise defensive preparations by an enemy as inherently offensive or detrimental to security . Analogies can be drawn to that of a classic “Security Dilemma’s”
 Russia began voicing its objections to U.S. policies shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 From its liberal pedestal, the US exhibited a selective vision when it came to Russia . The U.S. also exhibited selective vision in Russia .
Splits in a potential cooperative relationship were already clear by the mid-1990s . Splits in the 1990s were still clear.
 NATO Secretary-General Lord Ismay said the purpose of creating NATO was to keep the Americans in and Russians out .
 The Liberal Delusions That Provoked Putin, 2014, is the Foreign Affairs Journal, 2014 .
 The U.S. expected Russia to step into the ranks of subordinate states in the hierarchy topped by the American hegemonic power . Russian leadership expected to have some say in world affairs .
 According to Putin, Moscow gave Washington unprecedented access to its nuclear facilities in the 1990s .
 The US used the information they gained in forming its opinion, albeit correctly in the post-Soviet context, that Russia was a second-class power . Without granting the same openness to Russian counterparts, the US used it to form its opinion .
 Russia felt the U.S. ignored Moscow’s interests during the Kosovo conflict . These feelings were compounded when Russia felt that the United States ultimately ignored Moscow's interests .
 The Russian sector failed to materialize, and Russian influence was lessened . Regardless of Russian troops entering Pristina, a Russian sector didn't materialize .
 US-Russian relations were essentially frozen after the 1999 NATO bombing campaign until 2001 . US- Russian relations were virtually frozen after NATO bombing campaigns .
 The “Founding Act on Mutual Relations’ was an agreement with Russian on arrangements to deepen and widen the scope of NATO-Russian relations .
 Vladimir Brovkin was a member of NATO in Russia during the Kosovo War . He is a former member of the United States, and served in Russia for more than 20 years .
 The Bush-era policy represented a continuation of the Clinton administration's approach, but with Russia no longer as bogged down by inner post-Soviet dysfunctions .
 NATO expansion continued with open support for Ukrainian and Georgian membership . Plans for the deployment of missile defense facilities in Eastern Europe were finalized .
 Moscow interpreted both as an attempt to gain some sort of a first-strike advantage . Moscow interpreted the move as a bid to gain an advantage .
 The merits of these initiatives aside, Russia's annoyance and desire to sabotage these projects was very predictable . Russia's attempts to sabotage the projects were very predictable, says the author .
 relations with Russia got worse throughout Bush's two terms, culminating in 2008 with the war in Georgia . As a result, relations between Russia and the United States got worse .
After September 2001, USRussia relations became mainly focused on counter-terrorism and the war in Afghanistan .
 Bush’s strategy of ‘American Internationalism’ called for the strengthening alliances to defeat global terrorism and to work to prevent attacks against the United States and allies .
 The Afghan nation was very familiar with the Afghan region . It had significant influence in former Soviet Central Asian republics .
 Russian influence in the Asian region through participation was a vital interest . Also, maintaining Russian influence was a key interest in the region .
 Russian side expected more in return than the US was willing to deliver . However, the Russian side clearly expected more from the US .
 NATO did not honor Russia with any preferential treatment consistent with its status in the international arena, telling Putin to get in line . Putin asked halfjokingly when Russia was going to receive an invitation to join NATO .
 Bush's administration's approach made Russia's cooperation on several crucial issues unlikely . Even if Bush managed to avoid any violent crises with Moscow and seemingly made some meaningful progress, his approach seemed unlikely .
 Signs of progress between the two countries included a ‘Joint Declaration for Peace’ which promoted better relations on 52.5%.
 President George W Bush's National Security Strategy of the United States of America . President Bush's strategy is based on the U.S. Security Strategy .
 Putin Takes Control, National Geographic Channel. 26 denuclearization, economy, trade, science, technology and environmental protection .
 Russia's human right’s abuses in Chechnya, nuclear assistance to Iran, opposition to the Iraq invasion in 2003, and Moscow's renewed relations with North Korea .
 The West stopped emphasizing “shared values’ and began trying to rectify the situation by providing support to pro-Western political figures .
 Georgia and Ukraine were considered for prospective NATO and EU memberships . Russia’s security concerns escalated in 2008 when Georgia andUkraine were considered.
 Russia was determined to answer what it saw as a direct threat to its security . Emboldened by its rising economy and the revival of its defense sector, Russia is determined to respond to the threat .
 Russia’s invasion of Georgia in August 2008 sent a clear message about where Moscow drew the line with NATO expansion .
 The Obama Administration realized the growing dissent and worrisome state of US-Russia relations and asserted 58 .
 Tensions between Russia and NATO rose to new heights after the 2008 Bucharest Summit . Georgia could become a NATO member, provided it meets all necessary requirements .
 The U.S. and Russia cooperated in a number of areas, and substantive gains were achieved through the work of the USRussia Bilateral Presidential Commision that met regularly .
 The most important cooperative efforts were made in strategic arms control . Russia’s accession to the World Trade Organization, sanctions on Iran and the Iran nuclear agreement (the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action)
 Russia did not veto a U.N. Security Council resolution on Libya, but was widely considered more influential than Medvedev . Putin, now serving as PM, forcefully criticized the 2011 intervention .
 US-Russian relations further worsened with Russia’s disputed December 2011 parliamentary elections and Putin's March 2012 return to the presidency .
 Hillary Clinton expressed ‘serious concern’ and 64 days after Russia's parliamentary election . The US Secretary of State said she was concerned about the election .
 Background and United States Interests, Congressional Research Service Report, 2017. Background and U.S. Interests: 2017 .
 The U.S. intervention in Libya was a key turning point for Putin in his attitude toward the US, says Eliza Relman .
 This imposed sanctions on individuals involved in the detention, abuse, and/or death of a Russian lawyer and auditor who died in prison after uncovering massive tax fraud that implicated government .
 Russian government banned U.S. adoptions of Russian children . Russian government enacted the “foreign agent’s law, requested the closure of U. States foreign assistance programs .
 The United States suspended cooperation on trade, investment, and military-to-military engagement . The U.S. suspended cooperation.
 Putin signed a law requiring foreign-funded organizations to register and identify as foreign agents in December 2012 .
 The U.S. House of Representatives also removed from the G8 and became a subject of international sanctions for its actions . Russia also was removed from G8.
 Obama imposed additional sanctions for election-related malicious cyber activity in December 2016 . In December 2016, Obama imposed more sanctions for cyber activity .
 Russian Prime Minister on Worsening US-Russian Relations. Russian PM on Twitter account .
 Obama continued to aim at making the entire Eurasian continent look like western Europe . The U.S. sought to promote democracy, increase economic interdependence among the countries of the region .
 Moscow still had deep fears that NATO would move forward with its plans to bring Georgia and Ukraine into the alliance . Due to U.S. intervention.
 President Barack H Obama is president of the National Security Strategy of the United States of America . President Obama has been in charge of the strategy since 2009 .
 30 the U.S. made in Ukraine since 2013, prompted Putin to compare exporting democracy to the former Soviet doctrine of exporting the socialist revolution to the rest of the world . Mearsheimer: "Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West’s Fault.’
 The Rise of Nationalism and the Role of Vladimir Putin. I cannot forecast to you the action of Russia, says Putin .
 Russian President Putin used cultural propensities to ease the rise of Russian nationalism through government-sponsored propaganda .
 The ensuing nationalization moved away from the heavily corrupt and poorly executed market-based reforms attempted in the lead up to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Crony capitalism currently drives Russia through an oligarch patronage system, controlled by Putin . Crony capitalism is currently driven by Putin, according to reports .
 Putin began implementing changes that would guarantee his 76-year-old's 76th birthday .
 Will a New World Order Emerge from the Current Conflicts,’s Sochi, Russia, 19 October 2017 .
 Congressional Research Service, 31 March 2014, has 31 permanent place at the helm . The agency is based in Washington, DC .
 Putin created a powerful propaganda machine that cultivated Russian cultural propensities to messianism and encouraged the rise of nationalism . By nationalizing the leading media outlets, Putin created an effective propaganda machine .
 A rising nationalism promoted Putin’s continued rule as a strong leader destined to restore Russia to its former glory in both prestige and territory .
 The U.S. and allies seek to understand whether the breakdown in relations is due to irreconcilable differences in Russian society or due to the unique goals of Putin .
 Putin was the right person for the existing political climate at the time of his ascent. It seems Putin was right for the current political climate.
 Once at the helm, he focused on bolstering the same societal currents that brought him to the power in the first place . He focused on his role as president of the United States .
 The USSR left behind a controversial legacy for its citizens and foreign countries alike . Russia left behind controversial legacy.
 Through Stalin’s industrialization and Great Purges, Khrushchev's Thaw, relative prosperity accompanied by the 80th Thaw . The 80thththaw was a period of relative prosperity along with the Great Purge .
 The USSR was the only other country besides the U.S. that exerted a decisive influence over the destiny of the world . In the bipolar world, the USSR was one of the only countries besides the United States that exerted an influence .
 The USSR population was undoubtedly polarized. This international grandeur, along with internal contradictions, embodies the very cultural tradition of messianism, universalism, and suffering .
 78 percent of the Russian population voted for preservation of 82 .
 Khrushchev’s ‘Thaw’ (the 1950s to 1960s) is a period when repression and censorship were relaxed . Those sent to the Gulag's were released .
History.com: "Perestroika and Glasnost.com" "Cold-war/perestroika-and-glasnost" is the first time the two have been published together .
 The USSRs push to industrialize at any cost resulted in frequent shortages of food and consumer goods . 33 the Union across the participating republics were involved in the conflict .
 According to the Pew Research Center, 69 percent of the Russian population believes the dissolution of the USSR was a mistake . 69 percent (78 percent) of people over 35 years old and 50 percent under 35 year old believe the dissolution was a mistakes .
 The majority of responders are older individuals who have had difficulties adjusting to new circumstances . The majority are older people who may have had difficulty adjusting to the new circumstances.
 If the older population lacks objectivity, it can also be claimed that the younger population lacks experience . However, if the olderpopulation lacks objectiveness, it is also claimed that it can be claimed.
 Russian President Putin has called the breakup of the Soviet Union “the greatest geopolitical catastrophe’ of the twentieth century .
 The vast majority of former Soviet citizens in Russia consider the 1990s the most difficult time in their lives . The majority of ex-Soviet citizens consider the '90s the 'most difficult time' in their life .
 The 1990s were politically disastrous as the country seemed to lose the Cold War and its influence in the international arena . The country lost its influence on the world stage in the 1990s .
 U.S. financial assistance and economic strategies proved to be a failure. United States financial assistance was a failure .
 Russia opened itself up naively to the West, which immediately took advantage of it . The West quickly took advantage.
 Putin commented in October of 2017, “The biggest mistake our country made was that we put too much trust in you .’
 A Compendium of Reports on the March 17, 1991 Referendum on the Future of the USSR, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe Report.
 The most important is that the vast majority of Russians share Putin’s perception . The majority of Russian people share Putin's perception .
 Moscow has lost its former influence during the Balkans conflict. Humiliated or not, that Moscow's former influence was demonstrated .
 War over Kosovo crystalized attitudes over Russia better than any other event since 1991 . In particular, the war over Kosovo has crystalized the unfolding attitudes.
 The war made it painfully clear that Russia was no longer a Great Power, and the West imposed its policies across Europe and other countries despite Moscow's objections .
 Russia officially signaled it would not support Milosevic which meant Russia still mattered in the world affairs . Some may suggest the U.S. was restrained until Russia formally signaled it wouldn't support MilOSEvic .
 Russia's decision to give up Milosevic was interpreted as humiliation . It is the way NATO handled Russia’s participation in the conflict thereafter .
 NATO interpreted the Kosovo diplomatic agreements in its favor, ousting Moscow completely . Russia refused to grant Russia a military zone of its own .
 Leonid Bershidsky, “Putin spins a tale of Russian humiliation,’ he says .
 Troops seized the airport in accordance with the plan, but the mission was aborted due to Russian domestic politics .
 An abandoned Russian battalion in the airport without water, food or political support would become a symbol of Yeltsin's regime having betrayed Russian national interests .
 This cultural grandeur, coupled with actual political impotence, contributed to the rise of nationalism, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This culturalgrandeur, combined with real politicalImpotence," contributed to a rise in nationalism .
 Russian media was completely and totally one-sided in its coverage of Kosovo events . Russian media, mostly free and fair in post-Soviet Russia, was mostly free. Russia was also completely and completely one- sided in Kosovo coverage .
Common people condemned NATO bombing, and nationalistic arguments gained popularity . Common people condemned the bombing, which was condemned by many .
 Alexander Dugin portrayed Serbia as a hero nation worthy of emulation . Dugin was one of the staunchest Russian nationalist writers .
 Serbia chose to defiantly stand up for its Orthodoxy, Identity, and Integrity . Unlike Russia of the 1990s, Serbia was a country that chose to defy the West .
 For figures like Dugin, fighting the West for Serbia was Russia's destiny . Fighting the West was its way to salvation out of the slavery to which the Yeltsin administration was leading the country .
 Brovkin, Discourse on NATO in Russia during the Kosovo War. For analysis of domestic politics contributing to the Kosovo crisis see Brovkins, Discourses on NATO on NATO.
 Russia Freedom of the Press, Freedom House Report, is published by the Freedom House . For further analysis on freedom of the press in Russia with reports from 2002-2017.
 A Minority Staff Report before the Foreign Relations Committee, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., 2018 .
 Charles Clover, “The Unlikely Origins of Russia’s Manifest Destiny,” Foreign Policy, 26 July 2016 .
 Slav Orthodox brother against an injustice coming from the hostile West is in the best tradition of Dostoyevsky's universalism and Berdayev’s messianism .
 The rhetoric was considered extreme in the 1990s but is now routinely stated in Moscow . The rhetoric described here was consideredextreme in the 90s .
 Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Kosovo Intervention Twitter Account . Twitter account .
 The political climate became ripe for the emergence of the national leader who would reflect the country's nationalistic tendencies in the making .
 Vladimir Putin replaced Yeltsin on the eve of the New Year 2000, before his presidential term was finished . Putin won the subsequent election with an overwhelming majority of votes .
 The Czar Nicholas II took Russia to war in 1914 in part for the defense of Serbia .
 Government-owned, Channel One is one of the most effective tools of the Russian state propaganda machine .
 Vremya Pokazhet takes about 4 hours of Channel One’s prime air time . For example, the political commentary show takes about four hours of prime time .
 On the show, politicians, government officials, and various celebrities discuss the latest domestic and foreign news . The show also features celebrities, politicians and celebrities .
 The choice of attendees is carefully geared to reflect the government's favored anti-American views . The hosts are far from impartial .
 A few representatives of “alternative pro-Western views are invited as well . To lend legitimacy to the program, a few representatives are invited .
Every foreign policy fiasco is the result of the United States bullying the international 98. The U.S. has funded and funded every uprising in the former Soviet republics .
 Vremya Pokazhet participants have called citizens of certain European countries ‘vassals’ since they are in their view not free to do what they want but given privileges in return for allegiance .
 Ukrainians involved in the armed conflict against Russia in Donetsk and Lugansk would love to subjugate themselves to the Russian government . If only the American propaganda did not brainwash them, they would like to be subjugated to Russia .
 The U.S. would not strive to start wars around the world to boost its global hegemony . The peace in the world would be possible.
 Marlene Laruelle, “Russian World,’s-softpower-and-geopolitical-imagination.’-russia's-soft power-and/geop geopolitical-imaginations .
 A Color Revolution focuses on creating destabilizing revolutions in other states as a means of serving security interests at low costs . The revolution aims to create destabilizing revolution in other countries as a way to serve security interests .
 It has been used to describe the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, Rose Revolution in Georgia in 2003, and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan in 2005 .
 In December 2017, 45 percent of Russians said the United States was their number one enemy . That's a three-fold increase from three decades earlier, according to the Russians .
 Putin has developed a nationalistic outlook through media outlets . He was born from the “humiliation of the 1990s,’s ‘humiliation’
 Blaming a foreign enemy for Russia’s problems, internal and external, is central to the nationalistic propaganda campaign .
 The more effectively Putin can convince his common compatriots Russia is in a great patriotic struggle with the West, the easier it will be for him to maintain power . The more effective Putin is the more effectively he can convince Russia that it is a patriotic struggle .
 The Russians are more likely to throw their support behind a “strong’s authoritarian leader than a Yeltsin-like liberal who is associated with the tumultuous 90s .
 58 percent of adults in Russia see Stalin's historical role in either a “very” or “mostly’s positive light, compared with just 22 percent who feel the same way about Gorbachev .
 The roots of this cultural phenomenon are quite complicated . One may speculate that it has something to do with Stalin winning The Great Patriotic War against Germany .
 The Kremlin adopted the term ‘fifth column’ to discredit detractors as unpatriotic . It is only natural for Putin's administration to get involved in securing a buffer zone and building alliances .
 The "fifth column" is a group of sympathizers or supporters of an enemy who undermine a nation’s unity from within . The ‘fifth column’ is a groups of sympathizer and supporters of the enemy .
 "Fifth Column" is a weekly column. See "Five Column" at the bottom of the page .
 The closer the enemy sponsored coup, the higher the risk is for Putin’s survival . The higher the chance is for the Russian president to survive .
 Putin is actively involved in keeping his proxies at the helm in his immediate neighborhood – former Soviet Republics – and especially on its Western border .
 Annexation of Crimea and support of Donbas and Lugansk separatists stems from the attempt to salvage as much territory of strategic importance as possible after Ukraine’s former pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych lost power .
 The Church's power continued uncontested until the overthrow of the tsars in the early 20th century . It became a prime target for the new revolutionaries .
 Putin supported the incumbent and pro-Russian President Eduard Shevardnadze over pro-Western candidate Mikheil Saakashvili .
 Saakashvili benefited from “fair foreign elections’s monetary contributions from democratic institutions such as the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the US' Agency for International Development .
 He was benefited from NGOs such as Open Society Institute who funded student activists . He was also benefited from the Open Society Institutes who funded students .
 Putin supported a highly-unpopular Viktor Yankukovich over Victor Yushchenko, a pro-western candidate and eventual winner . In the 2004 Ukrainian “Orange Revolution,’s ‘Orange Revolution’, Putin supported the pro-Western candidate .
 Yankukovich would eventually succeed Yushchenko in 2010, but the western influence in eastern geopolitical affairs was demonstrably evident .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Church reemerged and had sought to play an essential role as it did before the revolution . The Church had sought a essential role before the collapse.
 Moscow has given the Church more support than they anticipated . But now the Kremlin expects something in return – unwavering loyalty .
 The Church’s official teaching, summarized in its Social Doctrine, emphasizes patriotism, close churchstate relations, and social conservatism .
2 Moscow's emphasis on conservative values can be traced as far back as Putin’s famous Munich Speech of 2007 . He announced Russia would not participate in the unipolar world order led by the US and oppose it at any opportunity .
 Putin made it clear to the international community that Russia intends to protect the conservative values in the world,e.
 The Kremlin needed an ally in promoting political conservatism, and the Church turned out to be a natural choice. When it comes to the domestic audience, the Kremlin needed a ally .
 The Church has always been a source of cultural and social conservatism . The Church is known for its conservative beliefs .
 ‘The very idea of separation of church and state is alien to Orthodox civilization.’ says Priest Vsevolod Chaplin .
 The Orthodox Church and the Russian Politics are the two main political parties in Russia .
 Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly, 1 March 2018, will be held in Moscow .
 The Russian Orthodox leadership spreads a message of love and support towards the government . Some of the Church's supported views become laws, like the “slapping law’s” where the police need to observe systematic domestic violence .
 These numbers point to a civilizational connection between the Church and the 114. The Church and 114.
 Rising Prices for Energy Resources led to the Relative Rebounding of the Economy, and its Military-Industrial Complex . Rising prices for energy resources led to a rise in energy prices .
 After the humiliation of the Soviet Union’s collapse and the instability of the 1990s, a nationalist niche grew alongside surging oil profits .
 In the decade and a half since Putin first became Prime Minister in 1999, his government has strengthened its control over oil and gas . His government has increased its role in the financial sector .
 The rise of nationalization diminished any existing incentives for investment and swept away the resources needed for private investment . The rise in nationalization also swept away resources needed to invest in private investment.
 In general, people of resource-rich countries are enthusiastic about nationalization . But in return, they expect special benefits from their respective governments .
 In the early years of Putin’s presidency, Russian citizens were enthusiastic about the future .
 The oil revenues increased consumption and stimulated growth since the profits were distributed through market channels . The oil revenue increased consumption.
 Second oil price boom from 2009-2011 did not result in long-term increased economic performance . Second oil prices boom in 2011 did not lead to increased economic growth .
 The economy stagnated in 2012 despite high oil and gas costs per barrel . The economy was stagnant in 2012, despite high energy costs .
 Russia’s Gross Domestic Product grew by only 1. percent in 2013 . Despite oil selling above $100, Russia's GDP grew by 1.1 percent .
 The IMF attributed Russia’s flattened growth to a non-oil budget deficit of 10 percent and a lack of economic diversification . The IMF also attributed Russia's flattened growth.
Russia’s Stagnated Growth Raises Pressure on New Growth Model,’ says Reuters .
 Kirill Rogove, a political analyst at Moscow’s Gaidar Institute for Economic Policy, says resource nationalism inevitably involves confrontation with the West as the regime seals itself off .
 They offer an excuse for repression, and they draw people into a nationalist narrative . The rally effect is the rally effect, says the author .
 The declared goals of the conflict are irrelevant; what matters is the perpetuation of conflict itself . The declared goal is to end conflict itself, says the author .
 The consolidation of authoritarian rule seems to be Putin’s 121th year in power, he says .
 Kirill Rogov: Oil price will set the test for Putin’s resource nationalism .
 Rogov, “The oil price will set the test. 45 plan,’ he says, depends on his ability to muster popular support .
 Putin's approval rating is said to have jumped to as high as 80 percent in 2017, adjusted to no lower than 70 percent after taking into account the reluctance to voice unpopular opinions .
 Putin will continue to channel the patriotic spirits of the Russian people . That likely means intensifying his conflict with the West .
 Presidential Address to Russia Citizens, 1 March 2018, will be held in Moscow .
 Russian messianism, nationalism, distrust of the West, as well as national security incentives, have created an explosive mix in Ukraine . Russia has been accused of creating a "messianism"
 Moscow’s objectives in Ukraine are to expel what the Kremlin viewed as an anticonstitutional government not representative of the majority of the Ukrainian population .
 According to Moscow, current nationalistic and even fascist Ukrainian leadership is a threat to its population, especially its sizeable Russian speaking segment .
 The annexation of Crimea, seen as inherently Russian territory, earned almost universal approval in Russia . It succeeded in boosting patriotic and nationalistic fervor in Russia.
 The annexation of Crimea is Moscow's last attempt to keep a foothold in Ukraine . The ensuing wars in the Eastern Ukrainian regions of Luhansk and Donetsk remain Moscow’s last efforts to keep an foothold in the country .
 The ensuing sanctions, well within the tradition of suffering in the hands of Western powers, only strengthened the antipathy towards the West .
 The current level of hostility makes it challenging to imagine 1.2 million people in the world . The current levels of hostility make it difficult to imagine .
 Ukrainian lands became a part of Poland in the West, The Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the North and East, and Genghisids Empire in the South .
 Muscovite Russians regained influence in the region as early as the fifteenth century and embarked on the mission of reclaiming former Kievan Rus’ lands . Meanwhile, Muscovaites regained influence as early in the Fifteenth century .
 Prolonged Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars forced Lithuania to ally with the Kingdom of Poland . The Grand Duchy of Lithuania formed the Polish-Lithanian Commonwealth .
 The united forces of Russia, Prussia, and Austria defeated the Commonwealth in a series of wars and partitioned it between themselves at the end of the eighteenth century .
 Ukraine was split between Russia and Austria during the First World War . It remained such until German occupation during the first World War.
 After the Bolshevik Revolution, it was once again reunited and incorporated into the Soviet Union . The Bolshevik Revolution was the first time it was reunited with the USSR .
 Ukraine was the most important of the fourteen non-Russian Soviet states . During the period of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was most important.
 Ukraine was the second most populous Soviet republic and a shield for the USSR's western edge . Ukraine was also the second-most populous Soviet Republic .
 Comparable to France in size and to Italy in population, it contained some 50 million people . The population is similar to France and Italy in size .
 48 it functioned as a critical passageway to Soviet-controlled Eastern Europe . 48 it was used as a vital passageways to Russia .
 Its east was filled with industries, mines, and was a significant producer of armaments . The east was full of industries and mines, including mines .
 Due to its fertile soil, Ukraine was known as the breadbasket of the Soviet Union .
 The Holodomor was a man-made famine of 1932-1933 that killed between 3 and 10 million people by varying estimates . The majority of those killed were ethnic Ukrainians .
Opinions vary on the cause of the Holodomor, from outright denial to the unintended consequences of industrialization and collectivization . Stalin's deliberate attempts to attack Ukrainian nationalism are among the reasons for the Holotomor .
 Ukraine and 15 other countries recognized the Holodomor as a genocide of the Ukrainian people carried out by the Soviet government .
 At the end of the 1980s, the challenges that resulted from Gorbachev's reforms gave rise to mass demonstrations throughout the Baltic republics .
After the protests spread to Ukraine in 1988 the Soviet Union’s days were numbered .
 The demonstrations started in Lviv and rapidly swept eastward to Kyiv, the capital, and other parts of central Ukraine . The demonstrations began in the city of Lviv .
 The Donbass region remained relatively quiet during the early rise of independence, largely due to the 10th anniversary of independence .
49 communist party’s conservative elements exercised more control, according to the agency . The agency says the party's conservative elements were in control .
 Gorbachev made one final effort in March 1991 to save the USSR in his call for a referendum . But it generated mixed results .
 In Ukraine, 70 percent of voters approved his proposal for a revamped federation . 80 percent supported Ukraine’s autonomy, which meant that Ukrainian laws would supersede the Kremlin's .
Disruption of supply networks made seeds and machinery scarce and too expensive for Ukrainian agriculturalists .
 Ukraine’s coal, steel, and heavy industries slumped given their dependence on demand from other parts of the Soviet Union . The Russian heartland also fought to preserve production and employment .
 The dramatic debates in the media revealing the Soviet leaders’ numerous failings, blunders, and cruelties were rapidly denuding the system’s legitimacy .
 The events of the moment clearly influenced the Ukrainian quest for independence . The events were clearly influenced by the Ukraine's independence bid .
 Sharp fluctuations in the public opinion polls existed between 1991 and 1993 between those that supported statehood and those who did not .
 Ukrainian-Russian relations have changed dramatically since the early 1990s . Ukraine's relationship with Russia has been a source of tension with Russia since then .
 In December 1991, 90 percent of Ukrainians voted for independence . In the December 1991 referendum, 90% of Ukrainians vote for independence.
Russian universalism is evident in promoting common Slavic identity along with Christian Orthodox brotherhood as an intrinsic value Russia is destined to persevere . Russian universalism has been shown to be a key part of Russia's future .
 The tradition of suffering in the hands of Western powers is consistent with the narrative of Ukrainian population being deceived into submission to the West . Ukrainian population is being deceived by the West, according to the narrative .
 Throughout the Ukrainian crisis, Moscow made an emphasis on the Russian and Ukrainian cultural proximity, along with shared history and religion .
 The term Russian World was popularized by the current Russian administration in the last decade . The Kremlin revived the phrase Malorossiya .
 Malorossiya stands for ‘Little Russia’ and was the name used for Ukraine after its inclusion into the Russian Empire at the end of the eighteenth century .
 The Collegium of Little Russia had the task of liquidating any remnants of Ukrainian autonomy . The main governing body on the territory of Ukraine under Russian rule.
 The term Malorossiya was adopted by Russian media to emphasize the cultural and historical unity of two states . The term was used to refer to Ukrainians with little or no Ukrainian national consciousness .
 The term was also adopted for self-identification by the separatists of Donetsk and Luhansk . The term is also used by the separatist group in Donetsk.
 Malorossiya, or Little Russia, is a new country in Russia, Washington Post says .
 Crimea was part of Russia for centuries before it was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1954 . Crimea's cultural links to Russia are stronger than to Ukraine .
 Similar arguments apply to the southern and eastern parts of Ukraine which are home to a significant percentage of Russians or Russian speaking population .
 Russian leadership claims they are motivated by the shared identity with the Russians living in Ukraine . They consider a genocide against the Russian population inevitable under the deeply nationalistic Ukrainian government .
 This argument is unconvincing given Russia’s past actions in the region. This argument, however, is unconvinced given Russia's past actions.
 Russia used the same cultural pretext in its 2008 invasion of Georgia . South Ossetia and Abkhazia resisted their full incorporation into Georgia .
 There was no severe threat of genocide or no new threat to the Russian population . In reality, there was no serious threat to Russia .
 There is no evidence the Ukrainian conflict would involve genocide against the Russian population . Likewise, there exists no evidence there would be genocide against Russian population.
 The case of identity with the Russian people in Ukraine does not offer a significant reason for the extreme behavior that Russia adopted against its neighbor .
 Russia took advantage of U.S. and NATO's failure to get involved and Ukraine’s weakness to 35 . Given Russian communities were under no real threat, Russia was not under any real threat .
 The Russian version of Responsibility to Protect is widely explored by the Russian government-sponsored media . However, this Russian version has been widely explored .
 Some of the examples include demonizing Ukraine's attempts to abolish Russian as the language of instruction in Ukrainian schools and end the dependence of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church on its Russian counterpart .
 During Soviet times, the majority of the schools in Ukraine had Russian as a language of instruction . The situation did not change considerably after Ukraine declared independence .
 Ukrainian legislatures have aimed at correcting this linguistic environment by making Ukrainian a mandatory language of instruction for all secondary schools .
 The International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty derived Responsibility to Protect to justify intervention of a sovereign state if it was determined that the state had “failed to protect people within its borders.’
 Ukraine's prohibition of any Soviet symbolic is seeing as a denial of RussianUkrainian common history and identity .
 Ukrainian lands remained under heavy Russian influence for centuries . Lastly, Ukrainian lands remain under heavyRussian influence .
 Moscow appealed to Russianness as a part of the very Ukrainian identity . Ukraine decided to ally itself with the West .
 Russian-Ukrainian cultures are mutually permeated by Western propaganda . Attempts to eradicate Russianness on the territory of Ukraine are viewed as the result of Western propaganda and an attempt to drive an artificial wedge between the two cultures .
 The US’ liberal approach is a key factor in the current Ukrainian crisis . realism provides a logical explanation for Russia’s actions .
 Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has been striving to survive as a great European power . Russia's nonconformist identity has been preserved in the age of democratic peace .
 Maintaining a buffer zone between Russia and NATO in the form of former Soviet Republics like Ukraine, no doubt, is a rational strategy for survival .
 The current conflict in Ukraine demonstrates the acute disconnect between the U.S. and Russia that prevents constructive dialogue . The conflict is the result of the conflict between the United States and Russia .
 The US builds policies on liberal values, Russia's worldview is profoundly realist . Russia often strives to explain its actions with cultural categories .
 Crimea had a right to decide its future, so it chose to join Russia . Once lawfully independent Crimea had the right to choose its future .
 At the same time, it has offensive revisionist aspirations due to its culture . perceived unfairness of post-Cold War world order and the rise of nationalism boosted by state propaganda .
 Russia suspended its free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned imports of Ukrainian food . Russia also banned imported Ukrainian food from Ukraine .
 It is difficult to assess if these sanctions had much impact on Moscow . While inconvenient, it is hard to assess.
 The sanctions were imposed at the same time the price per barrel of oil, a major export and source of revenue for the Russian government, dropped 46 per barrel . The sanctions came at the time of the sanctions.
 The answer depends on which international relations theory best explains the situation . International relations theory is best to explain the situation.
 The offensive realist position would argue Russia is defensive, i.e., allow Russia to exert control in the Contention Belt . Russia will never otherwise move past it .
 Others would argue that such breaking of the international law sets a dangerous precedent .
 The Congressional Research Service Report, 2017, was released on Tuesday . The report was released by the Congressional Research service . It was published by the U.S. National Security Council .
 In 2016, 47 percent of Russia’s merchandise exports went to EU member states .
 As recently as December of 2016, Italy voted against extending the sanctions . A month later, the Chairman of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Sebastian Kurz, proposed lifting sanctions against Russia in exchange for “any positive 50.
 The European Parliamentary Research Service Report, 2016, was published by the European Parliament . The report is based on the findings of the European Parliamentary research Service Report .
 Rajan Menon and Eugene Rumer maintain the fear of a new Cold War based on Russian actions in Ukraine is not well grounded . Rumer: "Fears of a New Cold War are not well grounding"
After a brief recession, Russia’s Gross Domestic Product is on its way up, indicating its closer dependence on oil prices than sanctions .
 In their opinion, NATO is not likely to interfere on behalf of a non-member, such as Ukraine, they say . In their opinions, NATO isn't likely to intervene on behalf.
 NATO’s most influential nations will eventually make peace with Russia and keep their distance to stop the sanctions’ boomerang effect .
 Russian economy showed encouraging signs of overcoming the recession that began in 2014 . Despite weakening external headwinds, the Russian economy is showing encouraging signs .
 The prospects of Ukraine becoming a member with its current preexisting condition are close to zero . Ukraine's prospects of becoming a country with its existing condition are near zero .
 58 and Russia will assuredly reciprocate. See Menon and Rumor, Conflict in Ukraine, 144. 58 and 58 will be reciprocate .
 Russia's economic and diplomatic isolation is not in Russia’s best interest, according to the Russian government .
 support to the West resonates most strongly in central and western Ukraine, while support for Russia predominates in the south and east .
 Ethnic Russians mainly concentrated in Southern and Eastern Ukraine and make up approximately 17 percent of Ukraine’s population .
 Ukrainian nationalists have supported close ties with Russia . They have largely been suspicious of Ukrainian nationalism and have supported Russia .
 President Barrack H Obama, interview by Fareed Zakaria, 1 February 2015 .
 Ethnic Majorities in Ukraine, 23.5% of Ukraine's population, according to the Ukrainian government . The country has been in conflict with Ukraine since 2004 .
 Russians during the Soviet period created a complex and often polarized ethnic makeup . Such a patchwork of cultures, however, along with a sizable influx of Russians, created a complicated ethnic makeup.
 Ukraine oscillated between pro-Western and pro-Russian leaders. This cultural mix had created an environment where Ukraine oscillates between pro and pro -Western leaders .
 Victor Yanukovych’s predecessor, Victor Yushchenko, was an avid pro-Western president . As an example, Victor Yanukovych was a pro- Western president .
 Before Yushchenko, Leonid Kuchma was considered to be a pro-Moscow president . He was considered a possible pro-Russian president .
 The most significant influencers in Ukraine's politics since its independence in 1991 have come from the politically well-connected businessmen, or “oligarchs,” who regularly influence the government for their security and profit .
 Ukraine has never been fully reconciled to its independence from the Soviet Union . They feel that the country belongs in Russia's political and economic orbit .
 Ukrainian president Victor Yanukovych rejected a major economic deal with the EU 64. In November 2013, after prolonged negotiations, he rejected the deal .
 The rebuffed Association Agreement included a free trade pact with the EU . It would have aligned Ukraine more closely with Europe, at least in economics and trade .
 Yanukovych seemed to have yielded to pressure from Putin, which opposed the Association Agreement . Putin instead opted for closer economic links to Moscow .
 A sizable portion of the population favored integration with the EU . The decision culminated in massive and violent protests in Kiev, Lviv, Kharkiv, Cherkasy, Ternopil .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in late February 2014, and the regime collapsed . The regime collapsed, and Yanukovych fled.
 Putin said to have put immense pressure on acting government to discourage alignment with the West . Putin was said to be putting pressure on the acting government.
 Russia's parliament approved Putin's request to use force in Ukraine to 66. Then on 1 March 2014, just eight days after Yanukovych fled, the parliament approved the request . The move was approved by the Russian parliament eight days later .
 Ukraine’s Self-Organizing Revolution, March 2014, is Ukraine's self-organizing-revolution .
 Putin quickly ordered Russian forces to seize control in Crimea . Crimea is a region of vital strategic importance and home to over 60 percent ethnic Russian population .
 Russia annexed Crimea and began deploying “little green men’s and other military support to Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine, pushing the country towards civil war . Soon thereafter, Russia annexed the Crimea and started deploying ‘little greenMen’
 The referendum was reportedly approved by 96 percent of those voting, with a turnout of 83 percent . The referendum reportedly was approved by 97 percent .
 Ukraine, the US, the EU, and others denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner . The referendum was held in Ukraine, Ukraine and the US .
 Putin signed a treaty with Crimean leaders on 18 March 2014, officially incorporating Crimea into Russia . The treaty was signed by Putin and Crimean leaders in March .
 Pro-Russian rebels, aided by Moscow, began to seize government facilities and territory in the eastern regions of the country referred to as the Donbas . At the same time, pro-Russian armed rebels began to seized government facilities in the region .
 For Putin, the annexation of Crimea under the pretense of protecting ethnic Russians has given rise to substantial economic and security-related gains . Putin's annexation of the Crimea has also been seen as a boost to the economy .
 Moscow has secured access to Sevastopol, which provides the Russian Navy with critical access to the Black Sea . It allows the positioning of high-end anti-aircraft missile systems on 72 .
 The Crimea is assessed at 4-13 trillion cubic meters of natural gas . The vast offshore energy resources exist off the coast of Crimea .
 Russia is estimated to have received 4 percent of Ukraine’s Gross Domestic Product through the annexation . Overall, Russia is believed to have gotten 4 percent.
 Putin's disinformation and propaganda activities have been on the rise in Ukraine, according to reports . Putin's influence in Ukraine has increased in recent years .
 EU's East Stratcom Task Force analyzes fake news and other disinformation . It shows a parallel between the rise of disinformation targeting Ukraine in the information space and military activity on the ground .
Fighting in Donetsk and Luhansk escalated in December 2016, so did the discrediting of Ukraine in pro-Kremlin media . As the fighting escalated, the media discredited of Ukraine.
 Ukrainian forces accused of hitting a civilian car with a tank and violating Russian airspace over Crimea .
 Putin has leveraged religious ties and put forth a narrative on strong religious ties between Russia and Ukraine through the Eastern Orthodox Church . Putin has consistently put forth the narrative on the strong religious connections between Russia.
 Russian popular support for the 2014 annexation of Crimea was seen in Russia's history . This religious historical sense was witnessed in the Russian public's support for Crimea .
In the case of Ukraine, great power competition for survival for survival through achievement of hegemony manifested itself in Putin's revisionist 77 .
 Moscow seemed to anticipate the likelihood of the U.S. and EU to condemn Russia for breaking the international law and to punish Russia economically . But the West would not go to war over Ukraine .
 Statesmen see hostility as indicating that the other is out to get them . Statesmen believe that the best way to cope with is threat is with negative sanctions .
 Putin's fears are further heightened by the West's desire to influence Russia's near abroad . Moscow's willingness to maintain a Belt of Contention buffer zone even through the employment of offensive military capabilities is a concern .
 The primacy of the external environment over states’ internal characteristics manifests itself in the refusal of the international community to guarantee Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity through military action, failure of economic sanctions, and division of EU members over the necessity of the sanctions .
Realist perspective provides a 84-year-old perspective on the current Ukrainian crisis . The realist perspective is the realist view of the current crisis .
 The Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe, Washington, DC, DC.
 Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics, 89, is the author of the book . He has also written a book on perception and perception in international politics .
 The anarchy of the international system explains Russia’s partition of sovereign Ukraine with only minor consequences for the aggressor . Russia's partition of the sovereign Ukraine is only minor to the aggressors .
 Ukraine does not receive enough support to oppose Russia effectively, according to the U.S. State Department . Ukraine has not received enough support for opposing Russia effectively .
 Ukraine expected help from the democratic world but learned every state is on its own in the anarchic system . Georgia in 2008, Georgia expected help in the democracy world .
From all the consultation and discussions, I have understood that we have different approaches and understandings of the building of a unionstate .
 Belarus saw the Union State being “built on the principles of equality,” Russia saw it as a legal vehicle of absorbing Belarus territorially .
In 2017, the relationship between these countries has deteriorated. Ten years later, in 2017, it has deteriorated . The relationship between the two countries has worsened .
 Russia uses oil and gas to coerce Belarus, reducing the price for good behavior and raising prices to punish for perceived transgressions . Russia uses the price of good behavior to punish people who are perceived to be guilty of wrongdoing .
State-controlled Russian media has been supporting Belarusian leader’s authoritarian regime for decades .
 United Nations Press, 2 October 1997, www.un.org/press/en/1997/ 19971002.belarus.html .
Russia reminds wayward ally Belarus of its economic muscle. 66 broadcasted some highly critical documentaries .
 Russia’s restrictions on Belarusian food imports, its refusal to soften Belarus’ debt obligations, and its push to host a Russian air base on the territory of Belarus all indicate a potential future Russian intervention . Russia's restrictions on food imports and its willingness to
 Russia had already assimilated the entire territory of Belarus from 1795 until the collapse of the Soviet Union . Such actions would not be unprecedented .
 Russia will continue to weaken and possibly attempt to annex its Western neighbor Belarus, which belonged to Russia for centuries . The Russian Idea of imperialism and messianism is in accordance with the Russian Idea.
 Russians and Belarusians, both along with Ukrainians, come from the same Kievan Rus’ tradition . Despite the animosity between Russians and Belians, the animosity comes from a similar tradition .
 Belarusian lands became a part of The Grand Duchy of Lithuania at the beginning of the thirteenth century . The decline and disintegration of Kievan Rus’ at the end of the eleventh century and a short period of existence as independent principalities .
 Inclusion into The Duchy resulted in an economic, political, and ethnocultural unification of Belarusian territories . Inclusion led to an economic and political unification of the country's territories .
 The Duchy remained a multicultural, multilingual state, and multi-confessional state . Ethnic Belarusians or Litvins populated most of TheDuchy’s territory .
 Jakunin, “Interactive Map of Belarusian History’s’ 67 became the official language for state and academic purposes . Jakunin is the name of the map of Belarus.
 incorporation into The Duchy led to the formation of the Belarusian national identity and a division between Belarussians and Russians . In other words, incorporation into the Duchies led to a division.
 As in the case of Ukraine, Russians began reclaiming the Eastern European region as early as the fifteenth century .
 Belarus remained in the heart of The Duchy and subsequent Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth which conducted a series of defensive wars against the Russian state . Belarus remains in the hearts of the Commonwealth .
After the partition of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth by Russia, Prussia, and Austria at the end of the eighteenth century the entire territory of modern Belarus became a part of Russia .
 Belarus, as the Belarusian People's Republic, first declared independence under German occupation in 1918 .
 Poland and the newly established Soviet Union partitioned the Belarusian People’s Republic as a result of the Polish-Soviet War . Less than a year later, Poland was partitioned by the Soviet Union in the wake of the war .
 Most of the industry, including whole production plants, had been moved to either Russia or Germany . Many of the plants were moved from Russia to Germany .
 Moscow conducted the policy of Sovietization on the territory of Belarus . The official use of the Belarusian language and other cultural aspects were strictly limited .
St steady growth in the number of national separatists would soon peak. However, as a result of continued economic and political deterioration of the state, steady growth is expected to peak .
 In 1988, Belarussian Popular Front of approximately tenthousand citizens quickly formed and promoted their non-communist history and separate language . In 1988.
 The Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic changed its name to 16 . The movement soon began voicing political demands, and in the wake of the failed coup against Gorbachev .
 The Astounding Devastation of World War II is a book by Jeremy Bender . The book is based on the book, “The AstoundingDevastation Of World War Two.’
 Belarus gained independence in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Lukashenko held a referendum that eliminated presidential term limits . He was elected president in 1994 .
 Lukashenko ran and won with the assumed help of voter fraud in every subsequent election . Even though the referendum did not comply with international standards, he won in every other election .
 Belarusian population mostly accepted Lukashenko’s authoritarian rule . The Belarusian government has been criticized for human rights violations .
Since 2017, antigovernment protests and rallies became a common occurrence . Since 2017, however, they have become more common .
 Belarusian population is mobilizing and growing more explosive. Despite long-standing repression, the population has grown more explosive . The Belarusian government has typically pacified the opposition .
 Belarusians pick up antigovernment banners and spill into the streets . The main issue is the plummeting salaries and rapidly increasing poverty .
 The government previously failed to see the need to modernize major state-owned industries such as metallurgy and mechanical engineering, including tractors and agricultural, cars and machine-tool constructing .
 As a result, these sectors were quickly outmatched on the global market .
 Complete or partial closings of many plants and factories caused widespread unemployment or underemployment . Many plants or factories were closed or shut down .
 The 2008-2014 period has been especially hard on Belarus citizens . Belarus has been particularly hard on the citizens of Belarus .
 Belarusian ruble was allowed to float freely to stabilize the country's external economic position . But internally this caused a devaluation of the currency by more than 50 percent .
 Analysis and Evaluation Role of Culture Lukashenko’s leadership has in the last decade become detrimental to Moscow's interests . Analysis and evaluation role of Culture has become detrimental.
 His perceived transgressions do not fit into the Russian messianic idea of the Russian World where all Slavic nations and their historical allies confront Western encroachment and U.S. hegemony .
 Belarus should be a loyal partner and one of the cornerstones of the Russian World . Belarus has its historical ties to Russia going as far back as Kievan Rus’ and most of its population Russified .
 Belarusian language is a mixture of Russian and Belarusian . 96 percent of the population speaks either Russian or “trasianka,’ which is a mix of Russian, Belarusian.
 The reason for such loss of national language was succinctly expressed by Russian General Mikhail Muravyov after an 1830 anti-Russian uprising and subsequent closing of Vilnius 26 .
 Currently, there exists no Belarusian language university and language lessons in schools are declining . There is no language university.
Nearly 85 percent of books published in Belarus are in Russian . Each year, nearly 85% of books are published in Russia .
Active promoters of Belarusian culture have started a national campaign called ‘Budzma’ which organizes language and cultural events across the country .
 Belarus is likely to become a target of rising Russian nationalism in its quest to rebuild the Russian World . Due to its cultural and especially linguistic proximity and the strategic importance as a buffer zone against NATO, Belarus is expected to be a target.
Given Russia’s imperialistic self-expression, it is highly likely Moscow will interfere directly in Belarus to some extent .
 Putin’s Nervous Neighbors, 5 October 2015, The Weekly Standard, www.weekly standard .
 Russian political scientist Michail Vinogradov explains a certain amount of nostalgia exists among the Belarussian population for the Russian imperial past .
 Putin has reawakened expectations that Russia could expand its borders . Putin, in line with these yearnings, has rewakened hopes that Russia will expand its territory .
 Putin’s skyrocketing ratings after the annexation of Crimea and his confrontation with the West remain the testimony of that nostalgia . Putin's skyrocket ratings after Crimea annexation and confrontation with West remain testimony of his nostalgia .
 Even Russia’s economic difficulties due to the imposed sanctions did not diminish his popularity in Russia .
 Pro-government propaganda on state-owned media undoubtedly helped solidify public opinion . Pro- government propaganda on the state- owned media helped solidified public opinion.
 Russia yearns once again for the vastness of its empire and greatness of its influence . But one should admit a rising Russia yearn for the huge influence of the West .
Belarus rejects Putin's call for unification with Russia, says Deutsche Welle Akademie .
 Belarus has a great strategic significance as a buffer zone between the West and Russia . Belarus has been a key part of Russia's relationship with the West .
 Belarusian leadership is not protecting Russian interests in that respect either, says Moscow . In Moscow’s view, Belarusian leaders are not protecting Russia's interests.
 Belarus has implemented a visa-free entrance and five-day stay for citizens of 80-countries . Russia is worried forbidden goods may enter the country through Belarus in the absence of secure borders .
 Any foreign visitor can enter Russia through Belarus through Belarus without the knowledge of authorities .
 Russia is building borders with Belarus . In response to the Belarusian visa-free entrance policy, Russia has built borders with the country .
43 Zapad is a recurring exercise scheduled every four years and takes place across western Russia, including Kaliningrad, as well as in Belarus . The exercise is aimed at countering NATO .
 Since 2008, Russia has used its strategic and large-scale exercises to 39, according to the Russian government . Russia has had 39 exercises since 2008 .
 74 refine its military capabilities, undermine regional stability and peace, and – twice, first in Georgia and then Ukraine – to mask impending aggression .
 Russia’s revived programme of annual strategic exercises in that aggression should be recalled . The ten-year anniversary of Russia's invasion of Georgia approaches .
 This anniversary should also cause reflection on Russia's use of snap exercise to mask troop movements at the start of the Ukraine crisis . Russia’s strategic exercises enabled power projection into Syria, and the way that Russia's strategic exercises allowed power projection .
 Russian forces continue to operate in both Ukraine and Syria . Many foreign analysts predicted that Russia would be unable to sustain simultaneous operations .
 Russia has not only managed to sustain both operations, but to continue its extensive exercise programme . Russia has also managed to maintain both operations in Russia .
 A contingent of Russian military forces stayed in Belarus to counter the increased NATO presence in Russia’s near abroad .
 The current presence of Russian forces in Belarus would likely influence the situation in the event of a coup initiated by the impoverished population .
 Russian military could seize power in Belarus to prevent a pro-Western candidate from the opposition replacing Lukashenko .
 Belarusian political opposition’s antiRussian sentiments would likely justify in the Kremlin's view, as in the case of Ukraine, the military intervention .
 Belarus could soon become a part of Russian territory . If Belarus decides to pursue joining the EU, it could become part of Russia .
 Russia's cultural arguments would work well in Belarus, a state that was once part of Russia for centuries . Belarus became culturally close and often ethnically 46.
 Once again, the West is not likely to start a war with Russia over Belarus, as was the case with Ukraine . The West is likely to not start a battle with Russia again.
 Putin applies political, economic, and even military pressure on Belarus . In what appears to be an attempt to oust Lukashenko and replace him with a leader more loyal to Moscow .
 Lukashenko's popularity in Russia has been downgraded in the Russian media . The move is designed to reduce his popularity and public support in Belarus .
 Russian state-owned media produced a series of documentaries about Belarusian leader . The documentaries portray him as an insane tyrant fond of Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin .
 In the movies, he orders political murders, persecutes and eliminates political opposition, falsifies elections, all while keeping his country in the Soviet time warp . The movies are based on the films of the Soviet era .
 Many legitimate sources confirm at least some of them, such as election tampering . Assessing the basis of these accusations is beyond the purpose of this thesis, but many legitimate sources confirmed some .
 Russia’s agenda runs deeper than truth-seeking – it targets Lukashenko at his home base, mobilizing Belarusian population against him .
Economic pressure is applied with the same goal – making the impoverished and desperate Belarusian population rise against Lukashenko .
 Belarus is stranded by Russia’s refusal to sell enough crude oil at a low enough price until Belarus pays off its $425 million debt .
 Russia has hiked crude oil and gas prices and reduced the amount of crude oil to be processed and resold by Belarusian refineries for profit .
 The lack of oil to refine and resell has caused profit losses for the already damaged Belarusian economy . Belarusian oil production has already damaged the economy .
 Russia promised to raise the quota if Belarus pays off its significant debt . Moscow knows Belarus cannot afford it .
 Belarusian food imports are a massive blow to the Belarusian economy . The country is refusing to import food from the country .
 Russia severely restricted food imports from Belarus due to counter-sanctions against the West . Russia, the main consumer of Belarusian agricultural products, severely restricted imports .
 Belarusian population, desperate for a better life, has begun to revolt against the existing government . The Belarusian government is currently in power .
 Belarusian president struggles to cover the holes in the country's budget by implementing new taxes and cutting social benefits . Lukashenko has been criticized by Russia for turning its back on his country's president .
 In the year 2017, examples include reducing pensions of employed retirees and implementing the “parasite tax,” applied to those who are neither formally employed nor registered as officially unemployed .
 Many Belarusians depend on imports, which are now more expensive . Living standards dropped for many Belarusians .
 The average monthly salary has fallen from an all-time high of $630 in mid-2014 to $380 as of the start 54 years ago .
 Russia Bans Transit of Embargoed Goods through Belarus, USDA Foreign Agricultural Service Report says .
 Prentice, “Belarus Suspends 'Parasite' Tax’s 78 of 2017, resulted in increased popular unrest and dissatisfaction for the economic policies . Prentice: ‘Belarus suspends ‘Parasites’ Tax”
 Before 2010, Russia buttressed the Belarusian economy, but the relationship is growing progressively bitter . The relationship between Russia and Belarus is becoming increasingly bitter .
 Russia needed the alliance in its recent confrontation with the West, Belarus and the West warmed relations . Just when Russia needed it, Belarus warmed relations, Russia needed to join the alliance .
 In 2016, the EU lifted sanctions imposed on Belarus since 2010 . The EU sent a delegation of economic officials to Minsk to discuss increasing financial and economic cooperation .
 Belarus still has many bilateral agreements with Russia in the security and economic spheres . Belarus still had many bilateral deals with Russia .
 Minsk also has established economic ties to Europe . Lukashenko periodically criticizes Russia for unfair bilateral trading practices and strong-arm diplomacy .
 Russia is suffering the consequences of the Western-imposed sanctions . The “oil in exchange for kisses’ model for Russia-Belarus relations does not work anymore, says the author .
 The chances for reconciliation between Lukashenko and Moscow appear slim . The chances of reconciliation between the two appear slim.
 The Los Angeles Times.com/world/la-fg-belarus -russiarelations-20170308-story.html .
79 has already applied political and economic pressure and destabilized domestic politics in Belarus . 79 has applied political, economic pressure, destabilizing domestic politics.
Western nations are dissatisfied with Lukashenko’s leadership, human rights violations, election rigging, and a government-controlled economy . Western nations are also dissatisfied with the leader's leadership and his leadership .
 Russia wants a reliable proRussian candidate who will be more cooperative and receptive to the Russian Idea . Russia wants to replace him with a reliable ProRussian candidate .
 The West would prefer a more progressive pro-Western candidate who would take Belarus on the path to economic, political, and social reforms .
 Neither Russia nor the West buttresses Lukashenko, it is probable his regime will eventually succumb to domestic pressure, as protests have intensified .
 Russian messianic and imperialistic aspirations appear to be zeroing in on Belarus . The country has a long history of political and political instability .
 Belarus is a strategically important region in Russia’s confrontation with the West . With its historical and cultural ties to Russia, Belarus is perceived as a cornerstone of the Russian World .
 Russia has buttressed the Belarusian economy with cheap oil and gas in return for Belarus’ loyalty . Until recently, Russia hasbuttressed the country's economy.
 Russia is employing political, economic, and military pressure to push Belarusian population to a coup . The recent lack of control over the Belarusian president has led to the country's president being ousted .
With Lukashenko possibly ousted and in the absence of any credible proRussian candidate to replace him, Russia may perhaps employ its 66-year-old . Russia may also employ its own 66.
 Background and United States Policy Concerns, Washington, DC, 12 February 2013 .
 80 military would be present in the country due to a large-scale military exercise . Soldatkin: "Russia reminds wayward ally"
 Russia can explain its actions by its sacred messianic duty to protect Russians and Russia sympathizers in Belarus against the pro-Western nationalist political opposition .
 The annexation to Russia may be within reach . Due to the prominent level of Russification in the country, the annexation may be in reach .
 The consequences of Russian activity in Belarus will further deteriorate relations with the West and test NATO’s resolve in containing Russia's militarization of the region .
 Russia’s cultural propensity toward universalism and messianism . On the defensive side: worsening relations with the West, especially the US, and Russia's desire to check NATO expansion. On the offensive side: the rise of Russian nationalism bolstered by Putin’
 As the previous analysis illustrates, these variables are distinct enough to be differentiated but are intertwined and sometimes difficult to distinguish . The previous analysis shows that these variables can be distinct enough.
 Russia’s cultural propensities for messianism, universalism, opposition to the West, and suffering make Russians particularly vulnerable to nationalistic propaganda under the conditions of crisis . Russia's cultural propenities formessianism and universalism make Russians vulnerable to
 The rise of nationalism exacerbates the existing Russia-West differences . It introduces mutual distrust and irrational elements of fear and hatred, says the author .
 The role of the West in Russian aggression lies in its failure to foretell the consequences of its policies. The West's role in Russia is in its failed to foretelling the consequences.
 In international relations from time to time, the opportunity arises to either turn an enemy into a partner or an even more embittered rival .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, the United States had a formidable opportunity to turn Russia into its ally . But cooperative initiatives such as the “Joint 82 Declaration for Peace,’ and the ‘Russian Reset’ have fallen short
 The opportunity was missed in the 1990s and 2000s due to a poor understanding of the Russian culture and how Russians perceive its place among nations .
 The United States provided an opportunistic Vladimir Putin the very material to reawaken nationalistic sentiments in the country . By treating Russia as disenfranchised, defeated, and weak, the U.S. provided an opportunity for Putin.
 The current Russian regime is deeply nationalistic, as it presents itself to its citizens, or leaders simply pursue their interests under the disguise of nationalism .
 The lesson learned is the nationalistic message resonates with the Russian population . It caused widespread support for the existing hostility between the U.S. and Russia .
 The rise of nationalism in Russia will not be easy to counter, as it has been cultivated for decades . It will likely take as long to reverse, as Russia has been cultivating nationalism for decades.
 Putin’s government will continue to invest in nationalistic propaganda, given its dominance over the most popular media outlets, including those in Eastern Europe .
 drawing less of a profit from the sale of Russia’s energy resources may curb nationalistic moods . Continued sanctions should be considered, according to the author .
 The problem is that sanctions affect European allies as much as they do Russia . The problem, however, is that the sanctions affect Europe's allies .
 When it comes to the consequences of Russian aggression in its immediate neighborhood, a particular pattern exists .
 Russia is often satisfied with establishing spheres of influence in nominally independent but de facto Russian territories . Russia has a history of wars in Chechnya and Georgia .
 The Ukrainian case study demonstrates the high probability of Russia maintaining a frozen conflict and a similar sphere of influence in eastern Ukraine .
Low-intensity fighting is taking place and will likely continue into the future . The September 2014 ceasefire agreement was reached in September .
 Such a frozen conflict will provide Russia with a significant source of leverage for intervening in Ukrainian domestic affairs . Russia will be able to use the conflict as a leverage for intervention in Ukraine .
 Russia is likely to create a protectorate on the 83 territory of eastern Ukraine . It will explain it by the perceived likelihood of anti-Russian ethnic cleansing .
 Russia will most likely try to avoid the associated political and economic crises through messaging and propaganda rather than military action . Even though a direct Russian military invasion cannot be excluded, Russia will likely attempt to avoid it through messaging.
 Belarus case study shows Russia would prefer to use soft power and establish a pro-Russian regime in Belarus . Belarus could show progress toward the Union State and possibly join as a Western province .
 If Belarusian president chooses not to accommodate, Moscow will likely create favorable conditions for his replacement . If the current Belarusian President chooses not, Moscow may be able to accommodate him .
 Belarusian political opposition is oriented toward Belarussian nationalism rather than Russian nationalism . Belarusian language, culture, culture and the heritage of the Great Duchy of Lithuania are key issues .
 If Russia fails to find a reliable candidate to assist in consolidating power, military intervention becomes more likely . Russia's military intervention could become more likely if Russia fails.
 Moscow could eventually stage a Crimea-style referendum on the voluntary annexation of Belarus to the Russian Federation . With a more widespread physical presence in the country, Moscow could soon stage a vote on the annexation .
 Russia can control the narrative and institute political change in Belarus . The promise of economic recovery in Belarus would come with virtually free oil and gas .
 The findings indicate that Russia will continue to leverage its power in Belarus indefinitely . It is likely Russia will perpetuate the frozen conflict in Ukraine and continue its influence in Belarus .
 It would be most beneficial for these two countries to find a middle ground between Russia and the EU where they do not violate Russia’s interests . But nonetheless, find a meaningful way to engage with the West.
 Congress and other policymakers have paid particular attention to Russia's increasingly forceful foreign policy .
 Russian actions in the near abroad, intervention in Syria, and interference in political processes in Europe and the United States are sources of great concern for U.S. national security .
Relations between Russia and the West have deteriorated in recent years . Whether or not Russia seeks a renewed competition with the West remains unclear .
 Russian nationalism led to a rise in Russian nationalism and heightened animosity between the countries . This led to the unintended consequences of a rise of Russian nationalism, according to the author .
 The U.S. risks getting involved in a downward spiral of containing Russia at all costs . The United States will likely continue to outperform Russia economically and militarily .
 Political scientist John Mearsheimer insists events following the Cold War do in fact offer a valuable lesson .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, he observes, the European region no longer 1.1. The European region is no longer a 1.5 percent of the world's population .
 The U.S. should have reduced its military presence in the region and cultivated amicable relations with Russia . The United States should have cut its presence and cultivated relations with the Russian nation .
 Pursuing this strategy would provide benefits to the U.S. by turning European security to the Europeans . The strategy would also provide benefits for the United States .
 US invested in NATO expansion, which overlooked Russian security interests and helped to ignite conflicts in Georgia and Ukraine . Instead, the U.S. invested in the NATO expansion.
 Mearsheimer: Moscow and China closer risking creation of their strategic alliance . He says it drove Moscow and Beijing closer to forming an alliance .
 In 2018, predictions of the China-Russia strategic partnership are ever more certain . China- Russia strategic partnership is expected to be a key part of the relationship .
 Both China and Russia assert the viability of an alternative world order, which can stand up to the U.S. Both countries are seeking an alternative to the United States .
 The two countries support one another’s interests at the U.N. The United Nations.
 China has not been critical of Russia's role in Syria . China voiced few objections to Putin's annexation of Crimea, they work closely on North Korean proliferation crisis .
 Russian and Chinese leaders agree that ‘negative factors affecting global stability are increasing around the world’ They are determined to oppose it, they say .
 The U.S. should reinvent the Russia strategy while considering past mistakes. Taking these experiences into account, the United States should reinvent its strategy .
 Russia speaks the language of strength, so one should not pacify Russia on areas of vital 3.2 billion people . Russia is a country that has a history of violence and violence .
 China says relations with Russia at best level in history, says Westcott .
 The U.S. should consider unique strategies under the current geopolitical context, Westcott says .
 The U.S. has the opportunity to adopt a policy of offshore balancing against Russia . Based on President Donald Trump’s prevailing “America First Foreign Policy,’ the United States has the chance to adopt the policy .
 The essence of the idea is to stay offshore as long as possible while recognizing that it is sometimes necessary to come onshore . The idea of staying offshore is the same as being onshore.
 It does not “imply intervention will never be necessary,’ rather that it will be occasional and limited to specific scenarios . It does NOT ‘imply Intervention will never’t be necessary.’
 Washington could provide assistance to allies and pledge to support them if they were in danger of being conquered . But it should refrain from deploying large numbers of United States forces abroad .
 Washington should pass the buck to regional powers, as they have a far greater interest in preventing any state from dominating them . It may occasionally make sense to keep certain assets overseas, such as small military contingents, intelligence-gathering facilities, or prepositioned equipment, but in general
 The U.S. must deploy enough firepower to shift the balance in its favor, says the author . The United States must help get the job done, he says .
 Emma Ashford argues the 1990 Iraq invasion of Kuwait was a good example of where offshore balancing could have worked well . Ashford says the Iraq invasion was a great example of offshore balancing .
 The U.S. should have returned to its role as an offshore balancer and significantly reduced its presence in the Middle East . The United States should have left its role in the Mideast as a balancer.
 NATO has decreased defense investment since the end of the Cold War . Lack of capability is mainly the result of a decrease in defense investment by the members of NATO .
 NATO’s 87 such a strategy, the United States would be able to cede ambitious efforts to remake other societies and converge on preserving U.S. dominance in the Western Hemisphere .
 The U.S. should consider downsizing its military presence in Europe and force Western European countries to counterbalance Russia . The United States should step in only when absolutely necessary, says the author of the book .
 At its height in 1953, the U.S. had 450,000 troops in Europe operating across 1,200 sites . The United States had approximately 450,00 troops.
 During the early 1990s, U.S. troop numbers in Europe dropped considerably . In response to a perceived reduction in the threat from Russia, the United States troop numbers dropped significantly .
 The U.S. remains in charge of NATO, expanding it without any clear provocation from the Russian side .
 The United States spent over $3.7 billion on security expenditures to support the European Reassurance Initiative in Fiscal Year 2017 . Shifting to offshore balancing, coupled with a rejection of attempts to shape regional states’ domestic politics, would allow the United States to take a founding document
 Five of 28 NATO member states spent the required 2 percent of GDP on defense in 2015 . In 2015, five of 28 member states (Estonia, Greece, Poland, the US, and the U.K. spent the needed 2 percent on defense .
 This strategy would alleviate U.S. policymakers’ need to “pick a side’ in regional disputes and drive European states to take on a more significant role. This would alleviate United States’s need to pick a side, say experts .
 Russia’s bellicose behavior is seen as a threat to their existence . For those NATO members that lived under the iron fist of the Warsaw Pact or that were absorbed into the Soviet Union after World War II .
 The U.S. and Russia are engaged in an implicit war waged by the US against Russia . This hands-off approach is more likely to minimize inflammatory rhetoric .
 This strategy does not imply the U.S. should disengage diplomatically or economically from Europe . This strategy doesn't imply the United States should engage diplomatically, or economically.
 U.S. policymakers may well find that our diplomatic influence on difficult issues improves when it is less entangled .
 Moscow views western European countries as being bullied by the United States into opposing Russia . More progress can be made through a peaceful process if the U.S. steps back, Moscow says .
 An international system where the dominant hegemon takes a secondary role would require a strong European presence to counter-balance . A strong EU presence would need to be a strong presence in the world's most important system .
 Russia remains too worried about its neighbors to roam into the Western Hemisphere . By maintaining the regional balance of power in Europe, Russia remains the most powerful state outside of the US .
 The Los Angeles Times.com/world/la-fg-belarusrussia-relations-2017070308-story .
Business Insider.com/percentage-of-countries-who-died-during-wwii-2014-5.5.
 The Chicago Tribune, 22 October 2017.com/news/opinion/ commentary/ct-perspec-putin-russia-humiliation-bershidsky-102320171020-story .
 The U.S. military is a major threat to Russia in the region .
Euromaidan-ukraine’s-self-organizing-revolution. World Affairs, March 2014, is the latest in a long line of events in the world .
 The BBC News Online, 16 November 2016, is the BBC's News Online News Online .
 The Weekly Standard.com/high-anxiety-in-the-baltics/article/1035834 .
 Mindfully.org.org: 24 May 2002 .
 Council on Foreign Relations, 2014. www.cfr.org/nonprol iferationarms-control-and-disarmament/strategic-stability-second-nuclearage/p33809 .
Russia’s-soft-power-and-geopoliticalimagination. PONARS Eurasia.
 Russia’s Intervention in Georgia,” August 2008.
Britannica.com/place/Belarus.com: May 2016 .
imediadistribution.com/ Networks/cid/ Details/NetworkIndex/7. Accessed 8 March 2018 .
Nato. Accessed 2 February 2017. http://www.nato.com/nato/.
 Deutsche Welle Akademie. www.dw.com/en/belarus-rejects-putins-call-for-unification-withrussia/a-15295158 .
 www.history.com/topics/cold-war/perestroika-and-glasnost. Accessed 20 March 2018 .
 Newsweek, 10 September 2012.com/putins-god-squad-orthodox-church-and-russian-politics-64649 .
U.S.KBN16G1L1.com/usbelarus-lukashenko-tax-idUSKBN 16G1l1.
Business Insider.com/putin-us-libya-intervention-Hillary Clinton-2017-2.com .
Russian lawmakers reject Ukraine's view on Stalin-era famine, says Russian News & Information Agency .
U.S.5N0JI1QI1G20131203.3 December 2013 .
Ukrainian-separatists-claim-to-have created-a-new-country-malorossiya-or-little-russia. Washington Post, 19 July 2017.
 The USKCN0ZN0N0E3 is the name of the U.S. Central Bank of Russia . It is the country's second largest bank .
Britannica.com/place/ Ukraine/Ukraine-under-direct-imperial-Russian-rule#ref40444469 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery .
 Reflections on a Research Journey, edited by The Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, is published on October 26 .
Joint Military Exercises Reinforce American Power in Eastern Europe .
 Obama, Barrack H., President interview by Fareed Zakaria, 1 February 2015 .
 Response to Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe . Response to the crisis in Ukraine. Response to crisis in the Ukraine and security concerns in Europe .
 Discourse on NATO in Russia during the Kosovo War, NATO–EAPC Research Fellowship Fellowship Final Report, 1999 .
 Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements . Assessing Russia's actions to United States and NATO posture enhancements .
 Washington DC: Congressional Research Service, 2017. Economic Implications.
 The U.S. Foreign Policy Toward Ukraine is on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, 114th Cong., 1st sess.
 A Minority Staff Report before the Foreign Relations Committee, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., 2018. A minority Staff Report.
 Testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee .
 Testimony before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Washington D.C., 17 September 2008 .