 U.S. condemned once again Russia's Crimea annexation, vowing to maintain sanctions until Moscow returns the Black Sea peninsula to Ukraine .
 The EU prolonged personal sanctions and the European Parliament passed a resolution supporting the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The EU extended personal sanctions on personal sanctions .
 The United States again condemns the Russian occupation of Crimea and calls for its immediate end . The U.S. State Department spokesman Mark Toner marks the three-year anniversary of Moscow’s takeover of Crimea .
 Russia annexed the Ukrainian peninsula on 18 March following a military intervention and a hastily organised referendum, which was rejected by the international community . Russia annexed Ukraine's peninsula in March .
 The U.S. calls on Russia to “cease its attempts to suppress freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association, and religion’ Among Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians, pro-Ukrainian activists and journalists, the United States says .
 The move is likely to dispel fears that the administration of Donald Trump will lift the sanctions against Russia . Russia imposed over its intervention in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea .
 European Parliament expresses equal concern about the deteriorating human rights situation in Crimea . It condemns the discriminatory policies against the Tatar minority .
 MEPs call on Russia to release immediately all illegally and arbitrarily detained Ukrainian citizens . MEPs also call for Russia to provide for their safe return .
 These include Mykola Karpyuk, Stanislav Klykh, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Oleg Sentsov, Olekandr Chyrniy, and other members of the military .
 EU lawmakers also urged Russia to allow all the above-mentioned people to travel freely . Mykola Semena is being prosecuted for his journalistic work for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .
On Russia-related issues there is a tradition of MEPs voting against the instructions of their political group leaders . MEPs vote against political leaders' instructions.
 Eurosceptics from Nigel Farage's EFDD group and right-wingers from Marine Le Pen’s ENF group . Those who voted against are mainly leftwing MEPs .
 Among the EPP rebels are former European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek and former European Commissioner Viviane Reding . The rebels are big names such as former European parliament president JerzyBuzek .
 ALDE leader Guy Verhofstadt has elevated himself to the position of being the main critic of Vladimir Putin’s policies .
 The European External Action Service published a wrap-up of the EU's restrictive measures in response to the crisis in Ukraine .
 On 13 March, the Council prolonged these measures until September 2017 .
 Russia annexed Crimea because it was part of Russia for two centuries, had been ‘donated’ to Ukraine by Khrushev in 1964 . There was a referendum that approved the move .
 The only reason why the West keeps sanctions against Russia is because it wants a more pliable leader than Putin . The West wants to be more pliability than Putin.
 Eltsin allowed its firms to loot Russia’s natural wealth and transformed Russia into a basket case . The West preferred the drunkard in chief.
 The Soviet Union chose to administer the autonomous Crimean region through Kiev . Crimea was not physically connected to the Russian Soviet Republic and Crimea received most of its water, electricity and food from Ukraine .
 The coup that resulted in Crimea being annexed by Russia was initiated when the parliament of Crimea was surrounded by armed men and the parliament voted at gunpoint to hold a referendum . Crimea was annexed in Crimea by Russia after the coup .
 President Putin claimed personal credit for planning and leading the execution of Crimea .
 Clearly, this was not a spontaneous initiative of the people living in Crimea . This was not an initiative of people living there .
 The sanctions were initiated because of Russia’s actions that threaten the security of Europe . Russia's actions threaten Europe's security, the EU says .
 In the 2012 parliamentary elections pro-Russia parties secured less than 4% of the vote . In 2012, pro- Russia parties secured fewer than 4 per cent of vote .
 The elite that the Soviet Union produced chose to steal from the country rather than build the country . The elite chose to take the country instead of build it .
 Russia could have had one of the highest GDP per capita in the world if oligarchs had chosen to build their country instead of exploiting it for their personal gain .
 Petersburg and Moscow remain to finish as do many projects that would boost economic performance . Petersburg and Russia remains to finish .
 The real coup was not that which separated Crimea from Ukraine, but that which led to the dismissal of Yanukhovich . Oligarchs are the legacy of America's beloved Yeltsin .
 When they saw that a coup engineered by the West would have deprived them of the right to participate in their country's politics, they took up arms .
 Russia threatening Europe’s peace, please, a minimum of common sense, please. Insofar as Russia threatens Europe's peace,please, please , please .
For Russia to invade the EU would be like me picking up a fight with Tyson, says Tyson . For Russia to invaded the EU, it would be a fight for Tyson .