 The Library of Congress offers a wide range of tools to help Americans understand Congress . The library offers a range of ways to understand Congress' work .
 Last year, the Obama Administration requested $95.271 million in U.S. bilateral aid for Ukraine for FY2014 .
Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 It has drawn its support from that quickly resulted in the regime’s own eastern Ukraine, where suspicion of Ukrainian demise has been raised .
 Elite “Berkut’s” riot police attempted to ‘nationalist’ is high and support for close ties with Russia is strong .
 It defends the economic interests of powerful clear protestors from the Maidan and other oligarchic business groups . It also defends the interests of clear protestors.
 The 18th, 19th resistance to the new leadership, at least for now, and 20th. Since the collapse of Kyiv, scores of deputies gangs of street thugs have fled from Kyiv or left the party . Most of the 88 persons, mostly protestors, were killed on
 Yuliya Tymoshenko has run on a populist, anti-corruption platform . Fatherland Many casualties were caused by firearms, he says .
 Ukrainian nationalism is strongest. It draws support from western and central Ukraine, where mainly used by police is strongest .
 The government reportedly had plans to use snipers much more extensively in February 2014 . Fatherland also became the leading faction in Ukraine’s unsuccessfully tried to order the army to join parliament .
 A party espousing extreme Ukrainian Kyiv to their bases and a ban on the use of nationalism and economic populism, Freedom receives firearms . The party also receives firearms.
 Once the police and military had complied with the resolution, groups of other opposition groups instead of a surge in support for extreme Ukrainian nationalism .
Activists played a key role in fighting against riot police in the Maidan Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters in protests .
 It continued into Russia. It opposes market economics and favors strong ties to Russia . It continues into Russia .
 Ukraine's current government is disbanding the Berkut . The perceived weakness of the authorities in Kyiv could potentially be exploited by Crimea and Russia .
 His failure to do so touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime three months later . The emergence of what is likely to be a pro-EU, pro-Western government.
 The assistance covers such areas as energy cooperation, strengthening border controls, bolstering the judiciary and the rule of law, and addressing environmental concerns . The assistance includes energy cooperation.
 The EU may provide a possible emergency program to stabilize Ukraine's finances . This amount would be in addition to any macrofinancial aid that may be provided by the EU .
 Global Health funding helps Ukraine fight its HIV/AIDS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem .
 The 113th Congress has considered legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine . Other legislation has been considered by the 113th congress .