 Ukraine, not just Ukraine, are simply geographical neighbours, rather than “little brothers’s in an extended family run from Moscow .
 Russia did not take its largest post-Soviet neighbour very seriously . For more than two decades prior to it, Russia did Not take its biggest post- Soviet neighbour seriously .
 Many in Moscow viewed Ukraine’s 2004-2005 ‘Orange Revolution’ primarily in terms of a new political technology of “colour revolutions’ launched by Americans in order to expand their geopolitical influence .
 Vladimir Putin made Ukraine's integration with Russia a centrepiece of the foreign policy program as he prepared to return to the Russian presidency in 2012 . Putin is expected to return in 2012.
 Despite all its dangers and complications, the actual situation today is far more favourable for Russia than what the presumed “successes’ of its policies would have offered . Russia is more favourable today than what it would have been if it had offered .
 This article was first published by Carnegie Moscow Centre on the 21st of March, 2018 .
 Dmitri Trenin, director of Carnegie Moscow Center, has been with the centre since its inception .
 He chairs the research council and the Foreign and Security Policy Program . He also chairs the Research Council and Foreign and security Policy Program.
 Russia has shot itself in the foot geopolitically speaking with respect to Ukraine, author says . He says it is alienating an ancient ally .
 I agree that it is probably to the benefit of world stability in the longer run . I think this was less inevitable than the writer suggests, but I agree it is likely to benefit the world stability .
 Russia has an economy smaller than that of Australia and a population smaller than Pakistan . It leaves Russia with an economy bigger than that.
 Tony O’Neill: Cold war warriors are still among us, seeing the nefarious hand of Washington everywhere . I see from Tony’s reply above, and the O'Neill piece earlier.
 Dmitri is essentially right about the key sources of the changes in Ukraine, he says . I think they are paranoid, says Dmitri . He says he is also right about what is happening in Ukraine .
 I would only add a number of extra observations to the essential historical and political context O’Neill provides . I would just add a few extra observations, he says .
 There are also many that come together again after war or political hostility . There are many who have come together after war.
 Union and Confederate USA, East and West Germany, North and South Vietnam, maybe in future North and North Korea . South Korea .
Tremin's assumption that Russia's and Ukraine's geopolitical separation is already permanent is not justified by comparative political history . Tremin’s basic assumption is that Russia and Ukraine are already separated is not true .
 Many Ukrainians would not see Russia as a predator, rather as a loved elder brother, if they were allowed safely to express their feelings . Many Ukrainians wouldn't see Russian as a predators, rather than a loved older brother .
 Ukraine is now a fascist state in the making, says O'Neill . I agree with O’Neill that Ukraine has now become afascist state.
 Richard Sakwa: Ukraine is as a liberal multicultural state that gives guaranteed rights to all its minorities . The only happy alternative future for Ukraine, he writes, is as liberal multicultural states that give rights to minorities .
 The odd question is who he would now publish such an abstract piece, as civil war continues t0 rage in the Eastern Ukrainian areas . Many of whom are avowed Nazis, many of them are also avowed Nazi .