Post-Soviet tolerance of blurred identities and multiple loyalties has ended . Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the military conflict in eastern Ukraine have ended .
 One state, two countries, followed by a comment addressing the discourse of two Ukraines in a critical way . One state was followed by another state, one state, and one country .
 The Russian language and culture can be a legitimate part of Ukrainian national identity, he says . He argues that some elements of the Soviet legacy still hold Ukraine together .
 The East lacked the symbolic resources necessary to construct its own version of a modern national identity . I also argued that the “other Ukraine,e.e. the East, had no distinctive voice and that it lacked a distinctive voice .
 In subsequent years I returned repeatedly to these arguments in connection with my research on transformations, discourses and identities in the Ukrainian-Russian borderlands .
Ukrainian intellectuals ask how the country could have ended up in such a disastrous situation . Today, like many Ukrainian intellectuals, I ask how many of them could have been killed .
 Ukrainian historian and public intellectual Andriy Portnov recently criticized the popular discourse of “othering” Portnov . Portnov: Donbas is “orientalized” and turned into a negative archetype .
 Ukrainian identity debate has been put back to zero. But it has also cleared the intellectual atmosphere and put the debate on Ukrainian identity back tozero .
 Journalists, academics and writers from eastern Ukraine have had a refreshing effect on the public discourse . Many of them are Russian speaking but Ukrainian patriots, many of them Russian speaking .
 Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa, Kharkiv and other big and small cities have rediscovered their “Ukrainianness” and are manifesting it in various ways .
 The future of Ukraine as a nation is today being decided in the East . Whether they do or not, the future of the country is currently being decided.
Some of my arguments from 2002 in light of the dramatic events that have meanwhile taken place in the Ukrainian-Russian borderlands. In this article I shall reconsider some of my argument from 2002 .
 Contemporary cultural studies like the concept of ‘borderlands’ because it seems to fit our complex, interrelated and dynamic world .
 In recent decades, borderlands have been re-construed as contact zones, as systems of communication and as social networks . In recent years, borderland areas have been used as a contact zone .
 As geopolitically amorphous zones ‘in between’ they generate hybrid identities . Political, economic and cultural practices combine different, often mutually exclusive values .
 borderlands are associated with multiculturalism, cultural authenticity and cosmopolitanism . Borderlands are linked to multiculturalism and cultural authenticity .
 From the nation-building perspective, their ambiguity is nothing to be celebrated . But from the nation's perspective, it's nothing to celebrate .
 Mixed and overlapping identities and multiple loyalties pose a challenge to the nationalizing agenda and potentially threaten the integrity of a nation-state .
 Since 1991, Ukraine has a new borderland. These two approaches clashed over eastern Ukraine, a former Soviet heartland .
 The Russian speaking population of eastern Ukraine voted for the Communists and for oligarchic parties . They were indifferent and even hostile to the national idea .
 Ukraine's troubled transition from communism. They appeared the main cause of Ukraine’s troubled transition . They still mentally lived in the Soviet empire .
 Ukraine’s eastern borderlands represented the weakness of national identity and a threat to the project of a truly independent Ukraine. From this perspective, Ukraine's eastern borderland represented the weaknesses of the national identity .
 Ukraine's political and intellectual elites reinvented their regions as borderlands, first of all in order to justify the close cultural ties and economic cross-border cooperation .
 The concept of borderlands helped legitimize the lack of a strong national identity . Stressing cultural diversity, bilingualism and the de-politicization of ethnicity also helped legitimized the concept .
 The Kharkiv region was re-narrated as a zone of joint Ukrainian and Russian colonization . It was characterized by an absence of ethnic conflict and peaceful co-existence .
 references to Soviet internationalism and preference of class over ethnic identity served to construe Donbas as a ‘special case’ that escaped the logic of the nationalizing state .
 The rejection of ethnic categorization and the emphasis on local identity was a typical reaction to what was perceived as the “nationalism’ of Kyiv and western Ukraine . The rejection was a Typical reaction to the ‘nationalist’ in Ukraine .
 This defensive borderlands discourse was linked to the trauma of the disintegration of the Soviet Union . This defensiveborderlands discourse is linked to a growing number of issues in the region .
 It evoked an undifferentiated, common cultural space with a local population . It valued blurred or hybrid Ukrainian-Russian, eastern-Slavic, Orthodox or residual Soviet identities .
Ukrainian national idea was not sufficiently inclusive and failed to accommodate the eastern borderlands . One can still debate whether it was the weakness of national identity in the East that paved the way to pro-Russian separatism .
 The annexation of Crimea and the military conflict in the East have ended. The era of post-Soviet ambiguity and tolerance of blurred identities and multiple loyalties has ended .
 Borderlands have again turned into 'bloodlands' and one can only guess what new constellations will emerge from this crisis .
Every part of this sentence must be reconsidered . In light of current events, every part of these sentences must be reconsidered .
 The loyalty of the Russian-speaking population to the Ukrainian state had never been tried . In fact, the loyalty to the state was never tried .
 Ukraine's annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and the ‘Russian spring’ inspired by Moscow, has now come . Ukraine's army, volunteers to the National Guard and those who care for wounded soldiers and refugees . Those who voted for the Donetsk and Luhansk “people�
 The majority opted for the Ukrainian state, some driven by considerations of safety and fear of violence . Others inspired by a new sense of patriotism, others inspired by the pain of national humiliation and by solidarity .
 There were also those who did – and still do – sympathize with the separatists and with Russia . However, there were also some who still do - sympathizing with Russia.
 Some were seduced by promises of higher salaries and pensions . Others rediscovered their Russian identity and had never felt at home in the Ukrainian state .
 One of the difficult questions we will be confronted with after the war is how to live together again in one state. The question will be answered by the U.S.
 The Maidan 2013/14 has been widely interpreted as a delayed attempt to complete the de-Sovietization of Ukraine and catch up with 1989 revolutions in eastern and central Europe .
 Most of the remaining Lenin monuments were destroyed as the Euromaidan rolled over the country . Many were left standing as sites of pro-Russian mobilization and symbols of discontent with Kyiv government .
 Ukraine has inherited both the industrial, communicational and cultural infrastructure of a modern nation as well as a framework of collective identity from the Soviet era . The country's heritage is not necessary something negative.
 At that time, I also believed that eastern Ukraine was a vital part of Ukraine’s European project .
 Eastern Ukrainian cities referred to the legacy of Soviet urbanization and the Ukrainian modernism of the 1920s and early-1930s .
 In Donbas, industrial culture and the working-class ethos formed in the Soviet era was a source of collective pride and a cornerstone of local identity .
More than two decades after the collapse of the Soviet Union, I am no longer so optimistic . Today, more than 20 years after the Soviet collapse, I'm no longer optimistic .
 Dmitri Medvedev’s programme for Russian modernization demonstrates. Modernizing Soviet modernity is an almost impossible task, as the epic failure of Dmitri's programme for modernization demonstrates .
 de-industrialization is a global trend, not something peculiar to the post-Soviet space . Of course, de- industrialization is not peculiar to post- Soviet space .
 In developed countries, old industrial regions also suffer from structural problems . Think of Detroit or the Ruhr valley in Germany, think of Detroit .
Reviving these regions requires investment, creativity and political will . Reviving these areas requires investment and creativity, according to experts .
 industrial assets and facilities inherited from the Soviet era were exploited to their limit . Rather than being modernized, the industrial assets were exploited .
 Post-Soviet capitalism in eastern Ukraine was a symbiosis of “red directors’ and criminal clans . Trade unions and institutionalized workers’ movements were largely absent .
 Today, those lucky enough to have a job on temporary contracts are entirely at the mercy of the management . Today, these lucky enough have a work on temporary contract contracts .
 Many small, mono-industrial towns – especially in Donbas – have become depopulated . People have either left to work in Russia, joined smuggler gangs or turned to small-scale subsistence agriculture .
 The urban infrastructure is obsolete and local mayors are considered successful when they provide cosmetic improvements to city centres . Local mayors provide some cosmetic improvements in city centres.
 The European football championship of 2012 left behind a few stadiums and hotels in Donetsk, Kharkiv, Kyiv and Lviv . But it had nothing like the economy promised by the Yanukovych government .
Post-Soviet capitalism corresponds to a specific type of political system rooted in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian variant of post-Soviet Capitalism corresponds to the Ukrainian variant .
 Donbas lacked political diversity and competition, and it provided the model that the regional elites tried to impose on the entire country . Donbas in particular lacked political Diversity and competition .
 Ukrainian political scientists Oleksandr Fisun and Oleksiy Krysenko have argued that elections turned into formal procedures for legitimizing an unfair and opaque system of power . They say this model laid a time bomb under the Ukrainian state .
 The population was employed at outdated, Soviet-era enterprises heavily subsidized out of the state budget . Social mobility was blocked and the population was unemployed at outdated enterprises .
Anti-Kyiv protests that started in spring 2014 mainly attracted the losers of the post-Soviet transition . Unlike in other regions, there were almost no alternative elites in Donbas, which explains why Euromaidans were marginal .
 Similar tendencies could be observed elsewhere in the East of the country, for example in Kharkiv, where governor Mykhailo Dobkin and mayor Hennadiy Kernes monopolized the political resources .
 Its bosses tried to ignore the Euromaidan protests and hired people to demonstrate in support of the Yanukovych government .
 Criminal bully-boys were used to harass Euromaidan activists and beat up protesters on the streets .
 Former sportsmen were often informally affiliated to the police and used as body guards and thug squads in local business wars . Known as titushki, these former sportsmen are known as the mafia background of parts of the political elite .
 Donetsk "overseers" planted in the local police and security services provided the social and political basis for a Ukrainian Vendée . Many other eastern and southern Ukrainian cities still suffering from the economic consequences of the Soviet collapse .
 Ukraine is not the remnants of Soviet modernity that prevents the Europeanization of Ukraine, but a monstrous neoplasm that has grown upon its ruins .
 Many Euromaidan activists miss the target of aggressive anti-Soviet rhetoric . That is why the aggressive rhetoric of many activists misses the target .
 The Lenin monuments are markers of a Soviet identity that has survived in the economically depressed industrial enclaves of the Ukrainian East . For them, the Lenin monument is a marker of the Soviet identity .
 The East and the West have different cultural identities based on distinctive historical memories and different, often mutually exclusive values . The popular discourse of ‘two Ukraines’ assumes that the East and West have separate cultural identities .
 The East, so it goes, has no tradition of a Ukrainian nationalist movement . The population, unlike that of the West, has internalized Soviet identity and supressed collective trauma of the Holodomor .
 What especially divides the East and West, according to this discourse, is the collective memories of World War II and the irreconcilable narratives of heroism .
 eastern Ukraine shares with Russia the heroic narrative of the Great Patriotic war . Western Ukraine honours the heroes of the UPA, the Ukrainian Insurgent Army .
 Twelve years ago, to me and many others, this discourse seemed potentially dangerous and threatening to Ukrainian integrity . Twelve years later, to many others this discourse appeared potentially dangerous, threatening to Ukraine's integrity .
 Nobody had a premonition of how its results would finally materialize . But nobody had a premonition of how the results would materialize.
 History was exploited politically, particularly during the presidential campaign of 2004 and the Orange revolution . The Orange revolution was also exploited politically .
Both camps operated a detrimental identity politics that essentialized the East-West division of the country and turned it into a political weapon . Both camps operated the same identity politics as the West .
 Old clichés about ‘nationalist’ Galicia and the “fascist threat’ were re-heated and pitted against the stereotypes propagated by the other side about “rootless’, “criminal” Donbas .
 The election of Viktor Yanukovych as president in 2010 barely altered the situation . Yanukovych was elected president of Ukraine in 2010 .
 Ukraine has little to offer western and central Ukraine and had no coherent identity politics at the national level . He continued to concentrate on his clientele in eastern Ukraine .
 The identity of Donbas continued to be defined against the “alien’s cultural and political values of western Ukraine .
 The Euromaidan provided a new source for eastern phobias about radical Ukrainian nationalism . The war of identities had been smouldering beneath the surface for years .
 The Euromaidan in the East is a highly ideological East-West dichotomy . It draws on World War II and the Soviet Union’s battle against Nazi Germany . There are other memories that actually matter more.
 Both individual and collective, these are memories of perestroika and the disintegration of the Soviet Union .
 The latter is remembered in the East not as a new beginning but as a rupture of the existing order, as an economic collapse and painful split with Russia .
 Fears of economic collapse resonated with memories of the 1990s recession . In eastern Ukrainian cities, the Russian market matters a great deal for many big companies .
 The violent confrontation in Kyiv escalated as the violent confrontation escalated . parallels were evoked with Russia’s constitutional crisis of 1993, when the political stand-off between president Yeltsyn and the parliament ended with street-fighting .
 Many people in eastern and southern Ukraine experienced these events as part of their own history . Despite national independence, many people in east and south Ukraine experienced the events .
Yushchenko's presidency also played a role in how the Euromaidan protests were perceived . Other memories of the Orange Revolution and Yushchenko’s presidency were also remembered .
 Many eastern Ukrainians associate this period with the failure of local “Orange’s politicians to fight corruption and carry out reforms . The period is a time of shrill and fruitless political conflict and endless intrigue .
 No research has so far been done on the collective memory of the recent past and its impact on local political culture and cultural identity .
 The discourse of “two Ukraines’ always found an echo on the pro-Russian side of the political spectrum . It was shared and amplified by numerous politicians and journalists in Russia itself .
 The state of the Russian economy was no less dire than the Ukrainian one . The war in Chechnya and the series of terrorist attacks in Russian cities made Ukrainians appreciate the peace and relative stability .
 In the 1990s, Russia’s ruling elites had other worries than Ukrainian independence .
 Russian nationalists had little influence on mainstream politics in Russia . Some of them fought in Abkhazia, Transdniestria and Yugoslavia .
 Moscow’s failure to ensure the victory of the pro-Russian candidate Viktor Yanukovych radically changed Moscow's perspective on Ukraine . The Orange Revolution and Moscow's failure to win the election radically changed the country's perspective .
 The revolution was seen as a western coup aimed at undermining Russia’s influence in its legitimate sphere of geopolitical interest . The revolution has been dubbed a Western coup .
 The pro-western Ukrainian elites were perceived as “traitors’ of Slavic-Orthodox civilization . associations were evoked with the Ukrainian national heroes Ivan Mazepa and Stepan Bandera . Both of whom had turned against the Russian / Soviet state .
 The aim was to discredit pro-western Ukrainian elites as archaic nationalists and to present even moderate and democratic Ukrainian nationalism as “fascism’s”
 Protests in support of the Russian language, against NATO and against the glorification of Bandera and the UPA were organized . Vandalization of “nationalist’s” monuments.
 The aim was not so much to impress the local public and the Ukrainian authorities as to create media events that gave the impression of strong opposition to Yushchenko’s politics in Ukraine .
 United by an “anti-Orange’s agenda, various actors – ranging from pro-Russian political parties to Soviet veterans’ associations – created a heterogeneous yet active milieu .
Denying Ukraine's distinctive national identity, Russia suggested alternative identities instead .
Russkiy mir is a new state ideology supported by the Russian authorities and the Russian Orthodox Church . It was largely based on the concept of Russkiymir, which during the 2000s advanced rapidly .
 Russkiy mir is an ambiguous and open concept that initially signified "Russia beyond its state borders" It later became a synonym for the construct of an Russian-Orthodox-Slavic civilization .
 Depending on the context, Russkiy mir has various connotations, ranging from neutral ethno-cultural to the imperial and explicitly revanchist .
 The three eastern Slavic nations – Russia, Ukraine and Belarus – constitute the core of Russkiy mir . A spiritual and cultural fundament going back to prince Vladimir’s baptism of Kyiv in 988 .
 Ukraine is represented as part of a thousand-year-old Russian civilization . Ukraine is thus represented as a thousand year-old Russia .
 These ties allegedly run far deeper than any recent, “artificial, construction of national identity’s national identity, according to a report .
 Russian Orthodox Church is not the only institution spreading the ideology of Russkiy mir beyond Russia’s borders .
 The Russkiy Mir Foundation is a state sponsored organization created in 2007 by the Russian foreign ministry and ministry of culture . Another one is the RusskiY Mir Foundation which was created by the foreign ministry in 2007 .
 It has branches in several Ukrainian cities, mainly in the East and South . It actively cooperates with Russian language schools .
 Russian universities and institutions of higher education have branches in Ukraine that promote Russian ideas and cultural values .
 Russian cultural products dominate the Ukrainian market and serve to export Russian imperial history and Russian patriotism, to excite anti-westernism. Not least, Russian culture is to glorify the Russian army and security services .
 Many commentators noted a new tone in the official Russian rhetoric after the annexation of Crimea .
 Vladimir Putin legitimized his actions on the grounds that it had been necessary to protect his “compatriots’s” ‘compatriot’ Vladimir Putin said it was necessary to protection his ’s ethnic Russian origin . The new Kyiv government was simply
Russkiy mir was reduced to ethnic Russian nationalism that equates Russians and Russian-speakers and denies the very existence of Ukraine .
 Russian media at first used the geographic designation “Yugo-Vostok’ , which was still Kyiv-centred . To re-identify this “other Ukraine’s’ other Ukraine, Russian media first used ‘
 Novorossiya was coined which reduces several Ukrainian oblasts to an “historical’ region attributed to Russia . Later, the much more powerful, geo-historical concept was coined .
 Novorossiya intends to constitute a new political reality . The creators of the concept intend to create a newpolitical reality .
 Some sort of alternative nation-building is underway, including the foundation of formal state structures . Meanwhile, some of the alternative nations are underway .
 A ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ has been proclaimed along with a “Luhansk People's Republic” Other ‘republics’, for example in Odessa and Kharkiv, may emerge any time .
 A new unifying narrative of a victorious revolution against a corrupt authoritarian regime came too late for Crimea . However, this new unifies narrative of the victorious revolution came tooLate for Crimea.
 There, the scarecrow of Ukrainian radical nationalism, in the form of the Pravyi Sektor, revived fears of ethnic violence and Ukrainization .
 The collapse of the ancien régime and some first unfortunate steps of the new Kyiv government seemed to confirm these fears . Kyiv's new government seems to confirm those fears .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea was a well-prepared operation that ended with the Crimea annexation . The Crimean Tatars and the pro-Ukrainian minority were protesting against the annexation .
 In the East and the South of the country, the power shift brought different developments . In the South, the change in power was seen as a result of a power shift .
 pro-Ukrainian part of the local population was not so much support by the pro-Russian minority . It was the common effort of local elites to prevent the collapse of the state institutions .
 A new alliance of local business, civil society and former counter-elites emerged around the basic agenda of providing peace, stability and security . The agenda has turned out to be pro-Ukrainian .
 Dnipropetrovsk's oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskiy used his financial and organizational resources to prevent a pro-Russian coup along the lines of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 In Kharkiv, the local Euromaidan transformed into a grassroots network of volunteer groups supporting the poorly equipped Ukrainian army and caring for wounded soldiers .
 New authorities and civic activists have initiated a public investigation and a reconciliation process intended to heal the city’s trauma . Odessa is only slowly recovering from the violent clashes of 2 May that cost dozens of lives .
 The "East" or "South-East" in the old sense no longer exists. One can say, then, that the “East” or “South- East’s’ old sense is no longer exist .
 The dramatic developments of spring 2014 have demonstrated that collective identities are situational and contextual and can rapidly change, especially under conditions of territorial secession, external aggression and military conflict .
 The ongoing war in Donbas will have profound and long-term consequences for the region . The region will be affected by the ongoing war. The war will have long- term consequences.
 The armed conflict has deepened anti-Ukrainian hostilities in some parts of the local population . It has taught other parts to appreciate security, stability and strong state institutions .
 If Kyiv government and its army and police force prove to be a guarantee of security for the population, the first step along the long road of re-integrating Donbas may have been made .
 armed conflict has also perpetuated the “othering of Donbas in public discourse. However, armed conflict also perpetuates the ‘othering’ of Don Bas .
 Russia is a driving force behind the separatist movement . A significant portion of the local population actively or passively has supported the Donetsk and Luhansk “republics’s, at least at the beginning .
 Ukrainian liberals continue to discuss how to win over the local population to the national project and to inculcate Ukrainian identity . nationalists cultivate social hatred and even consider mass cleansing .
 Tens of thousands of refugees have flooded Ukrainian cities, while hundreds of Donbas men continue to fight against the Ukrainian army .
 Hundreds of people have already been killed or wounded. Thousands have lost their property . Hundreds of them have already died or been wounded .
 Many families in western and central Ukraine do not understand why their sons and husbands should die for Donbas . Donbas does not even consider itself part of Ukraine .
 Donbas has already imprinted Donbas on the imaginary national map, with local toponyms such as Sloviansk, Krasnyi Luch or Torez now familiar to the whole country .
 Donbas has become the land where Ukrainian independence, democracy and the future of the nation are being defended . From now on, Donbas is Ukraine, from now on.
Bedingungen und Konsequenzen der Transformation einer alten Industrieregion, Münster 2006 . Bedingungens der Transformation is a German-based company .
 Her research focuses on borders and borderland identities and memory politics in Eastern Europe . She also focuses on gender politics and feminism in Ukraine .