 Putin massed between 150,000 and 200,000 soldiers along the borders of Ukraine . The attacks came as weeks of intense diplomacy and the imposition of Western sanctions on Russia failed to deter Putin .
 It moved to shed its Russian imperial legacy and forge increasingly close ties with the West . It has also moved to cut ties to the West.
 Kremlin-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected an association agreement with the European Union in favour of closer ties with Moscow . The decision led to mass protests that saw him removed as leader in 2014 .
 Russia responded by annexing Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist rebellion that broke out in Ukraine’s east .
 Ukraine and the West accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to back the rebels . Russia accused Ukraine and West of sending troops, weapons to the rebels.
 Moscow denied that, saying the Russians who joined the separatists were volunteers .
 More than 14,000 people have died in the fighting that devastated Donbas, Ukraine's eastern industrial heartland .
 Moscow has strongly criticised the United States and its NATO allies for providing Ukraine with weapons and holding joint drills . Moscow says such moves encourage Ukrainian hawks to try to regain rebel-held areas by force .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has repeatedly said Ukraine's aspirations to join NATO are a red line . Putin has expressed concern about plans by some NATO members to set up military training centres in Ukraine .
 The conflict has been raging for more than a decade . The conflict is currently between the two sides of the conflict .
 Russia does not want Ukraine in NATO – and has said as much in its list of security demands which were sent to the U.S. last December . Russia says as much as it wants Ukraine to be part of NATO as it does with Ukraine .
 Many of these ultimatums have been slammed as non-starters by the West . Many of them have been criticised for their lack of transparency .
 Putin has denied for months that he was planning an invasion of Ukraine . He has also called Ukraine an artificial creation carved from Russia by enemies . Ukraine's characterisation of Ukrainians is shocking and false .
 Ukraine’s admission to the alliance would require the unanimous approval of the 30 states that make up the body . Ukraine's admission would require unanimous approval.
Before being considered for membership, Kyiv needs to root out scourges such as corruption, NATO says .
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg rejected Russian demands to rescind 2008 commitment to Ukraine that the country would one day become a member .
 Analysts say NATO allies are reluctant to expand their military footprint in the region . Analysts also say that NATO allies, mainly the U.S. are reluctant.
 U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken has voiced support for Ukraine’s membership in NATO . President Joe Biden has been more ambiguous on the question .
 Shelling in the Donbas region has intensified since Monday . Putin recognised the two breakaway regions of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent . The West called the move the start of an invasion .
 On Wednesday, the separatists issued a plea to Moscow for help to stop alleged Ukrainian aggression . The U.S. has dismissed the separatists' claims as Russian propaganda .
 Putin said he had authorised military action to defend itself against what he said were threats emanating from Ukraine . Russia launched a full-scale invasion on Thursday shortly after Putin said it had authorised the action .
 Russian missiles hit multiple Ukrainian cities, including Kyiv . Ukraine reported columns of troops pouring across its borders into the eastern Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Luhansk regions .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy declared martial law and appealed to world leaders to impose all possible sanctions on Russia . He said he wanted to destroy the Ukrainian state .
 The full scope of the Russian military operation is not immediately clear . The full extent of the operation is unknown .
 Zelenskyy called on all citizens who are ready to defend the country from Russian forces to come forward . He said Kyiv would issue weapons to everyone who wants them .
 The U.S. has predicted that a Russian attack to take Kyiv may cause up to 50,000 civilian casualties . Thousands of Ukrainian and Russian soldiers are expected to be involved in the attack .
 European countries have been preparing for the likelihood of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians fleeing an assault . European countries are preparing to prepare for the possibility of thousands fleeing.
 EU foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell also promised the toughest financial sanctions the bloc had ever imposed .
 Washington and London have previously spoken of personal sanctions targeting the Russian president in the event of a major escalation in military action .
 Cutting Russia out of the SWIFT financial system would be one of the toughest financial steps they could take, damaging Russia’s economy immediately and in the long term . The system moves money from bank to bank around the globe .
 The move could cut Russia off from most international financial transactions, including international profits from oil and gas production . Russia accounts for more than 40 percent of the country’s revenue .
 The United States also holds one of the most powerful financial weapons against Putin if he invades Ukraine . The U.S. also holds a powerful financial weapon against Putin, blocking Russia from access to the United States dollar .
 The currency still dominates in financial transactions around the world, with trillions of dollars in play daily .
 The United States is considering imposing export controls on Russia . It could cut Russia off from the high tech that helps warplanes and passenger jets fly and powers smartphones .
 Russia has a war chest of more than $600bn in foreign exchange reserves and gold . It can use it to prop up the currency and absorb the shock of sanctions .
 The prospect of war and sanctions disrupting energy and commodities markets posed an immediate threat to a global economy barely emerging from the pandemic .
 Stocks and bond yields plunged, while the dollar and gold rocketed higher . Stocks, bond yields fell, while gold and the dollar soared .