 The unending crisis and bankruptcy of the imperialist system does not calm. The unenduring crisis and bankrupting of the imperialism system is no longer calm .
 In the past two months there have been new and important events of the class struggle in which the immediate fate of millions of exploited is decided .
 Revolutionary Marxism should be at the level of these real acid tests raising before the proletariat a program to conquer victory conditions, says John Sutter .
 This edition of the International Worker Organizer is dedicated to this year's edition . This edition is a special edition of this edition. This edition will be published on November 14 .
 Great Britain, smothered by Germany and the United States, seeks to go it alone at the Atlantic World . But also to the Pacific one .
The partnership of US-UK imperialism and that of the European imperialist powers is in question . The partnership of U.S. imperialism and the European imperialism is inquestion .
 The U.S. and Germany seek to encircle Russia and China to finish semi-colonizing them . The powers that came out victorious from the global crash of 2008.
 The world market has shrunk and imperialist banks only try to hide their bankruptcy by means of false balances and securities without backing in goods . The world markets have shrunk.
There is instability in the regime of imperialist domination that prevents this from settling its counter-revolutionary offensive, says the writer .
 The global workingclass is resisting with heavy fighting and, as in France and Bolivia - and more recently in Syriahappen, to conquer heroic mass offensives .
 The events of early May in Khantoman showed that the resistance, the exploited masses of Syria, could march on Damascus and "cut the head of the Snake" of genocidal Al-Assad .
 The insurrections of masses in Aleppo in June/July confirmed this notion categorically . In June/ July, the city's government confirmed the idea categorically.
 manipulation of generals-without-battles of the bourgeois leaderships, mounted over the resistance, prevented this... for the moment .
 This brochure includes multiple reports of the Leon Sedov Brigade from the same battlefield . You will see in this brochure the definition of the current time of the revolution.
 Readers will also find the work of our correspondent in Greece from the heart of the refugees who are under repression of the Government of New Left’s Syriza .
 We develop international conditions that caused seizures in that country . We develop the international conditions. We develop global conditions that cause seizures .
 Turkey has become an encircled sub-imperialism, seeking a sphere of influence, after an expansive cycle of 10 years . Crossed by all the contradictions of the revolution and the counter-revolution in the Middle East .
 Turkish oligarchy seeks to impose centrality manu militari inwards of Turkey, against its own working class, says author . Erdogan allowed the military coup to unfold, and the backlash of this are but evidence, he says .
 In our statement on Turkey we are opposed to the fallacy that the Turkish working class would have been which stopped the military coup . We are also opposed to a fallacy that Turkey would have stopped the coup .
 The reformist left is unable to distinguish the working class in the processes of civil war and military political clashes .
It is a parliamentary left corresponding to the upper layers of the working class . It is a utterly parliamentary left. It's a completely parliamentary left .
 The Turkish working class was crushed under bombings and brutally repressed in the large actions of this year’s May Day .
 The Kurdish fraction of the working class is bombarded daily by Erdogan’s troops . The Syrian working-class there, amounting 3 million refugees, is strangled and working as slaves .
 The coup was stopped by Erdogan with his majority in the armed forces and the bourgeois fractions . He sustains to launch a real backlash against the Turkish working class before this erupts .
 Therein we tackle the core issues of the world situation, Syria, and clashes between revolution and counter-revolution . We also tackle the issues of reform and revolution .
 Our current, the FLTI, is in the middle of a hard match regrouping the internationalist and healthy forces of the world working class .
 Marxists of Japan have conquered a front of international struggle with regard to the issue of political prisoners . They have fought together against treacherous leaderships and also in the internationalist struggle for the freedom of political prisoner .
Our readers may as well see it in this letter, which is presented as editorial in this material . Our readers may also see it as editorial.
 The American working class engages in battle with the IMF and Wall Street, supported by the reformist left .
 The American working class, together with Mexican masses, is the vanguard of the fight of the workers in the continent .
 The manufacturing workers of Bolivia have rebelled against the Government of Evo Morales . The Chilean working class and youth return to combat, thousand times betrayed by Stalinism and small groups of Trotskyism .
 We are witnessing extremely harsh struggles of the working class and great betrayals of its leaderships and the reformist left . The left has subordinated to "Socialist" Sanders in the U.S.
 The PT in Brazil means to kneel the exploited before one of its torturers . Temer Dilma s former partnercontinues the attack on the working class .
 In Brazil, imperialism selects its agents at the beginning of the economic crash . The working class must select their leaders for combat, but now at half of the road .
 The new left -as yesterday the world Social Forum only seeks disorganizing the left wing of the working class in the Americas .
 The left told the proletariat its ally was not in the new "French May" in raising the struggle of 35-hour working week for all European workers . They told the working class that the alternative was to support their own British bourgeoisie .
 This transforms the local bourgeois imperialist gang into ‘workers’ allies’ and the class brothers and sisters from the rest of Europe in their enemies . This transformation transforms the enemies of local bourgeois imperialism into “workers” allies .
 The working class of the imperialist powers subjected the working class to their own bourgeois gang . It led to physical clashes among them while their heads were scrambling for the areas of influence of the colonial and semicolonial world .
 The English SWP is a real center of organization of the forces of the world reformist left . The EnglishSWP is the center of group of forces of world reformists .
 The flag has transformed the flag of "UK independence" on a matter of principle of its program .
 We are facing a real focus 4 International Workers' Organizer of socialism and lackeys of the City of London and the Queen of England .
 The London bourgeois gangs treat the British working class equal or worse than Hollande treats the French working class .
 In France the capitalist gang is trying to snatch the 35 hours a week from workers .
 In the Spanish State and the rest of southern Europe, huge swathes of workers are unemployed and suffer chronic unemployment .
 In England, the "zero hour contracts" mean that the worker is 24/7 at the disposal of the company .
 These scoundrels, betrayers of socialism, have called for its own working class to vote in favor of the Brexit . The rupture of England with Maastricht.
 Workers for finishing with imperialist Maastricht's Europe and the banditry of the City of London's looters of the oppressed peoples of the world . They have submitted it to its imperialist bourgeoisie’s business .
 Other "Socialists" in Great Britain called to vote to stay in Maastricht .
 These undoubtedly defend the interests of transnational corporations and bankers in Paris .
 None of the social-imperialist currents has called to break ties with their bourgeois gang and go to common fight alongside their class brothers and sisters in Europe .
 The World Social Forum was in bankruptcy for years. It promised "socialism of the 21st century" with Chavez, Castro, Morales and the Chinese mandarins .
 French working-class fighting to open the road to a new "French May" to stop the offensive of the France Government, great businessmen and bankers .
 Ukraine's working class struggle is a struggle for the working class in Ukraine . We present also the persistence in the struggle of the workingclass in Ukraine.
 The Donbass miners continue to resist to a counter-revolutionary offensive and siege by NATO, Kiev-Fascist forces, plus the Russian-Stalinist fifth column that tries to surrender them from the inside .
 Donbass today receives forces from the uprising of workers and miners in the rest of Ukraine . However, "besieged" Donbass does not receive the uprising from the government of Poroshenko .
 The international conditions of new knockouts of the imperialist crac create objectively pre-revolutionary conditions internationally . The international condition of new knocksout of the imperialism crac creates pre- revolutionary conditions.
 The treacherous leaderships the masses have at their head are which prevent again a mass offensive internationally widespread . The dangerous leaderships are at the head, which prevent another mass offensive.
 In the case of Syria, amid the civil war, the rebel masses of Aleppo and Idlib were which in Khantoman defeated the forces of Al-Assad . They had in their hands the possibility to expropriate the banks of the bankers of AlAssad and imperialism .
 This led to the imposition of the siege of AlInternational Workers' Organizer 5 Assad to Aleppo . The siege led to a siege of the Syrian city of Aleppo .
 The masses returned to erupt against this siege, and ended up defeating the forces of Al-Assad, Turkey and Qatar . The false bourgeois leaderships pooled their forces to ""launch a counter-offensive" and break the siege with a corridor of 21km .
 The civil war in Syria is just looking for re-legitimizing those same treacherous leaderships when they are surpassed by the masses, so that they come again to control and disrupt the latter’s offensive. This modus operandi of imperialism and the treacherous leaders of the
 A modus operandi that works when the masses break the fences with which the bastions of revolution are besieged . Fences like that you see in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, Palestine, Athens .
 It is in moments of greatest offensive of masses when they break the control of treacherous leaderships . It is a moment of great offensive of mass leaderships, says the author .
 It is necessary to set up in the previous processes, bodies of direct democracy and self-determination, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: To seize that moment, which is what the manufacturing workers of Bolivia tenaciously sought, is what Paris young and workers vanguard and the rebel young
 Without this, the bourgeois opposition and the bureaucracy can return to take the control of the masses, both with demagoguery and manu militari .
 Trotskyists promote tirelessly a fight for setting up bodies of direct democracy of the masses in struggle . All currents and organizations that say to speak on their behalf have to submit . For this end we Trotskyist promote tirelessly.
 Struggles for workers councils, for militias with direct democracy is what guarantees that nobody will expropriate the struggle of the exploited .
 All the brochures of this IWO are dedicated to this fight, to draw lessons and raise a sharp program to defeat reformism and help the masses conquer victory.
 The old WSF leaderships are falling in the swamp of history . After destroying, betray and expropriating huge struggles of the first years of the 21st century, the old W SF leaderships have fallen .
 The "New Left" is composed of the old Stalinist leaderships and the Renegades of Trotskyism . It comes to take its turn to prevent the Socialist Revolution .
 This revision of equating Trotsky and Gramsci is a cynicism similar to Leninism counterfeiting Stalin carried out to show himself as Lenin’s successor .
 Trotsky and the left opposition leaders were the leaders —until 1924 / 1925 of the Third International . The left opposition leader was the leader of the left.
 Italian Stalinism joined the gang of Stalin against Trotskyism and the Bolshevik Leninists . From the start Gramsci and the entire Italian Stalinist joined the group .
 The Congress has before it is the fight against revisionism and forgery to Trotskyism which the reformist left has relentlessly peaked . The combat and the fundamental obligation that this Congress has is to fight against the left is to do so .
 Thousands of young people are looking for a way to the proletarian revolution to enter a supposedly Trotskyist party . All of this is amalgams, inconsistencies, fabrications to lure young people into a Stalinist one .
 Gramsci was a militant soldier of the Stalinist fraction, the bureaucracy choking the conquests of the October revolution and the Third International .
 Stalinism and its popular fronts strangled hundreds of proletarian revolutions in the world . And it completed the Stalinist program to support the "democratic stage" in support of the bourgeoisie .
 The Renegades of Trotskyism are looking for the "progressive Stalinist" with whom hundreds of thousands of revolutionary workers and young people are fooled .
In the 1960s and ' 70s Yalta ""Trotskyists" supported" Castro and Ho Chi Minh as "new Jacobins of the Socialist Revolution" in 1960s .
 liquidators of Trotskyism are still looking for their 'good' Stalinist . All of them have already handed out the worker States to imperialism .
 Renegades of Trotskyism have dusted a dead Stalinist, Gramsci, and want to ‘merge’ him with Trotsky .
 Trotsky faced Stalinism by grouping and organizing all the revolutionary resistance forces in the world . Trotsky faced the degeneration of the Soviet Union and treason to the III International .
 Trotskyism, in the '30, travelled all across the world organizing revolutionary forces left in the III International and then working on the centrist forces of the Socialist movement .
 Trotskyists founded the IV International and provided it with the theory program of permanent revolution . The IV International is the international character of proletarian revolution .
 The Trotskyists intervened and drew lessons from the events in Italy and in the troubled Europe of the interwar years .
 The Transitional Program was held by thousands of revolutionaries in the world . Trotskyism sought to regroup them, from Nazi Germany where he organized revolutionary cells up to Stalin's Soviet Union .
 International Workers'Organizer 7 The IV International organized their forces in China . They were occupied by Japan and English imperialism .
 Having started the Second World War, he organized the resistance in France occupied by Hitler . He organized the French resistance in French occupied by the German dictator .
 Trotsky discussed with and struggled to organize Italian internationalists, followers of Bordiga and the Prometheus Group .
 Never had Trotsky left him abandoned to the falsification and the siege of Stalinism in jail, if he had had even 1% of expectations about the possibility to converge with him .
 The battle against revisionism, which threatens not to leave stone on stone of Marxism, becomes crucial . The battle is crucial for the future of Marxism .
 A brochure will be released in the coming days. To do this we are preparing a brochure which is expected to be released .
 The III Congress of the collective by the Re-Foundation of the IV International/FLTI is all about this . In it also various organizations and currents will feature that promote with us a front of international struggle .
 A debate inside the internationalist currents of the world working class becomes decisive . A debate on theoretical and programmatic differences becomes decisive for the working class .
 An international grouping of the cream of the vanguard workers and the youth around the world becomes essential . An international group of the world's youth becomes essential.
 For us, who are confident in the program of the fourth international and its historical validity, it becomes necessary to face this perfidious policy of national-socialism of the new and old left currents .
 A new KienthalZimmerwald of the internationalist forces of the world working class becomes again necessary . A new Kienthalzimmerwald of the world's working class become again necessary.
 Breaking the siege of imperialist attacks on the bastions of revolution would be the starting points for this international grouping, says the writer .
 The "International Network for the Freedom of World Political Prisoners and Justice for our Martyrs" is the joint defense of the Leon Sedov Brigade of Syria by fractions of internationalist anarchist currents that openly confront Stalinism .
 The workers vanguard and future generations deserve a healthy and open debate of the internationalist working class forces .
 Marxism is settled in the worst decomposition with which capitalism corrupts autocracies and worker bureaucracies . That would be a serious blow against revisionism in Marxism .
 Trotskyists raise to advance to a fight-front and a debate among all currents that promote it . Combatting the latter is a decisive condition that we Trotskyists raised to advance, says author .
 Towards the III Congress of the Collective for the Refoundation of the IV International / FLTI we will make public all debates and discussions in our own ranks . Without this there is not and will never be life in a revolutionary movement .
 Let Stalinist and Social-Democrats parties suffocate the critical thinking of their militants and their revolutionary personalities .
 That's the history of Bolshevism about, as Trotsky said the struggle of its tendencies and fractions . That's a history that is nothing but as Trotsky says, a history of Bolshevikism .
 The Fourth International has passed the test of history . We affirm and that strengthens and unifies our forces. We affirm that we are in the Fourth International .
The working class has given one and a thousand opportunities to the revolutionary movement . The working class is giving one and one thousand opportunities.
 "The Fourth International and the War" was held in 1940 . It is not about preparing for only one revolution, but for a whole period of wars, crises and revolutions .
 This historical period will give revolutionary Marxism one and a thousand opportunities, as already it has been given and wasted . This historical time will be one and one thousand opportunities.
 Lenin: It is necessary to group 10 smart men, and not 10,000 morons . He apologized for calling the latter as such .
 The international conditions of the Syrian revolution and the international obligations of the revolutionary Marxists. From the trenches of the Syria revolution to the Executive Committee of the 54 Anti-war Assembly in Japan In Hiroshima and Nagasaki, United States dropped two atomic bombs .
 In five and a half years of Obama, Putin and Bashar the-dog massacre, they have murdered, in a real genocide . 600,000 oppressed and exploited in Syria... the equivalent of 4 nuclear bombs thrown by the U.S. in Japan .
 Trotskyists of the Fourth International in Syria greet this 54 Anti-war Assembly . They are from the International Trotskyist LeninistLeninist fraction .
Today once again we are, as we have always been, with you fighting together against imperialism, its regimes and Governments that starve, massacre and torture the world working class . Today once again, we are once again fighting against imperialism .
 We fight all over the world against Stalinism, the Renegades of Trotskyism and all the Union bureaucracies on whose shoulders the rotten capitalist system in bankruptcy is supported .
As in 2008 (with the crash of Wall Street), today the world crisis tsunami beats China . The world crisis is deepening the bankruptcy of the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty .
 The capitalist system shows the State of decomposition that it is in, and how it survives by throwing all its crises to the masses . The capitalist System shows the capitalist system is in.
 Kiev working-class has taken the streets to face the looting of the IMF . The fight to reInternational Workers' Organizer 9 cover Crimea and the struggle for a united, independent, and Soviet Ukraine to be the bastion to recover the USSR .
 In Greece, tens of thousands of refugees struggle to enter Europe . Thousands of young rebels are fighting for their rights and by pulling them from concentration camps .
 Black Lives Matter movement, workers and youth take the streets in the U.S. While they fight for USD 15 an hour minimum wage, they are also fighting for $15 an hour .
 The fight against the Transpacific Treaty of U.S. and Japan to enslave all the oppressed peoples of that region is driven by Japanese workers .
 In Africa and Latin America people are confronting the native bourgeoisie, partners to imperialism in the sacking of oppressed peoples .
 In Latin America the lie and the infamy has already dropped and collapses of the Bolivarian bourgeoisie . The only thing they have left in their withdrawal is more hunger, looting and repression on the working class .
 They show and have proven to be “left’s lackeys to the imperialist powers. So they show, they show and show they are right to the imperial powers .
From the FLTI, we want to send a message of solidarity and support to your struggle from the trenches of the workers and peasants .
 A revolt of the masses is being developed in Aleppo, the capital of Syria’s resistance, to break the siege of Bashar.
 The revolutionary masses have irrupted in real insurrectionary processes as in 2011 / 2012 . From 11 July, and earlier in Khantoman in early May, now fighting to regain the fenced Aleppo .
 This boiling of the masses is threating - and creating the conditionsto deliver more defeats to murderous Bashar Bashar, the policeman of the property of capitalists, banks and oil companies in Syria .
 Our struggle overflows to every step and breaks the control of the FSA generals and the entire Sunni bourgeoisie, which are sent to the liberated areas .
 In Syria, and in Aleppo in particular, a new intifada has started after years of massacre against the masses . In Aleppo, an anti-government campaign has started in the city of Aleppo .
 Bashar the dog and gunman Putin are doing the dirty work of crushing the Syrian revolution on account of all the imperialist powers . Bashar the Dog and Putin have been doing thedirty work of destroying the Syrian Revolution .
 In this country they try to give a lesson to the world working class and all the peoples of the world who "dare" stand up against the plans of hunger and looting of the imperialist gang against oppressed peoples .
 Palestinian intifada and Syria today from arriving or unifying in the same fight along with European workers . They try to prevent the fights of yesterday in Tahrir square in Egypt .
 Syrian refugees are spokespersons to the massacre and genocide suffered by the oppressed masses to South Mediterranean . Hundreds of thousands of refugees are struggling to enter Europe of Maastricht .
 10 International Workers' Organizer against the Syrian masses, as before it was the military coup and dictatorship in Egypt, the Saudi invasion of Yemen, the restoration of the rule of Tunisia, and military coups and imperialist attacks .
 This counter-revolutionary offensive seeks to crush the masses in Maghreb and the Middle East . So then imperialists have their hands free to attack their own working class .
 The French are tearing the conquest of the 36 working hour week . They are seen tearing up the 36-hour week .
 Imperialists now cannot survive in the middle of the slump and the crisis of the world capitalist system without snatching fundamental conquests from the world working class .
 Comrades, The WSF and the so-called "New Left" around the world have announced that ISIS is ISIS . ISIS is nothing more than the keeper of the hydrocarbons of U.S. imperialism in the areas in which AlAssad s troops have been defeated .
Al-Assad, Putin, ISIS and the same Kurdish bourgeoisie with its YPG and Stalinism are which hedge today Aleppo’s rebel masses . But al-Assad and Putin, Putin and ISIS are which Hedge today's rebel masses, says the writer .
 ISIS is the "perfect enemy" who all want to have in order to justify their killing and slaughtering the Syrian masses . ISIS is a perfect enemy who want to be able to justify the killing of the Syrians .
 It is a perfect excuse for shielding the imperialist powers against their own working class . It is the perfect excuse to shield the imperialist power against their working class, says author .
We write to you and greet this 54 Anti-war Assembly next to the Syrian exploited . We write to them and greet the 54 anti-war assembly next to Syria .
 Mustafa Abu Juma'a and Hamza al Twil were recently killed in the most advanced trenches in the combat against dog Bashar . We want to pay tribute to all the fallen of this blood-stained Syria .
 The masses have begun to raise red flags in the streets of Aleppo, Aleppo .
 The working class are painted in the blood of their martyrs, as the working class did since the 19th century . They are lifted up as a banner of the blood that theWorking class spilt in the struggle for their liberation .
 They have betrayed and handed over to the bourgeoisie any attempt to pave way for the revolutionary struggle against imperialism and its Governments . They have handed over any attempt of the masses to pave the way for a revolutionary struggle .
All of us revolutionary Marxists are honored to carry them to victory on our backs and our fists . All of us Marxists were honored to hold their fists to victory .
 We still remember that we were with you in the Anti WarAssembly 4 years ago . We still recall that we was with us in the anti WarAssembly .
We gave the same cry that we are giving today for breaking the fence to the heroic Syrian revolution . We put all the forces of the world working class to the task of stopping the war machine of counter-revolutionary Putin, Obama and Bashar.
 The working class and the poor people of Syria are being subjected to a counter-revolutionary fascist attack by imperialism and its minions, according to the writer . The attack amounting to genocide and a real Holocaust against the exploited, he says .
 This must not go on being silenced, and much less, hidden before the world working class, as does the left of Obama . This must be hidden before working class.
 attacking the interests of the capitalists, the war Lords, bankers and big business men well mark the way to the exploited and the resistance to conquer victory .
 There are riches that the looters of the work and the riches of our country have robbed our people iron and fire. 600,000 killed and 10 million refugees have been refugees .
 We know that our revolution has huge obstacles mounted by imperialism in its way. We know we have huge obstacles to our revolution, we say . We have to fight against imperialism in our way .
 People in Syria kill the snake by cutting off its head by cutting it off, we say . But as we say in Syria, people kill the snakes by cutting them off .
 This is in Damascus... it is AlInternational Workers' Organizer I 11 Assad and is surrounded by all the counter-revolutionary forces in the planet . This is the first time this has happened in Syria .
 There are funds to conquer bread and weapons, to march to Damascus, to fight for bread, decent work, land, housing and freedom .
 They are to boldly develop the expropriation of the capitalists to strengthen the Alliance of workers and peasants, and revolt all the exploited of the Maghreb and Middle East .
 Japan should know that they are attacking our positions in martyred Syria with AlAssad's barrel bombs and Putin's aircraft . U.S. drones attack us, which are ultimately the support of Obama and NATO, who have sent AlAssad to do the dirty work on account of all
When you face U.S. bases in Okinawa, you are fighting against the same murderous Japanese and American generals who, from the Mediterranean fleet, command these drones . When we fight against them and against United States drones, we know that when you face United States bases, you're fighting
 U.S. bases in Okinawa and the American masses fighting against the war and for their wages, we celebrate in the Syrian trenches . We know that there the decisive forces are that must be set in motion to break through the fence to the Syrian revolution and end with martyrdom .
 Four years ago our representatives attended your anti-war Assembly . We gave you our fighting banner that was looking for solidarity and a common international struggle to break through the encirclement .
 "We have fought together the imperialist powers and all the executioners of the masses of the world," says the group .
 We have been part of an international fighting front against the imperialist domination of the planet . We are part of a group that has been fighting against the imperialism.
 We want you consider a reflection and are insisting on a proposal that we advanced 4 years ago . But we are still in time, we want you to consider it, we say .
 Imperialism has concentrated its forces and its agents with counter-revolutionary agreements on the planet, as the Geneva Conference, to encircle and slaughter the Syrian masses . The Geneva Conference is being held by Imperialism.
 It s time for the working-class to centralize their forces to hit as a single fist .
World won't be the same with a martyred, crushed Syria and its defeated revolution, as it was not after the victory of Franco in Spain in the '30, which opened with the triumph of Hitler, the road to war .
 Super weapons of the United States, Japan, France, England already are being shot recklessly in great numbers .
 China and Russia also make ostentation of their military power, shell their bombs and are arming armies that do not clash with themselves or with imperialism . China, Russia, which also make Ostentation, shell its bombs and arm armies that don't clash with each other .
 Everyone, from a long while, do unload their weapons against the revolution and the oppressed peoples of the world that rise up, says author .
 No doubt if they crush the international working class, the vultures will peck each other .
Among the imperialist gangs it has opened a huge political and trade war in a world market that is shrinking . Meanwhile, among the imperialist gang it is opening a huge Political and trade War in the world .
 The Southern European powers are already vassals, such as Italy, Greece, Portugal and Spain . The Southern EU powers are currently vassal.
 Turkey does not allow it to take one square meter of territory in Syria or anywhere in the Middle East . There is no place for a new Ottoman empire.
 The victorious imperialist powers of the 2008 trade war have been beginning to compete for a world market that does not stop dangerously shrink again . USA or France, Germany and England in Europe have been starting to compete.
China and Russia look greedily to China and Russia, which inherited powerful military apparatus of the former workers’ states . They laid their sources of raw materials and millions of slave workers to produce for the world capitalist system .
 Thither, to Russia, China, Vietnam, Cuba aim to leave their catastrophe imperialist gangs . Thither is a former member of the Communist Party of the United States. Thither has been sent to Russia and China in recent years .
 The new capitalist states are looking to start a semi-colonization process and looting of their banks, their state companies and their domestic markets . They are trying to keep their banks and state companies .
 This is what the current situation of the world capitalist system bankruptcy poses. This is the current condition of the system's bankruptcy, says the author .
There is no place for all, except for new semi-colonies or wars, which will come if the proletarian revolution does not prevent it . There is no time for all.
 That's the plan of war and political, economic, economic and military offensive of the imperialist superpowers and financial capital . The plan is to attack the world's financial capital with war and economic and political offensive .
 USA and Germany make blocks to the Atlantic (as USA with Germany to corner Russia) or towards the Pacific . They make blocks.
 England did not agree to be subjected to Europe of Maastricht . England considers itself a Pacific power, with its financial and military bases in Singapore and Hong Kong .
Commercial and political clashes have already started, deepening the bankruptcy of the world capitalist system . Huge commercial and political fights have already begun .
 There is a speed race to see what imperialist gang manages to give hardest blows to its own working class to keep the hands free .
 With the capital crisis, the imperialist gangs will not stop recruiting new agents in the labor movement that defend them against the proletarian revolution . Comrades with the capital Crisis, the gangs will continue to recruit new agents .
 The emergence of a "New Left" as Podemos, Syriza, has recreated a huge social-chauvinist poisonous propaganda .
 Socialists in words and traitors in deeds of the self-called ""socialist"" left in England openly supports the exit of this imperialist country to Europe . labor aristocracies and bureaucracies of France and Germany tied the workers to the forces of the imperialist powers grouped in Maast
 The support of "socialist" in words and traitors in deeds to their own imperialist gangs is a crime against the world working class, says the author .
 Workers of France are fighting for the defense of the 36 hours per week . They pose in the agenda the fight to destroy the imperialist Europe of Maastricht in the West .
 Imperialism needs this greening of an old cancer in the world labor movement. Imperialism is the social-chauvinism where labor aristocracies and bureaucracies live of the crumbs falling from the exploitation of the colonial and semicolonial world .
 For this the renegades of Trotskyism and Stalinism disguise as "socialist" Podemos, supporters of the Bourbons monarchy, are outraged .
 Before, and even today, they are defending and covering up the anti-worker government of Syriza, agent of the bankers in Greece . Before and today, the Greek government is covering up its anti-workers government .
 Reformism has turned into social-imperialism, socialchauvinism... and has turned to the biggest enemy of the international proletariat revolutionary struggle . Reformism is now the largest enemy of international proletariat revolution .
From the FLTI, we salute your courageous conference of workers and young revolutionary internationalists. Comrades, From the FL TI, we salute your courage .
 This is an struggle example and program for the whole working class of the imperialist countries . This is a struggle example for the working class.
 It's crystal clear that reformism, expressed as social-chauvinism, has been recruited by the big capital to divide the working class .
Every immediate demand for our class to survive in this capitalist system in bankruptcy pushes more and more to an open fight against oppressors’ regimes and states .
 The limit the combat of masses have is the treacherous leadership they have at the head . The combat of mass leadership is the most treacherous leadership you have .
The objective conditions for the revolution are already more than mature, they are getting rotten . The objective conditions are more than matured, they're getting rotten, says the author .
 leaderships want to make exploited believe that it’s possible to live and raise the standard of living under such rotten system .
 Tens of thousands of political prisoners and condemned fighters in all the jails of the capitalist governments and regimes all across the world . Evidence of this, of the lies and disgrace of reformism, is evidence of this .
 They are hostages in the jails of the oppressors to contain the revolutionary offensives of the exploited . They are held in jails of oppressors. They are also hostages in prisons to contain revolutionary offenives .
 43 students from Mexico and the miners killed in Marikana. We call on you for fighting together to do justice for the disappearance of the 43 students .
 Aleppo is the capital of the Syrian resistance. We call on you from Aleppo to raise together the red banners, that is the one of the martyrs of our revolution .
 The head of the snake is in Wall Street, London City, Frankfurt and the Tokyo bank . The bank is based in Tokyo and London .
Demonstrations against taxes on basic services (water, electricity and gas) will start in September . It will affect the already low wages of workers and exploited masses .
 The whip of capital keeps punishing the masses, in the East and the West .
 Ukrainian masses show that their forces have not been exhausted yet . However, they show that they are still not exhausted yet.
 The protest was organized by the Union Federation of Ukraine, miners and steel workers unions, with the Federation of Independent Unions . The protest against retrenchments was held in Kiev .
 Unions of education and science workers from the regions of Kiev and Vinnitsa endorsed the protest . The protest was held in the city of Kiev .
 They demanded that starting on October 1 st the minimum wage must be equal to the consumptions, estimated in 3067 grivnas . When today it is not even U$50, when today it's not even $50 .
 Other demands are related to the increase of pensions for retired people and students .
 The Rada, the fraction of the Opposition Block, warned that the accumulation of citizen’s unhappiness and vital problems of the populations will lead to social uprisings .
 It is the same fight headed by miners and workers of Donbass who defend the mines and their jobs that imperialism wants to steal from them . It is also the same battle against imperialism that imperialism want to steal.
 In order to defend them, they set up militias disorganizing Kiev murderous army that attacks and bomb them, destroys their hospitals, schools, etc., and wins privates with their fight .
 The resistance of the masses in Donbass shows that the forces of the Ukrainian masses are not exhausted at all . Minsk pacts that divide the Ukrainian working class divide the working class .
 They are willing to fight against the plans imperialism and its puppet Poroshenko . They're willing to battle against the plan and Poroshenko.
 The tragedy is the huge betrayal of the leaderships, which imposed a divided fight and weakened their forces against the enormous enemy they are confronting, says the author .
 Ukrainian workers have been divided in different unions depending on whether they work in Kiev or Donbass .
 leaderships refuse to organize a joint struggle to confront the same enemy . Even if they have the same sufferings, attacks or increase in the cost of living in the entire territory, they refuse to participate .
 Ukraine will not have way out favorable for workers and exploited masses unless they unite their fight from Donbass to Kiev . If they defeat the hated Poroshenko government in the capital, they will not be able to win the vote .
 This demand for better wages and against the increase in the cost of living unifies the exploited from all over Ukraine .
 The demand that links their fight with one of the French, Greek and European workers. It is the demand that link their fight to the one of them .
The last chapter of the revolution has not been written yet . The last chapter has not yet been written .
 While the miners and exploited people keep resisting the imperialist offensive, the people are still resisting the offensive . The miners, exploited people are also resisting the imperialism .
 Road blocks, refusing to work on the mines, leaders and miners going on hunger strikes are ways that workers are using to fight for collecting the owed salaries and against closing and privatizing mines .
 On August 3 rd miners’ wives of Krasnoarmeyskugol organized a demonstration of ‘empty cups’ claiming the wages owed to be paid to their husbands .
On August 5 th miners of Chervonohrad protested in Lviv and blocked the international road Lviv-Rava-Ruska . On August 5th th miners protested in the city of Lviv .
Despite suffering burns in 12% of his body, he kept his hunger strike to protest . Despite suffering burns, he continued to protest against his treatment .
Workers of mine Stahanova in Oblast of Donetsk started a spontaneous strike on August 11th .
In their assembly they decided not to work in the mine and stop the production . In their assembly, they decided to stop production in their mine .
Workers of Lvivvuhillya were on their 8 th day of hunger strike in front of the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry of Ukraine .
 The plans of IMF, World Bank and EU for Ukraine are to make it a colony controlled by imperialism . This is the “way out’s” and this is the fate that capitalists prepared for this country of Eastern Europe .
 Imperialism dragged the nation to suffocation since it cannot pay the fake foreign debt . The payment plan includes privatization, closing or reconverting all mines .
 The miners of Donbass rebelled against this plan and in defense of their lives and work . They rose as the head of the fight and for that they set up militias and soldier committees .
 Kiev and the west controlled by Poroshenko, the region of Donbass under control of pro-Russian oligarchy and Putin . Putin got Crimea as payment for the services provided to imperialism .
 The tragedy of the Ukrainian revolution is that the treacherous leaderships have managed to impose the division among workers .
 Workers of Donbass and workers of Kiev refuse to surrender without fighting without fighting .
 French workers are confronting Hollande's government attempt to steal the 35 working hours a week . Their demands are the same as those of those of the French workers who are confronting him .
 In this brutal crisis and economic bankruptcy, Imperialism has decided that workers and exploited people must pay for the crisis . The crisis is a brutal crisis.
 International Workers' Organizer Ukraine 17 GREAT BRITAIN July 13, 2016 3REXIT Referendum SWP .
 All across Europe left currents also discussed at the same time than the bourgeoisie if England should or shouldn't leave the EU .
 At the end of the day the workers always pay for the costs of the crisis . Both ""stay"" in and ""exit"" from the European Union, are two policies of imperialist bands .
 None of these currents declared war against the trap of the referendum, against the deception it meant for the workers .
 French youth and workers went to the streets with their factory and action committees in their thousands facing the labor precarization and the slashing of their conquests that the Government of Hollande wanted to impose .
 French workers and youth showed the way, taking the solution of their problems in their own hands . French workers showed how to deal with their problems with their own problems .
 I.e. social base that support "British"" bourgeois policies so that Britain can go to the world to dispute against the other imperialist powers with which it is in a trade war. I.E. Social base that supports British bourgeois policies.
 SWP says more exploitation, plundering and misery in colonies and semi-colonies, and worse life and work conditions for the British working class .
 The SWP wants the British and global working class to forget that the policy of their' British bourgeoisie, which with his Queen and all of their transnationals, super exploit the world workers .
 The SWP and its sister parties throughout southern Africa did not raise that the Anglo American should be expropriated at "home" in London . pulling down the Queen of England the oppressed peoples would be liberated .
We are not speaking about a colonial or semi-colonial country, but of an imperialist power that plunders and exploits other Nations . We are not talking about colonial or Semi-colonial countries but of a colonial and semi- colonial country .
 Both those who called to stay in the EU and those that called to vote to leave the EU are encouraging British nationalism . The breakthrough for the British is within Great Britain lining up with a sector of the bourgeoisie.
 The bourgeoisie does not defend the homeland, but markets, foreign concessions, sources of raw materials and spheres of influence . The bourgeoisie doesn't defend its homeland but markets and foreign concessions .
 The bourgeoisie never defend the homeland for the sake of the homeland, says the writer . "The bourgeoisie never defends the homeland," he says .
 When its profits and its businesses are threatened, it is defeatist in its own nation . When it is threatened, its profits are threatened .
 UK capitalists defend their business with the EU and Wall Street, not the working class of the United Kingdom .
 The New Left endorsed the referendum; they were part of this trap, silencing that the imperialists may unify and divorceat will in order to exploit us best .
 German social Democracy voted for the German government war budget on 4 August 1914 . The 1WW voted to kill each other for their imperialist governments’ business .
 A real class-war by the workers and exploited across Europe is due against imperialist governments and regimes . A real-class-war is due to be against imperialism and regimes.
 The "new left" has isolated the British working class from theirclass brothers and sisters of France, Germany and the rest of Europe .
 Malvinas Islands is sort of a "land aircraft -carrier" aiming at Latin America . UK is in the NATO, and fills the world with military bases, as in Malvina Islands .
 Continued from back page open round with Chinese crack. Pamela Parson and Noelia Ling International Workers' Organizer Great Britain 19 Continued from front page openround with Chinese cracking .
 The French imperialism, after the selfattack of "ISIS" and then militarizing France, launched a brutal attack on the working class .
 A decisive struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in 2016 began in 2016 . A decisive battle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in 2016 started .
With the crisis of Maastricht and the world economy, nothing could be equal in the imperialist France . All the imperialist powers are discussing how to take a paid of the global market that has shrunk .
 The working class fought taking the streets with pickets, general strikes, setting up the embyons bodies of direct democracy, action committees, factory committees .
The working class showed enormous energies to defeat Hollande and Khomri law . The working class and the youth of France took the streets .
 He created the conditions to give a decisive blow to the working class . He had created conditions for working class, he said .
 The working class did not prepare the working class for the decisive struggle which was established . They did not prepared the workingclass for the crucial struggle .
 The entire reformist left sought out combat of the exploited to pressure the parliament to pass the law . Bureaucracies of the trade unions, like CGT (led by Stalinism), like Force Ouvriere, were exploited .
 The government cleared the lower house of the Congress by decree . An example of this was that the government cleared.
 On March 31, the first mass action against the law developed against Khomri law . The law was introduced in March .
 Millions entered to the fight, which exceeded and overflowed the levees of all unions that do not represent more than 10% or 15% of workers in France .
 The law is mainly an attacks to the first job, imposing days of unlimited working hours . The problem is that the law is mostly an attack on first job .
For the reformist leaderships and the bourgeoisie it was time to prevent this square from being transformed into a new Tahrir Square as in Cairo .
 The "movement of citizens" was proposed to fight the bourgeoisie and the working class . They traveled to France to preach a ""movements of citizens"" in general .
 France to explode and begin the decisive clash between classes. This decree makes France to exploded and begin a decisive clash.
Bonapartism of the 5 th French imperialist Republic showed its true face . Bonapartistism of 5th French imperialism showed the true face of France .
 The working class during the month of May carried out massive days of struggle l ik e on 12,17, 19 and 26 .
 These demonstrations were led by rebellious youth, those who "hate the police" and "vandals who break everything" as they claimed .
 Every day new sectors of the exploited entered to the revolutionary fight .
 After each day of struggle, the exploited carried out new strikes per unions . They set up action committees and strengthened the coordination . The youth they set upaction committees and helped strengthen the coordination.
 The government and great bosses responded with a brutal repression sending the order forces to systematically repress the demonstrations, pickets, the occupations of the public buildings and the struggle . Facing mass radicalization, their struggle, the struggle was the setting up of bodies of direct democracy
 The judges banned the demonstrations and sent thousands of telegrams and letters of intimation with threats of prison to the workers and students who were seen in the demonstrations .
 The action committees tended to coordinate the struggle of the exploited ones . Despite all this the exploited still were fighting and setting up their bodies .
 The role of unions and the "socialists" of all kind was to prevent these bodies to develop, centralize and coordinate throughout France by setting up the real power.
 The working class was still climbing the ladder in their struggle . But despite the leadership, the working class still climbed the ladder .
 On June 2 the main workers of power plants went on strike . They returned the service to the houses that were cut because they could not afford it .
 At the same time, Medef cut service to one of the headquarters of Medef (French employers' federation) and one of their leaders .
 Also cut power to a railway in support of the strike of the rail workers . Also cutting power to the railway to support the strike .
 This is a true example of how the workers were beginning to take the resolution of the problems at their hands . This is an example of the workers' resolution of problems at the hands .
 The real owner of the means of production was and who makes them work. And they showed who the real owner was and how they worked .
 The government of Hollande and the institutions of the 5 th 20 France International Workers' Organizer Republic were totally weak, hung by a thread . They had lost control of the working class, and put pressure to the parliament to moderate the adjustment .
 The economic struggle leads to a huge political struggle against the government . The government is trying to win back control of the economy .
 Ultimately, it lacked the momentum of a decisive revolutionary general strike to put the law down and with it Hollande .
 From there the great betrayal begins... a great conspiracy against the masses. From there, the great conspiracy begins .
 CGT and the entire trade union bureaucracy began conspiring with great bosses organized in Medef . The big bosses of the French imperialist corporations were involved .
 The union bureaucracy saves Hollande and the great imperialist bosses taking out the masses from the revolutionary general strike path . The government hardened the state repression, with thousands of telegrams, temporary detentions, police clashes against the masses .
 The workers must learn from this tramps imposed by the bourgeoisie, as the union bureaucracy, as it buys within the labor movement, says the writer .
 The bureaucracy had also lost control of the working class. But that strength was still on, because of the loss of control of working class .
 The working class had no leadership alternative that was going to tell the truth . The strength that had won their struggle in the streets and the weakness the government was left .
 The conditions for a general strike were more than ripe, they were decomposing, says the author . A general strike is expected to take place in the coming weeks .
 NPA and current union Solidaires only lent him his left shoulder to a weakened Martinez to cover it . The NPA only lent the weakened Martinez his shoulder to the Martinez .
 The Senate will not allow the Senate any negotiations with the strikers . The law is set at 35 hours a week labor .
 At the same time, sends bureaucracy to call and to put at the head of a national demonstration . If he did, no one would control the demonstration, he would be in charge .
 For the first time, the bureaucracy of all unions fell to the factories to make assemblies of all sectors to organize the march .
 Employers’ class hardens in the Senate and instructs its agent, the bureaucracy, to be mounted on the coming independent action .
 This happened on June 14, a huge and historic mobilization of the French working class . Huge swathes of the working class and youth clashed against the police in the streets.
 The bureaucracy, pushing the people, took control of the mobilization and contained the independent mass action . In moInternational Workers' Organizer France 21 ments showed in the Senate a fortress that it hadn’t.
 The bureaucracy took control again of the mobilization, putting itself to its head . The same Place de la Republique had neither been transformed into an institution of centralization of fighting sectors of the workers and youth .
 The working class rested in confidence that their huge mobilization could stop the law and rein in the government .
 The working class gives it a respite, to see what is achieved after so many days of struggle, without perceiving that the essential combat was still lacking, says the writer .
 The betrayal of the bureaucracy consisted of making the masses believe that the fight had already been enough to win . The betrayal made the masses think that they had already won .
 It was enough time and timely day to betray, and maneuver, and conspiracy to give its fruits . It was time and time to betray. It was too late to make a decision, and it was time to give it its fruits.
 The masses do not completely understand why after such struggle and the June 6 mobilization they had promised that everything was to change . But the employers remained very strong in their positions in the Senate .
 The bureaucracy of the 3 trade unions meet the Prefecture "to warn" that the march will be carried out on June 23 .
 The result was the realization of a march with a tour of 8 blocks in one direction . It was controlled by the police and by the services of order of the union bureaucracy .
 A new march was held on June 28 . It was also a restricted and agreed upon one . The march was also restricted .
 The bourgeoisie got, through the bureaucracy, through a relationship of forces that it had not conquered . Thus the bourgeoisie got. Thus the bourgeois got.
 The Government sends back the bill to the Assembly, i.e., to the lower House, from this new relationship of forces .
 The original Khomri law will be approved perhaps with some cosmetic reforms . This means a betrayal, a detour back to the starting point . This is a betrayal of the original law .
 They created illusions among the masses that you can stop the Bill in the lower House . The illusion was created by a group of people in the House of Representatives .
 In the Assembly the Decree of Hollande-Valls turns to be applied so that nobody can negotiate anything . The Assembly will decide whether to extend the decree .
 They are complicit in the betrayal of the Union bureaucracy, of which they are part, working for years as left leg of the French imperialist Fifth Republic . They have served for decades as squires to Stalinism and the trade union bureaucracy .
 The U.S. government played a role of bureaucracy’s cronies throughout the process of mobilization. They played that role.
 The working class never prepared the working class for the decisive political struggle that was due. They never prepared for the political struggle.
When the masses began to change posters, they wore reddish and “May of 1968’s drapes . The masses began changing posters of the “Square of the Republic’.
 When the bureaucracy agreed the betrayal with the Government, they wore yellow and accompanied from the left such treason .
 At the moment when the action committees arose and the task was to develop them - so that they become organs of dual power and direct democracy . Instead they supported the trade union bureaucracy .
 The trade union bureaucracy kept a unified front with the union bureaucracy up to the defeat . They kept a united front up to defeat .
 The NPA, for example, accompanied the CGT until it submitted the masses to the negotiation . We must ignore the law to prevent it from being applied and the worker ranks to be divided .
 Fet’s vote in factory assemblies and committees to set up again the action committees to break the wall imposed by the bureaucracy Union .
Martinez, Force Ouvriere and all of the bureaucracy do not represent the workers or the million that entered the fight . Martinez and all the bureaucracy don't represent the worker or the millions that entered .
 The French imperialist bourgeoisie maintains and decorates with coins falling from super-profits . They are social-imperialist agents of Maastricht, whom the French imperialist bourgeois maintains .
 The French working class should look at themselves in the eyes of the immigrant working class, the refugees and peoples oppressed by imperialism, says the author .
 The last word has not been said. The task of the moment is to ignore the law and the infamous agreement of the trade union bureaucracy with the Government .
 The offensive of the masses has been dispersed by the betrayal of their leaderships, not by the strength of the Government . The offensive has been dispersed by the betraying of their leaders, not the Government.
 The employers will pass to the offensive factory by factory, trade by trade to impose the increase of the work day .
Trade unions are present in every negotiation. What does the bureaucracy want? What does it want? That the trade union is present in each negotiation?
 The law means to go to all the factories and guarantee that nobody rebels again so that the law is applied . The law will prevent any centralized action of the working class .
 It is necessary to prevent this road that the Government and the union bureaucracy want to impose. It is needed to stop this road, says the Government .
 This is the motion that all factory assemblies or trade union sectors should vote anywhere this law tries to be applied . The 35-hour week is in danger of being applied .
 Only if they are unified with the European working class and face the looting of French imperialism in the semi-colonial world, workers in France may maintain their conquests .
 France cannot be a new Greece betrayed by the smoke-vendor left and the trade union bureaucracy . France can't be new Greece, says the French president . France cannot have a new Greek government, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 Plenty of water has been let fall over the spark of Athens to turn it off, and tons of sand and water to try to extinguish the fire .
 The international revolutionary movement has an enormous commitment ahead . It is to fight out the treacherous leaderships that have hand-tied the French proletariat .
 The French working class is carrying out in the last 4 months huge fighting days the streets fighting against the Khomri law . Hollande’s government of and the great French booses seeking to wrest the 35-hour workweek with the Khmri law.
 The French imperialism needs to impose to its own working France International Workers' Organizer class . The workers are exploited of its overseas colonies and immigrant workers .