 Science for Peace President Metta Spencer welcomed activists and concerned citizens to a day exploring the conflict in Ukraine .
 The program consisted of three moderated panels of knowledgeable experts addressing the past, present and potential future of the conflict . The program was hosted by CNN's John Sutter .
 The first panel, on background factors, was moderated by the Toronto Star’s Olivia Ward .
 Professor Marta Dyczok is an academic and frequent visitor to Ukraine . She says Vladimir Putin's determination to restore his nation to Great Power status is behind Ukraine's rise .
 Professor Dyczok denied the existence of solid evidence to support this allegation . Despite numerous reports of external interference by the U.S. or European Union, he denied the allegation .
 She asserted that Putin fears his own people, despite his overall popularity in opinion polls . She said he fears his people despite his popularity in polls .
 There is also a prevailing distrust among many Crimeans of the new leadership in Kyiv, hence their desire for autonomy .
 street demonstrations to escalate into a nationwide battle. Evidently, competing narratives, ideology, misinformation and the regime change led to street demonstrations .
 New leader Poro­shenko took over as President . His opposition to pro-Russian Ukrainians did not go down well .
Several journalists in Crimea were threatened by separatists and several fled to Kyiv . On the other hand, dissenting journalists were threatened.
 Regional differences escalated, forcing individuals to choose between Ukraine and Russia . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in Russia .
 Professor Alexander Likhotal is president of Green Cross Internat­ional . He also serves as an adviser to Gorbachev .
 He spoke via Skype from Geneva, noting that in Europe, unlike North America, there is an ominous smell of war . He also noted that in the U.S. there is a "im ominous smell"
 Likhotal sees the present conflict in Ukraine as part of the post-1989 restructuring of the global system . The current conflict is a continuation of the restructuring following the Second World War .
 The present conflict is grounded in the longer term of political economic mistakes on the part of both Russia and the West over the past twenty years .
 Professor Likhotal’s own lucid overview of the turmoil in Ukraine appears elsewhere in this issue .
 Professor Leonid Kosals spoke of Russia's internal situation as explaining Putin's role in Ukraine . Kosals is an economist from the Higher School of Economics.
 He portrayed Russia as in a deep systemic crisis rooted in its ongoing, decades-long transformation from the Soviet political economy .
 The massive consolidation of state and newer private enterprises has created an interlinked political structure of enormous power . The consolidation of the state and new private firms has created a massive power structure .
 Putin and his clan have vast power but limited acceptable authority . This has led to a crisis of legitimacy, where Putin has vast power, but limited authority .
 This has resulted in domestic opposition to Putin’s regime by perhaps 20 percent of the population, as found in polls as well as in protests .
 Kosals’s graphs showed recent societal changes in Russia . A drop in living standards, greater control of the media, an economic downturn and Vladimir Putin's approval/disapproval ratings .
 Kosals believes these domestic issues gave Putin an opportunity to invade Crimea and distract his own critics . Kosals thinks these domestic problems gave Putin a chance to invasion Crimea .
 The chances of political and economic reforms being implemented in the near future are uncertain .
 Russia has supplied rebels with artillery and ammunition since September 2014 . The Ukrainian Army stepped up their attacks on rebel-held areas of Donbas . Russia was not involved in the uprisings in the early stages, says Robinson .
 The rebels say they are called upon to “defend their homes’ against their own government . The rebels are a small fraction of Ukraine's government .
 The leader of the rebels, Igor Strelkov, is driven by distrust of the Kyiv regime . He assembled a militia, 90 percent of them Ukrainian citizens.
 The arms were largely seized from Ukrainian Army and Secret Service forces . Months before the Russians came to their aid, they were seized from the Ukrainian Army .
 Russians who volunteered to join the rebels did so as individuals and were not from the Russian Army . Russians who volunteer to join were not Russian Army members .
 Not until mid-July did Russia intervene by shelling targets across the border from their own territory .
 More artillery, ammunition and military advisers from Russia arrived since August 2014 . Strelkov was replaced by a leader more amenable to Moscow’s plans .
 Russia seems prepared to give rebels just enough assistance to keep Ukraine's army at bay . Putin’s objective was to pressure Kyiv to reach an accord with the rebels .
 Robinson rejected as false the notion that Poroshenko and his allies are fascists . Robinson rejected the notion as false as false .
Former fascists recruited by former fascists to boost their electoral gains . They are not, but they were strengthened by the recruitment of ex-fascists .
 The West has consistently applauded the current Ukraine administration, despite its short-circuiting of democratic procedures in displacing Yanukovych . The West also praised the current Ukrainian government .
 Sending the Ukrainian army east to attack rebel strongholds aggravated the rift and swelled the ranks of the rebels . The Ukrainian army has been fighting rebels in eastern Ukraine .
 The Poro­shenko government simply denies the destruction and loss of lives caused by his army’s indiscriminate shelling of built-up areas in the war zones .
 Gen­erals blame the rebels, claiming their purpose is to discredit the army . The rebels claim to be trying to discredit army .
 Robinson considers the West's attempts to change Russia’s behavior counter-productive . Robinson considers West‘s attempts to changing Russia‘to change Russia's behaviorcounter-productive.
 The second expert on this panel was Fred Weir, the long-time Moscow correspondent for the Christian Science Monitor .
 When Eastern tourists visit the new Russia they are favourably impressed by its improved standard of living . When Western Ukrainians visit Poland they smile at imagined EU futures .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea was a great mistake, for which it may pay over the decades as the new world order emerges . Second, Russia’s annexation of Crimean was agreat mistake.
 Russia watched the U.S. and coalition forces invade Iraq, Afghanistan, and Kosovo to serve their own interests . For 15 years Russia watched United States and Coalition forces invade Afghanistan, Iraq, Kosovo .
 These were naked geopolitical struggles, where rules of the game were changed when it suited them . These were Naked geopolitical struggles .
 Russia feels justified in doing what it feels must be done to protect its interests as well . Russia has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 Russia has encroached eastward in two decades, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's key naval base to NATO is not that far-fetched when one considers the situation .
 Fourth, Kyiv has mistakenly made war on the rebels in their several eastern strongholds . The rebels have been fighting in the past four years .
 Perhaps a more cautious political approach,g. anti-corruption rather than anti-terrorist campaigns, would be wiser .
 Borys Wrzesnewskyj has served in the Canadian Parliament . He is a frequent visitor to Ukraine where he supports political independence and democracy .
 Russia has long expected the dismemberment of Ukraine, says Putin . Putin has planned for it since 2004, he says .
 Wrzesnewskyj had seen in a line-up of voters who carried their passports to polling stations .
Poll officials could not explain how Russian military personnel or other foreigners were on the voters’ list .
 He outlined several contingency plans the Russians had made to take back Crimea . He also outlined several contingencies the Russian had made.
 Wrzesnewskyj called for the use of defensive weaponry to avert an invasion . To avert an attack, Wrzes newskyj said.
 The suggestion was challenged by other panelists, who all preferred a political solution . This suggestion was challenges by otherPanelists who wanted a political Solution .
 Doug Saunders from the Globe and Mail moderated the third panel of speakers tasked with a search for specific ways of stopping the civil war .
 He had just returned from Kharkiv, where two protesters were killed by a remote-controlled explosive device . He had returned from a demonstration where he was killed .
 Kulykov argued that sanctions against Russia are not working, though the drop in oil prices has had a quite an impact .
 Neither NATO nor Russia could limit the resulting war, he says . He outlines a number of possible futures, suggesting no military solutions are possible .
 One part might develop along European lines; another part along Russian lines . One part may develop along Europe's European lines . Another part might also develop along Russian Lines .
 The future is possible whereby peacekeepers separate the two parts of Ukraine . A blue helmet future could be possible for peacekeepers .
 Putin has plenty of support in Russia, but getting approval for an all-out war would be difficult . Russians bear no grudge towards Ukrainians, as they bear nogrudge towards them .
 The struggle is ultimately not for territory but for hearts and minds concerning Ukraine’s future . Ukraine's future is in the heart of the Ukraine crisis .
 He envisions a future in which the present conflict is frozen, fighting stops and fighting stops . The Eastern and Western territories compete with one another in development, each shaping their own future .
 John Feffer, of the Institute for Policy Studies in Washington, D.C., humorously explained his tardiness at the conference .
 Four inches of snow had been enough to paralyze the capital and delay his flight .
 Feffer saw this as refuting any presumption that Washington is omnipotent . Feffer said this was refuting the notion that Washington was omnipotent. Feffer: "Washington is not omnipotent"
 Feffer echoed his fellow panelists when he mentioned several cases of “frozen conflicts;” such as South and North Korea over the last 60 years . Feffer also mentioned South, North Korea and South Korea in his remarks .
 It may take time for both sides of the conflict to see the benefits of freezing it. Still, it could take time to see what benefits it could have .
 In the Korean case, it took three years and the loss of lives and property . The Korean case is the first of its kind in the country .
 Feffer believes the warring parties in Ukraine have yet to reach the stage where neither can make further gains . Feffer says neither can progress further gains in Ukraine .
 Geopolitics is never fair; minimizing pain and suffering is a more achievable goal . The world's most important goal is to minimize pain, suffering and minimize pain .
 There was no consensus that emerged from the conference, but there were some recurrent themes . The conference was held in New York City .
First, the global political economy is undergoing a major restructuring . First, the world's political economy has been undergoing a big restructuring .
 Ukraine-Russia conflict requires greater attention than merely following the day-to-day media coverage, says Peter Bergen .
Both the Ukrainian and Russian leadership are somewhat disconnected from their own populations and suffer significant problems of legitimacy . Second, both the Ukrainian, Russian leadership is somewhat disconnected with their own population .
 Third, a political solution is more desirable and more likely than a military solution . Third, the political solution, is more likely to be more desirable than the military solution.
 New thinking like notions of “frozen conflicts’ might be a diplomatic “harm-reduction’s solution. Here, new thinking like ideas of ‘frozen conflict’ may be a solution .
 Both Subir Guin and Edward Silva are members of Peace’s editorial board . Both men are on Peace's editorial board.
 Video of the entire conference is available at scienceforpeace.ca/1357 .