 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, recording or otherwise .
 Christians from various Ukrainian churches stood alongside one another as a witness for peace on Kyiv's central square during the Revolution of Dignity .
 Whitley became the first Principal of the Baptist College of Victoria in Melbourne, Australia, in 1891 . He also taught at Rawdon College in Yorkshire and Bridlington .
Whitley was a key figure in the formation of the Baptist Historical Society in 1908 . Whitley was the first member of the Historical Society .
 He edited its journal, which soon gained an international reputation for the quality of its contents . It still enjoys a reputation nearly a century later as the Baptist Quarterly .
 His A History of British Baptists remains an important source of information and comment for contemporary historians . He is also a well-known historian and author of a book about the British Baptist movement .
 He made an important contribution to Baptist life and self-understanding in Britain and Australia . He provided a model of how a pastor-scholar might enrich the life and faith of others .
 The establishment of the annual lecture in his name is designed as an encouragement to research and writing by Baptist scholars .
 Lectureship Committee gives grants, advice and other forms of support by the Lecturehip Committee . The giving of grants and advice serves the same purpose .
 The committee consists of representatives of the British Baptist Colleges, the Baptist Union of Great Britain, BMS World Mission and the Baptist Ministers’ Fellowship .
 The Whitley Committee is delighted that Joshua Searle has accepted the invitation to deliver the annual lecture for 2016 .
 Joshua is on the staff of Spurgeon's College and lectures in Theology and Public Thought . He has spent time living and teaching in Ukraine, where he has family, through his marriage, and many personal friends .
 His passion for this country and the work and witness of the Baptist Church is not just of political interest in this rapidly changing part of the world .
 In exploring the complex relationship of Ukraine and Russia he also exposes some of the darker challenges of being radical believers .
Free thinking Baptists have already paid a heavy price for their convictions . The Orthodox Church and the political state have suspicions of the Orthodox Church .
 Joshua identifies some of the daily conflicts to be negotiated by Baptists in terms of civic duty . He concludes that obedience ends where evil begins .
 It is no use focusing on the sins of individuals in the church while our state structures are complicit with injustice. It's no use focus on sins of people in the Church, says the author .
We may profitably reflect on the implications for ourselves in the market-centred West . We may profitfully reflect on our position in the West .
Whitley Committee invited to give the 2016 Whitley Lecture . Sally Nelson: I am very grateful to the Whitley Committee for the kind invitation .
 The Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity and Freedom in 2013-14 was held in Ukraine in the wake of the Ukrainian Revolution .
 My aim is to elucidate the church's role in public life by setting out a simple and generous evangelical vision of Christian engagement that is humble, hospitable, full of grace, ready to listen and serve .
 I dedicate this lecture to Michael Bourdeaux in appreciation for his lifetime of indefatigable advocacy on behalf of the millions who suffered persecution for their faith in the Soviet Union . I dedicate the lecture to him in appreciation.
 Michael has been a tremendous source of moral support and encouragement to me personally in recent years . Michael's fine example of courage and dedication to the gospel of freedom and truth continues to inspire my generation to look to the future with hope.
 I take this opportunity to express my warmest thanks to my colleagues at Spurgeon’s College for their support and encouragement . I take the opportunity to thank them for support, encouragement and support .
 I convey my deepest gratitude and respect to Sergey Rakhuba and Mykhailo Cherenkov for their friendship and inspiration . In particular, I convey his deepest gratitude. In particular. I convey their deepest gratitude, I conveys my deepest respect and respect .
 Anne Clements has been a good example of her judicious proofreading of this text . I am also very grateful to Anne Clement for her Judicious proofreading of the text .
 All translations from Ukrainian, Russian and German in this lecture are my own, except where indicated otherwise . All translations are written in the book .
 Mission Eurasia is a large mission organisation that works to train, equip and mobilise Christians throughout post-Soviet Eurasia .
Alexander Pushkin is the author of a new book, Alexander Pushkin's book, The Ukraine . The book is based on the life of Alexander Pushkins, who is currently living in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian culture is nurtured by an exuberant tradition of poetry, literature, music, and creative arts . Ukrainian culture has a depth and vigour that few nations could rival .
 A Ukrainian woman married to a Ukrainian, she says she is privileged to count several Ukrainians as some of her closest friends .
 I have found the Ukrainian people, on the whole, to be imbued with a passionate and innate love of freedom . I've found them to be in love with freedom, says the author .
 Christianity permeates every aspect of Ukrainian culture, unlike other nations that have visited in post-Soviet Eurasia .
 Ukraine has been the major hub of evangelistic and humanitarian activity throughout Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia . Since gaining independence in 1991, Ukraine has become a major hub for humanitarian activity .
Ukrainian Christians succeeded in establishing various NGOs, Christian missions, evangelical think tanks and various centres of theological education . Despite strong resistance from entrenched Soviet mentalities and the passing of unfavourable legislation, Ukrainian Christians have succeeded .
 Ukraine has the greatest potential to become a beacon of light and hope to the people of the Former Soviet Union . I have long been convinced that of all the nations in Eastern Europe, it is Ukraine .
 The Baptist community in Ukraine, despite its relatively small size, can play a leading role in the renewal of the churches, says the author . He says it can also play a role in transformation of all spheres of postSoviet society .
 Kirchliche und gesellschaftliche Entwicklungen in Ostmitteleuropa nach dem Zerfall des Kommunismus .
 The central square in Kyiv, known as Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Matioan He3zaneocnocmi, translated as ‘Independence Square’, became a rallying point for the protestors .
 Several people died in the mainly peaceful protests, which were met with bulldozers, batons and police violence in 2013 .
Alexander Khrapachenko was a cousin of a friend and former colleague of mine . He was a young Baptist, one of the protestors .
 Alexander was campaigning to ensure the future of a free Ukraine . Alexander, like the others in the ‘Heavenly Hundred’ , was campaigning for the free Ukraine.
 He paid the ultimate price when he was shot in the head by a police sniper on 20 February 2014 .
 Alexander and millions of other Ukrainians like him were protesting against a state that had become little more than a system of organised “kleptocracy’s’* and extortion. Alexander and many other Ukrainians were protesting.
 Law had become not a principle that guaranteed the rights of all citizens, but a tool in the hands of a corrupt elite that could be applied to extort money and power .
 The Ukrainian state had become a vehicle for the self-enrichment of the President’s family and a narrow circle of oligarchs and regime insiders .
 Yanukovych set about looting the Ukrainian economy when he took power in 2010 . When he took control in 2010 he was accused of looting the economy .
 In just four years, it is alleged that he had embezzled $100 billion from the state funds of Ukraine .
 protestors entered his estate and found evidence of grotesque luxury and incriminating documents that he had tried to dispose of in a lake before he left .
 Yanukovych took with him an estimated $32 billion of Ukrainian state funds over the border to Russia .
 Yanukovych was adorning his vast estate with Lebanese cedar doors at $64,000 each and spending $328,000 on wall panelling for his winter garden .
Ukrainian society required not just constitutional reform, but wholesale social reformation . A transformation of values would signify a clear break from the state-authorised crime, corruption and indignity of the post-Independence era .
 The "Revolution of Dignity" came to symbolize the awakening of civil society in Ukraine as a whole . The reinstitution of the values of dignity and respect throughout the country after the shameful debacle of Yanukovych's criminal regime .
 The main aims of the revolution were social justice, democracy and the rule of law, according to the Ukrainian government .
 The protestors were demonstrating against the corrupt presidential election, which was rigged to give the impression that Viktor Yanukovych had gained the most votes .
 The Orange Revolution succeeded in overturning this result and fresh elections were called . New elections resulted in a majority for the reformist President, Viktor Yushchenko .
 Ukraine's new leaders were unable to unite and soon succumbed to infighting . Putin's Russia spent millions of dollars on Yanukovych’s election .
 The result was an unmitigated disaster for Ukraine, as the country was brought further into Russia’s sphere of influence . corruption became even more endemic at every level of Ukrainian society .
 The Orange Revolution of 2004-5 was the unprecedented ecumenical mobilisation of all the main Ukrainian churches in defence of fundamental human values of dignity and freedom . The 2014 demonstrations were the first since the Declaration of Independence in 1991 and the Orange Revolution.
 All the major churches stood in solidarity with society against the state . For the first time in post-Soviet history, all the main churches stand in solidarity .
 The support that the churches gave to the Revolution of Dignity seems to have further consolidated this trust among the general population . The support of the churches gives to the revolution seems to be further consolidating this trust .
 At the height of the protests in December 2013, Dr Mykhailo Cherenkov said, “While the government is paralyzed, the church has become a source of support,’ he said .
 People are hiding in churches from the repression of the police, church representatives are calling on the people to take peaceful action .
 The church in Ukraine was found to be on the side of social reform . For the first time in postSoviet history, the church was found in the country's history .
 The militants arrived on campus on a sunny afternoon, armed with Kalashnikov rifles and rocket-propelled grenades . I was not on the DCU campus at the time, but I heard tearful accounts from friends and former colleagues .
 The armed men threatened the staff and students who were on campus at the time with ‘court martial’ if they did not comply fully with their orders . They spoke with pure Russian accents .
In an instant, these armed men forced them out of their homes and deprived them of their livelihoods . In an instant. In a instant, they were forced to leave their homes .
 The academic buildings and dormitories have been converted into warehouses . The former Baptist Rector of DCU noted that the academic buildings are being converted to warehouses .
 Hostages are being held there and dormitories have been transformed into torture chambers . Hostages have been turned into torture rooms .
 A classroom of a private Christian school on the university campus has been turned into a shooting range . Rebels shoot at Ukrainian symbols and children’s drawings .
 The aim of this lecture will be to focus the attention of readers on the humanitarian catastrophe that is taking place in the Russianoccupied areas of Ukraine .
 Many people in the West do not know about Russia’s undeclared, ‘hybrid war’ against Ukraine .
 In June 2015 Vice President of the Evangelical Baptist Union of Ukraine, Igor Bandura, reported that in the Donetsk region there are 56 Baptist churches that remain under Ukrainian control and 44 churches that are occupied by pro-Russian separatists .
 In the "Mykhailo Cherenkov, ‘Reconciliation Begins at Home’ in New Eastern Europe 5 (September/October 2015), 66-7 . In the ""' Mykhaila Cherenko’s “Rec onciliation
Congregations in these regions have either fled or gone underground, as their church buildings have been confiscated by armed Russian and pro-Russian separatists .
Post-Soviet Russia is the greatest threat to global peace and religious freedom in the world today, says U.S. author . West has not adequately grasped that in post- Soviet Russia a new ideology has emerged, he says .
 The notion of the so-called Russian World has started to dominate the discourse of the Russian Orthodox Church . We in the West need to realise how the notion of a Russian World is dominating the discourse .
 The Russian World, with its triad of Orthodoxy-Autocracy-Nationalism, has filled the ideological void left by the Soviet Union .
Under the influence of the Russian World ideology, nationalistic hatred is disguised as holiness and religious zeal .
 Recent commentators have pointed out remarkable parallels between the foreign policy strategies of Adolf Hitler and Vladimir Putin .
 In the 1930s Hitler used the existence of large German populations in Czechoslovakia, Austria and Poland to justify his demands for territorial expansion .
 All of this may seem like an academic or political debate about ideas, and as something that is far removed from theology or Baptist principles .
 The only countries threatened directly by this ideology are Russia’s immediate neighbours .
 In Ukraine the Russian World ideology is causing death and destruction on a scale unknown since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Baptists and evangelicals have been tortured and murdered in the Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine .
 If these facts alone are not sufficient to cause us to care about what is happening, then it needs to be made clear just how volatile the situation is in Ukraine at this time .
 Russia has nuclear weapons being unleashed by Russia against the capital cities of Europe and even North America . Unless decisive action is taken now, the Western world could be faced with a regional conflict .
 There is already alarm among Poles and Lithuanians that Putin may engage in the kind of brinkmanship that will result in a '°' This is the title of a book published in 2014 about Putin’s regime .
 The use of nuclear weapons against Russia’s ‘enemies’ is being openly discussed on Russian state television . Such weapons are a long-standing part of Russia's military strategy .
 The future of the whole of Eastern Europe now hangs in the balance, according to a report commissioned by the Royal Institute of International Affairs .
 If Putin's Russia manages to get its way in Ukraine, the whole of Eastern Europe could be plunged into a new dark age of Russian-led serfdom .
 Putin’s Russia will not stop its aggressive policy of expansion in Ukraine. For those in the West who advocate appeasement, let it be clear that Putin's Russia won't stop its expansion in the Ukraine .
 The whole of Europe (together with the Western values of freedom, accountability, democracy and civil society) could find itself confronted by an existential threat .
 The only way to counter the threat posed by the imperialistic Russian World ideology is by demonstrating unity in solidarity, he says .
 The diplomatic efforts by the West can only secure temporary, imperfect ceasefire arrangements . The West has been trying to secure a temporary ceasefire arrangements.
 Mykhailo Cherenkov remarks that, the religious aspect of the Russian World ideology that lies behind the violence “makes the conflict in Ukraine unresolvable by political or economic means’s religious aspect.
 If the war against Ukraine is a Holy War for Holy Russia, then no sanctions or diplomatic agreements will end ites . There is no military solution to the current conflict .
 In a nuclear age, the principle of Mutually Assured Destruction makes it futile to speak of any “winners’ emerging from the inevitable Armageddon .
As we struggle against these violent and dehumanising ideologies, we should be aware of the danger that the fight against evil can easily acquire an evil character itself .
 There is no doubt that Baptists are a small minority within the family of churches in Ukraine . There is a small majority of Baptists in Ukraine.
 The All-Ukrainian Union of Churches of Evangelical Christians --Baptists *° for 2010 was assessed at 151,000 members .
 Ukrainian Baptists °° was the main theme of the 2015 London Consultation on Ukraine at Lambeth Palace, London .
The Consultation was co-hosted by Mission Eurasia and BMS World Mission . The Consultation is a collaboration between the two organizations .
 As Chairman of Mission Eurasia UK, I served as one of the co-moderators of the Consultation . I was chairman of the Committee of Mission Eurasian UK .
 The blurring of distinctions between Baptist, Pentecostals and other evangelical Christian groups is partly a legacy of the Soviet era . The Blurring of the distinctions between the two groups is part of a legacy.
Some Baptists refused to accept this arrangement and were driven underground and persecuted for their faith . Some Baptists were forced to accept the arrangement .
 In 1961, these Baptists organised themselves into a breakaway organisation, known as the Church of Evangelicals Christians-Baptists . They became known as initiativniki, or ‘initiators’ would constitute less than 0.4% of the total population
Given their minority status, Baptist communities in Ukraine and throughout the former USSR have tended to make a virtue of necessity by idealising their marginality .
 Oleksandr Turchynov was appointed Interim President of Ukraine in 2014 . The appointment was the appointment of Oleksander Turchyov as Interim president .
 Turchynov belongs to the Union of Life Baptist Church in Kyiv . He is a regular preacher .
 The fact that Turchynov was a Baptist was played up by the Russian media . The Russian media portrayed him as a pawn of American interests and as a “sectarian’s” who did not fit into the ideological co-ordinates of the Russian World .
 Pavel Unguryan, who now serves as Vice-Minister of Environment and Natural Resources of Ukraine, is one of the Ukraine's top environmental officials . He is also the Vice- Minister of the Environment and natural Resources of the country .
 In 2013 there were 2,363 Baptist churches in Ukraine with a combined membership of 120,963 . The Ukrainian Baptist Union is the second largest Baptist community in Europe, after the Baptist Union of Great Britain .
 The Revolution of Dignity can be understood as a political or social event, but as a catalyst of deep, tectonic shifts in thinking about the interrelation between the church and the world, the nature of prophetic witness .
 In the history of the world, the Revolution of Dignity is merely an episode in a linear chronology . In the world's history, the revolution is only an episode of a linear timeline .
 The church's history may be the kairos moment ushering in a new series of opportunities and challenges . But in the history of the church, it may have been the kaisros moment .
 Ukrainian Christians can now bid farewell to the ideological remnants of a moribund and defunct Soviet system . The attitude towards Christianity wavered between grudging acceptance and outright hostility .
 The Revolution of Dignity signals the “coming of age’ of the Ukrainian churches’s churches. This development will have major implications that extend beyond the national boundaries of Ukraine .
 Baptists can be in the vanguard of a new movement for the reformation of the church and the renewal of society, says the author . He believes that despite their limited numbers, Baptists are in a movement for greater freedom .
 Ukraine has deep historical roots in Orthodoxy, but is also prevalent in Western Ukraine . The Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church is prevalent in western Ukraine .
 The Orthodox and Greek Catholic Churches will need a renewed vision of its responsibilities towards the state and society .
 Ukrainian Baptists' Responsibilities Towards the State and Society** The Revolution of Dignity has prompted new thinking .
 There has been a radical re-evaluation of the demarcation between the spheres of legitimate influence of the church, the state and society .
 The maps of the sacred and profane, religious and social have been redrawn . The maps have been published in the U.S.
 The task of the church is to discern between good and evil, between God and gods . The task is to illuminate the front line in the spiritual battle against the powers and principalities .
 The church is complicit in the crimes of the governing regime, the church says . By not calling evil that is evil, the Church colludes with the criminals .
 Baptists have a clear responsibility towards the state. In common with every citizen, Baptists are responsible for the state .
 The scope of this lecture precludes a detailed discussion of the meaning and application of the terms, “state” and “society’ and their interrelation . The church and individual Christians are obedient to the authorities .
In contrast to the classical tradition of political theory, Hegel drew a clear distinction between the “political’ and “civil’ spheres of ethical life’s.
 Hegel maintained that the role of the state was to represent universal values that transcend the irreconcilable conflicts over private interests that are an inevitable consequence of civil society .
 Civil society and the state are mutually dependent in so far as the competing interests within civil society require the regulation of the state . Civil society is mutually dependent on the state.
 For its part, the state cannot reach its full ethical potential without the operation of a robust civil society, says the U.S.
 How Followers of Christ Should Serve the Common Good is a popular guide to the common good .
 It is not the government, but moral conscience informed by the teachings of the Scriptures . The Scriptures determines what is good and what is evil .
 Baptists are called upon to distinguish between good and evil, and thus to legitimise the power that protects from evil .
 When those in power violate their legal and moral boundaries, they should not only be denied obedience, but should be actively resisted, as great Christian leaders such as Dietrich Bonhoeffer and Martin Luther King demonstrated .
 The church is responsible for submitting to legitimate authority which acts in accordance with the constitution and moral law . In distinguishing between good and evil, the church isresponsible for submitting.
 The church has a sacred duty to resist lawless authority, which rewrites laws for itself and turns the legal system into a tool for the misappropriation of power and wealth by the state authorities .
Among many post-Soviet Baptists, we hear about obedience much more often than about resistance . Many post- Soviet Baptists are more likely to obey than resist .
 If we read the Bible carefully, we see many examples of resistance to oppressive power . Yet, if we read it carefully, there are also examples of oppression .
In 1 Samuel we read about God’s stern disapproval of the establishment of political power in Israel . For instance, in 1 Samuel, God was sternly opposed to political power .
 In Ecclesiastes, the Preacher decries all political authority as vanity and hollow conceit .
 In the New Testament, the condemnation of political authority is even more explicit .
 Proper obedience is demonstrated in the payment of taxes, in answering to the institutions of power, and in complying with existing legislation . Proper obedience can be demonstrated in paying taxes and complying with legislation .
 Disobedience or resistance is demonstrated in criticising transgressions, in denouncing injustice, in the withholding of bribes, and in the refusal to take up arms against peaceful citizens .
 During the Revolution of Dignity the vast majority of Ukrainian Baptists recognised that they were called to resist the power of the corrupt state . The vast majority recognised that the majority of the Baptists were called on to resist power .
 If revolutionary resistance to the state is to avoid acquiring a destructive character, it must be imbued with Christian content, well-defined limits, and appropriate, non-violent modes of engagement .
 Baptists also have responsibilities toward the broader church and to society as a whole .
 In a world divided into spheres of religious influences, Baptist communities can create a place of meeting, dialogue and communication .
 Such a healthy ecumenism means no more and no less than the acceptance of genuine ecclesiastical diversity, good neighbourliness and the preservation of openness to others .
 Baptists can be loyally and wholeheartedly committed to their own unique tradition without believing that it embodies final and exclusive truth . There is more to be learned from other traditions.
 Baptists can relate to Orthodoxy in context of the history of the church, rather than through prejudiced beliefs about autocratic policies or national chauvinism .
 Baptists can relate to the state by respecting the law and fulfilling their political duties and responsibilities to all people .
 Baptists can relate to society by demonstrating solidarity with the legitimate aspirations of ordinary people for freedom and dignity .
 Baptists must avoid the temptation to become too closely aligned with the interests of the state, which can lead to a dangerous sacralisation of state power .
 For Baptists, the archetypes of a “God-bearing people’s” are devoid of their customary magical hold . “Holy Russia,” and “Orthodox people,’t. ‘Holy Russia’ and ‘Orthodox
 Throughout their history, Baptists have learned that the alliance of church and state is without biblical justification and is morally bankrupt .
 The recent history of Russia demonstrates that the hegemony of the Orthodox Church in post-Soviet society does not lead to spiritual revival, but merely creates a thin veneer of Christianity among a people who live in fear of the allpowerful church-state .
 Neither Orthodox monarchism nor atheistic communism are compatible with the freedom of the gospel . Neither is compatible with a prevailing authoritarianism, along with their prevailing authoritarianist.
 History affords numerous examples of the fatal consequences that can ensue when political and religious institutions are united into the totality of a single authority .
 Under such conditions, Christianity can become conscripted by imperialistic ideologies, says the author .
 This kind of fake patriotic religion leads to the blasphemous deification of the state, says the author .
 “national churches’ can invoke the name of ‘God’ as an idol who has bestowed a special blessing and favour on a particular nation, which then allegedly gives this “special” nation the right to invade and conquer neighbouring territories and subdue their peoples .
 Such a sham Christianity, which is a denial of Christ and the gospel, will always refuse to accept any higher power . Such aSham Christianity will ruthlessly destroy any forms of genuine Christian faith that go beyond cultural or national identity .
 This kind of idolatrous, nationalistic ‘official Christianity’ is a demonic distortion of the gospel . Paul alluded to the dark ‘powers and principalities’ which he alluded to in his Epistle to the Ephesians .
 Baptists are right to be cautious of such alliances between the church and state, especially in the post-Soviet Eurasia .
 Since the fall of the USSR, the witness of post-Soviet Christians has been enervated by a dangerous imbalance in the relationship between the church and the state .
 The church has tended to build a separate relationship with the state, promising it its loyalty in exchange for benefits, patronage and preferential treatment .
 As the church and state grew closer, society began to lose respect both for the state and the church .
In Ukraine and other nations of the former USSR, society became alienated from both the church and the state . In Ukraine and others of the ex-Soviet states, society was alienated from the church.
 The political system of a society includes both the state and civil society . The state and the civil society include both the government and the state .
Post-Soviet church became, in effect, co-ruler with the state . In reality, the post- Soviet church was co-run by the state, but it became a church .
 The church has a duty of obedience to the state only insofar as the state protects the welfare of one’s neighbours and the general well . The state is also a general well, being of the people .
 The church’s responsibility to society can be expressed positively in solidarity and negatively in constructive disagreement with social trends that do not correspond to the gospel values of truth, freedom, respect, dignity and compassion .
 It seems that the church is enamoured of disagreement and forgetful about solidarity . Thus, in relation to society, it seems that it seems to be enamored of disagreement .
 modes of evangelisation that were exported to Ukraine by Western missionaries in the years following the implosion of the Soviet Union .
 After the Revolution, both the evangelical and the historical churches have been faced with the unsettling truth that personal faith and evangelism alone are no long sufficient .
 The revolutionary events in Ukraine have demonstrated that traditional understandings of the church's responsibilities toward the state and society have been exhausted and are in need of revision .
 In this situation, I think that instead of calling the people to repent and make peace, we ourselves should repent for betraying the people, he says . "We have failed for so many years to speak truthfully to those in power," he says.
 Christianity in Ukraine is entering a new era. From Evangelical Activism to Missio Dei after the Revolution of Dignity, Christianity is entering new era .
Before long, the needs of mission dictated the need for missiology . The need for a comprehensive theological analysis of the ties that bind the church and the Kingdom of God .
Post-Soviet Baptists have abdicated their social responsibility . Too often, post-Soviet Baptistists have abandoned their social responsibilities .
 Some churches have reduced the task of mission to exhorting people to join their church . Some churches are now less mission-oriented .
 Society remains without a transformative influence as churches relinquish their vocation to be salt and light . Church leaders say they will no longer be able to change the world .
 The light shines only upon the faithful and the salt is distributed only to members of the church .
 It's no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot . It's not good for anyone, except for being thrown out, trampled and thrown out .
 Instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house . Instead of putting it on the stand, they put the house on the floor .
 The radical French theologian, Jacques Ellul, maintained that we must not wait for people to come to church, or to meetings organised by Christians .
To evangelise means to go into groups and meetings of people who are not Christians . To evangelise is to meet people who aren't Christians .
 To evangelise is to declare a gospel which enters the concrete interests, the anxieties and hopes of these people .
 The Christian vision of biblically-informed action on behalf of the overriding biblical imperative of social justice. Instead, there needs to be a vision of holistic mission, says author .
 As in the West, the emphasis of evangelicals on personal salvation has been misguided, writes David Frum . Frum says the emphasis has been carried away with narrowly defined personal issues at the expense of social responsibility .
 If someone is convinced that there is a place where they will be tormented after death, then they will no doubt make that affirmation, regardless of whether they are genuinely moved by Christ or not .
 This type of discourse endeavours to compel individuals to bow their knee regardless of their motives or the nature of their desire . This kind of discourse has been used to compel people to bend their knee .
 Thousands of “converts’ with no hearts. Like a lover of nuts who is offered thousands of shells with no centre, so we offer God thousands of 'converts' with no heart .
 You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when you have succeeded, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are .
James McClendon Jr. According to the late American Baptist theologian, this focus on making converts constitutes a demonic perversion of the true task of mission .
 The contours of the future are still hazy; we look as through a glass darkly . The future is still a bit hazy, but the future is a bit brighter .
 The post-Soviet church is currently passing through. Nevertheless, we can identify four stages of transition that the church is passing through .
Mission is not about inviting people to religious buildings to attend religious events organised by the church . Mission is not to invite people to churches to attendreligious events. Mission is to not invite people into religious buildings .
 Mission has a theocentric, rather than an ecclesiocentric. object and point of departure . Mission is a theOCentric, instead of an object, object and departure .
 Thoughts on God’s Mission within the CIS in the Future .
 Anglican Consultative Council XIII (London: Anglican Communion Office, 2006), 302.
 Paradigm Shifts in Theology of Mission . originates in the very nature of the Triune God, then mission becomes not so much an activity in which churches engage, but a divine imperative in which the church participates .
 The Kingdom of God, rather than the growth of the church, is the object of mission, says the author . "The kingdom of God" is more than the church's growth .
 The coming of that Kingdom ‘on earth as in heaven’ rather than numerical conversions, is regarded as the true aim of mission .
 A few designated “missionaries’ to the idea of a holistic mission, covering all spheres of life and mobilising all the people of the church to participate in the missio Dei .
 Such participation involves a renewed commitment to work tirelessly in the struggle for social justice . Such participation involved a renewed focus on the issue of social justice.
 A reconsideration of the idea of the “priesthood of all believers” provides impetus to a theological understanding of mission as a responsibility delegated to all people of God .
 The social base of mission has been expanded to a movement of missional professionals . This includes a ministry of professional missionaries and missional professional professionals .
 Ukraine has seen new missional initiatives, such as the creation of the Alliance of Christian Professional Associations and the mass publication of the Desktop Gospel (Eeanzenue nua pa6bouem cmoue), in which Baptists have played a leading role .
Today's mission involves the activity of the transfiguring Word in the world and social justice .
 The third trend that can be observed in connection with cultural and demographic processes is the call to revive, awaken, and reform existing church structures in order to equip the church for mission .
 The year 2013 marked the 1025 anniversary of the establishment of Christianity in Kyivan Rus . The issue of nominal Christianity in the post-Soviet nations of the Eurasia was highlighted .
 Only a small percentage of people in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus are practicing Christians .
 The federation was abolished by the Mongol invasions in the 1240s . Many people in Ukraine, Russian and Belarus today claim cultural ancestry with the Rus .
 In these traditionally “Orthodox nations, society is transitioning into post-Christendom . In many regions the church has become a museum, a relic to a bygone era .
 Fourth, a shift is taking place from the usual short-term thinking and naive exclusivity to a meaningful partnership between traditions and regions .
 Peter Penner calls for dialogue and a ‘truly biblical partnership’ in implementing ‘God’s mission’ between foreign and national movements .
 The mission of the churches will be served not by fawning and borrowing, but by mutually enriching partnerships and the creative construction of localised missiologies .
 These transitions mark a more profound shift in the missiological paradigm, says author . It will result in a radical rethinking of the church and its vocation, he says .
 It is no accident that these processes coincide in time with the 500"" anniversary of the European Reformation .
Post-Soviet evangelical Christians have skipped their Reformation. Some Ukrainian theologians and historians have even argued that post-Soviet evangelicals have skipped the Reformation .
 Such a "reformation" would be directed not merely towards the renewal of the church, but also the transfiguration of society . Such a “reformation’s’ would be aimed at renewal of church, and also the Transfiguration.
 Revolution is the harbinger of new life, but the revolutionary period is always preceded by labour pangs that presage the birth of a new awakening .
 society needs the church to imbue the public sphere with values that reflect the inclusive vision of compassion symbolised by the Kingdom of God .
 The church in the post-Soviet space is called upon to humanise society in the name of the Kingdom of God . If civil society is the realm in which human values are developed for the common good of the whole public domain, then the church is called on to
 Society can rightfully expect the church to demonstrate the cardinal Christian virtues of faith, hope, compassion and solidarity .
 The radical political implications of Jesus’s proclamation of the Kingdom of God have far greater power to attract and inspire people than the isolated calls of the evangelist to personal repentance .
 Reimagining Church and Post-Soviet Society Post-secularism and post-Christendom create opportunities for the Church’s return to public sphere .
 The church's main interest in an open society should be solidarity with society rather than patronage of the state . The church’s main interest is solidarity.
 Post-Soviet Baptists can lead the way towards the church’s return to society .
 The current revolutionary situation may be a particularly auspicious time for the church to engage with society . The church may be in the midst of a revolution.
 The church should educate its people and impart to them a new vision of hope. Instead of vying for preferential treatment and struggling for influence, the church should be educating its people, says the author .
 The church in the power of the Holy Spirit has a prophetic mandate to foresee a new tomorrow . The church has shown fidelity to past traditions and concern for the present .
 The prophetic vocation of the church is expressed in its capacity to anticipate the future, to warn of danger, and to serve as a harbinger of hope .
 The church should anticipate and embody renewal, awakening and rebirth and should educate its people to live out their prophetic calling as agents of the Kingdom of God .
 We must focus on preparatory work for the future, rather than on responding to and struggling with what we have already outlived and agonised over. We need to focus on preparing for the next generation .
 The emperor has no clothes. It is obvious to everyone that the current order has lost legitimacy . The emperor is no clothes .
 The dismal legacy of the seventy-year Soviet catastrophe has left their mark on post-Soviet society today . The spirit of servitude, falsehood and disrespect that it nurtured have left its mark on society today, says the author .
Post-Soviet church is called not only to engage in politics, but should itself become a polis . The church embodies an alternative vision for political engagement and mediation between society and the state .
 The Greek word, éxkAnoia, is translated in English Bibles as “church’s” The word has two primary significations, including the word "church"
 In a strictly linguistic sense, the church is that which is “called out from or to something’s something. The church is called out from and to something .
 In the whole Bible there is no single reference to the church as an organisation, institution or building .
 The church in the sense of a community that is “called out” is both empirical and an eschatological reality . The church is both an empirical and a eschatical reality, says author .
 The fullest expression of the meaning and nature of the church is to be found in the last book of the Bible .
 The New Jerusalem of Revelation 21 represents a transfigured world and the fusion of the entire human community into a spiritual fellowship without barriers or distinctions of any kind .
 Nowhere in the Gospels do we read of Jesus’s establishing a religious institution .
Far from founding a religious institution based on order and hierarchy, he built a community in which the values of compassion and justice were lived out in the context of a new order of existence .
 The problem in many post-Soviet churches is that missionaries and church planters have tried to build the Kingdom of God through programmes and evangelisation outreach strategies, which have had little relationship value .
 God has ordained community as his chosen means to build his Kingdom on earth . God — as Father, Son and Holy Spirit — has ordained communities as his choice to build the Kingdom on Earth .
 The earliest Christians had no designated buildings of worship, but would congregate in each others’ houses . The early churches were not “churches’ in the modern sense at all, but they would offer hospitality .
 The church without walls should welcome people into fellowship and allow them to journey with us as they become more integrated into the Way of Jesus .
 The missional task of the church is to witness to the compassion of Christ for the benefit of the watching world . The church's missional role is to help the people of the world see Christ's compassion .
 Churches that thrive in post-Soviet Eurasia will be those communities of believers covenanted together in the love of Christ . Churches will be guided by faithfulness to Christ, obedience to Scripture and an openness to the leading of the Holy Spirit .
Church without walls is a missional movement that builds communities of grace . Church without walls was founded in the 1970s, when church was built without walls .
 Compassion is the defining character of the Kingdom of God, which is concerned with relationships . It is also concerned with relationship relationships .
 Following Jesus in Contemporary Context (Downers Grove: InterVarsity, 2003), 230. Follows Jesus in contemporary Context (downers Grove)
 Compassion rooted in vision, covenant relationships, generous hospitality and inclusive community, must be both the object and point of departure of all of our educational and evangelistic endeavours, says the author .
 Compassion stands to mission in the same relation as fire to flame . Compassion is the heart and soul of mission, its most basic essence and condition of its being .
 Compassion remains a constant gospel principle to be practiced regardless of the cultural context . The ways in which compassion is demonstrated will vary according to the setting .
In a context of social breakdown and deprivation, the element of compassion becomes particularly paramount . In parts of Eastern Ukraine, such as parts of urban areas in eastern Ukraine, it is particularly important .
 Any “gospel of salvation, hope and new life in Christ that does not reach out to people with the compassion of Christ will not be heard and may even do more harm than good .
 Sin and evil are not merely personal issues, but also structural phenomena . Sin andevil are not just personal issues but structural phenomena.
 God also cares about institutions in government and the media that disseminate lies and misinformation to entire populations . Thus, while it is true that God cares about whether we lie or tell the truth as individuals, God also care about institutions.
 The church is thus called to become a humanising force in society that upholds spiritual values of truth and compassion . The church has been called to be a 'humanising force'
 This kind of transformation demands a radical reformation of the church’s engagement with post-Soviet society . The church's engagement with the post- Soviet society needs to be reformation .
 Civil society has a right to demand transparency, honesty and accountability from the church . Civil society should demand transparency and honesty from church, according to the group .
 The church has engaged in underhand business deals and political machinations in order to maintain its interests .
 Christian values of honesty, dignity, freedom, justice and compassion need to be inculturated and embedded in the mundane realities that govern social and personal relations in the nation as a whole .
 The gospel message of the coming Kingdom of God can become a powerful change agent within post-Soviet society . The gospel messages can become powerful change agents in post- Soviet society .
 The Ukrainian Revolution has the potential to become a symbol of hope for church and society . Hundreds of thousands of Christian participated in the revolution .
 Celebrating the Great Traditions of Christian Faith (Trowbridge: Eagle Publishing, 1999), 153. Celebrating Great Tradition of Christian faith .
 The Revolution of Dignity has signalled a new era in which the post-Soviet church is awakened to its social responsibilities . The church is able to demonstrate solidarity with the people .
 The church must jettison its obsequious dependence on the state. In order for Christian values to become incarnated in the fabric of social relations.
 The church must also resist the temptation to collude with authoritarian political regimes that attempt to impose morality “from above” by the passing of legislation, such as laws that discriminate against homosexuals .
 Such legislation may have a thin veneer of Christianity, but is in fact a denial of the Christian faith and values . Such legislation can never be institutionally imposed or endorsed by ruling ideologies .
 This kind of Christianity facilitates the development of civil society by being free, humble, generous, hospitable, full of grace, and ready to listen, learn and suffer for the sake of the Kingdom of God .
 The problem with recent missions in the post-Soviet space is that they have been concerned with making occasional forays into society for testimony and to “catch a few converts and bring them into the church.
 The open and inclusive missional vision of church without walls, by contrast, signifies movement in two directions .
 The church teaches society that which God reveals inside the church, but also learns from what God reveals to the church through social events .
 Society is the public space which is sustained, redeemed and sanctified by God’s presence .
 All around the world God is active, beckoning us to participate with Him in the great work of redemption .
 The church can demonstrate solidarity with such groups and affirm the dignity and human rights of all people, regardless of their political views, social status or sexuality .
 The church can do this without endorsing the lifestyles and opinions of those whose values appear to contradict biblical moral teachings . Some Christians appear to disagree with some of the Bible's teachings .
 Mission, Theological Education and the Transformation of Post-Soviet Society . 99.3.
 A church without walls sees the dissemination of the values of the Kingdom of God to all spheres of society as an urgent gospel imperative . The church will reach out to transform educational institutions, theological think tanks, the media, and all the various infrastructure of civil society .
 A church that wants to work in tandem with the humanising forces of civil society will be concerned not to consolidate a religious institution based on order and hierarchy, but will be much more involved in building authentic communities of grace .
 The success of this kind of mission is expressed not in the triumph of Christianity over society, but in compassion for and involvement in society . The success is expressed in compassion, not in triumph of Christianism over society .
 What is preserved here is the social responsibility, the desire to influence and change, but without the naive optimism about Christianisation and Christendom, says the author .
 Mission signifies not so much a movement from the church into the world, but also through the sacrament of living . Mission signifies a constant Christian presence in the world .
 This is not so much a course of action as it is a way of thinking and being. This is the way to think and being, says the author .
 The church’s mission in the world is to proclaim and encourage, send and convert, to go and teach, but also in non-binding forms, such as being, living, sympathising, loving, salting and shining the light of Christ in places of darkness .
 Church without walls is a gospel-orientated vision of renewal that requires a reconnection between mission and discipleship, teaching and preaching, sanctification and conversion .
 The Great Commission of Christ speaks not about a hasty transfer of the truth, but the long and difficult work of missionary teachers with students .
 The gospel is a call to radical metanoia, to a fundamental reorientation of one's material relation towards God and towards one's neighbours . The gospel has been described as a 'radical metanoia' by some .
 We demonstrate our fidelity to the gospel of Christ, not simply by adhering to sound doctrine, but by living and believing in accordance with the vision of incarnation, crucifixion and resurrection .
 Baptists often pride themselves on their commitment to the unshakeable authority of the Scriptures . They must also show that they are capable of expressing it in the material reality of their lives .
 The post-Soviet Baptist community now has a historic opportunity to lead the way into a vision of open Christianity and church without walls .
 The Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity has unleashed a new impulse for wholesale social reform and a desire to jettison the burden of neo-Sovietism and its dysfunctional modes of social interaction .
 As Hegel claimed, human actors are caught up in the drama, but no-one has seen the script . As Hegel claims, human actor is caught up.
 The Owl of Minerva takes flight only at dusk . We will only learn of the true significance of the Revolution of Dignity in hindsight .
 Ukrainian society took a bold leap away from the post-Soviet vices of corruption, cynicism, and irresponsibility . But even now it is apparent that historians will look back at the Revolution in 2013-14 .
 The Revolution marks a return to the values of freedom, compassion and solidarity that proved so fatal to the Soviet Union in the late 1980s . In due course, it will deliver the coup de grdce to the equally discredited and dysfunctional regime of Vladimir Putin's Russia .
 The Revolution may prove to be God's gracious call to the churches in the post-Soviet space to engage proactively in the transformation of unjust, corrupt social structures .
 Ukraine’s Christian community has helped to blaze a new trail out of the post-Soviet captivity of the church . Other countries in the region may now follow, which other countries may now following .
 Putin and his corrupt Kremlin apparatchiks are finally forced to release their stranglehold on Russian public opinion . Even Russia itself will have its own peaceful Revolution on Moscow's Red Square .
 Russian Christians can expect from their Ukrainian brothers and sisters fervent prayers, material support and spiritual solidarity . The RUECB praises the Russian President for ‘his churches stand by their people in their legitimate aspirations for freedom and democracy’
 I can see a new era in which Orthodox, Catholics, Baptists and others join together out of common reverence for Christ in order to infuse social space with spiritual values of love, humanity, compassion, forgiveness and solidarity .
 As I have been praying for Ukraine recently, I can see a vision beginning to emerge, says John Sutter . Sutter says he is peering through a glass darkly .
 I can see an Orthodox priest from Donetsk praying with a Pentecostal preacher from Kyiv . I can also see a Ukrainian preacher praying with an Orthodox preacher .
 I can see them calling each other brothers and honouring and serving each other out of reverence to Christ . I can also see them call each other brother and honour each other .
 A Catholic monk from Lviv stands alongside a Baptist pastor from Moscow, and together praying that the peace of Christ would rule in their respective nations .
 We might yet live to witness all of these things. But I hope we can have the faith to realise that with God all things are possible .
 This wish for a large-scale reconciliation between Orthodox, Catholics and Protestants in Ukraine is a worthy aspiration . It would constitute a significant and progressive step in Ukraine’s long journey out of the post-Soviet transition .
 There may even be reconciliation between the Russian and Ukrainian churches . There may be reconciliation.
 The Russian Baptist community lives in an atmosphere of intimidation, threat and surveillance by the Russian authorities .
 “The Ukrainian Revolution and Christian Churches,” in East West Church & Ministry Report 22, 1-5. Lunkin, R., ‘The Ukrainian revolution and Christian churches,’ in the report .
 "Journalists gather for Mezyhirya Fest investigate conference at fugitive expresident’s estate"
 The Ecumenical Imperative and the Kingdom of God is called the "Kingdom of God"
 This lecture advances the provocative argument that instead of calling the people to repent and make peace, the church itself should repent for betraying the people . The church has failed to speak truthfully to those in power and to stand on the side of the oppressed .
Baptists in both Ukraine and Britain need to reject narrow pietism that over-emphasises individual salvation, says author .
 The lecture concludes on a hopeful note by showing that despite limited numbers, Baptists can be in the vanguard of a new movement for the reformation of the church and the renewal of society .
 The lecture is based on the author’s experience of living and working in Ukraine . It also addresses vital issues that affect the global Baptist community .
 Scarle issues a prophetic challenge to the church to recover its calling to serve the Kingdom of God through dynamic engagement in the public sphere . Scarle: The church should recover its call to serve its calling.
 Dr Mykhatlo Cherenkov, Vice President of Mission Eurasia and Professor at Ukrainian Catholic Universily Joshua T Searle is Tutor in Theology and Public Thought .
 A Northumbrian by birth and tempcrament, he is a graduate of Oxford, Dublin and Praguc . He is a Northumbian by birth.
 He is the author of books and articles on millennial studics and the social theology of evangelical Christians .