 Roman Tsymbalyuk will be holding a black-and-white “Ukraine’s placard .
 Vladimir Putin's aim is to catch his eye during the Russian president’s marathon annual press conference on December 14 . Putin will ask a nearly ritual question about the war in his homeland .
 Putin fields questions on anything from world politics to his love life, from macroeconomics to regional kvass production . Every year Putin fields scores of questions at the year-end event .
 The show has long been a set piece on Putin’s political calendar . It is used by the Kremlin to project an image of power, omniscience, and openness .
 Putin’s answers go unchallenged. Crucially, the format does not permit follow-up questions, meaning Putin's answers are not followed-up .
 Russian state media has been criticized for promoting Kremlin-friendly narratives . But it does occasionally bring Putin head-on with issues that buck the Kremlin- friendly narratives .
 Putin's exchanges with Tsymbalyuk have become one of the more combative and colorful moments of the TV spectacle . Putin has asked about the war in Ukraine every year since it broke out in 2014 .
 Tsymbalyuk has taken the floor in 2014, 2015, and 2016 to ask about the war . He has been in patriotic Ukrainian garb to attract attention .
 Tsymbalyuk's question coaxed out the Russian president’s first acknowledgement after a year of denials . Moscow sent military advisers into eastern Ukraine, contradicting the official Russian line .
 In February 2014, Moscow-backed Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fled Ukraine amid a pro-Western revolution . Russia annexed the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea and backed a separatist war in the country’s east that has now killed more than 10,300 people .
 Tsymbalyuk appeared at the press conference in a gray sweatshirt emblazoned with “Ukrop,’ playing on a word for dill . The word was used by detractors to describe pro-Kyiv fighters in the Ukrainian conflict .
 Putin asked Putin how many Russian soldiers and tanks had been sent to the Donbas to support the separatists . He also asked about the prospects of a prominent Ukrainian in Russian custody being freed .
 Russia has insisted throughout the conflict that Russian troops have had no involvement in eastern Ukraine . The only Russians there have been “volunteer’s fighters, Russia has said .
 The next year, Tsymbalyuk returned wearing a loud yellow top and shirt and again asked about Russian soldiers . Tsymalyuk is a Russian soldier .
 He added sarcastically that he was “sending regards’ to Putin from two purported Russian intelligence officers captured by Kyiv’s forces in Ukraine .
 Putin for the first admitted publicly that Russian military specialists had been deployed to Ukraine . He emphasized that regular Russian forces had not been sent to Ukraine.
 The revelation sparked talk of the changing contours of Russia’s official narrative . But Tsymbalyuk said he was skeptical anything changed for Russians .
 The press conference was broadcast to Russians live on TV . Tsymbalyuk said the revelation was skated over or forgotten in subsequent news and television reports .
 With days to go, he said he hadn't yet formulated the wording of this year's question .
 He wants to ask Putin about talk of an international peacekeeping force for eastern Ukraine . But he said he wants to talk of a deal with Russia to give up control of the border to Ukraine .
 Putin wants to question comments by Putin invoking the 1995 massacre at Srebrenica . 8,000 Muslim men and boys were killed by Bosnian Serbs during the Bosnian War .
 Putin was asked about the possibility of returning the Ukrainian border to Kyiv forces at the Valdai discussion club in October .
 He feared that the result would be a “bloodbath’ and a situation similar to Srebrenica . He said he feared that he would be in a similar situation to that of Srebrerenica.
 Ukrainian reporter skeptical of the significance of difficult questions posed to Putin .