 Crimea is a peninsula on the northern coast of the Black Sea in Eastern Europe that is almost completely surrounded by both the Black sea and the smaller Sea of Azov to the northeast . Crimea is on the north coast of Crimea and the north east of Russia .
 It is located south of the Ukrainian region of Kherson, to which it is connected by the Isthmus of Perekop, and west of the Russian region of Kuban . It is separated by the Strait of Kerch though linked by the Crimean Bridge .
 The Arabat Spit is located to the northeast, a narrow strip of land that separates a system of lagoons named Sivash from the Sea of Azov .
 Crimea has historically been at the boundary between the classical world and the Pontic–Caspian steppe . Crimea has been at a boundary between Classical world and Pontic-Caspi steppe.
 Its southern fringe was colonised by the Greeks, the Persians, the Romans, the Byzantine Empire, the Crimean Goths, the Genoese and the Ottoman Empire . At the same time its interior was occupied by a changing cast of invading steppe nomads and empires .
 Crimea and adjacent territories were united in the Crimean Khanate during the 15th to 18th century . Crimea and neighboring territories were unified in the Crimea Khanate .
 Crimean Tatars were deported to Central Asia, an act recognized as a genocide . Crimea was downgraded to the Crimean Oblast after its entire indigenous population was deported .
 Ukraine was formed as an independent state in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Most of the peninsula was reorganized as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . Sevastopol retained its special status within Ukraine .
 Ukraine extended Russia's lease of the naval facilities under the 2010 Kharkiv Pact in exchange for further discounted natural gas . Ukraine extended the lease of Russia's naval facilities in 2010 .
 In February 2014, following the 2014 Ukrainian revolution that ousted the Ukrainian President, Viktor Yanukovych, pro-Russian separatists took over the territory .
 Crimea-wide referendum, unconstitutional under Ukrainian and Crimean constitutions, was held on the issue of reunification with Russia . Official results indicated the referendum was supported by a large majority of Crimeans .
 Russia annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014, incorporating the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol as the 84th and 85th federal subjects of Russia . Russia formally annexed Crimea in March 2014 .
 The classical name Tauris or Taurica is from the Greek word Tauria . The name is after the peninsula's Scytho-Cimmerian inhabitants .
 The Crimean Tatar name of the peninsula is Qırım and so also for the city of Krym which is now called Stary Krym . Krym served as a capital of the Crimean province of the Golden Horde .
 Herodotus identifies the port not in Crimea, but as being on the west coast of the Sea of Azov .
 No evidence that this name was ever in use for the peninsula . No evidence has been identified that it was ever used .
 The Turkic term is related to the Mongolian appellation kerm ""wall" But sources indicate that the Mongolians appellation of the Crimean peninsula of Qaram is phonetically incompatible with kerm/kerem .
 The name "Crimea" is the Italian form,e., la Crimea, since at least the 17th century . The "Crimean peninsula" becomes current during the 18th century, gradually replacing the classical name of the Tauric Peninsula .
 In English usage since the early modern modern period the Crimean Khanate is referred to as Crim Tartary . In English use since early modern period it is called Crim Tartaries .
 The omission of the definite article in English became common during the later 20th century . It became common in the late 20th Century .
 The classical name was used in 1802 in the name of the Russian Taurida Governorate . The name was also used in the 1802 name of Russia's first governor .
 In the 8th century BC the Cimmerians migrated to the area in retreat from Scythian advances . The latter also moved to the region .
 The region came within the sphere of Greek maritime interest and became the site of Greek colonies . Contemporaneously, and possibly because of the migration, the region came into the sphere.
 The most important Greek city was Chersonesos at the edge of today's Sevastopol . The city was the most important city in Greece .
 In the 9th century CE, Byzantium established the Theme of Cherson to defend against incursions by the Khaganate .
 The Crimean peninsula from this time was contested between Byzantium, Rus' and Khazaria .
 The area remained the site of overlapping interests and contact between the early medieval Slavic, Turkic and Greek spheres .
 Slavs were sold to Byzantium and other places in Anatolia and the Middle-East during this period . Slavs are sold to Byzantine-era cities in the region .
 Trapezuntine Perateia had already been subjected to pressure from the Genoese and Kipchaks by the time Alexios I of Trebizond died in 1222 . The Mongol invasions began its western swept through Volga Bulgaria in 1223 .
 The Perateia became the Principality of Theodoro and Genoese Gazaria, respectively . In the 13th century CE, portions were controlled by the Republic of Venice .
 The Crimean Khanate, a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire, succeeded the Golden Horde . It lasted from 1449 to 1783 .
 In 1571, the Crimean Tatars attacked and sacked Moscow, burning everything but the Kremlin . In 1570, the Tatars sacked Moscow and burned everything but Moscow .
 Until the late 18th century, Crimean Tatars maintained a massive slave trade with the Ottoman Empire . About 2 million slaves were exported from Russia and Ukraine over the period 1500–1700 .
 In 1774, the Khanate was proclaimed independent under the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca with the Ottomans . But was then conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783 .
 The Taurida Oblast was created by a decree of Catherine the Great on 2 February 1784 .
 The center of the oblast was first in Karasubazar but was moved to Simferopol later in 1784 . The center was moved from KarasUBazar to Simfopol in the 1784.
 The oblast of the Novorossiysk Governorate was abolished by Paul I on 12 December 1796 . The territory, divided into 2 uyezds, was attached to the second incarnation of the governorate .
 From 1853 to 1856, the peninsula was the site of the principal engagements of the Crimean War . A conflict fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of France, Britain, the Ottoman Empire and Sardinia .
 Following the Russian Revolution of 1917, the military and political situation in Crimea was chaotic like that in much of Russia .
 Crimea was for a time a stronghold of the anti-Bolshevik White Army . Crimea changed hands numerous times during the ensuing Russian Civil War . Crimea is now in the Crimea region .
 The White Army controlled Crimea before remnants were finally driven out by the Red Army in November 1920 . The Red Army took control of Crimea in the 1920s .
 White Russians led by General Wrangel made their last stand against Nestor Makhno and the Red Army in Crimea .
 When resistance was crushed, many of the anti-Communist fighters and civilians escaped by ship to Istanbul .
 Between 56,000 and 150,000 of the Whites were murdered as part of the Red Terror . The Red Terror was organized by Béla Kun, a former White House official .
 Crimea became part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1921 as the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic . Crimea was part of Russia's Soviet Union in 1922 .
 During the Second World War the peninsula was invaded by Nazi Germany and Romanian troops in summer 1941 across the Isthmus of Perekop .
 Crimea was occupied until German and Romanian forces were expelled in an offensive by Soviet forces ending in May 1944 .
 On 25 June 1946, it was downgraded to the Crimean Oblast . The Crimean Tatars were deported for alleged collaboration with the Nazi forces .
 A total of more than 230,000 people were deported, mainly to Uzbekistan . About a fifth of the total population of the Crimean Peninsula was deported .
After the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, doubts have been expressed from the Russian side by all means . But even by Western historians about the very legitimacy of the 1954 transition of Crimea to Ukraine.
 In post-war years, Crimea thrived as a tourist destination, with new attractions and sanatoriums for tourists .
 Tourists came from all around the Soviet Union and neighbouring countries, particularly from the German Democratic Republic .
 In time the peninsula also became a major tourist destination for cruises originating in Greece and Turkey .
 Crimea's infrastructure and manufacturing also developed, particularly around the sea ports at Kerch and Sevastopol and in the oblast's landlocked capital, Simferopol .
 Populations of Ukrainians and Russians alike doubled, with more than 1. million Russians and 626,000 Ukrainians living on peninsula by 1989 .
 In 1991, a referendum was held in the Crimean Oblast, and voters approved restoring the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic . In January 1991, the Crimea Oblast was restored .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea was formed as a constituent entity of independent Ukraine . It was formed after the dissolution of the Soviet Union less than a year later .
 The Verkhovna Rada voted to grant Crimea "extensive home rule" during the dispute . The Crimea Rada has been in dispute with Russia since 2007 .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine officially dissolved on March 15 March 2014 . One day before the Russian annexation of Crimea, the State Council of Crimea was established in place of the Verkhova Rada . The State Council was established on 17 March 2014.
Unmarked forces with local militias took over the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol . They occupied several localities in Kherson Oblast on the Arabat Spit .
 The United Nations General Assembly adopted a non-binding resolution calling upon states not to recognise changes to the integrity of Ukraine . Russia had control over the peninsula, but sovereignty was disputed as Ukraine and the majority of the international community consider the annexation illegal .
 A range of international sanctions have remained in place against Russia . A number of named individuals have been named as a result of the events of 2014 .
 Russia withdrew its forces from southern Kherson in December 2014 . The peninsula has been administered as part of the Russian Federation except for the northern areas of the Arabat Spit and the Syvash .
 In July 2015, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev stated that Crimea had been fully integrated into Russia . In July 2014, Medvedeva said Crimea was fully integrated in Russia .
 Russian government has invested heavily in the peninsula’s infrastructure since 2014 . The Crimean Bridge links the peninsula to the Russian mainland . Since 2014 the government has spent heavily on the peninsula.
 New sources of water are trying to be developed, with huge difficulties, to replace closed Ukrainian sources . New water sources are being developed in Ukraine .
 Russia provides electricity to Crimea via a cable beneath the Kerch Strait . Russia provides power to Crimea through a cable.
 The power grid company Rosseti reported to have fixed the outage in approximately one hour . In June 2018 there was a full electrical outage for all of Crimea .
 From the medieval period to the early modern period additional ethnic communities migrated to the area . prominent representation includes the Armenian, German, Serbian, and Jewish ethnic communities .
 Crimea is located on the northern coast of the Black Sea and on the western coast of Sea of Azov . The only land border is shared with Ukraine's Kherson Oblast from the north .
 Crimea is almost an island and only connected to the continent by the Isthmus of Perekop, a strip of land about 5–7 kilometres wide . Crimea is about 5-7km wide .
 The natural border between the Crimean Peninsula and the Ukrainian mainland is formed by the Sivash or "Rotten Sea" A large system of shallow lagoons between Russia by the Kerch Strait is known as the "Sivash" The Ukrainian mainland and Crimea are
 Beside isthmus of Perekop, the peninsula is connected to the Kherson Oblast's Henichesk Raion bridges over the narrow Chonhar and Henichedk straits .
 The northern part of Arabat Spit is administratively part of Henichesk Raion in Kherson Oblast . Shchaslyvtseve and Strilkove are the two rural communities in the region .
 Most towns in Crimea have several names, including Crimea . Crimea has a long history and many conquerors .
 The Isthmus of Perekop /Perekop/Or Qapi is about 7 km wide and connects Crimea to the mainland . The Istmus of the Perekops is about seven km wide .
 The North Crimean Canal now crosses it to bring water from the Dnieper . The canal is the first time it has crossed the canal to cross the canal .
 To the west Karkinit Bay separates the Tarkhankut Peninsula from the mainland . To the east, the Karkinin Bay separates Karkins Bay from the Karksin Peninsula .
 On the south side is the large Donuzlav Bay and the port and ancient Greek settlement of Eupatoria/Yevpatoria-Kerkinitis/Gozleve . The south side of the bay is the largest Greek settlement on the south
 The coast then runs south to Sevastopol/Chersonesus, a good natural harbor, great naval base and the largest city on the peninsula . The city is a great natural harbor.
 In the south, between the Crimean Mountains and the sea is a narrow coastal strip which was held by the Genoese and after 1475 by the Turks . In the north, the Crimea is a small coastal strip.
 In Soviet times the many palaces were replaced by dachas and health resorts . In Soviet time the palaces had been replaced by health resorts.
 Heracles Peninsula, Balaklava/Symbalon/Cembalo, is a smaller natural harbor south of Sevastopol . Foros, foros, Alupka, Gaspra, Yalta, Gurzuf and Alushta are the southern
 Kaffa/Theodosia was once a great slave mart and a kind of capital for the Genoese and Turks . Further east is KaffA/TheODosia/Feodosian which was once the great slave Mart and a greatslave mart .
 At the east end of the 90km Kerch Peninsula is Kerch/Panticapaeum, once the capital of the Bosporian Kingdom . The Kerch peninsula was once the city of Kerch.
 New Crimean Bridge connects Crimea to the Taman Peninsula . Just south of Kerch is the new Crimean Bridge which connects Crimea.
 The Syvash or "Putrid Sea" is a system of lakes and marshes which in the far north extend west to the Perekop Isthmus . Behind it is the Syvashes or " putrid sea" which is known as "The Sea"
 Southeast of Bakhchisarai is the cliff-fort of Chufut-Kale/Qirq Or . It was used in more warlike times .
Towns on the northern steppe area are all modern, notably Dzhankoy, a major road and rail junction .
 The longest is the Salhir River which rises southeast of Simferopol and flows north and northeast to the Sea of Azov . The longest river is the longest in the country and flows from the city to the sea .
 The Alma River flows west to reach the Black Sea between Eupatoria and Sevastopol . The Alma river flows west. It flows to the Black sea between the two cities .
 At the northeast point of the Sea of Azov at the mouth of the Don River were Tanais, Azak/Azov and now Rostov-on-Don . At the north side of the sea, the sea is known as the sea of Az
 North of the peninsula the Dnieper turns westward and enters the Black Sea through the east-west DniePer-Bug Estuary which also receives the Bug River . The east-east-west Estuary is also known for the Bug river .
 The southeast coast is flanked at a distance of 8–12 kilometres from the sea by a parallel range of mountains . The Crimean Mountains are the Crimean Mountains .
 It was believed that this cape was supposedly crowned with the temple of Artemis . Iphigeneia is said to have officiated as priestess .
 Uchan-su, on the south slope of the mountains, is the highest waterfall in Crimea . It is located in the Crimea.
 Many streams drying up completely during the summer. This means there is significant annual fluctuation in water flow . Many streams dry up completely in summer .
 There are more than fifty salt lakes and salt pans on the peninsula . The largest of them is Lake Sasyk on the southwest coast, but others include Aqtas, Koyashskoye, Kiyatskoe, Kirleutskoe.
 Lake Syvash is a system of interconnected shallow lagoons on the northern coast . It covers an area of around 2,560 km2 .
 There are a number of dams that have created reservoirs . Among the largest are the Simferopolskoye, Alminskoye and the Taygansky .
 The North Crimea Canal, which transports water from the Dnieper, is the largest of the man-made irrigation channels on the peninsula . The canal is located in the Crimea region .
 Seventy-five percent of Crimea consists of semiarid prairie lands, a southward continuation of the Pontic-Caspian steppe .
 Numerous kurgans, or burial mounds, of the ancient Scythians are scattered across Crimean steppes .
 The Crimean Mountains in the background and Yalta as seen from the Tsar's Path .
 The terrain that lies beyond the sheltering Crimean Mountain range is of an altogether different character . The terrain is of a different character.
 Here, the narrow strip of coast and the slopes of the mountains are smothered with greenery .
 This "riviera" stretches along the southeast coast from capes Fiolente and Aya, in the south, to Feodosiya . It is studded with summer sea-bathing resorts such as Alupka, Yalta, Gurzuf, Alush
 fishing, mining, and the production of essential oils are also important . Fishing, mining and mining are also key to oil production .
 Numerous Crimean Tatar villages, mosques, monasteries, and palaces of the Russian imperial family and nobles are found in Crimea .
 The Crimean Mountains and the southern coast are part of the Crimean Submediterranean forest complex ecoregion . The Crimean mountains and the south coast are also part of a forest complex .
 The natural vegetation consists of scrublands, woodlands, and forests, with a climate and vegetation similar to the Mediterranean Basin . It is also known as the Mediterranean basin .
 Crimea is located between the temperate and subtropical climate belts and is characterized by warm and sunny weather . Crimea is known for its warm, sunny weather.
 The northern parts of Crimea have a moderate continental climate with short, mild winters and moderately hot dry summers . The northern part of Crimea has moderate continental climates with short and mild winters .
 In central and mountainous areas, the climate is transitional between the continental climate to the north and the Mediterraneanclimate to the south . In the central and mountain areas, it is transitional.
 A subtropical, Mediterranean climate is found in the southern coastal regions . It is characterized by mild winters and moderately hot, dry summers .
 The climate of Crimea is influenced by its geographic location, relief, and influences from the Black sea . Crimea's climate is affected by its location and relief .
 Crimean coast is shielded from cold air masses coming from north and as a result has milder winters . The Crimean coast has a milder winter than the rest of the country .
 Maritime influences from the Black Sea are restricted to coastal areas . Inside the peninsula, influence is weak and does not play an important role .
 A high pressure system is located north of Crimea in both summer and winter . Winds predominantly come from the north and northeast year-round .
 In winter, these winds bring in cold, dry continental air while in summer . In summer, it brings in dry and hot weather .
 Winds from the northwest bring warm and wet air from the Atlantic Ocean . They are responsible for bringing precipitation during spring and summer .
 winds from the southwest bring very warm and wet air from the subtropical latitudes of the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean sea .
 Cool season temperatures average around 7 °C . It is rare for the weather to drop below freezing except in the mountains, where there is snow .
 Crimean mountains greatly influence the amount of precipitation present in the peninsula . The Crimean mountains have the highest rainfall in the region .
 The western parts of the Crimean mountains receive more than 1,000 millimetres of precipitation per year . The western part of the Crimea mountains receive the most precipitation in a year .
 Most of the peninsula receives more than 2,000 sunshine hours per year . It reaches up to 2,505 sunshine hours in Karabi–Yayla in the Crimean mountains .
 The southern Crimean coast has remained a popular resort for Russian tourists . Because of its climate and subsidized travel packages from Russian state-run companies, the region has remained popular .
 Map of the historical trade route connecting Uppsala with Constantinople via Cherson .
 The major centers of the Kievan Rus' Kiev itself, Novgorod and Ladoga, arose along this route . The major center of the Kiev-Ladoga region is in the city of Kiev .
 Crimea ports provide quick access to the Eastern Mediterranean, Balkans and Middle East . The Black Sea ports of Crimea are located in the Black Sea .
 The Dnieper River is a major waterway and transportation route that crosses the European continent from north to south . It links the Black Sea with the Baltic Sea, of strategic importance since the Varangians to the Greeks .
 The Black Sea serves as an economic thoroughfare connecting the Caucasus region and the Caspian Sea to central and Eastern Europe . The Caucasus region is a major economic hub for the region .
 In 2013 there were at least 12 operating merchant seaports in Crimea, according to the International Transport Workers' Federation .
 In 2016 Crimea had Nominal GDP of US$7 billion and US$3,000 per capita . In 2016, Crimea had a GDP of $7 billion .
 The main branches of the modern Crimean economy are agriculture and fishing oysters pearls, industry and manufacturing along mining, tourism, ports .
 Industrial plants are situated for the most part in the southern coast regions of the republic . Few northern areas, aside from central area, are located in the south .
 Dzhankoy, housing a major railway connection, Krasnoperekopsk and Armyansk, among others . Important industrial cities include Dzhanksoy, Krakk, Armyansk.
 tourist industry suffered major losses for two years after Russian annexation of Crimea in early 2014 and subsequent sanctions targeting Crimea .
 The flow of holidaymakers dropped 35 percent in the first half of 2014 over the same period of 2013 . The flow was down 35 percent.
 Crimea dropped to 3. million in 2014, and rebounded to 5. million by 2016, according to Russian administration .
 The most important industries in Crimea include food production, chemical fields, mechanical engineering and metal working, and fuel production industries . The Crimea region is home to the Crimea region of the Crimea peninsula .
 Agriculture in the region includes cereals, vegetable-growing, gardening, and wine-making, particularly in the Yalta and Massandra regions .
 Livestock production includes cattle breeding, poultry keeping, and sheep breeding . Livestocks include cattle breeding and poultry keeping .
 Other products produced on the Crimean Peninsula include salt, porphyry, limestone, and ironstone since ancient times . The Crimean Peninsula has been known to produce ironstone and salt .
 Crimea is reliant on an underwater power cable to mainland Russia . This is insufficient for local consumption and since annexation by Russia, Crimea has been reliant on the cable .
 Saki plant close to Jodobrom chemical plant and SaKhZ boosted production with Perm GTE GTU25P turbogenerators . Also gas thermal Saki power plant near JodOBrom plant andSaKhZ gas thermal plant close.
 Older plants are Sevastopol TEC which use AEG and Ganz Elektro turbines and turbogenerators about 25 MW each . Older plants include Sinferopol T EC Eupatoria, Kamysh Burun TEC and few others .
 In May 2015, work began on a multibillion-dollar road-rail link across the Kerch Strait . The link is expected to be completed in 2015 .
 The road bridge opened in May 2018, and the rail bridge is projected to be fully completed and operational by 2019 . The bridge is expected to open in May 2019 .
 With a length of 19 km, it is the longest bridge in Europe, as it overcame Vasco da Gama Bridge in Lisbon . The bridge is also the longest in Europe .
 Almost every settlement in Crimea is connected with another settlement by bus lines . Almost every settlements in Crimea are connected with each other by bus line .
 Crimea contains the longest trolleybus route in the world . It stretches from Simferopol to Yalta .
 The trolleybus line starts near Simferopol's Railway Station through the mountains to Alushta and on to Yalta . The line is on the way to the city of YaltA .
 Railroad lines running through Crimea include Armyansk—Kerch, and Melitopol—Sevastopol . Crimea is the Ukrainian mainland .
 Simferopol International Airport's new terminal opened in from April 2018 with the ability to handle 6. million passengers a year . The new terminal will be able to handle more than 6 million passengers per year .
 Yalta, Feodosiya, Kerch, Sevastopol, Chornomorske and Yevpatoria are connected to one another by sea routes . The cities of YaltA, FeODosiya and Kerch are connected by sea route .
 In Yevpatoria and nearby townlet Molochnoye are tram systems . In the cities of YevPatoria, the tram systems are also used in the city of Molochenoye .
 Crimea began as a holiday destination in the second half of the 19th century . The development of Crimea as a tourist destination began in the first half of this century .
 The development of the transport networks brought masses of tourists from central parts of the Russian Empire .
 At the beginning of the 20th century, a major development of palaces, villas, and dachas began . Most of the palaces and villas remain .
 These are some of the main attractions of Crimea as a tourist destination . The Crimea is a peninsula in Crimea .
 There are many Crimean legends about famous touristic places, which attract the attention of tourists .
 A new phase of tourist development began when the Soviet government realised the potential of the healing quality of the local air, lakes and therapeutic muds .
 Crimea became a "health" destination for Soviet workers, and hundreds of thousands of Soviet tourists visited Crimea .
 Artek is a former Young Pioneer camp on the Black Sea in the town of Hurzuf, near Ayu-Dag . It was established in 1925 . Artek was established by Young Pioneer in 1925.
 Artek was considered to be a privilege for Soviet children during its existence, as well as for children from other communist countries . Artek's name was the name of a Soviet state of the Soviet Union .
 After the breaking up of the Young Pioneers in 1991 its prestige declined, though it remained a popular vacation destination .
 Crimea became more of a get-away destination than a "health-improvement" destination in the 1990s . Crimea is now a more popular destination for tourists .
 The most visited areas are the south shore of Crimea with cities of Yalta and Alushta, the western shore – Eupatoria and Saki, and the south-eastern shore – Feodosia and Sudak .
 Crimea was among the top 20 travel destinations in 2013, according to National Geographic . Crimea was one of the world's top 20 destinations .
 The European Union, the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan, and several other countries imposed economic sanctions against Russia . Russia's largely unrecognized annexation of Crimea has led to sanctions .
 Many of the sanctions were directed at individuals, both Russian and Crimean . Many of these sanctions were aimed at individuals.
 In general they prohibit the sale, supply, transfer, or export of goods and technology in several sectors, including tourism and infrastructure . In general, they prohibit sales, supply and transfer of goods or technology in many sectors .
 Visa and MasterCard temporarily stopped service in Crimea in December 2014 . Visa andMasterCard temporarily halted service in the Crimea .
 The Russian national payment card system now allows Visa and MasterCard cards issued by Russian banks to work in Crimea . The system is now allowing Visa andMasterCard cards to work.
 The Mir operates in Crimea as well as Master Card and Visa . The Mir is operated by the Central Bank of Russia . It operates by the central bank of Russia.
 The politics of Crimea is that of the Republic of Crimea on one hand, and that of Sevastopol on the other . Crimea is one of the country's two largest cities, the city of Crimea .
 The 84th and 85th Federal Subjects of the Russian Federation have strongly supported United Russia in both local and national elections . Since becoming the 84th, 85th and 84th Federal subjects of the Russia Federation in 2014, both have strongly backed United Russia .
 United Russia won 70 of the 75 seats in the State Council of Crimea based on just over 70% of the vote . The most recent Crimean parliamentary election on 14 September 2014 was held in Crimea . The election was held on September 14, 2014 .
 Crimean Tatars have called for a boycott of the elections . turnout was over 53% which compared well with other regions of Russia .
 United Russia is also the leading party in the Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol . United Russia won 22 of the 24 seats at the last election .
 Dmitry Ovsyannikov secured re-election on 71% of the vote on 10 September 2017 . He was first appointed on 28 July 2016 following the resignation of Sergey Menyaylo .
 United Russia maintained its position as the most supported political party across Crimea at the Russian legislative election on 18 September 2016 . United Russia achieved 72.8% of the vote in the election .
 At the 2018 Russian presidential election, Vladimir Putin secured 92% of the vote in Crimea compared to 77% across Russia as a whole . At the 2016 election, Putin secured the majority of the votes in Crimea .
 According to the 2014 Russian census, 84% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their native language . The 2014 census was released by the Russian government .
 It was the first official Russian census in Crimea since Ukrainian that held in 2001 . The census was held in Crimea in Crimea for the first time since Ukraine's first census in 2001.
 According to the 2001 census, 77% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their native language . 11.4% – Crimean Tatar; and 10.1% – Ukrainian .
 The Crimean Tatar language was estimated to be on the brink of extinction in 2013 . In 2013, the language was only taught in 15 schools in Crimea .
 Turkey provided the greatest support to Tatars in Ukraine . Ukraine had been unable to resolve the problem of education in their mother tongue in Crimea .
 Ethnic composition of Crimea's population has changed dramatically since the early 20th century . Crimea's ethnic composition of its population has been dramatically changed since the 20th Century .
Berdyansky, Dneprovsky and Melitopolsky uyezds were on mainland, not in Crimea . But these numbers included Berdyansky and Dnepsky, not Crimea .
 The population number excluding these uyezds is given in the table below . The population numbers are given in a table below. The population figure is also shown in the list below .
 Crimean Tatars made up 12.1% of the population in 2001 . They were formed in Crimea in the late Middle Ages after the Crimean Khanate had come into existence .
 The Crimean Tatars were forcibly expelled to Central Asia by Joseph Stalin's government as a form of collective punishment . They had formed pro-German Tatar Legions, which they had formed .
 After the fall of the Soviet Union, Crimean Tatars began to return to the region .
 According to the 2001 Ukrainian population census, 58% of the population of Crimea are ethnic Russians . 24% of Crimea's population are ethnic Ukrainians .
 This was part of the 800,000 Germans in Russia who were relocated within the Soviet Union during Stalinist times . This was one of the 1,000,000 who were moved to Russia during the Stalinist era .
 Stalin in 1944 also deported 70,000 Greeks, 14,000 Bulgarians and 3,000 Italians . Besides the Crimean Germans, Stalin also deported 80,000 Germans, including 2,000 Russians .
 Kiev Patriarchate parishes in Crimea ceased to exist after 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea . In three cases churches were seized by the Russian authorities .
Ukrainian Orthodox Church kept control of its eparchies in Crimea . The Ukrainian Orthodox Church has been annexed to Crimea .
 Alexander Pushkin visited Bakhchysarai in 1820 and later wrote the poem The Fountain of BakhChisaray . The poem was written by Pushkin after he visited the city .
 Crimea was the background for Adam Mickiewicz's seminal work, The Crimean Sonnets . It was inspired by his 1825 travel, inspired by the Crimea .
 A series of 18 sonnets constitute an artistic telling of a journey to and through the Crimea . They feature romantic descriptions of the oriental nature and culture of the East .
 Ivan Aivazovsky, the 19th-century marine painter of Armenian origin, was born in Feodosia and lived there for the most part of his life .
 Crimean Tatar singer Jamala won the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 representing Ukraine with her song 1944, about the historic deportation of Crimean Tatars in that year by Soviet authorities .
 Ukrainian “law on concert activities’s’ only Ukrainian companies can organise concerts in Crimea .
 Crimea's vote to join Russia and subsequent annexation in March 2014, led to the annexation of Crimea . The top football clubs withdrew from the Ukrainian leagues following the Crimea vote .
 Some clubs registered to join Russian leagues but the Football Federation of Ukraine objected . Some clubs signed to join the Russian leagues.
 UEFA ruled Crimean clubs could not join Russian leagues but should instead be part of a Crimean league system . UEFA ruled that Crimean clubs should not join the Russian leagues .
 Crimean Premier League is now the top professional football league in Crimea . Crimea is the country's top football league .
 Crimean-born athletes given permission to compete for Russia instead of Ukraine at future competitions . Vera Rebrik, the European javelin champion, has been given permission for Russia to compete .
 Russia currently being suspended from all international athletic competitions . Rebrik participates in tournaments as a ""neutral" athlete .
 Jamala represented Ukraine at The Eurovision Song Contest in 2017 . In 2017, she won with her song 1944 which is about the conflict in Crimea .
 Organizing and holding the referendum on Crimea's accession to Russia was illegal under the Ukrainian constitution . Organizing the referendum was illegal in Ukraine, according to the country's constitution .
 Chapter X of the constitution provides for the autonomous status of Crimea . This is confirmed in regard to Crimea by the constitution .
 The autonomous status provides Crimea with a certain set of authorities . It also allows, inter alia, to hold referendums .
 The constitution makes clear that alterations to the territory of Ukraine require an all-Ukrainian referendum . The constitution says that alterations in Ukraine must be made to the constitution .
 Explaining the Local Appellations in Sacred, Grecian, and Roman History . Exhibiting the Extent of Kingdoms, and Situations of Cities, &c. cities .
 The Allusions and Epithets in the Greek and Roman Poets. And Illustrating the Allusions. And illustrations of the Greeks and Romans .
 The Whole Established by Proper Authorities, and Designed for the Use of Schools, is the first time a school has been built .
 The Annual Register or a View of the History, Politics, and Literature for the Year 1783 . The Annual register or a view of the history, politics, and literature for the year .
 UN condemns Crimea vote as IMF and U.S. back loans .
 Crimea Attracts More Than 4 Million Tourists Despite Annexation. Crimea Attracteds More than 4 million Tourists despite Annexation .
 Theguardian.com.com: Ukraine's Jamala wins with politically charged 1944"". www.theguardian .com: "Ukrainian Jamala won with politicallycharged 1944"
 The European western part of the country is more populated and urbanised than the eastern part . The eastern part is more urbanised and more populated than the western part .
Russias capital Moscow is one of the largest cities in the world . Other urban centers include Saint Petersburg, Yekaterinburg, Nizhny Novgorod .
 Russia spans eleven time zones and incorporates a range of environments . Extending across the entirety of Northern Asia and much of Eastern Europe, Russia spans 11 time zones .
 Rus disintegrated into a number of states, most of the Rus lands were overrun by the Mongol invasion . Rus ultimately disintegrated.
 The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century . The worlds first human-made satellite and the launching of the first humans in space .
 By the end of 1990, the Soviet Union had the second largest economy, largest standing military in the world . The Soviet Union was the second-largest economy, the biggest standing military.
 The Russian economy is the twelfth largest by nominal GDP and sixth largest by purchasing power parity in 2015 . It is governed as a federal semi-presidential republic .
 Russias extensive mineral and energy resources are the largest such reserves in the world . Russias is one of the world's largest oil producers .
 Russia is one of the five recognized nuclear weapons states . It possesses the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction . Russia is a great power as well as a regional power .
 The name Russia is derived from Rus, a state populated mostly by the East Slavs . The name Rus is also called Russia .
 Crimean Tatars constituted the majority of Crimeas population from the time of its ethnogenesis until mid-19th century . Crimea was the relative largest ethnic population until the end of 19th century.
 Crimean Tatars constitute approximately 12% of the population of Crimea . Starting in 1967, some were allowed to return to Crimea . Some of the Tatars are still in Crimea .
248,200 Ukrainian citizens identified themselves as Crimean Tatars in the latest Ukrainian census . 98% of them live in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . There remains a large diaspora in Turkey and Uzbekistan .
 About 150,000 remain in exile in Central Asia, mainly in Uzbekistan . An additional 1,800 citizens live in Sevastopol, on the Crimean peninsula, on Crimean peninsula .
 The official number of Crimean Tatars in Turkey is 150,000 . Some Crimean Tatar activists estimate a figure as high as 6 million .
 Crimean Tatars in Turkey mostly live in Eskişehir Province . The activists reached this number by taking one million Tatar immigrants to Turkey as a starting point .
 In Dobruja region, there are more than 27,000 Crimean Tatars, 24,000 on the Romanian side . 3,000 are on the Bulgarian side .
 The Cuman language is considered the ancestor of the current language of the Crimean Tatars . However, the Cuman is considered to be the ancestors of the Tatars with possible additions of the other languages like Crimean Gothic .
 Crimean Tatars trace their origins to the waves of ancient people Scythians, Goths and Armenians . Another theory suggests Crimean Tatar Tatars may have originated from ancient people in the region .
 Goths and Greeks were assumed to be some of the ancestors of the Tatars on the coast of Crimea . There were mixed hill Tatars and Greeks mixed with the coastal Crimean Tatars .
 Crimean Tatars emerged as a nation at the time of the Crimean Khanate . Turkic-speaking population of the Crimea had mostly adopted Islam already in the 14th century .
 Until the beginning of the 18th century, Crimean Tatars were known for frequent raids into Ukraine and Russia . At some periods almost annual, attacks were almost annual .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea is an autonomous republic of Ukraine . It gained a status following a referendum on 20 January 1991 .
 Russia annexed Crimea to incorporate the Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia . The Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014 .
 Crimea was annexed by the Russian Empire in 1783 . Crimea was ceded to Russia by the Ottoman Empire under the Treaty of Jassy. Crimea was recognised in 1792 when the peninsula was ceding to Russia under the treaty .
 Crimean parliament renamed ASSR the Republic of Crimea and proclaimed self-government on 5 May 1992 . On 6 May 1992 the same parliament inserted a new sentence into this constitution that declared that Crimea was part of Ukraine .
 Russian president Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk agreed to divide the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet between Russia and the newly formed Ukrainian Navy .
 On 14 October 1993, the Crimean parliament established the post of President of Crimea . The current constitution was put into effect, changing the territory's name to Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Anti-NATO protests broke out on the peninsula in 2006 after ratification of the May 1997 Treaty of Friendship .
Sergei Tsekov said that he hoped that Russia would treat the Crimea the same way as it had treated South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Thousands of pro-Russian and pro-Ukraine protesters clashed in front of the parliament building in Simferopol . The treaty was ratified by the Russian State Duma as well .
 Russian forces occupied airports and other locations in Crimea two days later . The interim Government of Ukraine described it as an invasion and occupation .
Members of parliament reportedly elected Sergey Aksyonov as new Crimean Prime Minister . Gunmen, either armed militants or Russian special forces, occupied the Crimean parliament under armed guard .
 Ukraine is currently in territorial dispute with Russia over the Crimean Peninsula which Russia annexed in 2014 . Ukraine and most of the international community recognise as Ukrainian .
 Ukraine has an area of 603,628 km2, making it the largest country entirely within Europe . It is the 32nd most populous country in the world, with a population of 42. million .
 The territory of modern Ukraine has been inhabited since 32,000 BC, during the Middle Ages . The area was a key centre of East Slavic culture .
 Following its fragmentation in the 13th century, the territory was contested and divided by a variety of powers, including Lithuania, the Ottoman Empire, Austria-Hungary, and Russia .
 Before its independence, Ukraine was typically referred to in English as The Ukraine . After independence, the Ukraine declared itself a neutral state .
 The Russian Federation formed a limited partnership with the Russian Federation and other CIS countries . Nonetheless it formed alimited partnership with other CIS nations .
 In the 2000s, the government began leaning towards NATO . It was agreed that the question of joining NATO should be answered by a national referendum at some point .
 Former President Viktor Yanukovych considered the current level of co-operation between Ukraine and NATO sufficient, and was against Ukraine joining NATO . These events formed the background for the annexation of Crimea by Russia by Russia in March 2014, and the War in Donbass in April 2014 .
 Ukraine has long been a global breadbasket because of its extensive, fertile farmlands . Ukraine is one of the world's largest grain exporters .
 The diversified economy of Ukraine includes a heavy industry sector, particularly in aerospace . The country's economy includes a strong aerospace industry .
 The Black Sea is a body of water between Eastern Europe and Western Asia . It is bounded by Bulgaria, Romania, Russia and Ukraine, bounded by Romania, Ukraine and Bulgaria .
 It is supplied by a number of rivers, such as the Danube, Rioni, Southern Bug .
 The Black Sea has an area of 436,400 km2, a depth of 2,212 . It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south and by the Caucasus Mountains. The longest east-west extent is about 1,175 km .
 Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea as part of a two-way hydrological exchange . The Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean via the Aegean Sea .
 The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara, and these waters separate Eastern Europe and Western Asia . The Strait is also known as the Bosphoros Strait .
 The Black Sea is connected to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch . The water level in the Black Sea has varied significantly .
 The Black Sea joins the world ocean in the Turkish Straits . At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established .
 The Black Sea is a basin, operating independently of the global ocean system . When this hydrological link is not present, the Black Sea will be a basin of the world's largest sea .
 Currently the Black Sea water level is high, so water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean . The Mediterranean is currently the highest water level in Black Sea .
 The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea, and comprise the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara . The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Black sea as follows, On the Southwest .
 The Northeastern limit of the Sea of Marmara is a line joining Cape Takil and Cape Panaghia . The line will be a line between Cape Takill and CapePanaghia.
Graeco-Roman tradition refers to the Black Sea as the Hospitable sea . The Black Sea was often just called the Sea, for the most part .
 The Black Sea was called inhospitable before Greek colonization because it was difficult to navigate, and because its shores were inhabited by savage tribes .
 Turkey, officially the Republic of Turkey, is a transcontinental country in Eurasia . It is mainly in Anatolia in Western Asia, with a smaller portion on the Balkan peninsula in Southeast Europe .
Turkey is a democratic, unitary, parliamentary republic with a cultural heritage . Turkey is a democracy and a parliamentary republic. Turkey is also a country with a heritage .
 The Aegean Sea is to the west, the Black Sea to the north, and the Mediterranean Sea. The country is encircled by seas on three sides, the Aegeans and the Red Sea .
 The Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles, Ankara is the capital of Istanbul . Istanbul is the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre .
 Kurds are the largest ethnic minority group, making up approximately 20% of the population . The area of Turkey has been inhabited since the Paleolithic by various ancient Anatolian civilisations .
 After Alexander the Greats conquest, the area was Hellenized . The process continued under the Roman Empire .
 The Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm ruled Anatolia until the Mongol invasion in 1243 . The empire reached the peak of its power in the 16th century, especially during Suleiman the Magnificent .
 During the war, the Ottoman government committed genocides against its Armenian, following the war . The Ottoman Empire was partitioned into several new states .
 Turkeys growing economy and diplomatic initiatives have led to its recognition as a regional power . The name of Turkey is based on the ethnonym Türk .
 The first recorded use of the term Türk or Türük as an autonym is contained in the Old Turkic inscriptions of the Göktürks of Central Asia . The English name Turkey first appeared in the late 14th century .
 The Khazar Empire, a Turkic state on the shores of the Black, was a Turkish state of the Khazar empire .
 Armenians constitute the population of Armenia and the de facto independent Nagorno-Karabakh Republic . Armenians are part of the Armenian population of the country .
 There is a diaspora of around 5 million people of full or partial Armenian ancestry living outside of modern Armenia .
 The largest Armenian populations today exist in Russia, the United States, Georgia, Germany, Lebanon, Lebanon and Syria .
 Most Armenians adhere to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a non-Chalcedonian church, which is the worlds oldest national church . With the exceptions of Iran and the former Soviet states, the present-day Armenian diaspora was formed mainly as a result of the Armenian Genocide
 Christianity began to spread in Armenia soon after Jesus death, due to the efforts of two of his apostles .
In the early 4th century, the Kingdom of Armenia became the first state to adopt Christianity as a state religion . Bartholomew was the first to adopt the religion .
 The name Hay comes from one of the two confederated, Hittite vassal states . He relates that the people spoke a language that to his ear sounded like the language of the Persians . It is further postulated that the name Hay is from one
 The word Armenian originated from the name Armenak or Aram, the Armenian Highland lies in the highlands surrounding Mount Ararat, the highest peak of the region .
 In the Bronze Age, several states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia, including the Hittite Empire . Hayasa-Azzi were Arme-Shupria, the Nairi and the Kingdom of Urartu .
 The sea is bounded in the north by mainland Ukraine, in the east by Russia, and in the west by the Crimean Peninsula . To the south it is linked by the narrow Strait of Kerch to the Black Sea .
 Sea of Azov is the shallowest sea in the world . There is a constant outflow of water from the Sea ofAzov to the Black Sea .
 The sea is affected by the inflow of rivers, which bring sand and shells, which in turn form numerous bays, limans .
 Water in the sea has low salinity and a high amount of biomass that affects the water colour . Because of these deposits, the sea bottom is relatively smooth .
 The sea shores and spits are low, they are rich in vegetation . The name likely derives from the settlement of an area around Azov, whose name comes from the Kipchak Turkish asak .
 A Russian folk etymology, instead derives it from an eponymous Cuman prince named Azum or Asuf, a formerly common spelling of the name in English was the Sea of Azoff .
 In antiquity, the sea was known as the Maeotis Swamp from the marshlands to its northeast .
 It remains unclear whether it was named for the nearby Maeotians or if that name was applied broadly to various peoples who happened to live beside it .
 The Maeotians themselves were said to call the sea Temarenda or Temerinda, meaning Mother of Waters . Other names included Lake Maeotis or Maeotius, the Maeotium or Maeotic Sea .
 The medieval Russians knew it as the Sea of Surozh after the adjacent city now known as Sudak . It was known in Ottoman Turkish as Balük-Denis from its high productivity .
 There are traces of Neolithic settlement in the now covered by the sea .
 Archaeologists still debate the theory. Subsequent work has been both to support and to discredit this theory .
 The Maeotian marshes around the mouth of the Tanais River were famous in antiquity . They served as an important check on the migration of nomadic people from the Eurasian steppelands .
 The area of the region is 28,461 km², its population is 1,083,367 . The Dnieper River runs through the oblast which includes the Kakhovka Reservoir .
 The Arabat Spit is a thin strip of land between the brackish Syvash and the Sea of Azov that is geographically part of the Crimean Peninsula . The oblast includes the portion of theArabat Spit .
 Russia gained de facto control of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in 2014 . The southern areas of Kherson are part of the Crimean Peninsula under direct Ukrainian control .
 The Kherson Oblast is administratively subdivided into 18 raions and 3 municipalities which are subordinate to the oblast government . The Oblast has 18 raion, 3 municipalities, and is part of the province of Nova Kakhovka .
 The Kherson municipality is subdivided into 3 urban districts . All information below is current as of 2015 . The Khersson municipality has a population of 6,000 .
 The local administration of the oblast is controlled by the Kherson Oblast Rada, the governor of the Oblast . The speaker is appointed by the President of Ukraine .
 Eastern Europe, known as East Europe, is the eastern part of the European continent . Eastern Europe is known as Eastern Europe .
 There is no consensus on the area it covers, partly because the term has a wide range of geopolitical, cultural, cultural and geopolitical issues . The term is used to refer to a range of countries and regions .
 There are almost as many definitions of Eastern Europe as there are scholars of the region . The United Nations paper adds that every assessment of spatial identities is essentially a social and cultural construct .
 One definition describes Eastern Europe as an entity, the region lying in Europe with main characteristics consisting in Byzantine, Orthodox .
 Another definition was created during the Cold War and used more or less synonymously with the term Eastern Bloc . A similar definition names the formerly communist European states outside the Soviet Union as Eastern Europe .
 Several definitions of Eastern Europe exist today, but they often lack precision or are extremely general . Historians and social scientists generally view such definitions as outdated or relegating .
 These definitions vary both across cultures and among experts, even scientists, recently becoming more and more imprecise .
 The Ural Mountains, Ural River, and the Caucasus Mountains are the land border of the eastern edge of Europe . The Caucasus Mountains and the Ural Mountain Mountains are on the eastern border of Europe.
 Thesaurus is a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union . It provides entries for 23 EU languages, those in italics are classified as Eastern Europe .
 Other official web-pages of the European Union classify some of the countries as strictly Central European . Other official websites of the EU classify some countries as strict Central European.
 The East–West Schism is the break of communion and theology between what are now the Eastern and Western churches . It divided Christianity in Europe, and consequently the world, into Western Christianity and Eastern Christianity .
 Since the Great Schism of 1054, Europe has been divided between Roman Catholic and Protestant churches in the West . Eastern Orthodox Christian churches are often associated with Eastern Europe. Eastern Orthodox countries are often linked to Eastern Europe .
 The fall of the Iron Curtain brought the end of the East–West division in Europe, but this geopolitical concept is sometimes still used for quick reference by the media .
 The Arabat Spit or Arabat Arrow is a spit which separates a large and very salty system of lagoons named Syvash from the Sea of Azov .
 The spit is located between the Henichesk Strait to the north and the shores of Crimea to the south . It is located in the middle of the peninsula .
 Arrow is not an idiomatic Russian or Ukrainian name for spit, rather this peninsula is called an arrow for unknown reasons . The peninsula is long and thin, perhaps because it is thin .
 The spit is low and straight on the Azov Sea side and it contains two areas which are 7–8 km wide and have brown-clay hills . They are located 7. km and 32 km from the Henichesk Strait .
 The top layers of other parts of the spit are formed by sand and its vegetation mostly consists of various weed grasses, festuce grasses and spear grass, salsola, Carex colchica.
 The latter activity is traditional for the due to the vast areas of shallow. The second activity is due to shallow areas .
 Salt production in the 19th century was about 24,000 tonnes per year on the Arabat Arrow alone . The spit is a health resort and its Azov Sea side is used as a beach .
 The entirety of the spit was occupied during the annexation . Russia withdrew its forces from the northern Kherson side in December 2014 . The rural communities of Shchaslyvtseve and Strilkove are located in the northern section of the spitting .
 As of 2014, the total population of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol was at 2,248,400 people .
 This is down from the 2001 Ukrainian Census figure, which was 2,376,000 . The interior was dominated by a succession of Scytho-Sarmatian, Hunnic, Turkic and Slavic conquests .
 Its south coast was Greek speaking under the Romans and their states, the Byzantine Empire, the Empire of Trebizond . The Empire was the first of its kind, and was the second of its type .
 In 1475 the region was conquered by the Ottoman Turks . During the late Middle Ages a few coastal cities were ruled by Italian city states .
 The colonization New Russia at the end of the 18th century was led by Prince Grigori Potemkin . He was granted the powers of a ruler over the area by Catherine the Great .
 The lands were given to the Russian dvoryanstvo, and the enserfed peasantry mostly from Ukraine . The land was given to Russia and Ukraine .
 Catherine the Great invited European settlers to these newly conquered lands . Crimea is geographically and demographically divided into three regions, the steppe interior, the mountains, and the coast .
 The Tatars were the predominant portion of the population in the area and about half of the steppe population . The Tatar are the predominant part of the region's population .
 Germans and Bulgarians settled in Crimea at the beginning of the 19th century . wealthy colonists bought substantial portions of land .
 The upheavals and ethnic cleansing of the 20th century vastly changed Crimeas ethnic situation . In 1944, 200,000 Crimean Tatars were deported from Crimea to Central Asia and Siberia .
 Crimean Tatars began returning to their homeland after the fall of the Soviet Union . They would become 10% of the population by the beginning of the 21st century .
 Crimea Germans were 45,000 in 1941 . Other minorities are Bulgarians, Bulgarians and Azerbaijanis, Greeks .
 In 1944, 70,000 Greeks and 14,000 Bulgarians from the Crimea were deported to Central Asia and Siberia . 200,000 Crimean Tatars and other nationalities were also deported .
 According to the 2001 census, 77% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their language . 11% of Crimea's inhabitants named their language, 11% named Russian .
 Bohdan Khmelnytsky, Hetman of Ukraine, established an independent Ukrainian Cossack state after the uprising in 1648 against Poland .
 Ukrainian military base at Perevalne surrounded by Russian troops without military rank insignia or cockade on 9 March 2014 .
 Two pikes on the left are wrapped in the traditional colors of Ukraine – blue/yellow and red/black .
 Armenia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia and Assyria with Adjacent Regions, Karl von Spruner, published in 1865 . Armenians, Assyria, Armenia, Babyria and Assyrians were also published .
 Neac�’u's letter from 1521 is the oldest surviving document written in Romanian . The letter is dated to 1521 .
 Rabbi Chaim Chizkiyahu Medini, the "chacham" of the Krymchaki Jews, with his wife, daughters, sons-in-law, and grandchildren . Medini is the father of two children, one daughter, one son, and one
 John Wall and Nenê of the Washington Wizards. Curry about to pass while being guarded by Wall and Wall .
 Curry averaged 7.6 assists per game during the 2014–15 NBA regular season . Curry was sixth best in the league, averaging 7.7 assists per games .