 They concluded that reconciliation in Ukraine, if it ever happens, will be a very difficult and long process . They concluded. If it ever happened, they said it would be a 'very difficult' process ..
 It was an occasion for the academic community and the public at large to analyze and discuss the origin of the current crisis and civil war in Eastern Ukraine . The larger geopolitical context of the Ukrainian crisis, involving the West and Russia, was also discussed .
 The first panel of the conference, ‘Two Ukraines’, featured presentations by three Canadian scholars of Ukrainian origin .
 Ivan Katchanovski analyzed the changes in regional electoral behavior and attitudes towards foreign policy orientation in Ukraine after the ‘Orange Revolution’ in 2004 and the “Euromaidan’s” in 2014 .
More specifically, he looked into the support of political parties and presidential candidates in different regions of Ukraine during these past ten years .
Support of pro-Western and nationalist parties growing in all regions of Ukraine . The support of the pro-Russian and pro-communist parties has declined in recent years .
 In October 2014, we saw a much stronger support for pro-Western parties in Central Ukraine . We saw a significant but much weaker support of the pro-Russian and pro-communist parties in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 The same pattern occurred during the presidential election in May of this year . Both elections were not held in the most populated parts of Donbas, which were controlled by separatists .
There has been an increase of support in Western and Central Ukraine in April 2014 . There has been a small support in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 Most people support an independent Ukraine without customs or visa restrictions with Russia . Most people in Ukraine support the independent Ukraine.
 Katchanovski commissioned a public survey in Ukraine by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology in April and May in order to determine support for political autonomy or secession in different regions of Ukraine .
 The data show that there was no significant support for secession in most regions of Ukraine . The data shows that there were no significant supports for secession .
 A civil war in Donbas by pro-Russian and Russian-backed separatists and the Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas in support of separatists signified a de facto break up of Ukraine . Pro-Russian separatists holding power in Don Bas .
 Olga Ostriichuk, an independent researcher, has studied the division of Ukraine in collective memory and the interpretation of past .
 Ostriichuk's talk was titled 'L’Ukraine au-dessus de tout' She reflected on how the nationalist parties conquered not only the physical space of the Euromaidan, but also the minds of people .
 A post-Soviet mentality was replaced by a mentality of heightened nationalism . In this mental reconquest, a post- Soviet mentality was replace by heightened nationalism.
For those who wanted to hear and see, it was clear that the demands of the Maidan were formulated and supported, above all, by people from Western Ukraine .
 There was a great deal of logistical support and car-pooling to feed the contestations on Maidan Square in Kyiv . There was no violence in December when Maidan was not attacked .
 Nationalist slogans, such as “Ukraine above all, were shouted on Maidan all throughout, so much so that they became trivial . The slogan was shouted so much that it became trivial.
 Nationalist themes were recreated on Maidan with symbols, folk costumes, slogans, and a strong presence of nationalist flags .
 All of this led to the radicalization of Maidan and of the Ukrainian society at large . All of these led to a radicalization in Ukraine, says the author .
 This nationalist radicalization has been a gradual process, culminating with the emergence of “Svoboda,” an extreme-right party . The party has been known for its radicalization, but it is now an extreme right party .
 It began to rise in 2004-2006, capitalizing on grievances and quarrels within the pro-western, “Orange’s” camp .
 The party gained important support in its stronghold – Western Ukraine – but also in Central Ukraine and in Kyiv . The party is gaining support in Western Ukraine and Central Ukraine .
 Svoboda has been involved in identity and memory politics for over a decade . This success on the national level is due to a great extent to the involvement of Svobododa in identity politics .
 Svoboda is involved very much in destroying and transforming symbols of the Communist past and constructing new, nationalist monuments .
 It has supported monuments to the Heroes of the ‘Celestial Hundred’ and people who died in this year’s war in Eastern Ukraine .
 Today, there are many events which mobilize the nationalist memory and the propagation of nationalist ideas . Today, many events such as folk festivals, commemorations, commemorative services, archeology, public posters, and more direct measures such as pressuring voters .
 Nationalism, coupled with religious fervor and mobilization of memory, becomes murderous and violent . Nationalism is a violent and violent form of nationalism .
Without the hyper activism of Ukrainians from the West on Maidan Square and without the support of the Ukrainian Diaspora in North America, the processes would not have been possible .
 Society would not have been able to mobilize to such a extent, to change to such an extent . Society would have been unable to mobilize such a large group of people .
 Ostriichuk argues reconciliation and healing of this society will be difficult .
 Halyna Mokrushyna spoke in her presentation about the Donbas region’s identity . She spoke about Donbas’ demands to obtain regional autonomy and Kyiv's stubborn refusal to listen .
 Donbas residents are Ukrainian citizens with a strong regional identity . They values Russian language, pro-Russian foreign policy orientations and a Soviet interpretation of Ukrainian history .
 For Donbas residents, an ideal Ukraine is a welfare state which provides social protection for its citizens, which preserves peace and stability . Ukraine is strongly present in the international arena .
 Civil rights and a feeling of Ukrainian nationalism are at the bottom of the priority list for Donbas residents . Ukrainians in the West are also at the top of the list .
 Euromaidan was also about nationalist, anti-Russian rhetoric, which Donbas rejects . Donbas rejected anti-Russia rhetoric .
 Donbas has been demanding more autonomy from the central government in Kyiv . Donbas wants Russian be an official, second language of Ukraine, and a close political alliance with Russia .
 These demands kept falling on the deaf years in the Kyiv regime, no matter who was the President .
 Donbas residents took the initiative in the spring of 2014, inspired by the popular mobilizations of Euromaidan .
 Donbas activists occupied administrative buildings and led to the proclamation of the Donetsk People’s Republic in April .
 It was a grassroots movement which reacted to the anti-Russian ideology and actions of the new Ukrainian political rulers who had seized power .
 Donbas refused Donbas a right to hold a referendum, so it went ahead and organized its own . In May, Donbas held its own referendum .
 The DPR is an attempt at a new political and social project which reflects the ideas and aspirations of a great part of Donetsk region residents . Two official languages – Russian and Ukrainian – are recognized .
 The second panel of the conference looked at the war in Eastern Ukraine through the geopolitics of the fight for influence in Ukraine . The conference was held in Kiev, Ukraine.
 Robinson sees the Donbas uprising as a mostly local initiative . Contrary to the narrative depicting the uprising as instigated by Russia, Robinson sees it as mostly local .
 The rebel armed forces are not centrally controlled or vertically organized, as one would expect if a single will had created them .
 The militias are horizontally organized, with a whole bunch of different militias that answer only to their immediate commanders .
 This reflects the way in which they were created – in a largely spontaneous fashion at a local level . This reflects how they were made in a mostly spontaneous fashion .
 The role of Russians in the rebellion is not insubstantial, Robinson said . 90 per cent of the rebel troops are Ukrainian citizens, he said .
 Robinson says this is not a war in which Ukrainian and Russian armies are fighting each other . Robinson says the two armies are not fighting each each other.
 Russian military supplies have mainly taken the form of items which are easily concealed . The military supplies are easily hidden in Russia .
 The incursion of Russian troops into Ukraine in August was not intended to destroy the Ukrainian Army or even to seize territory, but rather to inflict a sufficiently large defeat on the Ukrainians .
 Russia has repeatedly said that its objective is not to annex Donbas or to create an independent state there . But rather to have Donbas remain within Ukraine, albeit with greater autonomy, Russia has said .
 Russia has prevented Ukraine from defeating the rebellion . It has not been able to convince Kiev to negotiate directly with the rebels .
 Moscow is left with something it didn't want – a pair of independent republics in Donbas which lack proper states . The republics face massive economic and humanitarian problems .
 Neither Ukraine nor the West is going to help re-establish a functioning state and economy in Donbas, and so provide law and order, jobs, pensions, and security .
 Only one country has the will and ability to give the people of Donbas what they need. Only one has the ability to provide the people with the will .
 James Bissett is a distinguished Canadian diplomat with a long career of representing Canada abroad . He talked about NATO and U.S. involvement in the ongoing crisis in Ukraine .
 He holds the U.S.-led NATO alliance primary responsible for what is happening in Ukraine . He says he is responsible for the Ukraine crisis .
 Regime changes, if not by force, have occurred in Egypt, Iraq and Afghanistan . Bribing and providing NGOs with money to support the U.S. cause has occurred in three countries .
 Kaddafi in Libya, Milosevic in the former Yugoslvia and now Putin in Russia are blamed . The United States has done all of the interventions and the bombings .
 Eastern Ukraine probably will never be able to recover economically, it is Ukraine itself . It is not only Eastern Ukraine that probably will not recover economically.
 When the Soviet Union collapsed and Berlin wall fell, the Americans did not offer an iota of help to Russia or the former Soviet republics .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed, NATO had to find a reason for existence . It found it with the breakup of Yugoslavia .
 The U.S. bombed Serbia for 78 days and 78 nights . In the breach of article One of the NATO treaty stating that the alliance will never use or threaten to use force in the resolution of international disputes .
 If the Russians allowed the united Germany into NATO, then NATO would not expand eastward, Mikhail Gorbachev said . In addition to that, it broke its promise made to the last premier of the Soviet Union .
 NATO accepted a string of East European countries in the years that followed, including Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic . But NATO proceeded to accept the countries that followed .
 It did not look like they were going to get it… until the Maidan movement erupted . It didn't look like it would get it.
 Its origin lay in the frustration of Ukrainian people who saw no hope for their country, and started protesting .
 The U.S. uses Ukraine in an attempt to prevent Russia from re-emerging as a global power .
 It will not be President Poroshenko who decides when to stop the fighting . It will be President Obama who decides to stop fighting .
 Ivan Katchanovski expressed his opinion that it will be very difficult to reunite Ukraine . He also said it would be very hard to reunites Ukraine .
 A lot will depend on the current Ukrainian government’s ability to govern the rest of Ukraine .
 The extreme right battalions fighting in Eastern Ukraine could turn their arms against Kyiv and overthrow Poroshenko, as they overthrew Yanukovych .
 Kyiv has refused to investigate the mass killings that occurred on Maidan Square in February, in Odessa, in May and in the war in Donbas .
 Katchanovski’s research shows that some elements of the self-defense squads and of the militias of the Right Sector fascists orchestrated shootings by snipers on people in Maidan Square .
Kyiv is turning a blind eye to any investigation and the West is not pressuring Kiev to investigate . But Kyiv is not being pressured by the West to investigate any investigation .
 Olga Ostriichuck observed that when we speak about peaceful resolution, we speak of the need for a ceasefire . The need for peace is needed, he said .
 A reconciliation will involve a work of memory, a sober look at what happened and an honest effort to establish the truth .
 Canada and international community should initiate a peaceful resolution of the situation in Ukraine, she says . Canada and the international community must initiate a peace resolution, she adds .
 The political will to stop this civil war should come from within Ukraine itself. This writer said that the political will should be from within the Ukraine itself .
 It is becoming harder and harder for them to explain why they are fighting this absurd war . It's becoming harder to understand why they're fighting it.
 Kyiv regime is trying to deny hundreds of years of history and build a mono-ethnic Ukrainian nation which excludes Donbas . Instead of taking the richness of Ukraine as a multicultural and bilingual country and turning it into an asset.