 Russian forces attack from three sides. Russian forces launch major assault on Ukraine, firing missiles on cities and military targets .
 The invasion by land, air and sea began after a pre-dawn TV address . Initial reports of casualties included Ukrainian civilians and soldiers, and Russian troops .
 President Volodymyr Zelensky tweeted. Russia has embarked on a path of evil, but Ukraine is defending itself, he tweeted .
 Ukraine has declared martial law and severed all diplomatic relations with Russia . Ukraine declares martial law, severing diplomatic relations.
Kyiv, home to almost three million people, is home to more than three million . The capital is home. The city has a population of almost 3 million .
 Mark, a 27-year-old sales executive, said he was ready to be called up to fight . Mark, 27, is a sales executive who has been in charge of sales for more than a decade .
 Russia massed troops along Ukraine's borders on Thursday . The invasion followed weeks of escalating tensions .
 The UK, EU and other Western allies have vowed to impose tough new sanctions to punish Moscow . But they say they will not send in troops to Moscow .
 A man was also killed in shelling outside the major north-eastern city of Kharkiv . A Ukrainian presidential adviser said that more than 40 soldiers had died .
 Russia has positioned almost 200,000 troops and thousands of combat vehicles on Ukraine's borders ahead of Thursday's invasion . Ukraine said it had killed 50 Russian troops and shot down six Russian aircraft .
 Moscow first struck Ukraine's military infrastructure and border guard units . Russia first struck the country's infrastructure and security forces .
 Ukrainian forces say Russian military vehicles crossed the border near Kharkiv in the north, Luhansk in the east, Russian-annexed Crimea in the south and from Belarus too . Then Ukrainian forces said Russian vehicles had crossed the northern border .
 Belarus's authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko said his country's military were not involved . Russian tanks were later seen on the outskirts of Kharkiv, a city of 1. million people .
 Ukraine's president had asked how people who lost eight million of its citizens could support Nazism . Hours earlier Ukraine's President had asked about how people fighting Nazis could supportNazism .
 Under the defensive alliance's treaty, Nato can be brought together if any member fears their independence or territory is under threat .
Ukraine's Western allies had repeatedly warned that Russia was poised to invade . UN Secretary-General António Guterres said Putin should bring his troops back to Russia .
 The US, EU, UK and Japan imposed sanctions against leading Russians, Russian banks and MPs who backed the move . U.S. and EU imposed sanctions on leading Russians and Russian banks .
Earlier this week Russia's president announced he was recognising the independence of two self-proclaimed people's republics of Donetsk and Luhansk . The breakaway regions were seized by Russian-backed rebels after Russia invaded Crimea in 2014 .
 Mr Putin launched that attack after mass street protests in Ukraine that ousted pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych . More than 14,000 people have died in the east in a conflict between the rebels and Ukrainian forces .
Mr Putin said the military operation's objective was to defend the people in the breakaway areas . A shaky ceasefire had held but there has been a surge in violations in recent days .
 Ukraine is now a nation with growing democratic institutions, unlike an authoritarian Russia . Kyiv and its Western allies have repeatedly rejected Mr Putin's claims that Ukraine was being run by neo-Nazis .
 Putin has repeatedly accused the United States and its allies of ignoring Russia's demands to prevent Ukraine from joining the Nato military alliance and offer Moscow security guarantees .
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist . Email haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.
 It used to be part of the Soviet Union but became an independent country in 1991 . It also borders several other countries that are members of Nato, a defensive military alliance formed after World War Two .