 2014 events in Ukraine have given a strong incentive to rethink EU-Russian relations . The 2014 events have given an incentive to reconsider EU-Russia relations .
 These international relations are embedded in a complex network of security, energy and trade forces, including the EU and the OSCE .
 The events in Ukraine – the annexation of Crimea and violence by pro-Russian rebels in Eastern Ukraine – are not an isolated case, however .
 Analysis of Russian – Georgian relations reveal similarities with Ukraine . It suggests a pattern of behaviour.
 If we can refer to a pattern, this means the crisis is larger than Ukraine itself . This means Russia's ambitions in general, showing Russia’s ambitions ingeneral .
 Kosovo was the first major setback in the process of opening up relations . Kosovo was a first big setback in this process of opened up relations.
 A Russia-friendly discourse is that the West did not do enough to help Russia get back on its feet after the humiliating implosion of the Soviet Union .
 Putin's changed attitude in his second and third term of becoming a world power and regaining control over the lost territory after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . More specifically, this discourse recounts that Putin I reached out to the West but was not taken seriously .
 This pressure hampers their development because so much energy goes into maintaining territorial integrity . Moreover this pressure hampsers the development of the country .
 Ukraine is suffering from ‘enlargement fatigue’ and expecting a candidate country to be sufficiently prepared . The Vilnius summit was held in 2013 with measured enthusiasm .
 The last Soviet Constitution was translated into international post-Soviet law . The second aspect we need to understand is the international law on territorial integrity, which is based on the last Soviet constitution .
 The third aspect involved is intercultural communication and a different worldview . The third part is inter cultural communication .
 The Russian Federation invested in the creation and maintenance of international institutions that were meant to regulate the politics, economics and defense of post-Soviet states .
 The Collective Security Treaty Organization, Russia’s variant of NATO, also appears to have little practical use apart from military exercises .
 The much smaller GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development formalized in 2001 by Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova . It was meant to prepare these countries for European Integration .
 It focused on issues such as the ban of national products by Russia, the frozen conflicts in the region and the recognition of the holodomor . The 1932-3 famine that was practically orchestrated by Stalin – was almost genocide .
 The goal of the EaP is to bring partner countries closer to the EU on the basis of EU values, norms and standards . The goal is to reduce the gap between EU values and norms .
 This includes activities aimed at deep integration through Association Agreements, Free Trade Areas, and visa-free regimes . This includes Activities aimed atdeep integration through association Agreements and Free Trade areas .
 The Eurasian Customs Union was created in 2010 to be transformed into the Eurasian Economic Union . It is Putin's alternative to the EU and the most recent attempt to keep Russia’s neighbours closely knit .
 Yanukovych first rejected the European offer because Putin offered him a better deal into the EEU . Both had overlooked the will of the people, tired of corrupt practices and eager to live in a state that functions properly .
 Putin emphasizes the economic importance of this union, it seems to be more politically motivated. Even though Putin emphasizes economic importance, he seems to have more political motivation .
 Russia created a number of institutional mechanisms that lost their relevance as the participating countries lacked a common purpose . All in all, Russia created an institutional mechanism that lost its relevance .
 Putin’s EEU might well be next on this list of failed international organizations . It aims to keep the Newly Independent States closely knit .
 Ukraine’s history in Soviet times, its nowadays’ relation with Russia is complex . Due to Ukraine's history inSoviet times, it is difficult to understand the country's history .
 The largely pro-Russian Crimea was transferred to the Soviet Republic of Ukraine by Khrushchev in 1953 . It was probably to ‘compensate’ for holodomor .
 West Ukrainian territories were only annexed by the Soviet Union in 1939 through a secret clause in the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact . West Ukraine was once belonged to the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 His friends received influential positions all over the country . He was forced to flee the country in February 2014 after violent mass protests at Euromaidan . He refused to sign an Association Agreement with the EU .
 Georgia claimed independence from the Soviet Union in 1989 . The ASSR Abkhazia had in the Likhny declaration of 1989 already declared its independence . AO South Ossetia followed suit shortly .
 Russia is the biggest supplier of troops to UN peacekeeping forces . This lead to wars ending in ‘frozen conflicts’ monitored by UN peacekeepers .
Tensions between Georgia and Russia grew after the Rose Revolution of 2003 and the election of pro-Western president Saakashvili . Russia handed out Russian passports in both regions, interfering behind the scenes in the negotiations between Georgia.
 Tensions increased in terms of visa regime, the throwing out of diplomats, the ban of Georgian products from the Russian market, flights in Georgian airspace, build-up of Russian military at Georgian borders .
 Russia first occupied the territory of South Ossetia and then recognized both South Ossenia and the Abkhazia as independent states . Russia firstoccupied the territory. Russia first recognized both the South Osseia and Ab Khazia.
 Russia still has not complied with all Six Points of the Ceasefire brokered by then French President Sarkozy . After almost seven years, Russia still hasn't complied with the agreement .
 Russia is building a huge fence around South Ossetia cutting through villages, houses and other private property . It is in direct breach of formal borders and Human Rights .
 The Winter Olympics on the border with Abkhazia in 2014 was another way of showing Russian superiority to the world and specific control in the region . In 2014, organizing the Winter Olympics was a way to show Russian superiority.
 During Soviet times Russia had sensitive military equipment in ASSR Abkhazia . Many Russian generals had their dacha’s there .
 South Ossetia with its Roki tunnel through the Caucasus mountains is of strategic importance . The Roki Tunnel is a strategic importance for the region .
 The region of Samsa Javakheti close to the Armenian border is used to shelter Russian military camps . South Ossetia is near the border with Armenia .
 Russian army could easily establish a controlled corridor straight through Ukraine to Transnistria . Such statements give rise to more speculations as the Russian army is believed to be in control of Moldova .
 Georgia signed the EU Associate Agreement, but when Ukraine wanted to sign, Russia came with a better offer . Ukraine switched sides, unleashing protests that led Ukraine back to the EU-table .
 In both cases Russia gathered a large number of military troops at the respective borders and subsequently annexed parts of Georgia and Ukraine by force .
 Some Georgians are taking on the Ukrainian nationality for this lucrative opportunity . In the meantime, various experienced Georgian government officials have been hired by Ukrainians .
 Ukraine is a large country that borders the EU, while Georgia is a small country, small population, further away from Europe . Ukraine is large country, but Georgia is small country.
 Georgia more or less maintained its pro-Western course after the Rose revolution . The Orange Revolution in Ukraine was soon deceived as it was more party-bound and lacked the spirit of a pro-European future for the country .
 Russia had to lease the Sebastopol naval base on the Black Sea coast for its Russian fleet at a high price . Russia has a recurring tension about renewing the lease contract every so many years .
 Sébastopol has been home to the Russian Black Sea fleet since it was set up by Catherine II the Great at the end of the 18th century . It should have been leased until 2042 .
 With the annexation of Crimea the lease and high cost problem is removed altogether . With the annexing of Crimea, high cost and lease and lease problems are removed altogether.
 The Russian tax payer would have to cover for peoples pensions, the high unemployment rates in the region, healthcare, education and the rebuilding of the infrastructure . This scenario is unlikely because it is of no special military importance and furthermore, the tax payers will have to
 In view of Russian stagnating economy this would be an extra heavy burden with little to no advantage in return in return .
 It is perceived as more efficient to maintain pressure on Ukraine, destabilizing the country and thus maintaining control at a cheaper price . It is thought to be more efficient than it is.
 Russia would be more advantageous for Ukraine to have a prosperous Ukraine importing goods from the Russian market .
 Putin's actions match his words, yet so far so far his actions match what he says . Another pattern appears to be that western leaders have not taken what Putin says too seriously .
 A re-assessment of EU-Russia cooperation programmes is currently ongoing with a view to suspending the implementation of EU bilateral and regional cooperation programmes .
Projects dealing exclusively with cross-border cooperation and civil society will be maintained .
 The EU has adopted a prohibition on imports originating from Crimea and Sebastopol unless accompanied by a certificate of origin from the Ukrainian authorities .
During the Minsk talks late August and early September 2014, mediated by the OSCE, 12 points were negotiated . The talks included the opportunity to monitor the cease fire, to more self-governing power to certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 A planned meeting in Astana was cancelled in January because both Russia and Ukraine keep accusing each other of mobilizing forces in the eastern part of Ukraine . All the commitments of the Minsk protocol did not translate into actual results .
 Russians are now testing how far they can go with Europe by flying into European airspace . They are also increasing pressure on EU-Greece relations by giving support to Greece . Greece could have great consequences if Greece steps out of the Euro zone .
 Another potential source of pressure on the EU is Cyprus, backed by Russia . Cyprus is backed by the EU and Russia .
 Historically, Russians have seen the Eastern Mediterranean as a natural extension of the Black Sea . Russia has seen the Mediterranean as an extension of its Black Sea.
 Russia is trying to regain control in the Mediterranean. Under the leadership of Putin, Russia has been trying to gain control of the Mediterranean .
 The way to go about this is by controlling the natural gas in the Levant Basin . Europe is striving to contain the energy independence Europe is trying to achieve .
 Hungary has suggested using Israeli gas to substitute for reliance on Russia . Hungary for example has suggested use of Israeli gas .
 Russian behaviour in Georgia and Ukraine is that he will not stop but continue to find weak spots in Europe . Russia is trying to get a hold over Europe, rather than cooperating with Europe, says the EU .
 In the Russian worldview, the Euromaidan protests are supported by the West in order to establish a sphere of influence in Eastern Ukraine . In the modern world extremism is being used as a geopolitical instrument and for remaking spheres of influence .
 Putin: "We see what tragic consequences the wave of so-called colour revolutions led to,” so said Putin in a recent speech .
 The EU should also offer security guarantees to these countries. This all makes clear that EU integration with states in the Eastern neighbourhood can impossibly be merely economic .
 It would be good to have the OSCE monitoring and/or UN peacekeeping forces in Eastern Ukraine . It would also be good for OSCE to monitor and/ or UN peacekeepers in Ukraine .
 Most recently, various politicians also want to provide Ukraine with arms to defend itself against Russia . Most recent, they want Ukraine to provide its own arms to protect itself from Russia .
 Opponents say this will only escalate matters and lead to a full-fledged war . Opponents argue that this will not escalate matters.
 Better to follow the example in the Caucasus and freeze the conflict and introduce peacekeeping forces instead .
 A UN-peace keeping force logically would consist of military from such countries as India, Brazil, Norway, but most probably also from Russia .
The question of the command structure for such a force should be considered carefully in advance . The question of such a command structure should be discussed in advance.
 NATO has a 1997 treaty with Russia that forbids permanent bases in the Baltic States . Poland is a close alternative to Poland .
 The basis would consist of a new 4,000 strong NATO ‘spearhead’ force of which 1,000 troops from Britain would be in place .
 Putin's claim that he can reach the Baltic States militarily in two days offers some reassurance to the people of Baltic States and some deterrence to Russia .
 The question is whether this will change Putin’s political agenda. Fact is that their economy has stagnated, but the question is that it will change his political agenda .
 Some say he has become more compliant during peace negotiations on Eastern Ukraine . Others say he is more compliant in peace negotiations .
 Others point out that the Russian people have been used to self-reliance since Soviet times . Others say they have made sacrifices for having a strong leader and regained respect .
 Many Russians do not see a direct correlation with Putin’s policy and the economic malaise .
 The group of extremely wealthy businessmen around Putin is a group of very wealthy businessmen . Besides the Russian people as a whole, we also need to take into consideration.
 Putin will put pressure on Putin to come to an agreement with the West. They will not gladly accept lasting damage to their financial interests . The West will not be willing to accept the damage they have caused .
 Russia has found a way to reassert itself in the post-Soviet space with minimal military force . It appears that Russia has been destabilizing neighbouring countries and parts of the EU .
 The West should maintain economic and political pressure on Russia and show the intention to curb Russia’s behaviour consistently and unremittingly . In case they touch any NATO countries, the West should keep pressure on them .
 The Russian proverb ‘economy is a good servant but a bad master’ may hint at the answer . The proverb is a Russian proverb.
Today's international law is based on the way territory was arranged legally according to the Soviet Constitutions . If we want to look closer to the different institutions as manifestations of post-Soviet space, we need to understand that today’s international law.
 The Soviet Union was composed of Republics Georgia and the Soviet Socialist Republic Ukraine . On paper, the Soviet Union were sovereign .
 A delineation with less autonomy was the Autonomous Oblast such as the AO South Ossetia in Georgia . The AOSouth Osseti is a region of Georgia that has been declared an autonomous state .
 Ukraine between 1924-1940 had the Moldovian ASSR that became a full-fledged SSR in 1940 and claimed independence during the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 Crimea first had the status of Autonomous Oblast in 1991 . It has now been annexed by the Russian Federation in 2014 . Ukraine remained with one other province .
 The Georgian territories South Ossetia and Abkhazia were followed . In fact, almost the same pattern as with the Georgian territories.
 annexing forces involved in Crimea were more covert and not easily identifiable . Only this time instead of having a full-fledged war changing legal borders, the annexing force was more covert .
 He was an intern at the Dutch embassy in Baku and at the Netherlands Institute in Saint Petersburg . He was also an intern in the Netherlands.
 W.H. de Beaufort thanks for reviewing and commenting on this text at a short notice .
Stephen Szabo on Germany emancipating, redefining itself and also diverging its economic interests to Poland and China . Stephen Szabo's views on Germany have been widely criticized .
 The Rise of Geo-Economics, Bloomsbury Academic, 2014, was published by the University of Germany, Germany, Russia, and Germany . It was the first time the study was published in Germany and Russia .
 As mentioned in the Russia-NATO founding act of 1997 and the Russia NATO council signed late spring 2002 .
 NATO becoming ‘merely’ a political organization is discussed there . The danger of involution and of NATO becoming a political group is discussed .
 An armed attack against one or more members shall be considered an attack against them all . An attack against a member of a group of members will be considered as an attack on them all.
 PM 2006-2007; and president of Ukraine from February 2010-February 2014 . PM 2006 to 2007; and President of Ukraine since February 2010. PM 2006 -2007; President of Ukrainian Republic from February 2014 .