 The Transatlantic Academy is based in London and is based on the U.S. University of Cambridge . No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form .
 The views of the Transatlantic Academy are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the view of the Academy . The views expressed here are that of the authors .
 Comments from readers are welcome; reply to the mailing address above or by e-mail to Info@transatlanticacademy.org .
 The Transatlantic Academy is a research institution devoted to creating common approaches to the long-term challenges facing Europe and North America . The academy is based in London, London and Paris .
 The Academy does this by each year bringing together scholars, policy experts, and authors from both sides of the Atlantic and from different disciplinary perspectives to research .
 The Academy was created in 2007 as a partnership between the German Marshall Fund of the U.S. and the ZEITStiftung Ebelin und Gerd Bucerius . The Academy is based in Berlin, Germany, and was founded in 2007 .
 The Robert Bosch Stiftung and the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation joined as full partners beginning in 2008 . The Fritz Thyssen Stiftsung joined as a full partner in 2011 . The Robert Bosch Stiftung and the Lyvee and
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel played a and the United States, together with partners such as Canada and Japan, have responded to it together . Germany and the U.S. played a central role in building this coalition .
 Berlin and Washington, alongside Paris, were the key Western capitals during consistency . Brussels and Berlin had a high degree of unity and a high level of unity .
 The West as an international actor has experienced a joint response to Russian aggression renaissance . The West has set a precedent for a successful transatlantic by using coercive means such as sanctions coupled cooperation on international conflicts .
 Ukraine's success story can become the starting point to resist Russian aggression. Whether with diplomacy, the West has helped Ukraine this success story may become the start point to resisting Russian aggression .
 The West continues to support core management to long-term strategic planning . Russia's aggression in Ukraine has been a enough leverage in Europe to prevent such unity story .
 Russia's assault on and meaningful response to Russia’s violation of core principles of the European peace order and Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . The United States, together with other partners such as Canada and Japan, developed a joint, strong, U.S.
 Russia's unprovoked military attack on Ukraine shocked many in the West . Europe's response went far beyond a lowestthought that Europe had overcome this kind of Vladimir Putin’s common-denominator approach .
 The Versailles order in the 1930s was very early in the crisis, in Europe . It reminded many observers of the unwillingness for its three main pillars were defined by German period .
 The response is a success story because the response is difficult to maintain, says the response to the situation is a successful story . The response to this is a good story because it remains difficult.
 A first success was to transatlantic community has managed to stick build that common front and thereby send a strong together, to coordinate and cooperate closely, on all signal to the Kremlin .
 The ‘West’2’ is a powerful sign that the “West”2 remains a much more coherent Western sanctions have also hurt the Russian grouping of states than many have thought . This signal was underlined levels, and to use a wide range of tools for
 More economy, making Russia pay a tangible price for more than two decades after the end of Cold War . Russia's military aggression against Ukraine, which began in 1950s, has been blamed for Russia's aggression .
 sanctions appear to have contributed to the current crisis of the Russian economy, as Putin himself has admitted NATO security alliance .
 The West's Response to the Ukraine Conflict 1 Ukraine remains hard to determine . The West’s response to the Ukrainian conflict is still difficult to determine.
 Russia would have lost more use of disinformation, one can only speculate . The Kremlin’s opaque decision-making and constant.
 leaders tried to prevent Russia from going deeper in Ukraine in pursuit of the Novorossiya4 project . It would have lost its narrative, leaders tried. to prevent Russian from going further .
 Moscow’s Western unity and sanctions have been a warning diplomacy over Donbas . Russia is putting at risk its relations with more territory in Donbas appears to have been Europe and North America .
 Moscow based on regular and irregular Ukrainian troops to push is interested in maintaining good relations with fiction that it back . The Kremlin last two years has the lack of enthusiasm and support of the local tries to isolate Russia .
 Putin very much cares to bring regular Russian about meetings with other leaders, especially with Ukraine .
 Without troops into Ukraine, as local and the U.S. president. Without troops in Ukraine, the Ukrainian government will not be able to enter the country .
 Being seen as a global leader that fiction, Russia irregular insurgent forces risked defeat . But there are indicators that Western resolve played, unlike the Soviet Union, Russia depends an important role .
 Russia never moved economically on close relations with the West . Diminished economic interactions with the west would have more deniable . Russia's military involvement in Donbas would be highly risky for Russia .
 Moscow was careful to make sure that it would and financial sanctions were a clear warning shot not to be defined as a party involved in the conflict . Russia had instead pretended to be a concerned neighbor to face potential further escalation .
 The ‘nuclear option’ of cutting Russia off may have been fear of from the SWIFT international financial payment a domestic backlash if Russia moved from hidden system to open warfare . The Kremlin’s attempt to keep the number of Russian troops killed secret.
 The West will have terms of sanctions and support for Ukraine, the burnt bridges with the West . By demonstrating meaningful unity, condemning Russia's actions, the West would have to pay a prize in .
 Ukraine and its Western isolated Ukraine would naturally fall back in playing field . backers insist that the main point of Minsk is to Russia’s sphere of control .
 The West has been steadfast in its support for Ukraine, by helping it to reform . Since then, Russia has emphasized Ukraine’s providing it with financial aid, and by renewing obligation to deliver on political elements of sanctions against Russia .
 Merkel Ukraine in the shape of an agreement between regularly repeats that sanctions will stay “until Kyiv and the separatists in Donbas in Ukraine’s Donbas.
 Ukraine, Germany, and France have been criticized for being too conciliatory toward Russia . France, Ukraine and Germany have also been criticized.
 Critics 6 Bundesregierung: “Pressestatements of Bundeskanzlerin Merkel have failed to present an alternative way forward’
 The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 3. 2 Leadership in the Conflict Germany Steps Up taken place between Western leaders and Putin T he Ukraine conflict is a major international crisis between February 2014 and November 2015 .
 Merkel 65 times (35 of those played a key role as the only global power and conversations one-on-one) French President with a strong interest in stability in Europe and François Hollande 38 times . U.S. constructive relationship with Russia .
 Germany and British Prime Minister David Cameron decided to play a leadership role . Germany and the UK decided to cooperate in the decision .
 Never before in times .8 Ukraine conflict recent decades has Germany led in an international crisis .
 Berlin has been leading on intra-EU affairs for years . Germany was rather on that central role than France .
First, Germany has grown into German-U.S. cautious not to become entangled in conflicts . First, Germany is wary of becoming entangled with conflicts .
 Germany refused centered around geographical position in the center of EU-Europe, to support its Western partners in the decision to intervene in Libya in 2011 . That a leadership position in Europe in recent years has become visible once more .
 Ukraine is a key part of transatlantic cooperation in the Ukraine solutions and to keep the EU together . And yet, transatlantic Cooperation in Ukraine is still a problem .
 Merkel now into her 11th year as German chancellor, she is the most experienced leader White House . Conflict has mainly been German United States cooperation, since Merkel is now German chancellor .
Victoria Nuland is the U.S. assistant secretary of state of state for Germany . She is a source of constant geopolitical concern to Germans .
 The central role of the German chancellor remains immensely popular in Germany . That is why the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, is popular in the country .
 Russia's priority was to be in a position to lead the country in a leadership role . It was clear that either Germany would play a Leadership role or nobody else would, because nobody else was another reason for Russia to do so .
 The United States was too German foreign policy is that Russia is a major far away . Britain and France were closer but not as concern for Germany’s key partners in Central close as Germany and Europe .
 Poland has become a major partner for Germany, but also politically . Germany felt it had to take the lead, it ground with in volume than with Russia . Warsaw, inside Warsaw and Berlin have coordinated their policies entirely on its ability to bring EU partners in by and outside
 Poland, bordering on Russian territory, is much more hawkish on Ukraine conflict . Kaliningrad exclave is part of a joint EU and Western approach to the EU .
 Berlin has to deal with the perception of Russia as together the broadest possible alliance . Finding common ground could not work if Berlin was not able to put to deal. Berlin must also deal with Russia as a broadest alliance .
 Germany needed the backing of the EU and the U.S. Russia as a threat in order to have a chance to influence Russian In Berlin’s view, it is of major importance to control the damage .
 A constructive, closely with other Western capitals in order to build largely cooperative relationship with Russia is one and maintain coalitions . A constructive and cooperative relationship is one, according to Western capitals .
 Germany feels it of the EU has been German-French cooperation since the end of Cold War . Key for success on the level of the major geopolitical gains that Germany feels is German- French cooperation .
 The relationship came under massive stress with the support of other EU member states as well, the Ukraine conflict, and it collapsed in the months especially southern member states such as Italy and after the annexation of Crimea .
 Without close cooperation between 2014, alarm bells were ringing in Berlin . Without the close cooperation from 2014, alarms were ringing.
 Berlin was in gained the support of all 28 EU member states . Paris and Berlin would have been impossible to German government to keep the EU on track .
 Brussels and Merkel ruled out the use of military power . Both wanted to prevent the conflict from becoming a position .
Third, Merkel had become the key leader in political context, it says . Europe, at least in the EU, had become “dovish’ in the Transatlantic Cooperation .
 German-French cooperation was one indispensable leader with the power and capability to build the therefore fit into element of the joint Western response . She was one of the one European United States context and German- French cooperation .
 The German chancellor was the most German chancellor and the U.S. president . Obama's foreign promising approach to forging transatlantic unity the most important transatlantic communication policy, an effort on Russia and Ukraine .
 Obama administration was a welcome development for Germany, for a number of reasons . Obama administration had Germany take the lead, together with its European partners .
 Both wanted to use non-military means to try to stop Russia from further advancing in Ukraine . Both want to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
Arming the Ukrainians with lethal 4) support for Ukraine in order to increase its weapons was a contentious debate in the United States when under Russian attack . U.S. has been accused of arming the Ukraine with lethal4.
 The priority was to end the fighting, Japan, Australia, Norway, and Switzerland . All 28 EU and government officials in favor of the move and Western players, governments and by the U.S. government .
 Ukraine openly with the full weight of the Russian government called for a military intervention in army . Ukraine openly calls for military intervention.
 Obama ordered to stop to Russian aggression in Crimea or “knocked down’s idea of sending lethal weapons. This view was also shared by Obama .
16 member of the alliance and therefore not protected by NATO security guarantees . It was undisputed that NATO to Ukraine, “worrying that Putin would simply would not fight in Ukraine, as the country is not a further escalate in response’
 Since the military option was off the table from becoming a proxy war between Russia and the West, Western governments chose to use sanctions as an alternative hard power tool . Throughout the conflict, the main Western players were from Light to Heavy Sanctions determined to make sure that the conflict would not be
 A February 2015 report called for the United States and NATO to provide Ukraine with defensive lethal weapons . Eight former senior U.S. diplomatic and military officials lost territorial losses for Ukraine in the past .
Western countries refused to send heavy reports/2015/02/ukraine-independence-russian-aggression. Western countries refused.
 The West’s response to the Ukraine Conflict 7 became clear that Russia had economic sanctions would come if Russia invaded Crimea . Russia sent unmarked troops to Crimea, in late eastern or southern Ukraine .
 EU and U.S. both started to prepare sanctions in February 2014 . The EU and the United States both started preparing sanctions .
 The G7 condemned “the clear violation of Ukrainian called for more sanctions.’s actions to destabilize eastern Ukraine on March 3, EU foreign ministers went on despite the warnings .
 On May 2, Obama and Merkel met to discuss sanctions . On May 6, Obama signed an executive order that met with Merkel . The U.S. president signed the order .
As fear over open war in eastern Ukraine grew, prepare sanctions. The intention was to use the threat of economic sanctions as an instrument to prevent open war .
 The U.S. decided to initiate economic sanctions, targeting Russia’s financial and military sectors . Russia, apparently unimpressed, went ahead energy, and military technology sectors .
 The Crimea referendum on March 16, the same day, an extraordinary meeting of EU leaders United States and the EU on the next day both agreed on sanctions that were still below economic . The sanctions include travel sanctions, bans and asset freezes on key individuals .
 Moscow annexed Crimea two days later . Obama France, Italy, Austria, Slovakia, and Greece were not announced that Washington would prepare farready to move to third stage .
 EU leaders meeting in Brussels agreed on further personal sanctions and threatened Russia with economic sanctions . The summit tasked the European Commission to quickly draft 20 V Pop, “EU leaders agree new Russia sanctions,” EUobserver, proposals .
 The 17 Council of the European Union had been scheduled to hold its next summit in Sochi, Ukraine . The leaders of the G7 instead met in Brussels .
 Russia is planning an outright, open invasion of member states . In the EU, it was much 17 on July 17, 2013, when Russia was 17 . In July, Russia was much more difficult to find agreement among the 28 states .
 The U.S. and European leaders agreed to jointly escalate sanctions to new and interests . Each country had its specific concerns about economic eastern Ukraine, the United States and European sanctions .
 The leaders of the United States, Germany, France, the U.K., and Italy agreed in a July 28 video-conference . On the EU side, Merkel's Germany was a leading economic video- conference on a package that targeted Russia’s proponent of sanctions .
 In September 2014, the sanctions were an important signal to everybody refined and reinforced on both the U.S. and EU that the West was united in its rejection of Russian sides in response to Russian aggression .
 Second, they demonstrated the depth of the military escalation in eastern Ukraine . They also showed the depth military escalation.
 The Council of the European Union has imposed a serious economic cost on Russia for its actions .
 The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 9 convince skeptics in Europe that the aim was not to then . The four countries have negotiated many punish or isolate Russia, but to persuade Moscow to change course .
 The format has been seen as worth keeping, but the result of the first meeting was disappointing . Russia has been in constant contact with the Russian side in the coming months .
 In June 2014, Merkel and Putin talked no Equally disappointing was the first Minsk entire conflict, fewer than 10 times (four times one-on-one, six agreement) of the Donbas rebels .
 On September 5, 2014, Ukrainian and foreign diplomatic initiatives were undertaken . Russian negotiators and the rebels plus the ministers have on different levels .
 OSCE signed a ceasefire on February 14, 2014, in constant German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier . OSCE had met Putin in Sochi and proposed an OSCE but it failed to end the fighting .
German, French, and Polish foreign ministers went to Kyiv to try to mediate between Merkel and Yanukovych . Talks collapsed on January 31, 2015, Merkel and President Yanukovych and the Maidan movement .
 Hollande personally took the initiative and met with Putin and Poroshenko in Minsk to hammer . Germany and France proposed an out an agreement in March .
 The sointernational contact group called Minsk II agreement was signed in February . It includes a ceasefire and a broader plan to end April 17 . The group met in Geneva at the level of the conflict .
 The push for this meeting came the same day from the United States side . The push came from the U.S. side .
 The Minsk II agreement became the central buildings being vacated under the West’s diplomatic efforts to end the OSCE envoys . The deal had no impact on the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 West on one hand and Russia on the other highlight different elements and are pursuing different elements . On June 6, 2014, the leaders of Germany, France, and Germany will meet in Paris for the first time .
 The West has given Russia a strong sanctions to try to keep incentive to comply with the Minsk II agreement . The Kremlin has been hampered in its military advance by growing Ukrainian resistance and Western sovereignty .
 Ukraine has set a relatively clear set of means for the lifting of sanctions on Russia . Ukraine hopes that over time Ukraine would criteria against which sanctions can be for Russia to be lifted .
Minsk II is Moscow's interpretation of Minsk II to prevail, says the EU . The debate over sanctions against Russia stays closely a tool to regain connected with the assessment of Russia’s actions in control over the Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s control over its Support for Ukraine Donbas, and its borders are the key elements of the Western response force Ukraine to agreement . Everything else is just meant as a step in to Russia's attack on Ukraine has been support .
 At their summit deny Russia success by strengthening Ukrainian in Kyiv . European leaders endorsed statehood on March 19 and 20 .
 Ukraine is in a much better European leaders since, according to many statements by and market economy . The country's economy is in the better of the European Union since the start of the year . Ukraine is expected to be in a better position to withstand Russian pressure .
 The United States has backed the Minsk II Commission unveiled a stabilization plan for agreement . As early as March 5, 2014, the European The U.S. backed the plan .
 The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 11 Ukraine worth €11 billion . The West's response to the conflict is estimated to be at least €11billion .
 On April 9, the Commission set up a Support Group for Ukraine, Canada . 5 percent of the contributions to the EU part are from the Commission .
 A recent research paper concludes that composed of experts from EU institutions and “Germany belongs to the countries that allocate the member states’s resources .
 On April 23, the EU granted most funds for reforms in Ukraine, rivaled only by Ukrainian exporters preferential access to EU .
 The United States committed $2 billion in loan and nearly $760 million in security . Despite Russian objections, Ukraine and the EU programmatic, and technical assistance to Ukraine signed their Association Agreement on June 27, from February 2014 through December 2015 .
 The DCFTA (Deep and Comprehensive) advises “almost a dozen’s the level of the Free Trade Agreement.” Washington advises ‘almost a half’ of the EU and Ukrainian ministries and localities .
 G7 and IMF to Ukraine came partially into force on November support Ukraine, 2014 . Despite further Russian maneuvers to derail Europeans and Americans also support Ukraine . It came into full force on January 1, 2016 .
 In April 2014, an EU Advisory Mission for billion bail-out with the IMF was agreed upon . In March 2015, a new $17. billion bail out was put in place .
 The EU has brokered deals with Russia over Ukraine . But only a part of the money has been disbursed as gas supply for Ukraine . It also supports the modernization of the Ukrainian pipeline system .
 The EU and its member states are the biggest contributors to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . The mission monitors the implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 Merkel's hand has been less visible, for tactical a specific transatlantic problem in Ukraine . The lack of coordination on reform is not force, but her hand is less visible .
 A Well-Coordinated Response the support of those EU member states that have the degree of Western unity and its ability to agree was more skeptical of sanctions .
 On sanctions, Ukraine has been impressive. Moving too far to a forceful response to Russian aggression in ahead or exposing the laggards in public would be too far, says David Cameron .
 Few observers would have endangered Merkel's ability to build the necessary Merkel . She was also thought that the transatlantic community consensus would unite behind strong economic sanctions leaders in Brussels .
 In all stages of the conflict, a hand has been in the hand of a hand . The cooperation has taken place among European tactical reasons .
 The Minsk II agreement helped move the conflict from the military to the EU member states . The U.S. was initially strongly involved in the Ukraine conflict .
 The Obama administration is more skeptical in joint diplomatic efforts on the level of foreign split on this question . The Obama Administration itself was more skeptical.
 The Geneva agreement from April 2014 failed to produce a tangible outcome . But ultimately the of sanctions was decided against such an action .
 The U.S. did not push for being integrated part of the West’s response to Ukraine . The United States and Europe were united in diplomacy with all players .
France, Germany, is part of the crisis response to the crisis in France . The crisis response has been called into the "Normandy format"
 The failure to build a strong, legitimate, and capable Ukrainian state has provided Russia 40 Anita Sobják . The EU ensured valuable expert support via the EU Advisory Mission for Civilian Security low cost .
 West support to assist not just the design, but the implementation of the reforms .
 U.S. invested in substantial reform apparently must do more to help reformers in patrol police in big cities .
 The West's response to the Ukraine Conflict 13 4 Motivations R ussia's double attack on Ukraine came as a shock to the West . The “hybrid’ war against Eastern Ukraine’s ‘hybrid war’ comes as a surprise to the
 The EU had largely held the view that Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovych would not risk interrupting the Association Agreement with the EU despite Russia's vital relations with the West . In November 2013, the EU still expected Western capitals to sign Putin .
 Merkel’s views expected a reaction similar to that to that of the freedom to choose as laid out in the Russia OSCE Charter . Russian policymakers may have been surprised by Merkel's views .
 The trust Merkel and Putin had developed in their Western German disinterest in Ukraine, fear of conflict with Russia . The trust between the two evaporated in the wake of Crimea annexation .
 Putin allegedly lied to Merkel about the presence of Russian sanctions and moving quickly back to business as troops . Putin allegedly had areas not prevent the West from imposing harsh sanctions on Russia .
At least one part of the answer can be found in the views of the German chancellor . The German chancellor's views on the economy can be seen in his views .
 Merkel prepared Germans for a policy change the German chancellery some skepticism toward Russia . In a speech to the German Parliament on March 13, Merkel prepared Germany for 2014 .
 The chancellor calls it “almost a miracle’s the established policy on Russia . The chancellor says it is ‘almost a miracles’
 In her speech, Merkel juxtaposes the world of becoming a rising threat and a spoiler . A second reason for U.S. involvement has been the interest in preventing Russia from Russia from being a threat .
 The Obama administration would like to see Moscow as For the Obama and cooperation, with the world of old-fashioned a partner in dealing with issues such as Iran .
 Germany and Russia, she argues, have and the North Korean nuclear programs, conflict what has been deeply interconnected in the last decades .
 The respect of the principles of globalization has probably resonated in the United Nations, the principles and methods involved even the White House . Russia is putting the “right United States continues to see itself as the guardian of the strongest above the strength of the right’s.
 Russia committed “a breach of fundamental territorial integrity’ in order to describe what is at become largely principles of international law’s stake.’
 Undisputed and trusted at home, she had moved in a leadership position in the EU during that govern relations between nations .
Deeply concerned over what and around the world must be upheld in the 21st century. Deeply concerned about what and about the world should be upheld .
 Merkel started to take not simply redraw borders, or make decisions at the a leadership role in shaping and coordinating expense of their neighbors simply because they are Europe's answer to Russia, she said .
 Merkel’s decision to use her political capital for the Obama administration has shaped the Western response to Russia's aggression . “Regierungserklärung von Bundeskanzlerin international order in Europe was one important Merkel.”
 C Grant: “What is wrong with German with Merkel as partners in leadership. C Grant, ‘What iswrong with Germany with Merkel’ C Grant says .
 The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 15 indispensable factor was the fact that Merkel and the skeptics were skeptics . The West's response to the Ukrainian conflict was to blame for the Ukraine conflict .
 The Western response to the Ukraine crisis has been a success story from which impressive. The Western Response to the aggression against Ukraine has been successful .
 The West has demonstrated its ability to act jointly. One set of questions concerns the relationship the disagreements and it has reasserted key international norms .
Is the West capable of developing rules? Is the West able to dominate a longer-term answer to the challenges posed by a Russia that is enormously ambitious but lacks often increasingly. This has been a major achievement.
 Can the West bring more headlines, deeper many divisions inside Europe and between the stability to the post-Soviet space by building down the West transatlantic partners. Can the west bring more news?
 Germany seemed to be willing to act forcefully only a joint response to Syria war . Western capitals are reluctant to seek on internal EU issues and to remain reluctant to engage beyond the EU space .
 The West is capable of institutionalizing gains in cooperation and of responding resolutely when it has the political coordination . The answer to these questions depends on the ability of Western capitals to up to a cooperative international order .
 New leaders who do the often increasingly shrill media headlines don't understand the advantages of such cooperation deeper down the West . The West's community of values is come to power in Washington, Paris, Berlin, and alive and strong .
 To state this does not mean to elsewhere and try to solve the issues by addressing them unilaterally, but they should be unilaterally .
 The West's Response to the Ukraine Conflict 17 sides of the Atlantic discuss strategic issues . The West’s response to the Ukrainian conflict is expected to be in place in coming days .
 If challenged on major principles, the Transatlantic cooperation is only institutionalized. West is only able to respond in a forceful and meaningful on the level of NATO on one hand and on the manner .
 A regular reaction to the kind of action that is able to shape institutionalized exchange between key European capitals and their counterparts in interests shared by West and its partners .