 Barry was the chief economics correspondent at Voice of America for two decades . For two decades Barry was Chief Economics correspondent at the Voice ofAmerica .
 During three years in the 1990s he was the VOA correspondent in Prague . He wrote extensively about the economic transformation in formerly communist Eastern Europe .
 The seizure of Crimea and the humiliating ceasefire imposed on President Petro Poroshenko, she wrote, meant that Ukraine was again "a borderland playground" for its mighty neighbor .
Elizabeth Pond, a respected American author, recently wrote a eulogy for Ukraine . If you need to flag this entry as abusive, send us an email .
Poroshenko gambled that the Ukrainian army could defeat the Russian-backed insurgents without provoking an outright Russian invasion . The seizure of Crimea, Russia's military rout of the Ukrainians in the east, and the humiliating ceasefire imposed on President Petro Poroshenko, she wrote .
 Those districts adjacent to Russia form the core of the Donbas region that accounts for 20 percent of Ukraine's industry and 18 percent of its population .
 The president's 'Petro Poroshenko Bloc' is expected to be the biggest winner with over 30% of the vote . The best that can be hoped for is public endorsement of Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk's program of economic and political reform .
 Analysts say only 23 percent of Ukrainians in the Russian-speaking east are likely to vote . With the election being boycotted by separatists and the party of disgraced former president Viktor Yanukovych not participating, this will be Ukraine's first election.
The biggest problem is corruption, a fact freely admitted by Poroshenko and Yatseniuk . Their task, he says, is to build a properly functioning state .
When Poroshenko and Putin met in Milan on October 17, progress was reportedly made on the acrimonious dispute over gas supplies and pricing . However, he's optimistic that reforms will begin after the election .
 Ukraine's currency has lost value, down 18% against the dollar in the past three months . Through persistent gloom one analyst sees hope.
 Putin was threatened, said Satter, by Ukrainians desire to connect with the European Union . Lawlessness and moral decay became pervasive, Satter said .
Barry D Wood has written extensively about post-communist economic transformation . The answer should be apparent within 6 to 12 months .
 The Color Of Your Kid's Swimsuit Might Matter More Than You Think. Alabama Teen accepted to 15 Top Universities with $2 million in Scholarships .
 Blasted For 'RINO Hunting' Senate Campaign AdGeorgia's Brad Raffensperger to Testify at Next Public Jan. 23 .
Under OathRants by Herschel Walker's Son on Absent Fathers Go Viral At Awkward MomentGov.Gov. Probe — Under OathRant. Probe .
 Gavin Newsom Joins Truth Social To Call Out 'Republican Lies''Cowboys For Trump' Founder Avoids More Jail Time for Joining Jan. Jan. Joins Newsom's Truth Social to call out the GOP .
 Spent Days Vacationing In Italy As His State Suffered Historic Flooding .
Court Refuses To Dismiss Dominion's $1.5 million fine .
 Inside the ACLU’s Post-Trump Reckoning: The Coming War On Abortion Drugs .