 Support for ‘entry into the EU’ is still holding up as the most popular foreign policy option . It is 49 percent as of September 2016, not too far down from a peak of 55 per cent .
 This view is both real and promoted by Russian stooges like the Opposition Bloc and fake ‘think-tanks’ like the Ukrainian Policy Fund . This view has been promoted by Russia's 'stooges' like the opposition Bloc. This
 With the war in eastern Ukraine bogged down, Russia has shifted its attention and resources to winning the battle for hearts and minds . Russia has changed its focus and resources.
 Fake letters from ‘ordinary’ Ukrainians and workers are launched online or in social media . Then fed into friendly traditional media controlled by local oligarchs .
 Russia has been busily destroying Ukrainian-Russian trade in the last three years . This multifaceted anti-EU campaign will only grow in the short term, as Russia switches from anti-US propaganda as it sees how its relationship with Trump pans out .
 A series of commentaries and op-eds appeared over the holiday period airing previously heretical thoughts .
 President Petro Poroshenko's adviser Kostiantyn Yeliseyev produced a rejoinder in the Wall Street Journal on 4 January . Poroshenko also reportedly will not attend the traditional Ukraine event organised by Pinchuk in Davos .
 Some object to Pinchuk wanting to give away everything at once . Others claim that there was nothing heretical or treasonous about specific proposals .
 Another Ukrainian oligarch, Dmytro Firtash, has made similar noises about reviving trade with Russia . Pinchuk is currently facing legal problems in Austria .
 Both men have a personal interest in their companies regaining access to Russian markets . Both men are interested in Russian markets and have personal interests in Russia .
 Ukrainians are profoundly split about how to approach the presidency after Trump’s string of pro-Russian comments and gaffes during the campaign . But the campaign also anticipates and feeds a Trumpist agenda, when Ukrainians are deeply split about his presidency .
 The first thing Kyiv did after Trump’s victory was quietly to drop the local investigation against his former campaign chief Paulafort, who also worked for Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych .
 John McCain, Lindsey Graham and Amy Klobuchar visited Kyiv in December . They promised that the U.S. would not abandon Ukraine, and proposed tougher sanctions on Russia .
 The group followed up once they were back home by launching a bipartisan bill in January . It would toughen up Obama’s belated reactions to Russian interference in the U.S. election campaign .
 McCain's role in publicising accusations about Trump’s long-standing Russia links may backfire . But given McCain‘s role inpublicising accusations, the action may be backfire.
 There were, hopefully exaggerated, claims that the damage to Ukraine-Trump relations had already been done . There were also claims that Ukraine- Trump relations had been damaged .
 Other Ukrainians have proposed aligning with Trump’s business instincts rather than confront his agenda head on .
 Catherine Smagliy, who runs the Kennan Institute’s Kyiv office, says Ukraine must ‘move away from the image of the victim’ and focus on the development of economic and cultural cooperation .
 There could be big opportunities in Ukrainian industry, construction and agriculture . Don't forget that the president is a representative of businesses, big business .
 Ukraine's ability to confront Russia is to become interesting for U.S. investors, according to U.N. officials . Ukraine’s ability to create an attractive investment climate is to be interesting for United States investors, they say .
 This is the kind of language that Kyiv hopes that Trump will understand. This is a language thatKyiv hopes he will understand . Kyiv: "This is the type of language I hope Trump will know"
 Ukraine will have to redouble its effort after Trump’s inauguration, if it is not to be left out in the cold .
 Some optimists have argued that Trump is an opportunity for Ukraine to show that it is not dependent on external sponsors and can get its act together .
 Some have argued that ‘Ukraine itself should create defences strong enough to make large-scale war inconvenient and very costly for Russia'
 NATO membership prospects are already distant and will recede further under Trump . Public support stands at 39 percent, but public support stands on 39 percent .
 There will be a growing trend towards alternative ideas, such as building a Baltic-Black Sea Alliance of local states uncomfortable with Russian pressures .
 There will be growing talk on both sides to allow for flexible partnerships across NATO boundaries . There is also growing talk of flexible partnerships between central European and Baltic NATO member states .
 Ukraine faces another difficult year in 2017, with the EU facing a difficult year . Ukraine faces a tough year in the EU.
 The Netherlands, France and Germany will see continued obsession with migration from the Middle East and North Africa . Ukraine will also be unfairly tainting Ukraine, too, according to a report .
 Ukraine needs to show that the new Brussels buzzword of ‘stabilisation’ is not an alternative to reform .
 Dealing with the EU will be completely different to dealing with Trump, however .
 Kyiv needs to do much more to make a convincing case in this respect. This may not be the top item on Trump's agenda, but European public opinion cares more about whether Ukraine is worth saving .
 The views of the Author do not necessarily reflect those of UCL, SSEES or SSEes Research Blog .