 The ‘frozen conflict’ in Ukraine has suddenly become active on Sunday with an encounter involving the naval vessels of Ukraine and Russia at Kerch Strait in Crimea, the entry point of the Sea of Azov from the Black Sea .
 Russian boats fired on the vessels for allegedly disregarding warnings and violating Russian territory . The vessels were fired on by Russian boats for ' disregarding warning'
 The Sea of Azov was becoming the focal point of tensions between Ukraine and Russia . Kiev asserting its right of navigation and Moscow insisting on its sovereign prerogative to control the narrow Kerch Strait .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 has its origin in Russia’s annexation of the Crimea .
 Moscow estimates that western powers are egging on Ukraine to strengthen its naval presence in the Sea of Azov . It would of course have serious security implications for Crimea .
 Russia has lately built a 19-km bridge connecting Crimea with the Russian hinterland .
 Russia suspects that there could be covert operations to damage the Kerch Bridge, which provides the vital communication link to Crimea . Russia suspects there could have been covert operations.
 One interpretation could be that it is all related to Ukrainian politics . Another interpretation is that Ukrainian politics is related to the Ukraine .
 Ukraine is heading for presidential and parliamentary elections in March next year . The elections are expected to be held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 Petro Poroshenko is keen on securing another term. The incumbent pro-US president is keen to secure a second term .
 Poroshenko has seized Sunday’s incident in Kerch Strait to declare martial law .
 The martial law regulations give the government the power to curb public demonstrations, regulate the media and suspend elections . The government can also curb public protests and suspend the upcoming elections .
 The probability is high that Poroshenko is moving in the direction of canceling the 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections . The probability of Poroshenko's move is high.
 The West would also like itso.b in power in Kiev at any cost, according to the West .
 Ukraine situation is also at the very core of the tensions between Russia and the Western powers . But then, Ukraine situation also is at the heart of tensions between the two countries .
 Western power centres may want to poke the Russian bear to see what its reaction could be . It is all but certain that Poroshenko pushed the envelope only with some degree of quiet encouragement from some Western power centers .
 The anti-Russian constituency in Europe and NATO on the one hand and the 'Deep State' in the U.S. on the other are kindred souls in opposing President Trump’s agenda to improve relations with Russia .
 The incident comes just before the planned meeting between Trump and Putin in Argentina in the weekend .
 The Kremlin has signaled that the forthcoming meeting in Argentina is on course . The meeting is expected to take place in Argentina .
Anti-Russian transatlantic caucus will try to undermine the meeting, if not get it derailed altogether . But the anti-Russian caucus will attempt to derail the meeting if not derailed altogether.
 Trump is more assertive today than ever before in his presidency and might simply brush aside opposition to his agenda to improve relations with Russia . Russia's fear is that he is moreassertive today.
 Trump has lost no time to condemn Moscow for Sunday's incident in Kerch Strait . Western camp which rejects Trump’s approach to Russia has lost time to criticise Moscow .
 The European Union, NATO and France have taken a strident position demanding that Russia should forthwith release the Ukrainian ships and the detained personnel .
 Moscow has called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council . Moscow, in turn, has called on the Security Council to meet .
 Sputnik reported that a Crete-based U.S. spy plane entered the Black Sea area on Monday morning .
 Ukrainian hardliners are drawing encouragement from the Western support to stage more provocations against Russia . But the danger lies in the Ukraine hardliners drawing support from the West to stage provocations .
 A flare-up in Donbass between the Ukrainian army and the separatists also cannot be ruled out .
 Any renewed tensions over Ukraine will help the Cold Warriors to demonize Russia as a revanchist power threatening European security .
 NATO has stepped up backing for Ukraine and imposed more sanctions against Russia . That can provide the alibi for stepping up NATO’s backing for the Ukraine .
 The upcoming meeting in Argentina between Trump and Putin is unlikely to be productive . In these circumstances, the upcoming meeting will not be productive.
 The transatlantic rift has acquired a new dimension with Europe aligning with Trump’s adversaries in the United States in a joint enterprise to thwart his best-laid plans to do business with Russia .