 A thesis presented to the Faculty of the United States Army Command and General Staff College in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree MASTER of MILITARY ART and SCIENCE Strategic Studies . Approved for public release.
 The U.S. Fair Use determination or copyright permission has been obtained for the use of pictures, maps, graphics, and any other works incorporated into the manuscript .
 This author may be protected by more restrictions in their home countries . In which case further publication or sale of copyrighted images is not permissible, this author is protected .
 The ‘New Cold War’ refers to a revival of the political and military unrest, magnified by the modern era domains such as informational, cyber and social media with deep economic repercussions .
 The continuous changes in the Eastern Europe have a great influence on the Romanian security environment . The continuous change in the European security environment is raising many challenges for the decision makers .
 The most recent Romanian National Security Strategy was published by the Romanian National security Strategy . This study tried to decipher this security paradigm, unfolding the Russian economic, political and military capabilities .
 The emerging "New Cold War" will definitely affect the entire international community . Whatever history will decide to name it, this emerging “new Cold War’s” will definitely affected the entire world .
Young and vulnerable democracies must acknowledge the fact they represent significant opportunities for the Russian leadership to create unrest and instability, says the author .
 National security strategy, Russian way of war, Russian influence in Romania, security challenges 16 .
 The opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within do not represent the views of the Romanian Army, the Romanian Ministry of Defense, or other Romanian government or non-government entity .
Political views are not political views and are presented here for academic puiposes . They are notpolitical views and they are presented to the public .
 The ‘New Cold War’ refers to a revival of the political and military unrest, magnified by the modem era domains such as informational, cyber and social media with deep economic repercussions .
 At the end of the day, it was not about the destination. It was about the journey .
 John Kuehn, and LTC Andrew Lanier for their expert guidance, continual assistance and invaluable advice . John KUEhn, LTCAndrew Lanier, for their advice and continual assistance .
 My most sincere appreciation to my wife Ina-Maria and my son, Stefan, is for their patience and understanding during the many sacrificed weeknights and weekends .
 Staff members from staff group 13 alpha. I would like to thank them for their friendship and support throughout the year .
 Walachia, Moldova and Transylvania were part of many alliances due to their geopolitical position between several famous empires’ borders and their spheres of influence .
 The destiny of a small nation is always to find its own path through the major players’ fog of interests, knowing that, there will be pressure from all directions .
 The study will analyze how the new conflict between the West and Russia is influencing the economic, political and military domains of neighboring societies, particularly Romania .
 It will explore the major recent events as a means of gaining greater insight into the Russian development of policies and strategies and their intended goals . It will also examine the major events in Russia as a way to gain greater insight.
 The study will also explore the development, modification, and improvement of specific measures and capabilities developed to deter Russia’s destabilizing actions .
 The world's greatest and harshest war ended when the world’s greatest war ended .
 It was a different and longer one, more expensive, less inhuman, but yet very aggressive at all levels . It was more expensive and more expensive. It was also more aggressive, but still very aggressive, using all instruments of power .
 After communism collapsed, Russia, hurt and disoriented, struggled to survive for a decade . Russia faced unprecedented internal political and economic issues, including economic issues .
 The West helped it to maintain stability but not enough to thrive, hoping to keep it weak and vulnerable . The West has been trying to keep the West strong and vulnerable for years .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin came to power in 1999 . Today, we have to deal with the consequences of that policy, partly because of Western indecisiveness .
 Today’s reality is a new type of conflict, conducted with all the tools and weapons available to most important decisionmakers .
 Most of the people prefer to call it the New Cold War, even though there are voices against such a label .
 The emerging "New Cold War" will affect the entire international community by changing many core political, economic and military principals . Whatever history will decide to name it, it will definitely affect the whole international community .
 There will be some important events to be played out in the international arena and economic alliances to be negotiated with different nations pursuing different interests .
 The Royal Institute of International Affairs offers a three-step path for regional security . Russia, the West and the West will continue to consolidate democracy, rule of law and economic growth .
 Study assumes that Russia will continue its neo-imperialistic policy, defined as the control of foreign and domestic policies of other nations in the name of Russian security .
 Russia will persist in its attempts to dominate the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics states, influence EU states by profiting from the frictions and weaknesses that sometimes appear . Russia also seeks advantageous economic agreements speculating the energy dependency of numerous states from its proximity .
 NATO will continue to fulfil its defensive duties as it did throughout the majority of its history . This study assumes that NATO will remain leading role but diminishing its troop effort .
 hybrid warfare is considered a military strategy that combines irregular warfare, conventional warfare and cyberwarfare . Similar with the ambiguous warfare, hybrid warfare has been called hybrid warfare .
 Romania is part of the Central Europe or South-East Central Europe . When discussing Romania, different specification can be done, also valid .
 There are no political or ideological insinuations tied with this label, other than strictly geographical . However, there is no political and ideological insinuation tied to this label .
 The term international order refers to a combination of laws, rules, norms, and supporting institutions that shapes and helps govern international politics and economics .
 This title raised many controversies due to its past resonance and belligerent connotations . The title has also raised many questions about its use of slang .
 The general description of this status-quo refers to a revival of the political and military unrest, magnified by the modem era domains such as informational, cyber and social media . The US, EU, Russia or China have deep economic repercussions between them .
 The new dispute inherited the previous brand legacy, including the name, updated to the current reality . The Cold War was a frozen ideological, political, economic and military confrontation between the U.S. and the East .
 The study will be conducted without any surveys or interviews . It will be based on the researched literature about Russian, EU and Romanian institutions and policies .
Unavailability of both time and money for travel for research outside this area . Another limitation is the unavailability of time and time for travel .
 Study will confine its focus to materials published in English or Romanian language and occasionally on translated Russian documents .
 The research will focus on studying the Russian institutional transformation and its influence on the region and to Romanian institutions for the last decade . The analysis will be focused on security strategy issued by the Russian government in 2015 .
 It will not examine the Russian influence on specific European leading nations and it will not extend to other Eastern European states in detail .
 The study will not make predictions and will accept the fact that there will be operational variables that might change due to the present European volatile environment, especially regarding the political approaches in the region .
 The reason to pursue this study resides in the importance, the actuality and the strategic generosity of this topic, the study says . The study is a continuous presence on the top countries political leaders’ offices and worldwide news channels .
 Significance Russia is identified today as one of the most significant threats to NATO and many other nations . Russia has been identified as a major threat to many nations .
 The challenges have been amplified by decreases in U.S. forces and capabilities in the European theater . The challenges are amplified by recent decreases in the United States forces and capability in Europe .
 The EU and especially the NATO Eastern flank countries must develop their defense capabilities . In this context, the EU must develop its defense capabilities, the authors say .
 Romania’s political and military role in the region will consequently grow, as NATO efforts will have to increase as well . Romania's political, military role will also grow, according to the country's president .
 NATO officer to understand Russian defense and foreign affairs strategies in order to better comprehend their ways, deter their means and efficiently counter react to their ends . This is why it is important for the professional NATO officer.
 Only an effective leverage of the Unified Action capabilities in future operations will achieve deterrence and protect our values, says U.S. government .
 It will refer to some sources presenting the end of the Cold War, the post-war Russian evolution and the Western response to the Russian struggles .
 It will focus on the sources referring to the Russian influence in Romania and official documentation to support the analysis .
 At the same time, the analysis will be aligned with some structural strength and weaknesses of the Romanian political administration . The analysis will identify possible vulnerabilities .
 The public sector literature is the primary source of information used for this study . It comprises official documentation issued by national governments in the Russian proximity .
 Official strategic documents constitute the perfect starting point for analyzing the Ends and Means of Russian policies .
 After the end of Cold War there were a lot of changes in the security approaches adopted by the Eastern European countries and 9 Russia .
Security doctrine evolved in accordance with the new identified threats, according to the new security doctrine .
 This thesis will analyze the Russian official strategy released in 2015, in comparison with other similar documents released by the U.S. and NATO . It will grasp the influences over the Romanian security strategy .
 The Russian security strategy is the center of gravity for the Russian internal and external policies . Russia's national security principles and priorities are key to its security strategy .
 This thesis uses U.S. security documents, such as 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review and 2015 European Command Posture Statement, to compare different perspectives of recent action taken on both sides and how these actions reflect in official security stratagems . This thesis also uses United States security
 The Russian security strategy is generating consequences for neighboring countries, especially in Eastern Europe . The trends are also generating consequences to neighboring countries .
 Romania, Estonia or Lithuania recently adopted national security documentation influenced in certain degree by the Russian political moves . Romania, Estonian, Lithuania and Estonia recently adopted security documentation .
 The Romanian national security strategy was adopted in 2015 for the next four years . It was adopted after many political struggles and debates regarding the prioritization of the main security threats the country is facing .
 The Romanian Presidential Administration Strategic Guidance was issued in December 2015 . The document is crucial for national defense and foreign affairs institutions, the government says .
 U.S. policy and stability in Georgia, Georgia, December 2009, the Russian-Ukrainian conflict (December 2009) or the current RussianEuropean status-quo (Statement of General Philip Breedlove, Commander United States Forces Europe, February 2015) The
 The U.S. will readdress its strategic policies and reshape the funding concepts. This new situation will directly affect both NATO and EU members, including Romania . The new situation serves as a forcing function for the United States .
 It consists of all the studies, reports, reports and products, products, thesis and monographs published by community research institutions, study centers or any other academic establishments .
 The Russian strategies were the main subject for many research institutions throughout the time . The Russian strategy was a key part of Russian research institutions' research .
 The topic seems to be more appealing than before due to the current Russian intentions and political trends, as a reason of concern for many nations . Today, the topic is more appealing.
 The Army War College study project 1704 Analysis of Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe . The Implications for United States Land power presents a thorough picture of the Russian ways of doing business .
 The study begins with the visualization of the current Russian strategic environment, the political leadership, the reorganized armed forces, the economic realities and the system's vulnerabilities .
 The study is significantly relevant to this thesis . It is formulating a detailed analysis of the Russian military using Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership, Personnel and Facilities factors . It includes a description of the latest military operations conducted by Kremlin in the last decades .
 Army War College, 2016, 1-2. 12 which greatly facilitate the extension of the topic introspection due to the Romanian NATO member status . The college's first year of the year was held at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 In the first chapters, the study provides a chronological analysis of the Russian Post-Soviet transformation . The most important milestones in Vladimir Putin's plan to recreate a world power.
 Next, it presents an accurate image of the real Russian potential, both economic and military, underlining the issues and problems the country is facing .
 The last part of the report is dedicated to the foreign affairs domain, particularly to the relations between the EU, NATO and the Russian Federation . The report also focuses on the relationship between the U.S. and Russia .
 Romania is not seen as a primary target of the Russian exacerbated influence throughout the region . The study has a significant importance for this thesis because it focuses on the impact over the Transatlantic political and military institutions .
 Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, is a world renowned academic environment that provides considerable and valuable analysis about various areas of interest, including The New Cold War, from the military perspective .
 The Foreign Military Study Office produced volumes and articles . It offers a remarkable, in-depth investigation about the latest Russian uprising .
 He contrasted the observed transformations with the realities of the Russian-Georgian war, extracting the meanings and drawing the lessons learned . He also contrasted the observations and lessons learned from the war .
 The author's conclusion was that Russia was not yet a major player, he stressed its progress to become, again, a legitimate military power .
 Thomas describes Vladimir Putin's personality, revealing the direct connection between Russian geopolitical goals and his personal ambitions . Thomas describes Putin's personal ambitions and his political ambitions .
 Thomas studies the military goals and makes the assessment that the military objectives converge towards the geopolitical ones . Thomas says the military objective is to protect the nation's interests .
 Russians are seriously planning to create operational task forces in Brazil, Nicaragua or Cuba, he says . In the end, he perceives a greater danger for world peace because the Russians are threatening the United States home territory .
There is a certain sensitivity in Bucharest in regards to the challenges Chisinau have to face . The Bucharest city is the capital of Romania .
 Foreign Military Study Office continues the research and after investigating the military Means and military Ends of the Russian policies .
 This research is meant to close the gap and provide a comprehensive insight of the Russian military tactics . The research is intended to provide a complete insight of Russian tactics .
 The military Ways will always be the most valued by the Russian decision-makers and the most threatening to the Western societies . The Russian military Ways are the most feared to the West .
 Russian military tactics are being used to induce its objectives into Europe, NATO or Romanian sphere of influence . This volume enables the Russian competitors and adversaries to find the most appropriate course of action .
 Fort Leavenworth Combines Arms Research Library hosts a broad collection of research papers from graduates of the Master of Military Arts and Science program . The Foreign Military Studies Office’s work is also included in the collection .
Major Derek F Schin, USAF, is presenting the potential influence of a highly debated subject as the Ballistic Missile Defense relative to the geopolitical and strategic stability of Europe .
 The paper is evaluating Poland and Czech Republic, but in the end, the final locations to host 15 the BDM components were Poland and Romania . The paper also evaluated Poland and the Czech Republic .
 Research considerations are still valid and applicable to the Eastern Europe as a whole . BMD hosting nations in particular. However, the research considerations still valid .
 This defense project was seen as either a provocation or a response by the two sides . It will remain controversial and will remain a source for justifying future actions .
 The U.S. Department of Defense's research paper explores the Russian revival and the security implications imposed by this fact to Western military entities such as European Command and NATO . The research paper “Implications of a resurgent Russian Federation for United States European Command’
 These campaigns show the progress they made and at the same time will help the military community understand these new capabilities . The military community will help them understand the strong points and weaknesses as well .
 Russian forces are also interested in developing both conventional and nonconventional areas, as Information Warfare, Hybrid Warfare or Cyber Warfare . Russian forces want to reach the full potential of these methods .
 Russian doctrine is emphasizing as an integral part of the future operational environment . A great deal of progress has been made in Information Warfare .
 Currently, the Russians are 16 conducting an aggressive information warfare campaign against the West in particular and against any other considered threat in general .
 The Ulrik Franke report is entitled War by non-military means . It provides a general description of how Moscow is using this tool to influence designated targets .
 Hybrid warfare is another domain that will be analyzed throughout this work . Hybrid warfare will also be analyzed in the coming weeks .
 Used on a large scale recently in Ukraine and previously in other conflicts that involved Russian troops, this method became one of the most preferred tools of influencing and promoting its own interests .
 The work provides an in-depth description of Russian hybrid warfare historical employment between 1991 and 2014 . The work includes a detailed analysis of the Ukrainian hybrid conflict both on Crimea and Eastern border .
 The same topic is also dissected by the Center for Naval Analysis ’ study Russia’s “Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the United States Marine Corps .
 The authors define ‘ambiguous warfare’ starting with the analysis of the Gerasimov doctrine . They describe the way that Russian army is employing the doctrine into the recent conflicts on the Ukrainian territory .
 New Challenges 17 the study was addressed initially to the U.S. Marine Corps military . The insights provided by the analysis are useful to any military organization willing to learn about the challenges raised .
 The military is the main tool that Russian politicians can employ but it is not the only one . Russian politicians are able to use the military as a tool for their government .
 A project developed by two directors, Heather A Conley and Ruslan Stefanov . The thesis will delve into several works produced by this research center .
 The study provides meaningful information to this thesis about different political approaches supported by economic policies, especially in the energy domain, it says . The study also provides information about the Russian government's political policies .
 The New Cold War waged with other than military Means and Ways, to achieve the same Ends . The Cold War is being presented as a New War waged by the U.S.
 Before the breakout of Maidan events, he presented a new vision to conduct a combination of conventional and non-military operations to accomplish military objectives and achieve political success .
 The study introduces United States interests and policies into the equation . The study is a comprehensive approach to energy issues that EU is facing .
 Romania has its role in this energy calculation and it is driven by its energy status due to its available resources . As part of the EU puzzle, Romania is part of EU puzzle .
 In-depth analysis for this thesis continued with the exploration of other research center products . In- depth analysis for the thesis continued to look at other research centers .
Russian minorities in the former USSR states as a policy raison d’etre to create pressure and unrest throughout the target countries . This work is about the use of Russian minorities in former USSR countries as aPolicy raisond’tetre .
 The Russian Federation had to engage significant of effort using this influence mechanism . Russia's foreign affairs doctrine is predominantly defensive . Russia has to engage major effort to achieve this goal .
 Romania is not a former Soviet republic, nor is it a Russian-speaking nation, and not a nation with a Russian minority . Romania is a country with a minority of its own Russian minority.
 Romania is a country sensitive to the situation of its neighboring states . The former Soviet Republic of Moldova has a certain level of vulnerability to this type of influence .
 Stretching and Exploiting Thresholds for High-Order War is another book making a clear picture of how Russia, China, and Iran are eroding American influence using time-tested measures .
 The RAND Arroyo Center is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the United States Army . The center provides useful data to predict future challenges .
In the private sector there are interesting opinions of talented authors describing different aspects and effects of today's political decisions throughout the Euro-Asian area .
 Armand Gosu, a Romanian writer, is advocating the need to create a Romanian Eurasian Research Center . Gosu is one of the authors of the book, "Eurasian Research Centre"
 In his latest book Euro-Falia, he provides an interesting interpretation of the relations between Russia and its neighbors . He also provides a view of the Romanian role and positions adopted in several cases like Ukraine, Moldova or Syria .
 The New Cold War is a collection of Eastern European studies written under the pressure of the latest events that have marked a significant turnover in the world order .
 The quality and quantity of consulted literature for this work provides a wide range of expertise, from renowned research organizations, to worldwide-appreciated authors .
 There is a balanced representation of the sources originating from both Eastern and Western hemispheres, with documentation issued from public institutions or published by private entities or individuals .
 The research process will begin with the literature review in order to portray an accurate overview of the current situation instigated by the recent event and action conducted by the Russian Federation . After the iteration of the purpose of the thesis.
 The thesis will apply a combination of recent historical records research and pattern analysis based on the realities of the current strategical and operational environment .
Document analysis and notes review combined with latest news reports to portray the status of investigations . The main method employed during the thesis development is document analysis .
 The exploration technique will be the library research, based on an intensive analytic review of existing literature . The research will be based on a review of the existing literature.
 Content analysis and text interpretation will complement research results. Content analysis will complement the research results .
 The author will use cognitive mapping and limited data to identify existing patterns and to justify the validity of the overall analysis .
 The study will focus on the Russian political, economic and military importance on the international arena and on the Eastern European region . It will use multiple frameworks to complete the assessment .
 The DOTMLPF analytical tool will examine the current Russian military capabilities .
 The Ends-Ways21 Means correlation will be used to portray the Russian way of implementing its foreign affair policies .
 The thesis will focus on the evolution of the Russian security strategy up to 2015 . It will highlight the influences and the consequences inflicted to similar policies in Romania and some of the surrounding countries .
 The literature review established the validity and suitability of the sources used for this investigation . The review also found the validity of the source of the investigation .
 In the analysis chapters of the thesis, the author will outline the main events that have significantly changed the strategical environment in the last decade . The author will also outline the key events in the thesis .
 The methodology will analyze the Russian strategic goals and interests within the context of its desired sway in the world .
 The author will conduct a limited introspection of the contemporary, recent, post-Soviet Russian history . The path that created the emergence of this new discord labeled the New Cold War, closely tied with the rise of Vladimir Putin .
 The recent history will set the 22 background for today’s political, economic and military situation in the Russian society as a whole .
 The author will conduct a detailed examination on the military component utilizing DOTMLPF assessment to construct an accurate outlook on the existing Russian armed forces capabilities .
 The overall intention is to correctly describe the true Russian potential and how is the Russian leadership employing this potential to gain strategical advantages when engaging in political, economic or military disputes .
 The methodology will continue to explore the subject by transferring the analysis of the recent events and action that caused the tensions between the Russians and the West .
 The investigation will continue with similar analysis of the most important aspects of Russian National Security Strategy by focusing on its ends, ways, means and especially the risks involved .
 The author will combine the results of the research of governmental documents with different studies, projects and works published in the U.S. and Romania . To achieve this objective, the author will combined the results with different projects and projects .
 The study will be based on the Russian goals, the bold moves and its constant pressure on the NATO edge . Romania has to face a highly volatile security environment .
 The author will be the Russian exploitation of its instruments of national power over the Romanian society . How this pressure determines political and security decisions on short, mid or long term.
 This thesis will provide an overview of the Romanian-Russian diplomatic relations in the framework of the US, EU and NATO Romanian partnerships . It will also provide a look at the relationship between the two countries .
Economy was turned over in the last decades of the Russian transformation. Economy was turned into a Russian economy.
 A key weapon used in a ruthless energy war against different “opportunity targets, like ambiguous business partners or unsure proximity friends. From a major weakness incapable to provide the necessary resources to increase local productivity and better living standards, to a true weapon used.
 The author will concentrate on the Economic relations between the two countries . He will identify any vulnerabilities that could influence top level decisions .
 Information is one of the most important domain of any Russian security strategy, a mandatory milestone to achieve strategic objectives .
 Russian propaganda is a heritage of the famous Russian propaganda . The area is skillfully managed by different Russian institution and entities .
 Study will pinpoint the most common procedures used in Romania, detecting targets, the goals and the generated effects .
 Military is maybe the most powerful tool in the Russian political toolbox . Military is a powerful weapon in Russia, according to Russian media reports .
 Recently reorganized, this factor is successfully used to promote instability in many regions in the Russian proximity .
 The military really paid-off the 24 latest Russian investments, the military says . With a completely reshaped doctrine, it employs a mixture of conventional and non-conventional capabilities .
Without a direct physical presence in Romania, its shadow engenders uncertainty along the entire NATO Eastern flank . Without having a directphysical presence, its menacing shadow engender uncertainty along Romania's eastern flank .
 The thesis will end the analysis by drawing the conclusions, categorizing the information and extracting meaningful data .
 Russian influence on the Romanian national security strategy will be compared with similar lines of effort employed by the Russian organizations in the region .
 The study adds an important amount of knowledge and value to this topic . The objective analysis of several untranslated Romanian security documents, strategies, policies and research papers .
 In the future, various decision-makers can transform the results of this study into eloquent recommendation to be considered prior of different policies implementation .
 The year 2016 only produced several historical moments, true shifts from the international order . The year only, produced several historic moments .
After the 2016 U.S. Presidential elections, America seems to change its foreign policy from a global comprehensive approach to a mercantile, nationalistic attitude .
 The Brexit shook the E.U. political establishment and everybody is waiting for the economic wave of repercussions . The UK's economy has been hit hard by the EU's decision to leave the EU .
Turkey's political leadership survived the military coup and started a purge against its armed forces leadership . Turkey's political leaders survived the coup and began a purge of the armed forces .
 Turkey is conducting intensively offensive operations in Syria in cooperation with Russia . Turkey is trying to reinforce the presidential powers by changing the Constitution .
Every time the flavor is different, more interesting, less predictable, but always fascinating . History has a permanent repetitive tendency, but every time it's different, every time the flavors are different .
 There are many factors to initiate, influence and implement the change . But there are a few aspects that will never be obsolete when it comes to international order and change .
 The economics will always be an indicator, a factor, and a trigger for the challenging states to initiate disputes . The economics of the U.S. is an indicator of the state's economic strength .
 At the end of the day, all these aspects have an input in shaping the strategic environment, defined as the overall result of the competition, the cooperation, and the technologies and military equipment the world’s major players possess at a certain time .
 After the Cold War, the world transitioned from a bipolar power system to a unipolar one . The United States was the sole, unchallenged leader of the international order .
 The U.S. has been forced to adapt its political, economic and security approaches . This situation has created many challenges, forcing the United States to adapt .
 The 2007 trade and industry crises created an economic break in the Western society . The 2007 economic crises created a tactical break for emerging markets like Chinese, Brazilian or Turkish producers .
 Russia has significant reserves in its energy reserves . Russia is one of many nations with significant reserves like Russia to raise their revenues .
 In the same year, the United States would lose the Olympics Games to the Chinese . The U.S. will lose the Games to China in the year of 2012 .
 This event was a great propaganda opportunity, presented as the victory of the successful new communist society over the decadent Western civilization . The event was presented as an opportunity to promote the new Communist society .
 There are some other regional powers to complete the multipolar picture of the future . There are also other regional power powers.
 This portrait is characterized by the beginning of the second nuclear age, access to new military technologies, and a new dynamics of the military structure evolution . This portrait includes the start of the first nuclear age and access to the military .
After the Cold War, general opinion was that these capabilities were impossible to use . After the end of the Cold war, general opinions were that these abilities were impossible.
Since the assets became available to other nations besides the U.S., Russia or China, the risks considerably increased .
 It is the responsibility of the major players to align the foreign policy of those nations and contain their actions in order to preserve peace .
 Along with the nuclear arsenal, these countries developed many military capabilities once available only to the rich states, like drones, missile systems or cyber capacities .
 They have been constantly working to modernize and adapt their military structures, making them more robust, more proficient, and more convincing at the negotiation table . They also have been working toModernize, adapt and adapt the military structures .
 The future strategic environment will be molded by the major powers ability to lead and control their sphere of influence when mitigating worldwide historical events . The world will be shaped by the power of major powers.
 Romania started the long journey of Western reintegration after four decades of collectivism by reforming its internal structures . Romania is a new society driven by the rule of law and democracy .
 The E.U. and the U.S. are strategic partners with the most important contribution on Romanian internal and external policies .
 As a result, the country is very sensitive to their decisions and interactions with other major players . The country is also sensitive to its interactions with major players.
 Russian actions influence security strategies around the entire border area between East and West, threatening NATO security and EU stability . The Chinese are trying to control and restrict freedom of flight and navigation in South China Sea .
 Romanian decision-makers are interested not only on their partners decisions, but on the actions of other nations . In this context, the Romanian government is interested on other nations' actions .
 The revanchist Russia, the strategic and economic rise of China, is the constant threat of violent Jihadi movements and rogue states actions as Iran and North Korea make the uncertainty to expend to an intimidating level .
 Lack of rules on domains like the cyber sphere and outer space increase the overall complexity of the situation .
 The first one, the domination phase, began right after the end of the first Gulf War and lasted the entire mandate of President Bill Clinton . The first, the first, began in the early 1990s and lasted right after that .
 The second phase was violently initiated by the 9/11 attack and identified a new threat to the world leader, known as terrorism . The first phase was violent, and the second was violent .
 War on terror marked the U.S. evolution for more than a decade, setting the nation on a path of consecutive catastrophic successes .
 The U.S. Armed Forces created a myth of invincibility within the United States Armed Forces . This theory drove its attention away of the conventional approaches in combating a classical, near-peer military .
 For the U.S., the main objective was to maintain free and unimpeded access to Eurasian region . For the United States, the main goal was to keep free and unimpressive access .
 The emergence of a hegemon like China in this region, threatening the freedom of trading around South China Sea area, is at least alarming .
 The rebalance had important consequences in Europe, where the U.S. military presence in 2015 reduced to 65,000 soldiers . It was the lowest level since the end of Second World War .
 Maintaining this alliance is vital for the U.S. interests, but for the European unity as well .
 In July 2014, Congress allocated one billion dollars to European Reinsurance Initiative to reinforce NATO and U.S. presence in Eastern Europe .
 In the economy, the level of uncertainty is constantly growing, says the economist . In the past, the economy has been in the midst of a recession .
 Oil, gas, and renewable energy markets are facing extreme instability due to the ongoing changes in the strategic environment . Oil,gas, and energy markets face extreme instability.
 With a new administration in 2017, many of these uncertainties also originate from the questions raised by the newly elected President Donald Trump about the future policies on energy, production, and trade .
 EU Transformation The EU is not yet an actor state on the international stage . The EU has been called the EU's first ever actor state .
 All decisions are made by consensus between all member states . Each state sovereignty is a basic pillar in this design construct .
 This format requires a lot of time to coordinate collective concepts and actions . Most important, it requires many compromises regarding common definitions of interests, values and norms .
 The complexity of the European history, the cultural diversity within its borders, and the different stages of progress of the states, determined the politic and security domains to have a dawdling evolution comparing the economic one .
 The E.U. economy was hardly challenged during the recent economic crisis that hit North America and Europe in the last decade . Nevertheless, even the E. U.S. economy is hardly challenged.
 The decision did not create much enthusiasm among the member states . The decision to limit each member national deficit per year to three percent of the Gross Domestic Product did not created much enthusiasm .
 Brussels must increase coercion from Brussels to reinforce, sometimes, not very popular, but necessary policies. This moment demonstrated the necessity of a tougher approach and increase coercion, says David Cameron .
 Some states, like Greece, Portugal or Spain, protested and opposed initially the imposed measures . It is not a smooth process; some states like Greece and Portugal have protested .
 Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia are trying to coagulate interests by artificially created groups inside E.U. Other states are also trying to obtain a position of advantage in different negotiation processes .
 Great Britain, influenced by a strong current of populism, decided to leave the Union . Great Britain was influenced by the current current of populist politics .
 The E.U. wants to create a homogeneous entity with real, strong, coherent instruments of power . But it has to maintain the course of transformation.
 Diplomacy, Information and Military tools are required to leverage effectively the economic potential and to rely less on the transatlantic partnership . Economy is not enough; Diplomacy and Information is needed to leverage the potential of the region .
 The economic challenge showed the path to solve issues, according to the economic challenge . It was a combination of increase powers for the Union institutions and national compromises .
 The E.U. has to face complex, more diversified security dilemmas, and the transformation process is highly required in multiple domains . Today, the E. U.S. must face complex and more diversifying security challenges .
 Throughout the entire territory, especially in the West, the shadow of terrorism and radicalism expands day by day .
Future elections in the Netherlands, France and Germany have a special, if not crucial importance, after the British exit from the Union .
 More than ever, the E.U. must be united and act coherently in order to provide the security its citizens and its partners expect .
 The Global Security Strategy was adopted in June 2016 . The priorities of the European security policies and the common vision were laid out on the Global Security strategy .
 NATO is capable of delivering a military response when required to deter high risk situations . NATO is also capable to deliver a hard power component as well, according to the document .
 The E.U. adopted the Comprehensive Approach Policy to coordinate external actions . The emphasis was more on prevention and long-term commitment to crisis resolutions rather than immediate protection actions .
 If this transformation process continues unimpeded 24 U.S. Congress, Statement of General Philip Breedlove, 4.3, will be released .
 Chinese actions have an increase relevance for the entire world economic, trading and defense agenda . China Rising is far from the European arena, but China Rising has an increased relevance to the world economy .
 Romania’s security policies must be in accordance with the actions of its partners or its predicted threats . Romania's security policies should be in response to its partners' actions or threats .
 China’s behavior will have second and third order effects on all the other major players’ actions on the international stage . As they recently become more and more assertive, China's behavior had and will have a second andthird order effect on all of the others
 Romania was affected because China’s general attitude on trading and its actions on the international waters determined the U.S. to shift their attention from the European theater . The United States was affected by China's actions on international waters .
Once the West implemented the deterrence actions and economic sanctions against Russia, China tried to leverage this economic opportunity by trying to extend cooperation with Russia especially in the energy domain .
 China's support to North Korea influenced the development of the BDM system in Romania, as part of the precautionary measures taken against a presumed North Korean attack . Thirdly, China’s support to the North Korean regime influenced the hurried development of a BDM.
 China indirectly facilitated the Russian actions in Europe, primarily in Ukraine, but also in Moldova, the Baltics, Greece or even Hungary . By redirecting U.S. attention towards the Pacific, China indirectly helped Russia in Europe .
 Since the beginning of the century, China has been consolidating its economy . China has consistently consolidated its economy since the beginning.
 For many years, it was the perfect business partner for every nation willing to trade . It was the best business partners for many years .
 China has a great advantage over other competitors on the markets, the high rate of productivity, which factor determined many companies to invest intensively . Cheap labor and available resources provided China with a greatadvantage over others on the market .
 Chinese economy grew constantly allowing leaders from Beijing to expand their sphere of influence economically and militarily, raising legally unacceptable claims in South China Sea area . As a result, the Chinese economy grows constantly allowing the leaders from China to expansion their sphere.
 Chinese authorities started an ideological competition with the West in 2008 . They started to promote on the government-controlled media, recent or historical events about possible victimization and humiliation of the Chinese people .
 China declared unilaterally Air Defense Identification Zone in the East China Sea without considering any of the heavily involved nations in the Asia-Pacific trading activities . The zone was declared in November 2013 .
 China continued to build up its artificial islands in order to impede freedom of flight or navigation on international airspace or waters . The U.S., Japan, Korea, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia or the Philippines were among those protesting .
 The U.S. is rebalancing its resources and policies from Europe to Asia, along with Chinese government efforts to modernize its military forces . This was one of the reasons to determine the United States.
 China's relations with Romania became significant for the West and for Romania as well . Russia's economic containment decreased since the Russian economic containment increased .
 The two countries decided to abstain from the United Nations resolution regarding the Libyan 28 ORourke, 1-2 . The first signs of this friendship were visible when the two countries abstain .
 Both have voted against a resolution for a military intervention in Syria . Since then, both have constantly voted against the resolution .
 China is playing the friendship card, trying to benefit as much as possible . That means China is trying to help as muchAs possible .
 It will include not only relatively cheap energy but also some concessions about border issues . It will also include some concessions on border issues and other concessions .
 Ian Bremmer stated in his article New Cold War on Business that Moscow is burning bridges with the West and building pipelines with China . He said Moscow is building pipelines and building bridges with West and China .
 The U.S. and the West have recently agreed on a $400 billion contract to support a new gas deal . They have a long common border and some common goals . Both are facing United States containment strategies .
 China received an invitation to invest in the Siberian Vankor project . The project is part of a project to build a new bank in the region .
 Approximately six million people on the Russian side and roughly 40 million on the Chinese side . However, along that border are living about six million on that side .
 It is difficult for the Chinese to accept a border drawn by Russia in the early 1800s on some territories that once belonged to the Chinese emperors .
 The Journal of Slavic Military Studies is published in Russia . It is the first of its kind .
 The project was finished in May 2016 . The Russian government said it was a direct threat to Russia .
 The evolution, or devolution, of relationship between China and U.S., China and Russia will continue to have a crucial impact over the economies and the security environment of smaller countries, like Romania .
 The Caucasus region struggles and Middle East convulsions have a specific relevance for Romanian decision makers . Russian Involvement in Recent Events and Their Lessons include the Western and Eastern major players interacting on the international strategic arena .
 Georgia was not offered a Membership Action Plan at the NATO summit in April 2008 . Georgia received solid promises from the U.S. 36 Victor Cosmei and Raluca Pantazi .
 Russia started the five-day war against the small Caucasus country . The move surprised not only Georgian society, but the Western powers as well .
 Russian unspotted recovery revealed to the entire world . It was the moment that Russian un Spotted recovery was revealed .
After the conflict, the Russians recognized the separatist provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . They tried to persuade their partners from Shanghai Cooperation Organization or Collective Security Treaty Organization to do the same .
Only Nauru, Nicaragua, and Venezuela decided to recognize the self-proclaimed independence . Only Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Nicaragua, were unsuccessful .
After the conflict, the United States and international community decided to help the Georgian government to rebuild the economic infrastructure and the military through economic commitments . The United States contributed with 1 billion dollars, the U.S. contributing with 1billion dollars .
 The Obama Administration announced a US-Russia reset of political relations that discouraged the Georgian authorities . The West did not have a comprehensive answer, the Obama Administration said .
 In January 2011, when the Georgian conflict implications were far from resolved, the world confronted another crisis, the Syrian protests . In January 2013, the Russian-Georgian conflict in Syria was the focus of the crisis .
 The riots started as a movement against the Allawi regime of Bashar Al-Assad . The riots turned into a civil war due to the authorities’ violent response and other external aspects .
 Syria is facing some critical fault lines run across the country . At the intersection of profound political and strategic trends that extend across the Middle East, Syria faces fault lines .
 First, there is a collapse of the social balance between the government and the society . The social balance is perceived to be the oppressor or the society.
 Syria is a victim of the intensified clashes over regional dominance between Iran and its neighboring Arab states, primarily Saudi Arabia . Syria is the victim of an intensified conflict with Iran .
 The increasing Sunni-Shia rivalry, mainly felt in Iraq and Lebanon, is beginning to mark Syria as well . Thirdly, the increasing Suni rivalry, is also felt in Lebanon and Iraq .
 Fourthly, there is a continuous rise of political Islamism throughout the region and repercussions are spreading . There is also a continued rise of Islamism across the region .
 The balance between ethnic groups within the multiethnic Levantine societies tends to find a position of equilibrium . The balance of ethnic groups in the Levantine society tends to be balanced .
Major players considered Syria an opportunity to implement their own vision for the country . Also considered Syria a chance to implement its own vision .
 Russia decided to support the regime in power to maintain its influence on the Syrian policies . Russia decided not to back the regime to maintain influence on Syria's policies .
This will allow its troops to maintain their location on Tartus Russian base, obtained 45 years ago . This will allow it to maintain its location on the Russian base .
 The Latakia province plans to open a second base in Jablah, the southern part of the province . They also intend to open another base to increase operations .
 Five Russian ships crossed the Bosporus strait between 20 of August and 7 of September 2015, filled with military equipment from the 27th Motorized Brigade Novorossiisk .
 Russian government deployed S-400 surface-to-air cruise missiles at Khmeimim base . At least five navy ships, 5000 soldiers, special forces and paratroops from the 7th Mountain Division .
 In October 2015, the offensive operations against the rebels’ forces were successful and the communication with Aleppo city was reestablished . The communication with the city was also reestablished in October 2015 .
 Turkey got involved in the civil war because of the security threats raised by the chaotic migration waves and the Kurdish population actions . Besides the antagonist U.S. and Russian interest, Turkey also got involved because of security threats .
Assad's regime is facing an impossible situation to regain its national unity, says the writer . This aspect led to the impossible situation, at least on short and midterm, he says .
 In March 2016, Russian troops announced withdrawal from Syria . In December 2016, the Russians led the peace negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan .
 To be successful, the diplomatic solution must engage and reconcile and reconcile the views of players at global, regional and local . 43 Armand Gosu, Euro-Falia, , 254266. 41 levels .
 Syria was the Russian greatest alibi in front of the entire world . For that reason, Syria is the Russian great alibi .
 Russian leadership allowed Russian leadership to show its force projection capacity and advertise its recently modernized military forces .
 It demonstrated Russian political ability to play important roles as a world power, and not just a regional one . It demonstrated Russia's political ability. It demonstrated that it was not just one regional one.
 Ukraine's illegal actions drew international attention from its illegal actions in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has been accused of a series of crimes against civilians .
 Russia started a regional crisis in March 2014 when it decided to annex the territory of a sovereign neighbor . Russia has been involved in a series of regional crises since March 2014 .
 In November 2013, the riots in Kiev degenerated into violent clashes and the authorities lost control of the situation .
 There were shootings and the victims began to fill the local hospitals . There were also shootings and victims were killed .
 Viktor Yanukovych, the Ukrainian president at the time, fled the country and found refuge in Moscow . Yanukovych was the president of Ukraine when he was president .
 The country demands a proWestern government, economic reforms, and anti-corruption measures . The country demanded a pro-Western government and economic reforms .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of interfering in Ukraine's borders . Foreign politics analysts differ on the reasons for Putin's actions in Ukraine .
 One specialist says it was about the Russian defense system that could have jeopardized the Sevastopol Navy Base existence by a Ukrainian alliance with the West .
 Others consider the historical significance of Crimean peninsula to the Russian people .
 Few believe the reaction was just an improvisation of Putin as a response to an unpredictable change of government in Kiev .
 All of the explanations are right because each of them contain little pieces of truth, according to analysis .
 NATO’s several rounds of expansion brought it closer and closer to the Russian border, producing adversarial reactions from Kremlin .
 The West justified it by explaining the internal desire of each of the new member to join the collective defense system . But the Russians perceived it as an encirclement .
 Crimea offered Russia a great strategic position at the Black Sea and an ideal operational bridgehead . Once annexed, Crimea offers Russia a good strategic position.
 The ethnic Russians living in Ukraine were another good tool to use in conjunction with intense propaganda, creating a perfect cover for the separatists movements .
 The historical Russian heritage of Ukraine in general and Crimea in particular was an important piece of the puzzle . The historical Ukrainian heritage of the Crimea was a key part of the Ukrainian history .
 Crimea is the historic soul of Russia. There were countless occasions to stress that Crimea is Russia's historic soul .
 There is also an aspect regarding President Putin’s strong personality, which added some complexity to this event .
 As a Deputy Mayor of Saint Petersburg, he held a speech about the situation of more than 25 million Russian outside the borders . He stressed the necessity to protect them .
 In 2008, he warned the West about the consequences that a pro-Westem orientation of Ukraine will induce to its own and regional stability .
 Over the years, Timothy L Thomas, 45, was Russian Military Strategy. He was also known for his personal adversity for 45 years . He is now the president of Russia's Military Strategy .
 There were also economic reasons encountered by the Kremlin decision-makers when they orchestrated the annexation .
 Eastern Ukraine lure coal resources, shale oil, and defense industry factories . Eastern Ukraine is trying to destabilize and weaken the country in combination with energy prices .
 From March 2014 to March 2015, the separatists backed by Russia maintained an aggressive offensive against the Ukrainian Armed Forces . A cease fire occurred up to August 2015 . The separatists were backed by Russian forces .
 The situation was seen by many as a tactical break for separatists to get logistical reinforcement . Kremlin requests for banning nationalist political parties, changing the constitution to approve the Russian language as second official one were unacceptable .
Since September 2015 Russia increased its participation in Syria and somehow, Ukraine became a stalemate . The situation is similar to that of other frozen conflicts stage-managed by Moscow .
 The crisis influenced all the new Eastern European NATO members, especially the Baltics and Poland, accompanied by Romania . This crisis influenced the new NATO members.
 Russian Reemergence Financed by Oil Prices Russian rejuvenation was not easy . Russian rejuvenated by oil prices was noteasy .
 Gerard-Francois Dumont writes about negative demographic trends as the most significant problem . Dumont says Russia is struggling to regain its super-power status .
 Many argue that decreasing democracy is the main issue, along with reinventing the Russian economy . Many do argue against that statement, saying instead that decreasingdemocracy is the key issue .
 Oliver Crone is very appreciative about internal military reforms and restructuring . Emil Pain appears worried about the increased discourse favoring nationalism and imperialism in contemporary Russia .
 Regionally, besides amplifying energy policies, maintaining territorial disputes among former Soviet states is an important goal, as well . Maintaining territorial disputes in the former Soviet States is a key goal .
Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova and Ukraine are the main arguments to respond to Western expansion . Ukraine, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan are among the countries that are fighting for self-determination .
 United States Army War College, Project 1704, Analysis of Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe, an appropriate U.S. Response, and the implications of United States Landpower .
 In conclusion, what started as a huge promise, ended as a disappointment and a threat to the world’s peace . The world's peace was a threat, according to the UN .
 Sometime along the way, Russia became unpredictable and partially uncontrollable . Russia has become unpredictable and uncontrollable in recent years .
 Recent Russian History as Written by Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin. The 1990s brought tremendous changes in world’s political relationships .
 The United States was unchallenged after the Soviet collapse . Europe celebrated its reunification, and started to consider the costs to achieve it .
 It was left in bankruptcy, facing the wave of capitalism spreading over the nation . It was also struggling in disputes with its neighbors .
 When Boris Yeltsin came to power in 1991 after defeating an attempted coup, the situation was extreme . The situation wasextreme when Boris Yeltin came into power .
 He tried to deal with the new security challenges by creating the Commonwealth of Independent States . He cut deals with Ukraine for basing the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea and with Kazakhstan for the use of Baikonur Cosmodrome .
Economically, he had to manage painful reforms such as the privatization process of more than 120,000 state firms and the increasing rate of imports . Economically, it was a difficult task for him to manage .
 In 1998, the Russian economy hit the bottom; the GDP in that year was 45 percent smaller than in 1989 . The GDP in 1998 was 45% smaller than the same year in 1989.
 Vladimir Putin was appointed as prime minister to coordinate the second Chechnya conflict . In December 1999, Yeltsin resigned, setting Putin up to be his successor in leading a Russian Federation that was still trying to find its rooting .
 The ambiguous Russian situation lasted until the summer of 2000 when Prime Minister Vladimir Putin became president .
Based on previous reforms and rising prices of energy, he reinforced the economy and strengthened the middle class . Based on the previous reforms, he strengthened themiddle class .
 From 2003, he abandoned liberal economic rules and started to control production through the oligarchs and former intelligence services officers . From 2003 he abandonedliberal economic rules .
 Thereafter, he commenced a radical process to reorganize and modernize the conventional armed forces . Thereafter he commenced the radical process.
 In August 2008, he “conventionally’s crushed the Georgian armed forces in five days, he said .
 Vladimir Putin made a step back from the political stage and again became the prime minister . Then, prevented by the Russian Constitution from serving a third term as president, he became the PM .
 Dmitry Medvedev was appointed as his successor for presidency in the next four years . But everybody knew who the true master of the Kremlin was, he said .
 Once the White House welcomed a new administration in 2009, the circumstances seemed to favor Vladimir Putin .
 President Barrack Obama initiated the political restart of US-Russia relationships . Good signs appeared in the past .
 Russia signed a new arms control treaty, then assisted U.S. operations in Afghanistan and closely cooperated with the United States on Iranian and Libyan issues in 2011 . Russia also cooperated on Iranian, Libyan issues.
 Russia even gained access to the World Trade Organization in August 2012, five months after Vladimir Putin’s re-election .
 The honeymoon suddenly ended in February 2014 because of the aggression against Ukraine . Nevertheless, the honeymoon was still on .
 Putin astonished the world when he suddenly annexed Crimea and started a hybrid war in the Eastern part of the country, breaking the 1996 Budapest Agreement .
 Relations only worsened when the Malaysian Air flight 17 was shot down over Ukraine . The Kremlin refused to accept the international investigation results and assume responsibility .
 The international community inflicted severe economic sanctions on Russia . There were no tangible results from the sanctions .
 Russia searched for new trading partners such as China, India, Brazil or South Africa . Russia continued to challenge the West on Syrian territory .
 In August 2015, Russia started to increase its military efforts in Syria . In October, Russia launched an intensive offensive against the rebels .
 In November 2015, a Turkish F16 fighter shot down a Russian bomber, ratcheting up tensions between the two nations . One month later, aTurkish F16 shot down an Russian bomber .
 Putin supported President Recep Tayip Erdogan during the failed coup of the Turkish Army in the summer of 2016 . Then, Vladimir Putin supported Erdogan during a failed coup.
 The two autocrat leaders shook hands again, and continued cooperative operations in Syria . The Syrian government and the opposition have been working together for years .
 In March 2016, Russian troops began to withdraw partially from Syria . In December 2016, Russia led the peace negotiations between the Assad regime and the rebels .
 There are many controversies related to the latest Russian transformation . There is one aspect everybody agrees with the decisive role of President Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin in creating and pursuing a New Russia .
 The Russian president's notoriety was equally created by his determined actions and by the Western leaders’ cautious, sometimes timid reactions .
 The media had various nuances to this general perception, with Russian media praising Putin unconditionally and the Western press declaring its fascination for an unconventional leadership style .
 Forbes magazine considered Putin the most powerful man on the planet four consecutive years, from 2013 until 2016 . Putin was considered the world's most powerful person by Forbes magazine .
 The first son of the nation, a great politician, and self-declared great specialist in everything . He is also a great champion of the world, and a great campaigner .
 He is a true champion, a Judo black belt, a good hockey player, and a good car-racing driver . He is also a practiced horse rider .
 President Barack Obama has made great efforts to maintain his image as an omnipotent head of nation . Obama has been known to be a powerful leader to gain his people's admiration and intimidate his adversaries .
 He uses media as the main tool of propaganda, having no deontological rule between facts and inventions, when presenting stories .
 He is a man of traditions, who values Russian culture, customs, and history . He is the father of Russian children .
 He deeply believes in the Russian greatness as enduring and he will do anything to bring back the glorious days of the past . He will not be able to leave the country for the next few years .
 The Russian people are proud of their rich heritage, says the author . He thinks highly of the late Soviet Union and retells his own modified version of the story to them .
 He has his own concerns about conspiracies, internal and external . He sees “colored revolution’s all around his borders, he says .
 This very important aspect greatly influenced his decisions and his autocratic leadership style, based on high pressure on people around him or on other nations’ leaders .
 Vladimir Putin is a man of surprises, mostly unpleasant for his neighbors and the rest of the world . Putin is also unpleasant for its neighbors and its neighbors .
 A pragmatist and opportunist, he acts rapidly and decisively, sometimes giving the impression he values more the shock than the long weighted decisions . He acts quickly and decisively.
 As a State Security Committee officer he witnessed from the Dresden KGB building, he witnessed the fall of the USSR empire .
 The Russians want to consolidate the old Russian Empire territories, to control their neighbors . They want to obtain universal recognition as a world superpower .
 Czar Peter moved the capital city from Moscow to Saint Petersburg and for the following two centuries, Russia integrated into the European norms and values for better or for worse .
 In 1917, Moscow and Russia dramatically separated from its Europe orientation . The capital moved back to Moscow in 1917 .
 Russia silently and ominously follows its internal and external private agenda . Most of the time those efforts were in vain because Russia silently follows its own agenda .
 The Kremlin is interested in preserving a system that has been described as authoritative capitalism . The Kremlin wants to preserve a system of governance combining liberal economic features with influences of the centralized control .
 The Russian leadership understands the importance of its population support, as a critical condition to maintain power . It praises patriotism to counterbalance the effect of the recently imposed economic sanctions .
 Russia pursues extended boundaries in accordance with traditional perception of its earned spheres of influence . Ukraine, Moldova, the Baltics and the Caucasus region in Russia's mission to provide protection for Russian people .
 It looks for permissive buffer areas along Eastern Europe or Middle East and expanded influence within the Eurasian Economic Community to ensure major player status . It also looks forpermissive buffer area along Eastern European and Middle East .
 Russian security strategies evolved during the recent years. Following these objectives, Russia's security strategies have evolved .
 The Russian National Security Strategy adopted in December 2015 clearly contests the Post-Cold War unipolar international status quo .
 A solid basis has been created at this time for further increasing the Russian Federation's economic, political, military, and spiritual potentials . The Russian Federation is a polycentric world .
 Russia positively weights its economy, considering it capable to overcome recessions and sanctions applied by adversarial governments . Russia is also considered capable of overcoming recessions, sanctions and other challenges .
 Russia's economy has demonstrated the ability to maintain and strengthen its potential in conditions of world economic instability . The Russian Federation has applied the restrictive economic measures against the Russian Federation .
 The Russian Federation's implementation of an independent foreign and domestic policy is giving rise to opposition from the United States and its allies . The U.S. is seeking to retain their dominance in world affairs .
 The buildup of the military potential of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the endowment of it with global functions pursued in violation of the norms of international law . The location of its military infrastructure closer to Russian borders is creating a threat to national security, the author says .
 2015 Russian Security Strategy continued the pattern established by the previous governmental security documentation and generated the latest aggressive actions of the Russian Federation . This new expansionist model raised numerous worries and challenges worldwide .
 General Breedlove is the highest military representative of the West . In 2015, he presented the United States Forces Posture Statement to the House Armed Services Committee .
 Russian assertive attitude is one of the main threats in the European theater, according to report . Foreign fighters concealed by the refugees’ waves coming from Middle East and transnational threat from Africa .
 It built up an Anti Access Area Denial zone by deploying Iskander M missiles in the enclave province of Kaliningrad, Crimea and Syria .
 It resumed a provocative posture by intercepting United States aircraft or shadowing U.S. vessels in international waters .
 It also arrayed numerous armed forces along the Western border and organizing ostentatious offensive operations such as ZAP AD 2013 or LAGODA 2016 exercises . It alsoarrayed many armed forces.
 Russia’s political system always lived and developed under the constant fear of an invasion from one of the neighbors . The West seen as the permanent aggressor .
 The Vikings in the tenth century, the Mongols on 1223 and 1236, the Swedish in 1707, the French in 1812 and the Germans in 1941 . All these superpowers at the time wanted to subdue the Russian national will of self-determination and extract its valuable
 The demographic structure is a heterogeneous combination of more than one hundred nationalities . The demographic structures are a heterogenous combination of over one hundred nations .
 The most important minorities along with the Russian 77 percent are Tatars 3. percent, Ukrainians 1. percent . Chechens 1.% and Mongols 1.1% are less than 1.percent .
 The Russian leadership always praised the nationalist and patriotic feelings, sometime manipulating history to ensure the popular support . To gain this population trust, the Russian leadership often praised the nationalists .
 The Kremlin had run the country with an autocratic style, called imperialism, dictatorship, communism, or autocratic democracy . In addition, from the old Czars to contemporary presidents, the Kremlin was the citadel inside the city .
 The Russian Constitution is a blend of the most important Western fundamental laws, such as the US, the German or French .
 Some of the most interesting features of the presidential administration competence are the assignment of the prime minister and the ministers . The ability to dissolve the legislature, calling for new elections, if necessary, is one of the interesting features .
 The legislature is comprised of two chambers, the State Duma lower chamber and the Federation Council, upper chamber . The Federation Council is the upper chamber, the lower chamber, and the lower chambers .
 One senator will be appointed by the governor and one by the regional legislature . They are not elected, therefore one will be elected by the governors .
 The legislature faces many obstacles if trying to admonish the government with a non-confidence veto . In contrast with the presidential institution, the legislature face many obstacles .
 The government depends more on the president rather than the legislature . The president is more important than the parliament .
 The Supreme Arbitration Court addresses mostly economic arguments, and the Supreme Court as the 92 Nichols . The judicial branch contains the Constitutional Court ruling over disputes between government branches .
 The system is probably the most unreformed component of the Russian state, with many provisions originating from the Soviet era . Many attempts to control different law courts have been made .
 President Putin himself had an initiative to merge the Supreme Court with the Supreme Arbitration Court . President Putin is seen as the most independent one in the world .
 The overall political atmosphere is not encouraging for democracy, at least not for the liberal one, as the West knows and promotes it .
 Vladimir Putin’s leadership is decisively influencing the political arena since 1999 . Since 1999, Vladimir Putin's leadership has been decisively influencing political arena .
 In the first two terms, his internal main objective was to consolidate the centralized control and settle an autocratic political environment . In the second two terms he was trying to settle a political environment.
 He launched his campaign in 2000 exploiting his management contribution in the second war in Chechnya . Then he started to control the Russian economy by dominating the oligarchs .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky was an oligarch condemned for economic offenses in 2005 and freed in 2013 . Most famous was the Russian oligarch's case, which he was convicted of economic offenses .
 Putin gained the power to name governors, instead of being elected, in 2006 . In 2006, he passed a law to ban the 96 independent deputies .
 Media was severely restricted and independent stations were constrained . Simultaneously, the media was severely limited .
 Vladimir Putin was confident enough to appoint Dmitry Medvedev as his replacement for presidency in 2008 . Putin was also confident to step down into the prime minister position again for four years . The Constitution limited the president to two consecutive terms in office .
 A second election was preceded by several protests and President Medvedev made some minor political concessions . The second elections were preceded by a second election.
 In the 2012 presidential elections, Vladimir Putin won the elections with 63. percent of the 71. million votes, but the protests did not stop until they were violently repressed .
 He immediately initiated internal legislative and economic reforms, increased defense expenditures, and requested a new foreign affairs policy . He also initiated internal reforms and increased defense spending .
 The trial of an already deceased Sergey Magnitsky or the multi-year sentence meted out to the activist group Pussy Riot for singing anti-Putin songs in a church .
 Putin's internal support increased despite the internal political and economic situation . Since 2014, foreign policy became the center of Russian society’s attention .
 Economics Russian recent history and political developments decisively influenced the Russian economy’s evolution in the last decades .
 After the end of the Cold War, Russia became an important international partner, especially for large consumers with a voracious appetite .
 A further analysis must examine the lessons of the recent developments, the characteristics of the Russian economy .
 Russia expanded economic ties with the EU in the 1990s and early 2000s . The EU became more and more dependent on Russian energy and its financial resources .
 In return, the Kremlin gained increased political influence over Europe .
 The EU alone imported 11. billion barrels of oil and 14. trillion cubic feet of gas per day in 2009 . As an example, the EU alone exported 11.billion barrels ofOil and 14 billion cubic feet.
In the last ten years, the Russian global trade grew from $210 million in 2003 to $730 million in 2014 . In the last decade, the world's global trade growth has grown from $ 210 million to $7 million .
 At the end of 2012, Russia’s GDP was $2,015 trillion, the sixth largest economy in the world . Russia is the world's largest economy .
 At the end of 2013, the war in Ukraine broke out and since May 2014, Russia has dealt with drastic economic sanctions imposed by the West .
 The Ruble began a depreciation process and the index of the Russian markets reduced . The Russian national currency, the Ruble, began a devaluation process .
 President Putin and his inner circle of political leaders are firmly controlling an economy predominantly based on oil, natural gas and other commodities . Oil and natural gas industries play a crucial role on the international oil andnatural gas industries .
 Institutionalized corruption and patronage are ravaging the economic environment . The system is allowing the system to control the decisions, the policies and the profits .
 Russian leaders possess a psychological advantage when negotiating economic and political aspects at strategic levels . Russian leaders are heavily dependent on those resources, especially with European partners .
 Russia is counting on financial revenues to diversify its economic investments and finance its social, military or political projects . This reliance is dual by its nature, because Russia is also counting on the financial revenues of this exchange .
 The oil and gas industry represents 16 percent of Russian GDP, 53 percent of overall federal budget and 70 percent of the Russian exports . The oil industry represents 12 percent of Russia's GDP and 53 percent the federal budget .
 In 2011, EU paid for 53 percent of Russian energy production, CIS for 30 percent . 17 percent went to Asia or other non-EU countries, like Turkey .
 CIS nations’ late payments or their significantly diminished prices more often granted from political reasons rather than economic reasons . The European customer role seems to be substantial, according to the author .
 The future of the Russian economy is difficult to predict, since it depends greatly on the political decisions, although a certain degree of interdependence exists . To conclude, the future of Russia is hard to predict.
 The energy sector will remain the major driver of the economy . The Russian decision makers will continue to expand their distribution network and control other neighboring countries .
 Gazprom, the most important firm that controls the Russian energy commerce, owns the majority of the Russian distribution network . Gazprom owns the most major Russian energy network .
 Russia has in place the North Stream project, a straight pipeline from Russia to Germany . Russia has also been in place for the project .
 The project would connect Europe with Azerbaijan and Caspian Sea area . The EU blocked this initiative and looked for alternative solutions like the Southern Corridor .
 From 7 percent of its exports on these destinations in 2010, Russia is planning to extend to 20 percent by 2030 . Russia plans to extend its exports to these destinations by 2030.
 The projects look promising on paper, but not in the short term. While these projects can bring breath life back in to the Russian economy, they can bring life back to the country .
 The future world-order design and strategic contexts depend on the future, they say . They say .
 Russia must confront the steep realities of today’s constraints and sanctions imposed by the Western powers as a response to Russian political actions .
 Oil prices dropped substantially in December 2014, from an average of $110 per barrel to $60 per barrel . The average price of oil was $110 a barrel .
 Russian's must diversify their investment fronts and areas, looking for alternative domains . In these conditions, the Russian’s must diversified their investment front and areas .
 Russia can continue to be a cheap oil and gas producer . But even in this case, some investments are required .
 The Arctic zone is also strategically important for Russia and its recent militarization actions in the area highlights its interest to secure future resources and influence . Russia's recent military action in the Arctic zone highlights its desire to securefuture resources .
 Russia has other concerns to deal with, such as currency depreciation, capital flows, or funding the development of the new annexed territory of Crimea .
 The weak Ruble is creating animosities among Russian executives because it becomes expensive to service the foreign debt . The Ruble has created animosity among the Russian executives .
 Russia has a moderate national debt, but corporate debt is nearly ten times higher . Russia has the highest corporate debt in the world .
 At the same time, it changes the balance between imports and exports since the imports become more expensive .
 Another major problem is stopping the capital flowing from Russian markets . The capital is flowing from Russia's markets .
 In 2014, estimates showed an amount of more than $100 billion flow, $120 billion in 2015, $75 billion in 2016 and $55 billion in 2017 . In 2016, estimates show a total of $55billion in 2017.
 Russia’s strategy, Tactics, and Influence in the former Soviet Union,’ CNA Analysis and solutions: 13.
 The newly annexed Crimean territory needed financial aid from the federal budget . Additionally, the newly annexed territory needed money from the government .
 Russia was planning to spend $2. billion in 2015 and $13. billion by 2020, a statement says . The plan is a very ambitious plan for the Russian economy .
 separatists regions of Donetsk and Lugansk need the Kremlin financial attention as well . The signs are not very encouraging .
 Military Factors at the end of the Cold War, the USSR and the Warsaw Pact collapsed . The USSR and Warsaw Pact fell apart .
 The main cause of the crash was not military action, but rather economics . The crash was caused by economics, rather than military action .
 Russia faced tremendous challenges trying to reform the Red Army . The Red Army is perhaps the most impressive demilitarization process of a nation in the world history .
 Russia reduced its forces to 1 million in 1994, and allocated only $14 billion in 1994 . From 5 million personnel in 1988, Russia had 5 million troops in the Army .
 During the presidency of Boris Yeltsin, the military suffered the most . The military suffered most during the president's presidency .
 Funding was insufficient, barely covering the social expenses of the underpaid personnel, let alone maintenance, training, and equipment costs .
 In the 1990s, Russia was involved in minor conflicts in Moldova and Tajikistan . In 1994 in the first Chechen War, it had to scrape to find 65,000 soldiers to carry out that operation .
 When the Kursk submarine tragedy happened in 2000, the captain’s monthly salary was $200 .
 The new army was created by the president of the United States in 2009 . The army was formed from the U.S. Army of the Army, which is now the largest military force in the world .
 Russia relies on its nuclear arsenal to maintain its status as a world superpower . Its armed forces, primarily the land forces, ensure its regional supremacy . Today, the Russian military relies on the nuclear arsenal.
 It is necessary to apply the DOTMLPF evaluation framework to conduct an in-depth investigation of the Russian military complex system . It is needed to describe the current military power capacity and the status of the reorganization and modernization process .
 He believed the world nations would listen twice to Russian arguments only with reinforced Military and Informational tools, to promote the desired security environment .
 Vladimir Putin approved his first strategic security document in 2000, the National Defense Strategy . The document was published in 2000 .
 The Ministry of Defense leadership became civilian and the General Staff became subordinate .
 A lack of an adequate doctrine for waging small wars partially led to Russian failures in Afghanistan and the first Chechen war . A traditional lack of a doctrine for small wars led to Russia's failure in Afghanistan .
 Russian engagements set the limits of Russian engagements, no more than two local or regional conflicts and one peacekeeping mission, simultaneous .
 Russia updated its National Defense Strategy with a new document adopted in December 2014 . The strategic shift of the U.S. towards Pacific and other political trends throughout Europe and the world .
 The new National Defense Strategy defined the future battle, extended the hybrid approach . It included the popular movements and protests as a tool of the warfare and highlighted threats Russia is facing .
 In the Russian interpretation, war in the future will be a combination of military assets with political, economic and informational means . The use of new weapon systems, high technology devices heavily relying on robotics and electronic warfare.
 To achieve success, the enemy should be decisively engaged throughout its entire defense depth . The enemy should use lethal and non-lethal capabilities to achieve success .
 Russia is communicating publicly threats perceived to jeopardize its internal balance and external interests . Russia is also communicating publicly the threats perceived as to jeopardizing its internal balances and External interests .
 The doctrine presents the causality link between the reemergence of frozen conflicts from the proximity of the Russian borders to the NATO expansion process .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine encapsulated this approach to warfare, and will be discussed later in the Leadership section . The “Gerasimov doctrine’s” approach to war will also be discussed .
 Russia maintains a significant amount of conventional armed forces with a significant reserve force . The military relies mainly on the strategical capacity of the nuclear weapons to deter future conflicts .
 The Five Day War with Georgia ended, the Russian military leadership started to analyze the operations and emphasized lessons learned from the conflict .
 The Russian Federation Armed Forces and Priorities for its Creation for the period of 20092020. By October 2008, they already had launched a program called “The Future Outlook of the Russian Federation armed forces’s Future Outlook.’
Large divisions partially filled with permanent personnel and partially at the mobilization, with smaller but completely staffed brigades . They tried to connect the operational combat readiness with the organizational structure of the army .
 In 2017, the Red Army downsized from six to four military districts, West, South, East and Central . The Red Army is now in four districts, including the West and South .
 The Western district is the most important in the Russian defense vision . It benefits of the best equipment and personnel and encompasses the majority of the air force assets .
 The Southern district forces do not have the same status quo as the Western ones but they lead the Ukrainian operations . They maintain a high state of readiness to meet potential threats from separatists, Islamic extremists in the North Caucasus, the energy rich Caspian basin and the vitally important Black Sea
 The Eastern district covers wide areas from the oriental side of Russia . Central district acts as a strategic reserve, more or less . The Central district protects Russia from a presumed Chinese aggression .
 Russia has limited flexibility in massing its forces against a certain threat, without leaving gaps in the defense system . In this array of forces, Russia haslimited flexibility inmassing its troops against a threat .
 At the same time, this huge geography causes various sustainment support challenges when conducting operations . The geography of the world is a huge problem for operations .
 Special Forces and Airborne forces will be augmented with up to three brigades of conventional forces . These forces will consist of Special Forces, Airborne and Special Forces .
 The Russian reorganization process addressed the forces and the command structures as well . The Russian military structure was also addressed by the government .
 Since 1 August 2015, the Russian Armed Forces have a new branch called the Aerospace Forces . Many analysts consider this new entity to be the fifth, unnamed, military district .
Built similarly to the North American Aerospace Defense Command, this center consists of a network of radars capable to provide early warning in case of any ground or space missile attacks . The center is a reaction to the United States Global Strike concept .
 The Russian defense forces now consists of three other branches, the Ground Forces, the Navy and the Strategic Rocket Force . The Russian Defense forces now consist of three different branches, including the Navy .
Training process is very important if not crucial, says Russian military leaders . Training process is crucial for Russia's military leaders.
Military strategy consists of preparing, planning, and achieving political and military goals through the employment of forces and resources . From a Russian perspective, military strategy, as the highest level of operational art, consists in preparing and planning .
 The overarching purpose of the armed forces is to sustain and enforce the political actions of the government . The main goal is the political impact rather than the fighting power of the force, says the military .
 Russian training process focused on adjusting the training system and implementing changes into regular operations . New doctrinal provisions in place.
 The military schools were reduced in quantity with the purpose of increasing the learning and training quality of the officers and other ranks .
 The number of exercises grew considerably in the last years . To increase the readiness status, the number of exercise exercises grew significantly .
 In accordance with the new strategic orientation, the troops did not neglect mountain operations and arctic region training .
 The training emphasized forces’ capacity to adapt to endure realities of the battlefield and to utilize new rules of employment .
 It included the role of population in shaping operations, ambiguous hybrid warfare, the massive use of disinformation and misinformation . It also included the use of horrific violence as an intimidation tool of the local population .
 Russian officials received strong promises and that triggered Russian actions . Nevertheless, they did receive strong promises .
 The Russian T-72 tanks were not as advanced as the Georgian T- 72s, which had been modernized with GPS systems, thermal imaging, night sights and more efficient communication systems .
 Russian defense industry could not equip its own army with advanced weaponry . At that time, Russia's defense industry was the second largest provider of arms in the world .
 The defense industry is more proficient, benefiting from the full support of President Putin and a generous funding program . President Putin promoted to revitalize and modernize the armed forces .
 The new developed programs included all armed forces categories, from military vehicles to ships, submarines and aircraft . The new programs include all military vehicles, ships, aircraft, and ships .
 Primarily used by the Russian Federation's armed forces, it is also used by numerous other countries and organizations .
 Moscow leaders want world known defense firms to produce systems in Russia instead of being purchased from abroad . The plan expands with the Moscow leaders desire to invite world known companies to produce the systems in Russian .
 The Russian security forces are in the middle of an ambitious modernization process designed to reassess the Russian superpower status . The modernization process is aimed at reassessing the Russia's superpower status.
 In March 2015, Ministry of defense issued a public statement to lay out future equipment acquisitions priorities . The statement was released in March 2015 .
 The first listed are strategic nuclear forces and aerospace forces, followed by communications, reconnaissance, command and control, electronic warfare, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, robotized attack complexes, military transport aviation, precision guided munitions and individual protection systems .
 Russia has received 41 new intercontinental ballistic missiles in 2016 . Three more regiments of Russia's strategic nuclear forces will receive new missiles in 2017 . Each regiment will receive 10 launchers .
 In 2012, he appointed new leaders to conduct the reforms and the ongoing operations managed by the Minister of Defense .
 Former General of the Army Sergey Shoygu replaced Anatoly Serdyukov in the Minister of Defense position . Colonel General Valery Gerasimov became Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 The new leaders continued their predecessors’ reform work and even improved some of the concepts and programs . The new leader continued their previous reform work .
 Vladimir Putin prepared the background for his future actions by these appointments . However, the general impression was that Vladimir Putin's command philosophies were congruent with his .
 General Gerasimov urged the Russian professional military thinkers to study the past and the current strategic and operational environment . The rules of engagement had dramatically changed.
 Wars are no longer declared and, having begun, proceed according to an unfamiliar template . Wars are not declared and have begun, according to the template .
 A perfectly thriving state can, in a matter of months and even days, be transformed into an arena of fierce armed conflict . The experience of military conflicts, including those connected with the so-called colored revolutions in north Africa and the Middle East, is described as a
 The open use of forces, often under the guise of peacekeeping and crisis regulation, is resorted to only at a certain stage . The use of force is used only for the achievement of final success in the conflict .
 The general understands the realities of the present and the advantage the West’s armed forces possess over the Russian forces . He advocates for a different approach, encompassing the non-conventional, semi-military ways and uses them in a proportion of 4:1 in relations to the
 The hybrid ambiguity, subversion, propaganda, cyberattacks or population manipulation are great venues that can target enemy critical vulnerabilities and avoid unbalanced confrontation .
 This philosophy looks like a revival of partisan techniques, with modern means . This philosophy is like a revive of partisan technique, withmodern means .
 A Go Approach to Mastering China's Strategic Concept, Shi, vi-6, Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army, 2004 .
 Professional Military Education reforms mentioned in Training subheading earlier were meant to improve the education system and the quality of the graduates .
 One of the biggest challenges was to train a new, professional non-commissioned officer’s corps .
 Leadership will remain the domain of the officers, focused more on humanities and sciences . Non-commissioned officers should gain more knowledge on the technical field, maintaining a higher level of combat readiness .
 The Russian armed forces face challenges and the ongoing status of the engaged reforms . A way to examine the personnel situation is to compare the heritage of the force and the status of reforms .
The personnel heritage consists of a large mass conscription system, partially unmotivated and untrained . The personnel heritage includes a large conscriptionsystem, partly unmotivating and unt trained .
 This system slowly evolved into a mixture of enlisted conscripts, recruited for one year and professional non-commissioned officers, specialized in technical fields and combat tactics . This system gradually evolved to a mix of enlisted and professional officers .
 The challenges for Russian personnel policies rises from the poor training and economic ambiguity of the country .
 Conscription is a decent way to man the force, but it is not a sustainable long-term strategy . Russia faces demographic problems, especially when it faces demographic issues .
 The majority of the population is not fit for the military, according to the U.S. military . The population of the remaining human resources basin is not enough to support the military .
 A 2010 study showed that from 400,000 high school graduates, only one third passed the standards .
 reality shows a minority of Russian exceptionally proficient troops compared to the rest of the force . Today reality shows the majority of Russian troops.
 To even the training level will require a significant amount of resources, especially time, which does not resonate with the Kremlin leader’s ambition and impatience .
 There are hopes in Moscow that some of the ongoing reforms will solve these issues . There are also hopes in the city that the reforms will also solve the issues .
 The conscription system is declining and there are efforts to improve the living standards in garrisons . There are also attempts to improve living standards.
 At the same time, Russia is trying to create a reserve force to compensate the population average level of military skills needed in case of mobilization .
 The Russian military has already traveled a long way. It is a long journey ahead, but the Russian military is already traveling .
 The Ministry of Defense public statement from March 2015 states not only the priorities for new equipment acquisitions but also it lists the facilities in which the Russian government must invest in the future .
 The Arctic region is the main focus in terms of funding new military settlements . By far, the Arctic region has been the biggest focus in the region .
 The need to make “quality adjustments’ to strategically important regions since Russian Federation is the second priority after the funding of Strategic Nuclear and Aerospace Forces . The need for ‘quality adjustments' is also a priority for Russian Federation .
 The huge amount of resources presumed to exist in the area and melting speed of the northern ice cap, motivate the Kremlin to militarize the territory to gain a position of advantage in the future negotiations .
 Sea ice cover remains at record low levels in Kara, Barents and Bering Seas . In the meantime, sea ice cover continues to remain at record high levels . Russian military is trying to create a military infrastructure and deploy Arctic subunits .
 Russian troops' situation in Crimea has been consolidating the Crimea region . The Sevastopol garrisons have been upgraded . The Crimea region has been the focus of the Russian military effort .
 Same priority is allocated for the Kaliningradskaya Oblast . Same priority also allocated for Kaliningrad enclave facilities .
 The Russian leaders use the military tool mainly to intimidate and enforce the political will of the Kremlin . In conclusion, the Russian leaders are trying to enforce their political will .
 Russia won the strategic stakes during conflicts that involved Russian military. Although operational and tactical levels during conflicts had numerous lapses, Russia won.
 Ukraine did not join Western organizations, Chechnya did not break away, NATO enlargement stagnated, U.S. softened the tone and accepted the new Russian status . Ukraine is not in the news anymore, and in European capitals there are voices questioning the economic sanctions .
 The Russian foreign affairs strategy is a combination of aggressive military force with assertive political policies, says the Russian Foreign Affairs Agency . "These are the results of the Russian foreign Affairs strategy," says the agency .
 Russian Foreign Affairs Fundamentals and Goals In Russia, Vladimir Putin’s views are usually not a subject to contradiction at political levels .
 His influence on national policies is massive and decisive, therefore in many domains, his beliefs were soon transformed in state policies . His influence is huge and decisive .
 Since Putin era began, the focus of those policies was to restore Russian international prestige and its dominance over the former USSR area . The focus of the Putin era is to restore Russia's international prestige .
 The highest motivation was to overcome the West’s efforts, especially the US, of undermining and humiliating Russia by taking advantage of the weakness confusion of the 1990s .
 In 2007, he announced that the West must be more sensitive to the Russian needs and demands . In 2007 at the Munich security conference, he said the West should be moresensitive to Russia .
 In 2008 at the Bucharest NATO summit, he warned about the dangerous consequences that the Georgian and Ukrainian trajectories towards the Western sphere of influence might cause .
 The Macedonian government tried to maintain its presence in the Balkans . He tried to influence Macedonian as well as Montenegrin governments away from the Western organizations .
 He suspended compliance with the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty because of the BMD system development . He suspended the compliance with Conventional armed forces in Europe .
Since 2014, his collaboration with the international community in terms of security cooperation has diminished drastically . Since 2014, he has been in contact with the world's largest security community .
Political declarations transformed into facts, as demonstrated by Estonia, Ukraine, Syria, and Kaliningrad . The Arctic zone is the Arctic zone .
 Russian Foreign Affairs spectrum analysis reveals the existence of two major school of thoughts in Russia that might look contradictory but they actually complement each other .
 The first one is the soft attitude of Russia towards the world in general and the West in particular . Russia has a soft attitude towards the West, says the Russian president .
 cooperation with the West in areas such as Syria, Ukraine, Afghanistan and Iraq is not only necessary but also critical . The West alone failed in securing these states, says the U.S.
 The second approach is the hard attitude regarding the achievement of Russian international objectives . The hard attitude is the second approach to Russia's achievements .
 Russia must act strongly to challenge the U.S. and the West, says Putin . Russia must consolidate the relations with China and other regional powers from Asia, Africa or South America .
 pressure on former Soviet states is a natural sign of strength and any negotiation with the West, a sign of weakness . It considers pressure on ex-Soviet states a natural signs of strength .
 Vladimir Putin does not seem to be following any of these approaches, but rather he is trying to combine them in accordance with different situations and topics, in order to obtain maximum advantage .
 Russian philosopher's style in dealing with foreign affairs policies adjusted in time under the effect of a combination of several aspects such as his personal ideological beliefs . His personal beliefs originated in different Russian philosophers views praising the “Russian World’s concept and his negative perception of the United States strategies
 Edward Snowden’s asylum request or the weak response of the Western powers to the Georgian or Ukrainian wars strengthened his beliefs and encouraged his behavior .
 The Russian foreign affairs philosophy is more important than its recent viewpoint about the international order, the disposition of power and influence around the globe and the future challenges and opportunities .
 Russia believes the time for a multipolar world order arrived, the development and use of force became imperative . The adaptation of methods to the modem ages is essential, says Russia .
 The unipolar system with the United States in a central role and the Western allies supporting its actions has ended due to Asian countries actions that eroded the Western establishment . The economic regional fragmentation as a result of a failed globalization supported by the West, says the author .
 The new realities and new technological advances cannot be ignored, according to the author . Thirdly, the new realities are essential, therefore adapting to the modernized world is essential and offers innovative ways .
 Information Technology favored fast access to knowledge and diplomacy expanded its horizons by leveraging civil society organizations, humanitarian assistance entities and improved communication tools . Information technology favoredfast access to information and diplomacy .
 Russia maintains its defensive approach in foreign affairs in order to protect its compatriots, its interests and its role in the world . In the end, Russia maintains a defensive approach to foreign affairs .
 Russia has played for centuries as a counterbalance in international affairs and the development of global civilization . It is characterized by consistency and continuity and reflects Russia's unique role in the world .
 Russia conducted a predominantly defensive foreign affairs campaign with isolated offensive actions that are not contradictory, but actually in accordance with overall intentions of Kremlin leaders . In its view, Russia conducted an offensive campaign that is not contradictory to its overall intentions .
 The West challenged the West because it creates instability and disorder useful to its polemic leadership . It challenges the West.
 It acted in Chechnya to stop a possible secession and protect the national territorial integrity .
 In Georgia and Ukraine, the Russians reacted to the NATO’s aggressive and ambiguous expansion . The Russian government has been criticized for its actions .
Sevastopol naval base was a strategic asset that could not be lost . Also, Sevastopol's naval base could be a strategic assets that could be lost.
 The Syrian intervention was mandatory due to the thousands of Russian fighters that joined the terrorist organization Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . The Russian fighters maintain the risk of coming home any time to create instability .
 President Putin sees himself as a defender of the present Russian status and a caretaker of Russian historical tradition to defend against Western aggressions, regardless of whether they were Swedish, French, German or possibly American .
 Russian MEANS: Diplomacy, Compatriots, Propaganda, Doctrine, International Treaties, Diplomacy and Resources, Energy policy . Russian MEans: "Diplomacy" and "Energy policy"
 Treaties, Corruption, Economy, Hybrid forces, Frozen conflicts, IO apparatus, Doctrine, Energy, Economy and Resources, Oligarchs, CIS, corruption, Diplomacy, Propaganda, Cyber, "Trolls Armies" Intelligence, lOs, Controlled media, Dias
 Russia wishes to consolidate its global trading situation and strengthen economy . From an economic perspective, Russia wants to consolidate its trading situation .
 The Kremlin wants to protect its citizens and expatriates inside or outside Russia . It wants to gain a more significant role in international or at least regional culture .
 Vladimir Putin said he wants to reconnect Russia with the Russians . He said he wanted to spend 60 minutes on the show .
Russia knows that due to the destructive capacity of nuclear weapons, the chances for an open high intensity conflict are reduced . Russia knows that because of the nuclear capacity, the chance for a high-intensity conflict is reduced .
 Russia understands that a good military force and threat it poses, can be, in many cases, enough to incline the balance in a desired direction . But, Russia understands it can be.
 The Kremlin also knows that sometime even even even the simulation of great capability can very well accomplish the mission .
 Russian foreign policies face many challenges. Strongly influenced by the historical background, geography, economic and political relations, Russia faces many challenges .
 China is a traditional enemy with a potential to become a clear partner . China is an old enemy with potential to be a clear partners .
 Ukraine and Belarus are two countries situated dangerously close to the Russian heart mainland . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Georgia is the gate to the Caucasus resources and can offer a negative example to Azerbaijan in terms of its relations with Russia . Armenia is seeking for protection, while Georgia is seeking to protect itself .
 Chechnya is a taboo subject while Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan are useful tools against terrorism and transnational crime . Chechnyans are also a useful tool against terrorism.
 This summarizes the strategic and regional context that Russia is trying to control through its policies . This summarizes Russia's attempts to control its policies in the region .
 In the official foreign policy documentation, Russia mentions its “priorities,” the areas that should concentrate in accordance with national interests .
 U.N. emphasizes its unique ability to impose sanctions and manage the rule of law in international relations . It starts with the need to strengthen the United Nations role .
 Russia can enforce international security by abiding arms control treaties and encouraging others to do the same, fighting terrorism and negotiating peace in the worlds’ hot spots .
 Russia wants to promote international economic cooperation with any partner that respects Russian interests . Russia also wants to encourage cooperation with other countries that respects its interests .
 It respects the Paris Agreement regarding the environment protection . It wants to delimitate the outer limits of its continental shelf to create new economic opportunities .
 It also suggests an increasing international humanitarian cooperation to protect the legitimate interests of Russian compatriots and to promote relationships between Slavic nations .
 Russia will increase its information support to foreign policies in order to deliver accurate and unbiased information to international community and to Russian citizens, inside or outside the borders .
 The documentation refers to the importance 92 of the regional foreign policy, to develop bilateral and multilateral cooperation within former CIS and beyond .
 The concept highlights the general Russian foreign policy strategy . It establishes five main lines of effort to fulfill its objectives .
The main objective on the geopolitical line of effort was to reestablish the Russian superpower status . The main objective was to reinestablish the Russia superpower status.
 To accomplish this purpose, Russia used several ways such as the power projection and the world mediator role . Russia used various ways to achieve this purpose .
 In Syria, Russia demonstrated a certain level of capacity to project military capability oversees . Russia demonstrated the ability to project capability in Syria .
 The U.S. military has a reorganized and modernized military capacity . It was a wonderful opportunity to show its force to the other major powers but more important to the regional powers .
 Russia conducted a highly sustained diplomatic campaign stating that it is the only viable alternative to fix the aspects broken by the West’s “reckless” actions . Russia conducted an extensive diplomatic campaign.
 It started the negotiations in Kazakhstan to conclude the Syrian conflict . The Syrian conflict started in Syria in 2011 .
 It took the lead to solve the Afghan conflict together with other regional powers from the area . It took a lead in solving the conflict with other regions from the region .
 It also claims that it is ready to cooperate with Kiev authorities to “help them solve the Ukrainian internal conflict’s internal conflict . It also says that it will help Kiev authorities solve the conflict .
 Another end was to stabilize and control the Russian near abroad through the security line of effort . The Russian government has been trying to control the country's near abroad .
 Russia employed different ways to succeed, such as hybrid warfare, and maintaining the buffer zone method . To succeed, Russia used different ways such as the hybrid warfare strategy of ambiguity and maintaining a buffer zone .
 Moscow employed hybrid warfare to complete Crimean annexation, to support separatist movements in different countries . Moscow also used hybrid warfare in Ukraine to leverage the so-called “frozen conflict’ in the bordering areas .
 The strategy of ambiguity is a broader concept around the hybrid approach design . The strategy is to maintain internal stability and the current regime in power .
 Informational Operations campaign aims to feed Russian audiences in and outside the borders . It encompasses a sustained Informational operations campaign .
 This design assures Russia strategic flexibility in the following diplomatic approaches to lock their objectives . This design is designed to ensure Russia's strategic flexibility .
 The last way employed to secure the Russian “near abroad is their creation of buffer zones, according to the Russian government . The buffer zones are created by exploiting ethnic divides and weaknesses of victim states .
 This technique was successful in Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, but the loss of the Baltics and the doubts regarding the Finish intentions to join NATO offers countervailing evidence .
 regional politics designated to accomplish the objective of Russian domination among its sphere of influence . Regional politics designated as regional politics to accomplish objective of Russia's domination .
 It refers mostly to the interference in smaller neighbor’s internal affairs or in other countries as the opportunity arises . It refers to certain flaws in the social system to produce insecurity and distress .
 The most preferred ways to intervene is the energy diplomacy, economic blackmail, and intimidation up to aggressions if necessary . If necessary, the most preferred way of intervention is to use diplomacy and blackmail .
 Russian energy policy is mostly transcending the economic and trading framework . Russia is always backing up the diplomatic agenda, according to the Russian government .
 Moldova, Ukraine, and Georgia suffered heavily because of Russian decisions to reduce the trading flows . The Center for European Policy Studies found that Moldova and Ukraine suffered heavily .
 At the same time, possibilities for sales in the EU were limited due to the quality obstacles and strict technical standards .
 Russian ways to intimidate and even abuse states’ sovereignty is no longer a surprise . When a situation is aggravated, Russian ways are no longer an surprise .
 The economic line of effort has the goal of consolidating and strengthening the Russian economy . Russia's economic line is to consolidate and strengthen the country's economy .
 The political ambitions of Putin’s regime created many animosities among the international community .
 Numerous analysts consider that Putin foresaw this outcome, but did not envision accurately the scale of it . Many analysts consider this outcome as a result of Putin's actions .
After the Georgian intervention the economy seemed to be more reactive than the political domain .
 CIS is a useful tool in maintaining the Russian status as a superpower capable to manage its proximity to Russia . CIS is also a good tool in managing the Russian situation .
 Through CIS, Russia can control the Caucasus and Kazakhstan resources, the pipelines towards the European customers . It allows a certain leverage of the economic development of its members .
 Russia understood that gaining access to the big stakes of the worldwide economics would be possible only through solid partnership with important players like China . Russia understood it would only be possible to gain access to big stakes.
 The Kremlin made numerous efforts to increase cooperation within China, India, Brazil or South Africa .
 The last line of effort, and also the most complex, is referring to the Russian compatriots . The most complex line is to help Russia's compatriots, as well as the Russians .
 In the Russian language, there are two different words to define a Russian, based on his origin . The Russian language is based on the origin of his origin.
 The Moscow objective is to protect these populations and at the same time to gain influence over the host nation governments . Moscow is trying to protect its population and gain influence in other countries .
 Russia uses a combination of official diplomacy to promote and increase the Russian cultural role . Russia also uses a range of information tools such as cyber actions, propaganda and controlled media .
 State funded organizations work closely in conjunction with entities specialized in spreading the strategic narrative set by Kremlin . State funded groups work closely with entities special in spreading strategic narrative .
 The investigation explores the means and resources available to support this design . The investigation also explores the ways managed by the Kremlin to succeed .
 In 2016 Russian foreign policy capstone documentation, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs describes the institutions, processes and instruments that allow Moscow to leverage the international environment in its favors .
 The president of the Russian Federation nomination is at the top of the list . The Russian Federation's president is in charge of the country's largest political body .
 He is responsible to create and communicate his vision about the world and the role of the Russian Federation in the global context .
 The Federal Assembly, the State Duma and the Russian government due to their task of creating and implementing the appropriate legislation to facilitate the presidential vision materialization. Next mentioned are the Federal Assembly.
 Security Council has a significant role due to its duty to foresee and solve potential defense challenges . The Security Council is tasked with foreseeing and solving potential defense problems .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs develops the strategy based on the president's intent and domestic legislation provisions and acts accordingly .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry will conduct linear and synchronized international programs and humanitarian operations . Several governmental organizations such as the Federal Agency for the CIS, Compatriots Living Abroad, and International Cultural Cooperation support the project .
 In addition, the economic entities are resourcing and some even shaping the international environment to facilitate the unity of effort .
Each of the ways presented in the previous subheading and grouped into several lines of effort requests a significant amount of efforts and resources . Each of the Ways presented in previous subheadings are grouped into a number of lines of efforts .
 The military, usually employed in theaters of operations or used as an intimidation tool, is probably the most important piece in the Russian strategy .
 Diplomatic tasks are primarily to foment advantageous agreements or to conduct peace negotiations . Diplomatic task is primarily to negotiate advantageous agreements .
 The economy, the resources and the energy policy proficiently leverage results in luring or convincing current or future partners . The economy and the resources are key to luring and persuading current orfuture partners .
 The doctrine and legislation design focuses on easing the foreign affairs actions . The doctrine is designed to ease foreign affairs action .
 Unconventional force capability spreads ambiguity and creates instability when needed . Uncon conventional force can be used to create instability .
 Bilateral relations and international treaties strengthen Russian’s position on both regional and global stages . Bilateral Relations and international treaty strengthen Russian's position.
 The manipulated compatriots can initiate unrest and opportunities for the Russian government and allow it to gain influence by intervening in the support of the “oppressed’s population .
 The oligarchs form a shield of power around the Russian leaders . They help maintain the power system and internal distribution of wealth .
 Spreading corruption abroad helps the Kremlin to dominate its sphere of influence by keeping neighbors vulnerable, in terms of relationships .
 Frozen conflicts are perfect opportunities to uphold the so-called buffer zones around borders by blocking those nations' social evolution .
 All these assets, factors or concepts are valid and available means in the leadership’s hands . All the assets or concepts that are valid or available are valid, according to experts .
 The Russian mechanism expertly combines these necessary means to obtain the desired effects in each of the projected ends . The Russian mechanisms expertly combine these needed means to get the desired effect in each.
 For Romania, knowing in detail Russian foreign policy is essential, if not crucial, for Romania . Knowing in detail Russia's foreign policy has been crucial for Romania.
 The new emergence of Russia as a world superpower can affect the Romanian interests and the country path towards the European values and principles . Russia is searching to expand its sphere of influence.
 The Russia's troll army are statesponsored online political commentators and trolls linked to the Russian government . Bc6-6pm aabi, also known in English media as the Russia's trolling army, are known as the Russian troll army .
Russian foreign policy ends, Ways and Means to accurately identify and address risks . This goal required a thorough analysis of the Russian foreign policy Ends, ways and Means .
 DIME represents the ability of the U.S. government to employ efficiently these instruments in the pursuit of its interests .
 The 1991 Gulf War changed the world’s perception of warfare, due to its superb execution by the U.S. military . The Gulf War.
 The new generation armored vehicles, the aviation precise support, the attack helicopters effectiveness, integrated fires and precision guided munitions, night vision devices, electronic-optics improvements, the Global Positioning Systems, all these hitech capabilities demonstrated the unchallengeable character of the U.S.
 The U.S. Army demonstrated its ability to deploy large division formations in a short amount of time to significant distances . The logistics, the most criticized component of the United States Army, demonstrated their outstanding ability.
 The Chinese, the Russians and other world and regional powers understood they had to reorient their efforts in order to avoid a direct military confrontation with the Western forces in their region .
 In 1999, two Chinese officers described the future of warfare as an ambiguous environment, more complex, more subtle, and more subversive .
 The military violence of warfare will decrease in the future while the economic and technological violence will increase in more extensive and yet concealed ways . The economic and technology violence will be more extensive, yet concealed.
 The DIME, the Economics in the case of the Chinese or the Diplomacy and Information in the cases of the Russians, studied the vulnerabilities caused by the insurgency .
 The first priority is Diplomacy, shaping the environment and testing the targeted area situation and perceptions . Diplomacy is the first priority for the British government .
 Russian diplomacy proved its efficacy many times in history providing knowledge and valid options to the Kremlin . Based on an old, brilliant and skillful diplomatic school, Russian diplomacy has been successful many times .
 The Kremlin initiates the In formation tool to spread the Russian narrative in the press, social media and internet channels . In parallel with the diplomatic efforts, the Kremlin also uses the In Formation tool.
 Economic instrument of national power is an option leveraged by Moscow to enforce the constraints imposed to certain targeted groups or nations . Moscow has an option to enforce constraints imposed on certain groups and nations .
 Energy policy, also known as energy diplomacy or economic dependency, are famous methods used to impose the Russian will .
 The Military instrument is significant in the Russian employment of DIME . It represents the intimidation tool, the “big stick’s always present in the background to convince the negotiation partners at the table .
 The Military intimidation component goes two directions, one designated to remember the small nations the Russian power . The second one is to challenge and deter other major powers ambitions .
 It must understand accurately the current context in order to translate the situation into feasible, suitable and acceptable internal, regional and international policies .
 Romania must seize opportunities, manage the challenges, and consider the vulnerabilities . Romania, must seize opportunity, manage challenges and consider vulnerabilities, says Romania .
 Eastern and Central Europe nations are still vulnerable after ten years from their integration in the Western organizations . Eastern andCentral Europe nations still vulnerable to Western integration .
 Some countries are still challenging liberalism and have a strong orientation towards autocracy . Others have tried to impose restrictions on press freedom or human rights . Some are still struggling with the communist inherited corruption, rule of law legislation and judicial independence .
 The current situation constitutes the perfect environment for the Russian interference to maximize the effects of their DIME employment in the Eastern Europe region . The situation is the perfect situation for Russian interference.
 Russia is doing ample efforts to discredit Western culture and its values, attitudes and beliefs . Russia is trying to discredit western culture and values, and its beliefs .
Through diplomacy, it tries to erode the emerging democracies existing in the region by encouraging the Euro-skeptics’ movements . It also encourages other nations to follow the example, mocking capitalism, promoting illiberalism and endorsing organizations sponsored from Moscow .
 The European parliament has tried to enforce anti-corruption measures in Eastern Europe . It has also reviewed the investments plan in some of the Eastern Europe countries .
 The Information domain is critical in implementing the disruption strategy in Eastern Europe .
 Some countries have significant Russian ethnics in their territories . Others have to face only the propaganda oriented towards their local population .
 The Russian information tool is a critical asset to disturb the internal governance coherence and spread mistrust among the people and international partners . However, regardless of the demographic components, the Russian information tools are a critical Asset to disturb internal governance.
 Russia scheduled a long list of military exercises along its Western border to respond to the NATO Atlantic Resolve Operation . Russia is responding to NATO's request for NATO to respond the Atlantic Resolved Operation .
 The exercises, the frozen conflicts in Transdnistria and Eastern Ukraine, and the Kaliningrad enclave militarization are the supporting efforts to the Russian strategic goals . The exercises are the support for the Russian Strategic goals .
 Russia is combining the effects of these instruments to accomplish its objectives and to take advantage of any cracks in the Western establishments . Russia is also combining these instruments with other tools to achieve its objectives .
 The Russian and Romanian nations' relations have a long history between the two countries . Diplomacy has been difficult for both parties and other times with painful aspects .
 The European context and interests always influenced the politics and diplomacy . The EU has always been a key part of Europe's political and diplomatic life .
 By the seventeenth century, Russia consolidated as a major European power . Romania declared its independence in 1877 from the Ottoman dominance at the end of the Third Crimean War .
 In October 1878 the Romanian King Carol I received an accreditation letter from the baron Dmitri F Stuart . He emphasized the great military collaboration between the two armies on the recent war .
 Russia was the second state after Austria in September 1878 to recognize Romanian Independence . The Czar Alexander II “graciously welcomed him’ as an official representative of Romania’s government .
 The good, mutual relations continued up to January 1918 when interrupted because of the Bolshevik Revolution’s impact on the First World War .
 Bilateral relations reinitiated from June 1934 to June 1941 when Romania was part of Operation Barbarossa . Romania, a German ally at the time, was a Germany ally at that time .
 In 1955, Romania joined The Warsaw Pact, but later refused to allow military maneuvers on its soil . Romania later limited its participation in military maneuvers elsewhere within the alliance .
 The relations between Romania and the European and North Atlantic organizations have been on a decreasing path . Romania's orientation towards the EU has led to a decrease in relations between the two countries .
 The last important Romanian-Russian agreement lasted from 1991 to 1993 . The last significant bilateral highlevel meetings took place in 2003 and 2005 .
 In 2002, Romania was officially invited to join NATO and the accession process was finalized in 2004 . Romania was formally invited to joined NATO in 2002 .
 There was a stagnation period in 2006 and 2007, but after the Romanian official membership to the EU in 2007, they constantly declined .
 The only major Russian visit to Romania was the presence of Vladimir Putin at the NATO summit held in Bucharest in April 2008 .
 Since then, efforts to recast bilateral connection were mostly timid on both sides for several considerations . The efforts have been mostly timid since then .
 The most important topics of the recent diplomatic engagements and negotiations are the Ballistic Missile Defense System and NATO bases, the Black Sea cooperation theme, the frozen conflict in Transdnistria, the historical issue of the Romania national treasury and other routine political statements .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg presided over a ceremony to mark the activation of the BMD system at the Deveselu air base in May 2016 .
 Romania replaced the Czechs in the project scheduled to finish in 2018 with the Polish component . Initially designed to include Spain, Turkey, Poland, Poland and Czech Republic facilities, eventually Romania replaced Czechs .
 Russia contested its declared purpose to protect the U.S. and its allies from any nuclear aggression initiated by rogue states such as Iran or North Korea .
 The Kremlin considers the “anti-missile shield’ a tool to intercept the Russian nuclear ballistic missiles that could target the U.S. It will allow the Americans the strategic advantage of striking back, it says .
 President Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Medvedev warned the US, NATO and Romania that Russian military would develop capabilities to counter the BMD system effects .
 This issue is also a continuation of an older disagreement regarding the buildup of the new NATO bases in Romania, Poland and other new member states’ territory . This is also the same issue as an older dispute over the NATO bases.
 Russia judged this situation as a violation of the NATO-Russia Agreement and December 1998 NATO Declaration . Russia judged the situation as violation of NATO- Russia Agreement and a violation.
 The Black Sea is another common topic on the Russian-Romania official discussions . The Black sea is also a common topic for official discussions.
 For many years, the influence over commercial and military traffic opened numerous controversies . The influence over the commercial andmilitary traffic opened many controversies .
 Russia considers the Black Sea a strategic area relative to its national interests . Today, Russia considers it a strategic region relative to the national interests.
 Organization for Black Sea Economic Cooperation is the main tool to regulate commercial relations between its members . Economically, the OECE is the biggest tool for regulating commercial relations .
 This initiative started in 1992 and included twelve states from the Black Sea area . This initiative began in 1992. It included 12 states from Black Sea areas .
 Russia’s rhetoric on this topic refers to increase the role of the Black Sea Naval Force organization, also known as BlackSeaFor .
 Russia considers maritime exercises held by NATO forces in the Black Sea a violation of the Montreux Convention . Russia considers the maritime exercises a violation.
 The main objective of Russian diplomacy on this matter is to proliferate ambiguity and to create dissensions between the Black Sea countries, some of them NATO members and other candidates for European integration .
 Another important subject is the frozen conflict of Transdnistria, in the Republic of Moldova . The frozen conflict is also a major issue in the Moldova region .
 Romania and Russia agree that the situation must be resolved, but the resolution differs . Romania, Russia and Russia, along with all parties involved in this divergence agree that it must be solved .
 Russia militates for a federalization solution of the Republic of Moldova that will better protect its compatriots . Romania supports the U.S. and European answer for a national reconciliation without a direct Russian military or political interference .
 North-Eastern neighbor has deep historical roots due to its close ties with its North- Eastern neighbor . Therefore, its support is more moral and strictly diplomatic .
 The Romanian national treasury is a sensitive, historical topic that will remain in the Romanian society conscience for many years . The topic of the treasury will be a sensitive topic for years .
 Romanian authorities send their national thesaurus to Moscow . The move was made due to the German submarine actions .
 The national treasure was confiscated in 1918 as a result of the Bolshevik Revolution . It was handed to Russian authorities for safety reasons during the First World War .
 Romania's gold reserves would have brought the country to 13th place in the world, almost 20 places higher than it is today . The country is now 13th in the global gold reserves .
 The Kremlin returned parts of it in 1935, 1956 and 2008 as a sign of the Russian benevolence . The majority remained unreturned .
 Romania and Russia signed a Friendly Relations and Good Neighborhood Agreement in 2003 . The two countries nominated a mixed Romanian-Russian committee of historians to establish the national treasury inventory .
 The committee scheduled annual meetings but in 2013, the Russians stopped participating in the investigations . The committee planned annual meetings.
 The next meeting will take place in Moscow, during the second half of 2017 . The meeting will be held in the secondhalf of 2017.
 The most visible entity of the diplomatic relations in Bucharest is the Russian Embassy .
 Media covered an increasing number of events and appearances of the Russian Ambassador Valery Kuzmin on three types of topics .
 The most common is the economic approach, the latest was a criticism of some internal policies . The most surprising was a cultural initiative .
 The Kremlin criticized the Romanian authorities in a surprising attempt to promote instability and gain some popularity in a generally antagonistic society .
 Russian Foreign Affairs Minister message stated that Romania officials concentrated too much to create an anti-Russian perception and they forgot to listen its own population .
 The Russian desire to intensify the cultural exchange between the two nations could be an objective along the same line of effort . The two nations have been trying to intensify their cultural exchange .
 Russia could work very well on specific areas with countries that have, generally, different views . He also stated that according to the new Russian diplomatic strategy called “the network diplomacy,’s’ new strategy,” Russia could also work well on certain areas .
 nations can leave aside aspects that separate them and focus only on the issues where they have common interests . That means nations can left aside aspects of their interests and focus on issues that are not separate .
 Information is critical to impose its will in present realities inside its internal society, around the world .
 The pattern includes gradually planned actions starting with official institutions, use of the compatriots abroad, public and private media, social media, and corruption support and religious influence .
 The Russians are using a distinct recipe in Romania, tailored to the Romanian environment and its critical vulnerabilities . Due to local specificities and conditions, the Russians use a different recipe in the country .
 The Russian governmental institutional design to influence the Romanian society are underdeveloped and not visible enough . The differences between the Romanian Latin philosophy and the Slavic enforced ideology of the socialism era are significant .
 Russia initiated “The Russian World’s foundation, a cultural entity with offices in the top three Romanian university centers in Bucharest, Cluj and Constanza .
 In 2011 and 2012 there have been celebrations of Romanian cultural days in Russian cities of St. Petersburg .
 Romanian teachers could study the Russian culture in a special program in Moscow . For example, the 24 Romanian schools that included the Russian language in the curriculum could study Russian culture .
 The Russian compatriots line of effort is not a factor in Romania, at least not in the classic way of the Ukrainian, Estonian or even Moldavian cases .
 In former USSR republics, the compatriots provide an opportunity to affect local politicians and their decisions . They represent a great source of political, economic and even military intelligence .
 Russia has to make significant efforts to shape the environment in the sense of “creating the compatriots’s compatriots. Because of that reality, Russia has been making significant efforts.
 The Russian government is trying to reach the older segment of the population, the communist nostalgic persons, or to create new groups of believers in the Russian solutions .
 The rest are located along the borders with Ukraine and Republic of Moldova . The rest of the country is located in Ukraine and Moldova.
 The Russian state media are using the state media to initiate the Kremlin distorted narrative and the private media controlled by Moscow to reiterate and proliferate the altered news .
 The main objective is to spread the fake news in accordance with the Russian goals on certain suggested themes . The Russian government is trying to spread fake news by using certain themes .
 The hope is that the Romanian media will broadcast “the sensational’s many times without a proper filtering process, says the writer .
During Russian actions in Ukraine there has been a news spread by Russian propaganda, creating an invented separatist movement of the Romanian ethnics .
 The main themes identified in Romania as preferred subjects for the Russian propaganda are anti-Americanism, characterization of Romania as a United States slave, antiNATO rhetoric, the Ballistic Missile Defense System, and EU collapse .
 Romania has proved to be faithful supporter of U.S. policies and a reliable NATO member in the last decades . Romania has been a socialist country for 45 years .
 Russian propaganda concentrates on reminding the Romanian population of the United States bombing campaign in the Second World War . The Americans want to force the young Romanians into the first line of the battle .
 U.S. Army troops stationed on Romanian territory at NATO bases . These actions target the Romanian population in the hope of changing a generally favorable perception of the US .
 Russia is targeting also the local politicians and their decisions, blaming them for being too obedient to Washington imperialistic demands . At the same time, Russia is also targeting also local politicians.
 NATO is described as an offensive organization created solely to promote the same imperialistic values of the West . NATO is called an 'offensive organization' by the United States .
 NATO accuses Romania of using Romania as a buffer zone between its forces and Russia . This narrative continues to accuse NATO of installing the BMD system components .
 The second approach is describing the BMD system as inadequate to provide security for Romania, its only purpose being to protect the West . The system is geared towards defense of NATO against unpredictable states as Iran .
 The narrative presents an apocalyptic view, with the EU and the U.S. draining all the Romanian resources and in the end, leaving the country again in the Russian sphere of influence, in poverty and social distress .
 Russian intentions can be only positive because they will dominate the region and are in their best interest to maintain a prosperous and stable region . On the other hand, the Russian intentions are only positive .
 Russian media is also ready to take advantage of any significant social, political or economic event that might offer an opportunity in influencing Romanian democratic establishment and the society .
 Sputnik, the successor of the former state official news agency Ria-Novosti, even started an online poll regarding the necessity for the Romanian government’s resignation .
 The results showed the Romanian population did not want instability or a new government but just a necessary correction of a legal initiative . The results were published in a report by the Romanian government .
 The intensity of the Russian state controlled media interference should be noted . However, the intensity of Russian state control of the media is not noted .
 Social media is also an area utilized by the Russians to influence the Romanian society . The demonstration is visible in the number and quality of the “fake news’s’ and of the comments over different topics on internet sites .
 The Russians are noted for their “trolls’ factories’ and their ways of shaping the news and the perceptions of the world .
 Some of the postings have nothing in common with the topic, just praising the traditional Russian benevolent attitude towards Romania .
 Other tools such as cyber-attacks, corruption support or even the Orthodox Church involvement are present, but very limited in scale and effects . Other tools like cyber-attack and corruption support are also present .
 Romanian population is strongly committed to eradicating this social disease . Romania has significant corruption systemic problems, but is more resistant to politician manipulations .
 The Romanian Church is an autocephalous Orthodox Church since 1866 when it broke from Constantinople . It has limited implication in the political life of Romania or Romanians .
 The existence of the Russian propaganda machine in Romania cannot be denied, nor neglected, says the Romanian government .
 Ed Royce is the Chair of the U.S. Committee for the Foreign Affairs . Royce recognized its undermining effects on the democratic stability of the Eastern Europe young democracies .
 The influence is marginal even if the persuasion was present and the public space is well balanced . The influence of the public is marginal, even if it's well balanced, says the author .
 Romania was definitely part of this negative influence strategy and resisted the pressure . democracy provides also the key to counter these actions, says the writer . Romania was also part of the negative influence strategies, he says .
 The Russian military instrument of national power, metaphorically known in history as a “hammer, always searching for nails became more sophisticated lately . The military instrument is metaphorically called a ‘hammer’ in history.
 Historically, the Romanian Armed Forces and the Russian Red Army have a long common precedent, evolving from love to hatred relations, back and forth .
 At the end of the nineteenth century, the Romanian Army joined the Russian Imperial Army against the Ottoman Empire . As a result of the common victory, Romania declared its independence .
 Russia changed its political system and abandoned the Romanian Army in front of the German and Austrian offensive . The friendship between the two ruling monarchies seemed to transfer the sympathy towards military and the population as well .
 This situation evolved into a powerful discontent among Romanian population perceptions . This situation has become a powerful problem for the Romanian population .
 The Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact decisively determined Romania to join Germany in the Second World War . Romania attacked the USSR in order to liberate the illegally annexed province of Bessarabia .
 During the socialist era, Romania and Russia were military partners within the Warsaw Pact . The partnership between the two nations never recovered .
 USSR imposed a tacit regime of isolation against Romania in 1968 . Once Romania vehemently protested, in 1968, against the Soviet invasion of the Czech Republic .
 After 1991, the two nations reduced their direct political and military cooperation, especially after 2004 Romanian integration into the North Atlantic alliance . The two nations began to cooperate less than a decade ago .
 Russian military actions have a great impact on the NATO policies and subsequently on Romania . Any influence the Russian Federation that applies to NATO is an influence on all members. However, Russian actions have an impact on NATO policies .
 The Georgian conflict was a powerful signal sent by Russia, but significant Western military reaction did not come until after the 2014 Ukrainian crisis . The Russian military reaction came after the Ukrainian crisis.
 European Command and NATO HQ decided to start the European Reinsurance Initiative . The mission was led by the United States forces to demonstrate its commitment towards its European allies and to strengthen the Eastern flank of NATO .
 The U.S. government allocated an additional $3. billion in the fiscal year 2017 to accomplish this task . Currently, the assurance mission is transitioning to deterrence because of the negative Russian influence in the region .
 The Russian military conducts direct, low intensity, Information Operations activities on the Romanian territory . Besides the indirect influence, through the NATO channel, the Russian military carries out direct and low intensity activities .
 By U.S. doctrine definition, IOs are one of the most effective methods to influence populations and authorities .
 The integrated employment, during military operations, of information-related capabilities in concert with other lines of operation to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the decision making of adversaries and potential adversaries .
 The intention is to create a favorable image of the Russian Federation, a strong and powerful country capable of dealing with U.S., NATO and all other Western threats to its national interests .
 The military component of these operations is a replication of the more nuanced activities conducted through the Information tool . The military part of these activities is a replicated of the other part .
 Russia’s 14 th Army presence in Transdnistria. Another indirect military influence is Russia's 14 th army presence in the region .
 Romania will promote security cooperation with the Republic of Moldova . Romania will continue to provide requested assistance for Moldavian authorities based on the Romanian previous experience .
 The Russian military influence is more visible in the political and military departments . It contains a significant slice of IOs as well, to ease and intensify the effects of the use of the other instruments of national power .
 Romania is one of the most important economies from Eastern and Central Europe . Romania has an economic growth of 5 percent in 2016, the greatest in the EU, and a GDP of approximately $441 billion .
 The country has considerable natural resources including rich agricultural lands, diverse energy resources and significant industry based on a wide range of manufacturing activities .
 The Russian economic instrument of national power in Romania falls to a secondary position in comparison with the other tools and their effects on the Romanian society .
 Russia did not want to commit more funds to invest in a country with no compatriots or a stronger Russian affiliation . On one hand, it looks like Russia didn't want to invest more funds .
 Russia holds the third place in nonEU foreign investments in Romania . The country is the third largest country in the EU .
 In the energy domain, Romania has a privileged position that depends little on the Russian energy .
 Russia has its own petroleum and gas reserves . The imports from Russia are most of the times dictated by seasonal pricing opportunities .
 In January 2016, Romania imported only 5 percent of the natural gas needed for internal industrial consumption from Russia . In November 2016, the imports increased to 25 percent due to Russian low-level prices .
 Treaties signed between 1991 and 1993 regulate the Romanian-Russian economic exchange . Economic relations between the two nations were moderate after the collapse of the communism .
 At the governmental level, there is only one mixed committee to enhance economic, technological and scientific cooperation .
 The commercial exchange balance shows that the bilateral economic agreements and trading activities developed with difficulty and dramatically dropped after crises such as the Georgian conflict in 2008 and the Ukrainian intervention in 2014 .
 The recent economic sanctions imposed on Russia produced powerful effects in Moscow and its investments in foreign countries, its military programs and to its internal projects . The recent sanctions produced powerful effect in Moscow .
 Russia is trying to realign major powers outside the Western sphere of influence . Russia is also trying to discover opportunities within the EU economic circle .
 Russian offers for future collaboration in private or governmental projects . Popular perceptions of Russian society and cultural and ideological differences are obstacles difficult for Russia to ameliorate .
In the current European theater the high volatility atmosphere enabled a continuous changing process, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The new defense paradigm caused by the Russian actions since 2012, and the EU transformation spasms caused by immigration and Brexit .
 adaptability is an absolutely necessary condition in order to maintain internal and external stability . Adaptability is a necessary condition to maintain external stability, according to experts .
 Romania requested at least an adaptation, mostly due to the increasing level of Eastern threats, the immigration challenge and international organized crime networks . For Romania in particular, the security environment requested an adaptation .
 Romanian authorities acknowledged the necessity of redesigning the institutional security structure . The legal framework existed, but the legal framework exists .
 The international partnerships Romania joined are fundamental premises with essential impacts on the construct of the security doctrine and their effects, especially for foreign affairs policies . Romania joined the international partnerships with Romania .
 NATO is the most important military alliance Romania is part of, and the EU is a vital economic organization for the Romanian interests . The EU is the first factor to determine the main lines of efforts in the security approach .
 The Romanian Supreme Defense Council, 37. Decree no. of the Romanian Supreme Defence Council, December 10, 2015, was announced .
 The European Security Strategy became a universal guide for all the EU members’ security strategies . The EU Security Strategy has become a universal guidance for all EU members .
 Romania sees the Russian Federation a significant consideration factor during the security policies building process . Romania sees Russia as a significant factor in the security process .
 Russian Federation is a potential high-risk actor that already affected Georgian, Ukrainian and Moldovan European integration itineraries . Challenging the international order, acting to disturb the stability within the Black Sea region and repeatedly ignoring the international laws transforms the Russian Federation .
 The Romanian Presidential Administration issued The Romanian National Defense Strategy for 2015-2019 . To address these new developments and new legislative requirements, the government issued the strategy .
 The Guide of The Romanian National Defense Strategy for 2015-2019 was released in December 2015 . In December 2015, the Supreme Defense Council approved the strategy implementation of the strategy .
 The 2015 security doctrine introduces new concepts in the national defense community and legislation . The 2015 Security doctrine is the first of its kind .
 Romania is a strong country in Europe and beyond, ready to protect its citizens inside or outside its borders . Romania's new strategy aims to transform Romania into a strong nation in Europe .
Extended National Security is a new concept that refers to the expansion of this domain to include all political, economic and social actors of the society .
 National defense domain terminology defines more clearly the two main components . The internal defense is the sum of actions designated to maintain internal order and territorial integrity and the collective defense . The Romanian Armed Forces is part of the NATO efforts to preserve the sovereignty of its members .
 Hybrid threat concept refers to ability of any state or non-state actor to create unrest and instability . Hybrid threat refers to the ability of a state or Non-State actor to make unrest or instability .
 Strategic credibility is a concept to describe better the end state of the strategy design . It comprises the continuity and predictability of the foreign affairs policies with a strong, consolidated internal democracy and uncontested rule of law .
 The main internal objectives of the strategy are consolidating the Romanian capabilities to face the future challenges . The strategy is to protect the rule of law, freedom of justice and address terrorist threats .
 The majority of these objectives implies a certain degree of interaction with the Russian Federation policies . The majority is because of the intersection of interests, convergent or divergent .
 The main threats described by the strategy are the Eastern neighborhood destabilizing actions to cause instability, criminality, and massive migrations .
 The perpetuated frozen conflicts and inter-ethnic animosities in the Romanian proximity is creating supplementary pressure and tensions . The perpetuation of frozen conflicts is creating additional pressure and tension .
 Disturbances on the energy markets are critical to Romania’s energy security . Romania's energy security is critical to the country's security .
 Cyber threats are new to the list of possible security risks along with terrorism . The list includes terrorism, terrorism and terrorism .
 Many of the identified threats originate with Russian Federation policies and capabilities .
 The most significant will be subject to the following objective-way correlation analysis .
 Romania sees threat and associated risks in the Russian employment of the Information instrument of national power . Romania sees threats to democracy by ensuring the economic sound environment and rule of law .
 Another end is the consolidation of the regional and international role of the country . The country's role in the region is also being consolidated .
 This end includes the increasing the role within NATO and EU, consolidation of the strategic partnership with the US, strengthening the Eastern flank of NATO, supporting the Moldovans European integration and promoting stability on the Black Sea region .
 Romania identifies several risks that jeopardize the current situation . Most important are the recent security developments in the Eastern proximity and the Russian Federation Black Sea fleet’s increased capabilities .
 Enhancing bilateral and trilateral agreements with neighboring countries is also a suitable approach to a sustainable regional stability . The region has a long history of regional stability.
 The risks associated with disturbances on the energy markets affects the objective of maintaining a constant economic growth . The risks related to disturbances on energy markets affect the economy .
 Romanian authorities’ intent is to avoid possible energy diplomacy effects and economic blockades, as part of the Russian toolbox . The Romanian authorities are fighting corruption and prevent cyber-attacks .
 Another major concern is too protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks . IOs and economic projects with a subversive character oriented against national energy security .
 Russia possess the ability and means to create instability through all the above-mentioned ways . With the exception of terrorism, Russia possesses the ability to create unstable situations . Russia has a history of instability, including terrorism .
 Early warnings and identification of terrorist and hybrid threats is crucial to protect critical infrastructure . Early warnings are crucial to protecting critical infrastructure.
 The balance between the energy consumption and production could be a valuable indicator of dysfunctionality .
 The Energy Union is an EU project to connect more members to an energy intra-European network . The solution is the energy diversification production, unimpeded access to resources and increased efficiency .
Promoting national identity and culture and protecting Romanians inside or outside the border is an important and sensitive objective due to increasing number of working population spread throughout the EU . Romanian citizens living in the Republic of Moldova.
 International criminality in the West and the frozen conflict of Transdnistria are also areas of concern . The Russian Federation plays a significant role in the conflict .
 The main lines of effort to address these areas are the human rights protection for Romanian citizens and their free practice of their own culture . The main line of effort is the human right protection for the Romanian citizens .
 Romanian leadership must consolidate defense capabilities . To ensure its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, the Romanian government must consolidate its defense capabilities.
 The main risks to this end comes from the instability initiated beyond the Eastern vicinity, the Black Sea region tensions, the frozen conflicts from near abroad, the Balkans problems and migration .
 A vital condition is to continue the reorganization, modernization and equipping process of the Romanian Armed Forces to achieve the 2027 final transformation aim . Allocating constantly the minimum 2 percent of the GDP for military expenditure is needed .
 The defense industry has to adapt to the new realities and expand cooperation with Western similar companies to support the increasing security demands. Subsequently, the defense industry must adapt.
 The Russian actions translated into intensified training and exercises, but it did not resume with the readiness elevation .
 A credible defense force should not only be properly manned, trained, but also equipped . A credible Defense force should be properly trained, trained and equipped .
 Bucharest's leadership adopted the political decision to raise constantly defense budget and expenditures . Starting 2012, Bucharest’s leadership adopted a political decision.
 The new allocation will result in acceleration of the army transformation process, personnel training development, continuation of the existing major acquisition programs and even initiate new ones .
 The Romanian military has a timeline to finish the equipment and procedures modernization by 2027 . The military is becoming a fully capable force, flexible and highly efficient organization .
 The Romanian Army maintains the training standards of its troops with an emphasis on the high readiness level of NATO allocated forces .
 Romania included multiple multinational exercises in the NATO program of exercises . Romania was part of the Readiness Action Plan . Romania included several multinational exercises .
 Romania will continue to be a reliable NATO member, fully committed to the deterrence mission . Romania will also contribute to the strong signal sent to Russia by the allied forces .
In the new financial allocation context, defense investments will play a significant role . Defense investments will be key in new financial allocations, according to analysts .
 Romania already engaged in several modernization programs over recent years . New budget will allow it to continue, accelerate and even start new programs .
 Romanian Air Forces will continue to develop the F-16 Multirole Aircraft Program . The Romanian Air Force will continue developing the program .
 The Romanian Army will continue to renew fixed and mobile communications and information systems, procurement and modernization of armored combat vehicles and multifunctional transport platforms . The Romanian army will continue the prospects to renewfixed and mobile communication and information system .
 Romanian Naval Forces to purchase four new corvettes for the Romanian Black Sea Fleet . Government to modernize the frigates T-22 R-stage 2 to full operational capacity .
 The application of the Russian DIME on the Romanian security policies is significant, says the author . The application is causing the emergence of new security concepts, he says .
 Bucharest's leaders to consolidate the pace of the Romanian military development, mainly the training and the equipment acquisition processes . Externally, it warned the Romanian authorities about the danger of the Eastern vicinity instability .
 Russian Federation interests and actions in Kaliningrad, Ukraine and in the Black Sea area raised many challenges for the Romanian decision makers . Topping the complexity of the unpredictable Turkish situation and the outcome of the Middle East and North African conflicts generating uncontrollable migration, are Russian Federation interest and actions
 The study tried to decipher the security problem, analyzing how the new aroused conflict influenced the regional economic, political and military balance, and the repercussions that affect Romania .
 The new Russian international approach is the main vehicle to examine the trends of the Russian policies and strategies development process . It used the major recent events conducted from Kremlin and the new Russia international approach as the main vehicles to examine how to deter or diminish Russian destabilizing influence .
Tensions between the West and Moscow are known as The New Cold War . This thesis is to identify the current Russian strategy to influence Romania, a NATO member state and a U.S. strategic partner .
For many Romanian analysts, being part of such important alliances and having strong partners should have been enough to maintain Romania in a safe zone .
 Young and still vulnerable democracies represent significant opportunities for the Russian leadership to create unrest and instability, according to the Russian government .
 Romania along with many other states in the region are the main targets of the Russian Federation’s actions, with different levels of intensity in accordance with the political conditions at a certain time .
 The study used secondary research questions to explore the current security environment, the policies and the relationships between the major actors and their interaction . The study also asked questions about the relationship between actors and each other .
 The thesis encompassed detailed analysis about the Russian political, economic, economic and military relevance to the operational environment . The thesis was to understand completely the place of the Russian Federation on the international order .
 The Russian Ends, Ways and Means of the foreign affairs policies employed to accomplish its strategic objectives were very important to display the mechanisms and the patterns Kremlin uses to shape the political and social environment .
 The study shifted its focus from the general Russian foreign affairs approach to the particular case of Romania .
 The study looked at the impact of the Russian influence on the Romanian security policies and the Romanian responses to these challenges . In the end, it was very important for the relevance of the study.
 The most common methods used within the chosen methodology were document analysis, content analysis, texts interpretation, cognitive mapping and limited quantitative data interpretations . Most common methods are document analysis and content analysis .
 The DOTMLPF indepth analysis was used to evaluate the Russian Federation on the international background . The analysis was the examination of the political, economic and especially the military situation .
 The Russian Foreign Affairs policies consideration was conducted using Ends-Ways-Means framework . The framework was used to emphasize the correlations between the political objectives established by the Kremlin's leaders .
 The last step of the analysis explored the changes generated by the Russian actions to the Romanian security strategies . The analysis used an Ends-Ways-Risks correlation between the Romania security objectives and lines of effort .
 In the last 15 to 25 years, the Romanian society became, somehow, insensitive to Russian cultural values and its influences . The Romanian society has become insensitive to the Russian culture and influences .
 The insignificant Russian minority makes the cultural influence relatively ineffective . The insignificant Russians make the culture of the minority ineffective .
 This does not mean it is immune to any kind of Russian influence, since its arsenal is quite diverse . However, this does not means it is immunity to any type of Russia influence .
Today’s employment of Russian instruments of national power in Romania transformed the general DIME into a more moderate version . That highlights diplomatic-political and informational components, according to a report .
 The most preferred diplomatic topic of the Russian officials is the Ballistic Missile Defense System . The most common diplomatic topic is the missile defense system .
 Deveselu military base turned into a key element of the Russian propaganda used to spread disinformation about its offensive capabilities throughout the Russian audience and to create unrest in Romania .
 The Kremlin is using this theme to gain support of the international public opinion by portraying the West as breaking the international treaties . The Kremlin says Romania became an innocent target of the Russian missiles, caught in the middle of a dispute .
 NATO will consolidate its presence along the Eastern flank. This rhetoric will continue to develop, as NATO will consolidate its presence .
 Militarily, the overall influence on NATO (viewed as the United States and its Western allies) transfers to the Romanian Armed Forces as well .
Military equipment acquisition programs accelerated and their objects diversified . Military equipment acquisition Programs accelerated. Military equipment acquisitions programs accelerated .
 Russian investments are occupying the third place in Romania . Economically, Romania has a certain energy independence, but Russia is occupying third place .
 It is not a crucial level, but it is still important, if not considering EU member states investments .
 The energy diplomacy promoted by Russian authorities in the region does not affect Romania . There are some imports from Russia of natural gas and petroleum, especially in the wintertime .
 The population negative perception of the Russian policies is an obstacle difficult to overcome . Russia's political orientation, the population's negative perception, is also an obstacle .
 There is a Russian strategy to influence Romania as part of a broader plan to influence the entire region in accordance with its own interests . To sum up and answer the primary research question, there is a key question .
An authoritarian control of the internal political situation will ultimately enable Russia to achieve its ambition to obtain universal recognition as a major world power with an important role on the international order paradigm . Russia's power will ultimately help Russia achieve its ambitions to achieve universal recognition.
 It employed a systematic approach to impose its will in the former Soviet region, in the European environment and finally in the international affairs . It employed the same approach as it did in the past .
 Russia using informational and diplomatic campaigns to spread the Russian narrative among the Romanian population . Russia is targeting the younger generation as well as the older communist nostalgic, but with limited results .
 Russia is an important player in the major European decisions . Peter the Great Czar was the first Russian player to play in Europe's major European games .
 The Kremlin is using diplomacy and information tools to influence political decisions in both younger Eastern democracies and in the Western societies .
Eurosceptic parties in countries to held future elections. Praising the UK's role in the Turkish turmoil is part of a strategy to promote bilateral agreements with EU members .
 In Romania, a young democracy with internal political and social struggles, Russia is using strong informational methods to criticize the European and U.S. policies . Russia is also spreading the Russian propaganda presenting Russia as the only viable alternative to the savage Western-style capitalism .
 Russia aims to reemerge as an international power, emphasizing its military power and challenging the major world players by continuing its militarization process in the Arctic zone . The Anti-Access Area Denial zone from Kaliningrad enclave to Crimea and parts of the Middle East and through military intervention
 In Romania, Russia is conducting reduced Information operations to frighten the population regarding the security risks raised by NATO equipment and troop’s presence .
 This strategy acknowledged new hybrid and asymmetric forms of warfare comprised of mixed methods between military operations, criminal activities, social media interference and cyberattacks .
 The new strategy identified the risks, main directions and the lines of effort for the security and defense institutions to follow .
 Most of the new strategy objectives identify the ‘actions from the Eastern proximity’ as the main security risks . Most of new strategies identify “action from the eastern proximity” as the biggest security risks.
 Accelerated integration process into western organizations and security cooperation with regional and international partners will enable Romania to protect its interests, its sovereignty, its borders and critical infrastructure and the rule of law and democratic values .
 Romania must counter efficiently the Information operations conducted from its Eastern proximity . Romania must protect the rule of law, freedom of justice, human rights, to fight corruption, to improve business environment .
 The frozen conflicts and inter-ethnic tensions in the Romanian vicinity are adding pressure to the security environment . The frozen conflict and inter/ethnic tensions are also adding pressure.
 Predicting and countering disturbances on the energy markets are very important to ensure Romania’s energy security .
 Recommendations generate a wide range of recommendations, starting with a necessary increase of the means and ways to counterbalance the Russian diplomatic and informational offensive and ending with enhanced military cooperation .
 A political and economic environment, free of corruption and sustained by powerful democratic institution can lay down the path to prosperity for the Romanians, says the author .
 Education is probably the most important weapon against manipulation and ignorance . Education is a weapon against manipulations and ignorance, according to CNN .
 Romanian security problem is not only complex but also crucial to the Romanian security issue . From an academic point of view, the research perspective opened by this thesis is not just complex but crucial to security .
Future studies can concentrate on different topics using this work as a reference and a starting point . Future studies can use this work to focus on other topics .
 There can be examinations of the Romanian available means to counter the Russian influence on the society, the military or economic actors to identify the necessary future investments in security .
 Other studies can focus on the relationships between Romania and Russia, in the Black Sea Region context and challenges .
 The Russian influence on the Romanian security industry is a valid research subject . The process of transition towards Western military “products’ is also a validResearch subject .
 The BMD system and the “first strike’s nuclear strategy could be an interesting research opportunity to counterbalance the Russian narrative and myths about the system in the NATO and Romanian defense architecture .
 This center could be a great facilitator for Romanian leaders to understand better the relationships between different states, societies and systems within Eurasia .
 Romania broke the majority of the Russian Federation culture and values after the collapse of communism in 1989 .
 If Romanian elites will follow the trend, it will be a significant mistake . But, if the Romanian elites are following it, it would be a mistake .
 Knowledge is power and knowing the risks and influences around will help the leaders to act coherently and efficiently, says the author .
 The thesis could be a reflection point for the Romanian audience. It could be about the vulnerabilities of a relatively small nation placed in a complex geostrategic environment . The Romanian government is determined to prevail and to return into its European family .
 The slow accumulation of small actions, none of which is a casus belli, but which add up over time to a major strategic change, is a slow accumulation .
 Framework to analyze capabilities within the “domains of doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities .
 DOTMLPF is a joint term and analysis methodology that originated in the Army . The Army's analysis methodology is based on the same methodology as the Army's .
 This is a regional organization to foster multilateral political and economic initiatives regarding cooperation, peace and stability in the Black Sea region . This is an international organization. This is the first time a regional group has been formed to foster cooperation and peace .
 It was initiated at 25 June 1992, in Istanbul by the "Bosphorus Statement" Summit Declaration . It was signed by Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania, Romania and Ukraine .
 Turkey vetoed Cyprus application and Greece vetoed Macedonia application . Greece vetoed the application . Turkey vetoed the Cyprus application .
An agreement regarding the regime of the straits established in 1936 gives Turkey control over the Bosporus and the Dardanelles . It regulates the transit of naval warships and restricts the passage of naval ships not belonging to Black Sea states .
 Atlantic Resolve is a U.S. military commitment to collective security through a series of actions designed to reassure NATO allies and partners of America's dedication to enduring peace and stability in the region .
 The U.S. initiative began in 2014 as a consequence of the Russian revanchist attitude and its aggressions in Ukraine . It is an initiative to reassure its allies that the United States remains committed to maintain the peace and stability in Europe .
 The High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy is a member of the EU .
 General Philip Breedlove, Commander United States Forces Europe, EUCOM Posture . Breedlove is the commander of U.S. Forces Europe . He is the leader of the United States Armed Forces Europe.
 Analysis of Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe, an appropriate United States Response, and the implications of U.S. Landpower .
 Assessment in Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe and Recommendation in How to Leverage Landpower to Maintain the Peace .
 Russian Military Strategy:Impacting 21 st Century Reform and Geopolitics . The Russian military strategy is based on Russia's "21st Century Reform"
 Strategia Militara is a Romaniei in Contextul Noilor Repere Europene . It is the name of the Romanian city of Rome .
 Oliker, Olga, Christopher S Chivvis, Keith Crane, Olesya Tkacheva, and Scott Boston are among the stars of the show .
 Master’s Thesis, United States Army Command and General Staff College, Ft.S. A.C. Thesis is a master's Thesis . Thesis was held at the U.S.-based Army College in Fort.