 Ukraine puts more sanctions on Russia, changing foreign currency laws, and expected to nationalize all Russian banks and businesses inside Ukraine . Ukraine is also expected to change its own currency laws .
 A significant increase in Russian optempo in Donbass including the bombardment of civilian settlements . The increase in civilian settlements has been seen in recent years .
 Homeland Defence Minister Avakov launches planning for de-occupation of Donbass . Col. Col. Avakov also launches plans for Donbass de-Occupation .
 Girkin has paranoid fears of an AFU offensive to wipe out the proxy force . Girkin says AFU is trying to take control of the military .
 Javelin testing in Ukraine imminent, while NGU takes delivery of US-made PSRL-1 clone RPGs . NGU also taking delivery of U.S. made PS RL-1 clones .
 Savchenko made some bizarre statements, including a bizarre statement about the Ukraine crisis .
 SBU raids RIA Novosti and Russia Today offices in Kyiv for conducting infowar against Ukraine . Bureau Chief of RIAN detained and charged with high treason .
 Russia has a special right to conduct infowar without hindrance. Russia howls, demonstrating again exceptionalism . Russia has the right to carry out infowars without hindance, says the author .
 The sad fate of Ukraine’s military dolphin pod a major media topic in the West .
 Ukraine's central bank governor says liberalization of Ukraine's arcane foreign exchange controls will make it a much more investor-friendly place .
 The Verkhovna Rada is expected to consider a historic proposal to replace 25-year-old foreign exchange legislation with an entirely new law . The new law will open our country to international investors and make it easier for Ukrainian businesses to operate globally .
 liberalization of our arcane foreign exchange controls will make Ukraine a much more investor-friendly place . Ukraine will help the country take its rightful spot amongst the major European and global economies .
 The National Bank of Ukraine has been working to stabilize the macroeconomic situation in Ukraine for nearly four years .
 My new post-revolutionary team took over the National Bank in 2014, finding ourselves in a difficult context .
 Ukraine was not only experiencing military aggression from Russia in the East, but the profound economic turmoil that coincided with it . The National Bank has worked tirelessly to stabilize the situation and tame inflation .
 A bill to nationalize the property of Russian companies and banks in Ukraine was introduced by the Verkhovna Rada . The bill was introduced for consideration by the Rada.
 The author of the document is People’s Deputy Roman Zvarych from the Petro Poroshenko Bloc faction .
 The document says it is necessary to transfer Ukraine property of the aggressor state . It also establishes liability for violation of legislation on sanction, the document says .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has signed a decree to expand sanctions on Russian companies and entities . The decree follows a recently adopted decision to expand the sanctions on Russia .
 President Petro Poroshenko has signed a decree on putting into effect the decision of the National Security and Defense Council on the application and cancellation of personal special economic and other restrictive measures to individuals and companies .
 Angela Merkel expresses concern about repeated violations of a cease-fire between Ukrainian forces and Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 A family, including a teenager, was killed in the village of Troyitske, Luhansk region .
 The woman is in a critical condition in hospital in Donetsk . Chairman of the Donetsk Military and Civil Administration Pavlo Zhebrivskiy said she is in the critical condition .
 Russian-led forces mounted 50 attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas in the past day . They used heavy weapons 19 times, including heavy weapons .
 No casualties are reported among the Ukrainian military since the beginning of the day . No casualties have been reported since the day.
 The enemy used mortars and Grad multiple rocket launchers in Luhansk and Donetsk regions . The enemy also used mortar and Grad rocket launchers .
 Fierce fighting with Russian-led troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, continued on Saturday, May 12 . One Ukrainian soldier was killed in action, another four were wounded in action .
 The casualties of the Russian-led forces include one killed and six wounded troops . The casualties include one dead and six injured troops .
 Ukraine says one of its soldiers has been killed and two wounded in clashes in the country’s east .
 Russian-led troops in Donbas shelled a school in the Ukrainian town of Svitlodarsk, Donetsk region . One civilian was wounded in the incident .
 Units of Ukraine’s Joint Forces seized enemy weapons near the town of Maryinka in Donbas .
 The weapons are being transferred to the area of the Ukrainian troops’ withdrawal . Currently, the weapons are in the area.
 The SBU has held several events for almost a year to brief on the war crimes committed by PMC Wagner in Ukraine . TheSBU has been in Ukraine for nearly a year.
 Russia-backed separatists who control the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk have unveiled their newest multiple launch rocket systems . The Cheburashka is the latest in a long line of rocket systems to be unveiled .
 The Cheburashka is a 217mm multiple launch rocket system developed by Ukrainian separatists . The CheBurashka was developed by Ukraine's separatists .
 The new Cheburashka MLRS fitted with two launcher units each able to fire 32 rockets . According to Russian media, the new launcher units can fire 32 missiles .
 The main role of the Cheburashka system is to support Russia-backed separatists troops with suppressive fire to counter mortar positions, destroy enemy nodes of resistance .
 The rocket launcher pods are mounted on a mobile elevatable launcher platform . The pods can be mounted on an elevated launcher platform.
 The rocket launcher weapon system is mounted at the rear of the KrAZ-260 truck chassis . The vehicle has a rocket launcher system at the back of the vehicle .
 Russia-backed separatists showed improvised 23 mm heavy sniper rifle . The MLRS can launch rockets directly from the cab or remotely from outside of the truck cab with a cable .
 The Command of the Ukrainian Joint Forces Operation in the Donbas requested in a Facebook post that all media and bloggers avoid posting data on tactical movements of the Ukraine Armed Forces .
 On April 30, Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko officially announced the completion of the Anti-Terrorist Operation and the beginning of the Joint Forces Operation in the Donbas .
 Interior Minister Arsen Avakov has launched a campaign for de-occupation of Donbas, eastern Ukraine . State Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine Oleksiy Takhtay says.
 It is important at this stage to receive information from international partners and their support, Takhtay said .
 Igor Girkin, nom de guerre Strelkov, claims everything is ready in the Armed Forces of Ukraine to liberate most of the occupied region .
 Russia has begun a de-facto blockade of Ukrainian ports of the Sea of Azov . Chairman of People’s Front parliamentary faction, Maksym Burbak does not rule out the blockade .
 Petro Poroshenko plans to participate in the testing of Javelin anti-tank missiles until the end of May .
 The United States Javelins to Ukraine confirms the weakening of Russia at the international arena . She noted that the provision of the U.S. Javelin to Ukraine confirmed the weakening.
 The Javelin anti-tank missile system delivery to Ukraine was announced earlier .
 Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov says the National Guard has received the first batch of U.S.-made anti-tank grenade launchers PSRL-1 .
 Critics warn that such move would risk greater division in Ukraine and throughout the Orthodox world . Euronews Agency Critics say such move could risk greater divisions in Ukraine .
 The State Food Safety and Consumer Protection Service of Ukraine says the country has obtained the right to export beef to the Turkish market . The agency says it has obtained a right to exports to Turkey .
 The harmonization of the veterinary certificate for Ukrainian beef exports to Turkey is at its final stage . The harmonizing of the Veterinary certificate for Ukraine is at the final stage of the process .
 The radical activists were angered after a statement against the renaming of streets for World War II-era Ukrainian nationalists was included in a broadcast .
 Members of a far-right Ukrainian group disrupted an LGBT event in Kyiv on May 10 without Ukrainian police intervening . Amnesty International said in a May 11 statement, Amnesty International.
 Ukrainian Member of Parliament Nadiia Savchenko says she is ready to serve 22 years in Russian prisons in exchange for 60 Kremlin hostages . Savchenko is suspected of plotting terrorist attacks and seizing state power .
 Some people think there is no growth of anti-Semitism in Ukraine . If there are any cases – it is the Kremlin’s intrigues.
 Even a letter of American congressmen about the situation with anti-Semitism in Poland and Ukraine was assessed as something that was inspired by Russia .
 I consider it unacceptable to bring this shameful phenomenon to Ukraine – as it recently took place during the actions in Lviv and Odesa . I consider this unacceptable to bringing it to Ukraine .
 No cases of anti-Semitic violence were reported in Ukraine in 2017, according to the PEW Research Center poll . The level ofAnti-Semitism in Ukraine is lowest in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Savchenko has appealed to the court with a request to bring her from the remand center to the sessions of the Verkhovna Rada .
 The guards cannot enter the session hall, there are such laws and rules . Then wait for me near the doors while I am working in the sessions hall .
 Savchenko claimed that a lot of cases of corruption take place . Savchenko said he was on the National Security and Defense Committee .
Workers of the Security Service of Ukraine and the Prosecutor’s Office of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea exposed the network of the media entities controlled by the Russian Federation .
 The law enforcement bodies hold the investigative actions at the office of RIA News-Ukraine . A spokeswoman of the SBU reported on Facebook .
 The SBU officers are conducting searches in the office of RIA Novosti Ukraine . The press secretary of the Ukrainian SBU Security Service’s chief, Olena Gitlianska, has said the searches are being conducted .
 Russia Today's Margarita Simonyan says the officers of the SBU Security Service of Ukraine have blocked the work of the channel’s Kyiv office .
 The actions of Kyrylo Vyshynsky, the Head of RIA News-Ukraine, were preliminarily qualified as state treason .
 The preliminary qualification of the crime is the state treason . At the moment, the preliminary qualification is the State treason .
 Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky has been indicted on charges of high treason . He was detained on May 15 and charged with treason .
 Kirill Vyshinsky was detained in Kyiv on May 15 . He was paid EUR 53,000 every month for discrediting the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 Petro Poroshenko introduced the decision of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine on additional measures for the counterwork against Russia's informational aggression in February .
 We are not losing the information war, in fact, we are winning it, and there are many examples . We are winning the information wars, and we are not lost it .
Volunteers, civil society, and the state are doing everything possible for this, he stressed .
 Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky was detained on May 15 and was indicted on charges of high treason in Ukraine . He has admitted in court that he has both Russian and Ukrainian passports .
 Ukrainian court has ordered the head of a major Russian state news agency’s branch in Ukraine held for two months . The case drew angry criticism from Moscow and expressions of concern from media watchdogs .
 The head of a major Russian state news agency’s branch in Ukraine has been transferred to the southern region of Kherson for prosecution . He was arrested in Kyiv on suspicion of treason and is now being held in the south .
 Authorities in Ukraine say they arrested a senior journalist from a Kremlin-funded news agency . The journalist faces up to 15 years in jail for treason for treason .
 Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky was detained on May 15 . He was indicted on charges of high treason in Ukraine .
 Vyshinsky charged with treason should be arrested until July 13 pending an investigation into his case . The Kherson City Court in Ukraine’s south ruled on May 17 that the case should be investigated .
 Ukrainian state security agents searched the offices of Russian state news agency RIA Novosti and detained the director of its Kiev office . They accused RIA of being used in an “information war’ by Russia against Ukraine .
 Relations between Kiev and Moscow nose-dived after Moscow annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 . Moscow backed a separatist insurgency in Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region that has killed more than 10,000 .
 The military had been using the secretive unit since the ’70s . The bottlenose dolphins were apprehended by Russia when it annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Ukraine’s military-trained dolphins may have died because the aquatic commandos refused to eat the rations provided by their new handlers after the Russian takeover in Crimea, an official says .
 Ukrainian representative said the dolphins died after going on a hunger strike .
 The sea mammals were being trained in a Soviet-era facility in Sevastopol . It breeds marine assistants for the navy .
 Ex-Ukrainian Navy combat dolphins die in the occupied Crimea . They refuse to be fed by Russian instructors .
 Combat dolphins that previously served with Ukraine’s Navy deceased in annexed Crimea . They were stationed in Crimea where they were stationed .
 The mammals who lived and trained at the naval base in Sevastopol, Ukraine, contacted with the Ukrainian military using special whistles .
 Russian instructors received whistles and the rest of the equipment from the dolphins . The dolphins refused to contact them or even take food from them .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has opened the country’s newly built bridge to the annexed Crimean Peninsula . Putin drove a truck across the controversial span .
 The bridge spans a treacherous strait between the Black and Azov seas . The bridge gives a key link to the Russian mainland .
 The Russian leader jumped behind the wheel of an orange dump truck . He led the charge across the 12-mile bridge connecting the two regions for the first time .
 The bridge over the Kerch Strait will be of use for the Russian occupants when they have to leave the Ukrainian peninsula . The bridge will be used for the Russians when they leave.
 Russia has defended the construction and opening of a road-and-rail bridge to Crimea this week . Russia has faced international criticism over the construction of the bridge .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin rode a truck to inaugurate the newly-built bridge . The bridge connects mainland Russia to the annexed Crimean peninsula .
 The U.S. State Department condemned the opening of the $3. billion bridge . It says it violates Ukrainian integrity and impedes the navigation of ships into Ukraine from the Sea of Azov .
 The Russian Federation has responded to the criticism of the U.S. on the Crimean bridge . It will not ask for anybody’s permission to build transport infrastructure on the peninsula .
 Canada condemns construction and partial opening of Kerch Strait Bridge . Canada condemns the construction and opening of the bridge .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin will mark the opening of the Kerch strait bridge . The bridge has become a symbol of Putin's 18-year rule .
Four years after annexing Crimea, the Russian leader unveiled a bridge to Russia . The builder's feline mascot has become famous all over the country .
 A blue and yellow drone playing the Ukrainian anthem was launched in the Russian-occupied city of Simferopol on May 18 .
 On May 18, Ukraine marks the Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Crimean Tatar Genocide . The Day of Struggle for the Rights of the Crimean Tatars is also known as Day of struggle for the rights of the Crimea .
 Representatives of human rights organizations earlier criticized the presidential bill .
 Avraam Shmulyevich says Moscow is forming Latin American-style “death squads’ in occupied Crimea . Shmulevich: Kremlin plans to use them to promote militarization of society, suppression of dissent .
 The two post-Soviet Chechen wars showed the Kremlin that “the post- Soviet people do not want to die,” Shmulyevich continues .
 Many analysts say Putin's attitude has prevented him from engaging in even broader forms of aggression abroad .
 "This work has begun with children," says Shmulyevich . “this work has began with children,’ he says .
 The Kremlin hopes that as a result of their experiences, they will want to fight more than the current younger generation .
 Israeli analyst: All other independent youth subcultures and groups have been chipped away at, discredited and set to fight one another .
Young people are being transformed into “chained dogs of the regime’ in various spheres, says Shmulyevich . This process is especially well advanced and worrisome in Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The peninsula is strategically close to the Mediterranean basin and the main communication lines of the West . It is important if there is a war, especially if a war .
Russian elites have gotten used to the thought that there is nothing terrible in nuclear war, he says . He says it is completely possible to make use of tactical nuclear weapons .
 The reason Moscow has formed these death squad-like detachments in occupied Crimea is that they can be used there, shifted to Russia itself, or used in the event of a war .
 Russia can suppress dissent on the Ukrainian peninsula, they can attack demonstrators in Russia . They can become a target in the event of a war, and they can also attack demonstrators.
 This process involved “the ideological processing of people and the creation of a certain ‘fifth column’’ Shmulyevich says .
 Shmulyevich: "If a serious war should begin, it is not excluded that part of these people will be used for diversionary actions’
 Israeli analyst Shmulyevich says Putin's militarization program won't end up in the kind of ‘death squads’ The phenomenon is disturbing, he says . Some of them likely have and more may in the future, he adds .