 In the first paper above, I place Chabad Lubavitch at an unknown position in the Judeocentric Power Complex . In the second paper, he places Lubavitches at anunknown position .
 Banksters, Frankists and Donmeh use Chabad to hide behind in a gemütlich tribal scheme against the goyim . They appear to be foremost according to Ipatyev’s article, but there are more important groups above them .
Radical Zionist sect Chabad seeks to move to Ukraine from the USA . The sect has already milked dry, the sect says .
 Dnepropetrovsk Chabad and Kolomoyski, who finances and directs fascist punitive operation in Donetsk and Lugansk, are trying to make Ukraine over into a promised land . Another Promised Land can't be, but DnEPropetroversk Ch
 Today we will read the scroll of Esther, as we have done over thousands of years on Purim .
 President Vladimir Putin's plans thwart Chabad – Lubavitch’s new Zion in Ukraine .
 Donetsk and Lugansk republics, and later, of the whole South – East Ukraine, are separating . Even more painful is the process of separating the Donetsk, Lugansk and Donetsk republics .
 Flimsy new Jerusalem began to fall apart as soon as builders started it . builders lied and betrayed, sacrificed ordinary Ukrainians with cruelty unprecedented for 21st century .
 Builders of new Khazaria unleashed all their hatred of Russia and Russians, against Putin and his team . They called the new Russian president Aman, thereby emphasizing his patriotism and understanding of the enormous danger in the plans by Kolomoyski and the Chabad.
 Kaminetski’s reference to a millennial common history on Ukrainian land is more important for grasping the root causes of Kolomoyski's revolution .
 Khazar Jews fled in the 10th century after the defeat of Khazaria . To White Tower area, KhazarJews fled to White Tower .
 The Khazars have moved to Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine, as a contributor to the ‘city on a hill’ — the new Jerusalem .
 In Dnepropetrovsk a temple was built for Schneersona to sit on his throne . It is Europe’s largest complex of this type of temple .
 The Lubavitchers no longer expect Moshiach in Israel, but on the Ukrainian soil, recreating Khazaria, a new historical homeland, because they don’t remember Israel .
 Motives of the coup were not as much religious as political as political, but had been covered up with fictitin to hide the truth .
 Maidan victory on February 22, 2014, benefited those who had been shaping people's anger at President Yanukovych and his corrupt cabal .
 All those who have called the Ukrainian people to revolt, to take action against the police and Special Forces “Berkut’s ‘Berku’ The Ukrainian people have called for the uprising against police, Special Forces .
 Chabad has won the revolution in Ukraine, but its goal was hidden deep in the bowels of the new government . Chabad's goal was to win the revolution, but it was hidden inside the bowel of the government .
 Owing only to lightning Crimean operation, it became clear to those who care about the fate of the Ukrainian people .
 The goal is to recreate Khazaria in Ukraine, with Schneerson on the throne . The goal will be to recreateKhazaria. The goal was to recreate the Khazarian in Ukraine .
 The coup benefoted not the Khazars nor Khazar Jews but the invited Jews and world-wide Jewry . The coupbenefited not theKhazars or Khazar Jewry but the Jews .
 Obadiah received the title Bey, which means malik in Arabic,e. He headed the government of nominal Khan who was kept in custody and paraded before the people once a year .
 Kolomoyski distributes roles and appoints his representatives to public office . Turchynov, Yatsenyuk, Avakov and Nalyvaichenko constitute just a collective “nominal Kagan’s”
Money and political influence of Chabad Lubavitch helped the Maidan revolution . The Khazaria awaited for resettling to, after the United States collapse and before the imminent war in the Middle East .
 IMF and ECB "professional actions" aimed at redistribution of influence in the Ukrainian economy . But ordinary Jewish communities lose with this neighbor monster of international politics .
 The oligarchs, long-time members of Chabad, will benefit, having invested money and influence in the revolution . The oligarch will benefit from the revolution.
 A Christian Orthodox entity, Crimean Gothia separated from the Khazars and joined the Byzantine Empire .
 Recent accession of Crimea to Russia was due to the enormous influence of the peninsula in Ukraine . The entire Ukrainian people were affected by the influence of Crimea .
 Crimea is most important geostrategically in the Black Sea region and the Middle East . Crimea is the most important region in the world, according to the UN .
 The neo-Khazar organizers in Washington and Dnepropetrovsk know it well . Putin was faster, leaving no chance to the Kolomoyski junta nor their Chabad bosses .
 Attitude towards Russia and Russians became a test for the tens of millions of Ukrainians . Attitude to Russia and Russia became a Test for tens of Millions of Ukrainians.
 Those who considered themselves Russian, grasped the goal of Kiev junta and rallied against it .
 Ukrainians who hate Russia and Russians, defend the junta's fascism, against their own interest, agree to the revival of Khazaria . Those who considered themselves “ordinary’s Ukrainians’ who hate Russian and Russians. Those who consider themselves ‘
 Obadiah's coup targetted tribal aristocracy of all ethnic groups of the Khazar Khanat that got on with the Turkic dynasty .
 A civil war erupted, with Hungarians fighting on the rebel side, and mercenary Pechenegs on the Jewish side .
 A Gentile harming a Jew does it to God Himself deserving death, according to Babylonian Talmud . It was a ruthless war, as according to Talmud, a Gentile harms a Jew .
 Right Sector thugs of Chabad member Yarosh and his own assault troops were hired for considerable money . Not trusting the troops when ordered to shoot at Ukrainians, in the rear Kolomoyski put the right sector thugs of Yarosh as well as the assault troops .
 The entire punitive military campaign is not paid by Kolomoyski, but by his subordinate government of Yatsenyuk that fights Ukrainians with their own money .
 Fueled by Chabad hate propaganda, this bloodthirst of fallen un-humans led to the grisly tragedy in Odessa on May 2 .
 More than a hundred were burned alive and shot in Odessa’s House of Trade Unions .
Cold-blooded bandits poured napalm on victim’s head and ignited it, and then filmed the living torches rushing through the corridors . The epilogue of Kolomoyski fascism is the epilogy of Kolmoyski Fascism .
 The executioners are not citizens of a free country, but have become slaves to Chabad . Chabad is the capital of the Chabad province . The executions have been carried out in Chabad.
After this war, Khazaria changed its appearance, and it now has a new look . It's not amenable to dating, but it's changed its look .
 From an integral system it has become an unnatural, amorphous mass of subjects under the ruling class of alien blood and religion .
 An ethnosocial chimera escapes classification. It’s not feudalism, since an ethnossocial chimera escaped classification . The chimera is a social chimera, not a feudalism .
After May 2, 2014, Ukraine has lost its previous statehood, never mind that under anti-people government in Kiev . The Ukraine government has been in power since the beginning of the year .
 Chabad brought Odessa holocaust to their altar, just like the killing of Mariupol police officers on May 9, 2014, for refusing to shoot civilians .
 The name “Ukraine and Ukrainian culture were destroyed, becoming the symbol of horror fascism that has grown from forced Ukrainization of the “Nenko’s population.”
After the referenda on Donetsk and Lugansk independence, the secessionist federation’s militia began a total destruction of storm troopers .
 Fight for freedom, supported by millions of citizens in Ukraine, will now spill over beyond Donbass borders .
 The first tranche of the IMF loan did not go to pay for Russian gas . But was divided between the top of the Dniepropetrovsk Chabad and the Ukrainian oligarchs .
 Amorphous Ukraine is collapsing, passing her fate into the hands of New Russia and its staunch supporters and defenders .
 It became clear that there would not be any return to the old life of Khazaria in Ukraine .
 Chabad Jews in Kiev create self-defense units not to protect Kolomoyski junta, but to buy time for export of their savings .
 Fascist thugs continue punitive campaign against independent Donbass, shooting Kiev soldiers in the back and finishing off the wounded . This rage is not as dangerous as a week ago.
 The Rubicon has been crossed, and the militia of free republics rightly plan a march on Kiev and Dnepropetrovsk, in order to destroy the lair of the fascist traitors and oppressors of New Russia’s free people .
 This main question should be resolved today, otherwise one regime will be replaced by another . The main question is whether one regime should be replaced with another .
 The western regions significantly differ from the eastern ones, as far as the relation to property and collectivization of labor are concerned .
 It is necessary to develop the principle that strategic enterprises become the property of the people,e. the state .
 Land properrty is transferred in perpetuity to those who are not middlemen, but want to be the master in construction .
 Natural resources can not be transferred into private hands, foreign concessions or cartels citizens, but should be national asset . Natural resources should not be taken into privatehands, foreign concessioners or cartel citizens .
 The entire Ukrainian nation needs to understand the ultimate goals of New Russia, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says New Russia is a new nation, but the goal is to become a new country .