 Crowds of smiling families turned out to wave tiny yellow and blue Ukrainian flags in the summer sunshine .
 August 24 is the anniversary of the day the country won its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . It was August 24, the day it was the first anniversary of its independence .
 This year's Independence Day carried particular symbolism, since pro-Russian separatists held eastern regions of the country .
 The celebrations were intended to shore up support for Poroshenko, who three months before had won the presidency .
 The Kiev display of military hardware mirrored the annual parades that had rumbled over Red Square in Communist times . President Vladimir Putin reinstated the parades to showcase a resurgent Russia .
 Crimea may have been lost without a fight, but eastern Ukraine would be different . Ukraine would have been different, but it's not clear what happened .
 The columns of armor Poroshenko said would be sent directly from Independence Square to the front line would hardly be enough to stop a stealth invasion by Russian troops .
Russian ambush of Ukrainian forces forced Poroshenko to plead for an immediate cease-fire . The battle may not be the last in the struggle for Ukraine .
 It took Poroshenko four days to publicly acknowledge the terrible news .
 Several hundred Ukrainian soldiers in Ilovaisk had been surrounded, their rear guard along the Ukraine-Russian border crushed or beaten .
 The Russian forces simply marched in, says Lieutenant General Ruslan Khomchak .
 The Russian advance came to its climax on the 23rd anniversary of Ukraine's declaration of independence from the Kremlin . It was hardly a coincidence the Russian advance.
 The assault left 10 Ukrainian soldiers dead and the woods around them flattened, a general recalls . The assault killed 10 soldiers and flattened the woods, he says .
 Khomchak understood that his invisible foe was cutting off his only escape route . But he couldn't obtain permission from the military commanders in Kiev to make an orderly withdrawal .
Ukraine's lopsided war with Russia began in April when armed men started seizing administrative buildings in the eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Instead, his troops started making contact with the approaching Russian juggernaut .
 Ukrainian forces retook the transport hub of Slovyansk in early July . Donetsk and Luhansk are self-proclaimed republics . Their ideology is a mishmash of Communist-era slogans, czarist imperialism and Russian Orthodox Church iconography .
 On July 17, the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 over separatist-held territory shocked world .
 The Ukrainian military, bolstered by newly formed volunteer battalions, appeared to be on a roll . Rebels denied they possessed rockets capable of bringing down a passenger airliner at cruising altitude .
 Whenever Ukrainian forces approached, they were met by intense Russian artillery fire, officials in Kiev say .
 If they were to seize Ilovaisk, commanders believed, they would be able to cut the highway serving as the Russian supply line to rebels in Donetsk .
 The battalions didn't lack fighting spirit, but their original function was to police areas liberated by the army, not to take on a full-scale invasion .
 A campaign on social media demanded the Kiev government provide immediate relief for the hapless volunteers stuck in Ilovaisk . It soon became clear there were insufficient reserves available to tip the battle in Kiev's favor .
 The only reinforcements arriving in force were coming to save the rebels . Sector D was a Ukrainian defensive line along the Russian border .
 The convoy we destroyed had simply gotten lost, recalls Yuriy Bereza, commander of the Dnipro Battalion .
 The Ukrainians captured two dozen Russian troops in the ensuing skirmishes . The Ukrainians capture two dozen Russians in the fighting .
Nine captured Russian paratroopers were paraded in Kiev on August 27 . Putin had strenuously denied that Russia was party to the Ukrainian conflict .
 A second column of Russian armor has entered Ukraine at Novoazovsk and was closing in on the port city of Mariupol on the road that links Russia to Crimea . frustrations broke into the open between local Ukrainian volunteer police battalions&mdash;which answer to the Interior
 Donbas Battalion commander Semyon Semenchenko was wounded in Ilovaisk . He posted an interview on his Facebook page accusing the central military leadership of abandoning his comrades .
 Bereza offered to release two Russian prisoners&mdash . In return for the safe passage of the Ukrainians trapped in Ilovaisk .
 The Russians stalled, providing Ukrainian commanders with a new escape route . They demanded the Ukrainians surrender their weapons and suggested to Khomchak that he leave behind the volunteer battalions .
 The convoy continued along a field road until it reached the outskirts of Starobesheve .
 The second Ukrainian column, which traveled out of Mnohopillya, experienced a similar fate . Hiding by day and walking by night, the men reached Ukrainian lines two days later .
 Hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers were dead, missing or captured, and practically all their equipment was destroyed .
Residents of Ilovaisk felt embittered and forgotten after almost three weeks of shelling .
 Homes, the hospital and the school where the Ukrainian military had set up base all bear the scars of bullets and bombs .
 Skeletons of trucks stand frozen in fields where drivers tried in vain to escape .
 A piece of a rocket, a pile of helmets and a charred pack of cigarettes lie on the shoulder . A pile of helmet helmets and cigarettes are among the items lying on the shoulders of the rocket .
 Mikhail Tolstykh, 34, claims Ukrainian forces never even entered the town&mdash . He goes by the nom de guerre Givi, a former driver .
 Givi is seated behind his desk in the railway police station in Ilovaisk . "It's history. It's history," he says . The police station is located in the city of Ilovisk .
 He completed the 11th grade and received his only military training as a conscript in a Ukrainian tank unit outside Kiev . He says he completed his 11thgrade and received the only training in the tank unit .
 Ukrainian commanders say they held with Russian officers for the Ukrainians' safe passage . When the conversation turns to the negotiations, Givi's voice rises .
 I respect and love that country and have always supported the policies of Putin and Medvedev . I respect the country and support Putin's policies, says the Russian president .
 Alexander Borodai and Igor Girkin, both Russian citizens, led the separatists' political and military wings until their abrupt departure in August . They left Russia in August after six months of fighting .
 Alexander Zakharchenko, a local electrician who succeeded Borodai, has conceded that as many as 4,000 Russian volunteers have fought for the rebels . But if incontrovertible evidence of direct Russian military involvement was hard to come by before the battle at Ilova
 They were boys, conscripts, who didn't even know they were going to war . They didn't know they would go to war, they were boys .
 The Defense Ministry's Danylyuk doesn't deny there were problems in coordination&mdash . After all, the Ukrainian armed forces had been neglected for 20 years .
 Without declaring war, they entered our territory and started fighting . Without declaringwar, they started fighting in our territory .
 The relative lull in the fighting is seen more as a chance to swap prisoners, regroup and rearm to fight another day . The Relative lull is seen as more as an opportunity to fight again .
 Poroshenko himself has admitted that 65 percent of Ukraine's armor was destroyed .
 Ukrainian serviceman stands next to the destroyed Grad multiple rocket launcher system .
 The Kiev display of military hardware mirrored the annual parades that had rumbled over Red Square in Communist times . President Vladimir Putin reinstated the parades to showcase a resurgent Russia .
 The columns of armor Poroshenko said would be sent directly from Independence Square to the front line would hardly be enough to stop a stealth invasion by regular Russian troops .
 Putin is fighting for control over what he calls "Novorossiya" or "New Russia" It is a czarist-era designation for southeastern Ukraine . But it proved to be a milestone in the country's recent history .
Ukrainian forces have narrowed the ring around Luhansk and the other rebel stronghold in Donetsk .
 Russian troops pouring across the eastern border near Amvrosiivka and barreling toward the rail junction at Ilovaisk . Ukrainian officials were dumbstruck in the face of an incursion by the regular Russian army .
 Ukrainian forces were worn out and spread dangerously thin across hundreds of miles of countryside . By early August, Ukrainian forces had been worn out.
 volunteer battalions Dnipro and Donbas, made up of weekend warriors, were sent in on August 18 . There was not enough Ukrainian infantry available to take Ilovaisk .
The two sides fought each other to a stalemate, with the Ukrainians hunkered down to the west of the train line that bisects Ilovaisk . A terrified civilian population caught in the ferocious crossfire . His unit suffered two dead and eight wounded.
Ukrainian soldiers are briefed by a commander before fighting commences against militants . The only reinforcements arriving in force were coming to save the rebels .
 Sector D, a Ukrainian defensive line along the Russian border, crumbled as the Russian ""rescue force" plowed north toward Ilovaisk .
 Khomchak says his soldiers captured a T-72B3 tank, used only in the Russian army, fixed it up and started using it against its former owners . KhomChak says soldiers captured the tank and used it against former owners.
 A second column of Russian armor has entered Ukraine at Novoazovsk and was closing in on the port city of Mariupol . frustrations broke into the open between local Ukrainian volunteer police battalions and the Kiev military command .
 Bereza offered to release two Russian prisoners in return for the safe passage of Ukrainians trapped in Ilovaisk . Bereza offers to release the two prisoners.
 The Kremlin chief, shielded by a wall of plausible deniability, assumed the role of disinterested peacemaker . A wounded Ukrainian fighter is airlifted out at a military base camp near Kurakhovo, Donetsk Oblast on Aug., 2014 .
 Ukrainian officers say the conditions for the orderly retreat suddenly changed as morning broke .
 The Ukrainians set off along two different roads heading toward Starobesheve, a town about 15 miles away from the prisoner exchange . When his column passed through the first enemy ring, he was amazed to see so many Russian troops .
 Khomchak set out on foot through the fields with Bereza and a dozen other fighters . He was knocked out by a civilian Volkswagen Transporter .
On September 5, a fragile cease-fire went into effect . On September 5.
Ukrainian forces have narrowed the ring around Luhansk and the other rebel stronghold Donetsk .
Residents of Ilovaisk felt embittered and forgotten after almost three weeks of shelling .
"People don't feel they have to follow a president who sent his troops to kill us," says the acting principal, Larisa Chalenko . The acting principal is a petite woman wrapped in an overcoat in her windowless school .
 The road leading to Starobesheve is littered with the remains of vans and burned-out armored personnel carriers with their turrets blown off .
 The pro-Kremlin rebels who now control Ilovaisk are happy to take credit for the stunning turn of events . The rebels say they are proud of their actions .
 Mikhail Tolstykh claims Ukrainian forces never even entered the town of Givi . The 34-year-old former driver, who goes by the nom de guerre, says the town never even had a military presence .
 The gates of his base have been painted in the white-blue-red of the Russian tricolor . His young soldiers wear patches on their fatigues .
 The only aid the rebels receive from Russia is food, medicine and building materials . All their weaponry was captured from the Ukrainians .
 The bodies are of soldiers of the 93rd, 51st and 24th brigades and the Donbass Battalion killed during the battle of Ilovaisk in south-eastern Ukraine .
The question of Russian involvement has dogged the Donetsk uprising from the very start . The Donetsk uprising has seen more than 1,200 Russians killed .
 According to her data, up to 4,000 Russians have been killed or gone missing in the conflict . The data is based on data from the Russian government .
"If we were Germans, Ilovaisk would be our Stalingrad," says Sergei Ivanov, a blogger who had to flee Luhansk after the separatist takeover .
 The Defense Ministry's Danylyuk doesn't deny that there were problems in coordination . The Ukrainian armed forces had been neglected for 20 years .
On both sides of the front line, there is little confidence in the shaky cease-fire . On both sides, there are little confidence.
 A few days ago, his group of separatist fighters took the name "Somalia Battalion" because, Givi says, they are as fearless as Somali pirates . The group's leader says they are fearless and fearless .
 A broken country is currently in its 25th year of civil war . It's clear he's unaware that that broken country has been fighting for 25 years .