 Obama took control of Ukraine in February 2014, via a coup d’etat against the democratically elected President . The new Government that he imposed in Kiev was democratically very vulnerable, he says .
 Obama overthrew the new regime in Ukraine's southeast . Those southeastern voters needed to be gotten rid of in order to make the new, pro-U.S. regime stick .
 locals took over government buildings and refused to accept the new coup-imposed, anti-Russian Ukrainian Government . Then, elsewhere in Ukraine’s southeast, locals took control of government buildings .
 Obama and his newly appointed leaders of Ukraine didn't like that, and were determined to stop the rebellion . Obama and new leaders of the Ukraine didn’t like that.
 No one can understand Obama’s defeat in Ukraine who does not know that he imposed upon Ukraine a Government that was committed to an ethnic-cleansing campaign to get rid of the people that had voted for the man whom Obama overthrew .
President Obama lost this war that he started with his February coup . That’s basic to know, in order to have any possibility to understand why Obama lost the war .
 The Obama-team chose to design the ethnic-cleansing program . There were going to be concentration-camps for everyone in the southeast who supported the breakaway-movement .
 The U.S. regime always staunchly backed what the new Ukrainian Government was doing in the southeast . The United States has always backed the new Ukraine Government .
 A massacre of peaceful opponents of the new Obama-imposed Government took place in Odessa on May 2nd . The massacre occurred at the Odessa Trade Unions Building .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi, a Ukrainian billionaire, hired Joe Biden’s son and won a local governorship from Obama’'s team . The massacre was co-masterminded and was funded by a Ukrainian businessman .
 She alleged that it is they, and not the Ukrainian Government, that’s doing the “escalation,” in the Ukrainian civil war that the U.S. had started, she said .
 Ukraine's oil companies have to clear land in Ukraine's southeast to frack Ukraine's gas . The land is to be cleared to enable oil companies to drill for gas .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi, whose United States agent is Joe Biden’s son, Hunter Biden, also hired someone from John Kerry's clique . The biggest one is owned by oligarch IHor Kolomoysskyi.
 Most of the gas fields in Ukraine’s southeast are no longer assets that can be sold off to Western oil companies . The Ukrainian Government is desperate to repay the nearly $30 billion that the U.S., EU, and IMF lent to that Government to finance their ethnic-cle
 If loans don't work out, Western taxpayers will be forced to repay those lenders to Ukraine, as Western citizens pay taxes . If those loans don’t work, Western citizens will have to repay them .
 Ukrainian Government ultimately did fail to get rid of enough Ukrainians . However, our Ukrainian government ultimately did not get rid.
 Ukraine's "bilateral partners" have lent Ukraine all that they can or will, and the job was way short of being finished . The job is still to be finished .
 The best that was in prospect for any continuation of it was a long-drawn-out guerilla war . The West had neither the money, nor the will, for which the West hadNeither the money or the will .
 President Eisenhower’s Order To Force Citizens To View The Holocaust is on display .
 The IMF acted as middleman for the West’s aristocrats, protecting them from losses on their international investments . IMF member-governments absorb any aristocrat's losses .
Public in any country that borrows from the IMF get voraciously stripped . Ukraine citizens in Ukraine will increasingly recognize IMF borrows .
 Obama’s Ukraine-deal was a bummer for just about everybody, except weapons-makers .
 The reason Obama lost is that the residents in Ukraine’s southeast would rather fight to the death than yield to our nazis .
 Unlike the Jews in Nazi Germany, the ethnic Russians in Ukraine have their own guns . They also have the ones from Ukrainian troops they had killed .
 Only a few dedicated nazis on our side are on the side. But, above all, they’re willing to fight to the death .
 There just aren’t enough dedicated nazis in any and all countries, for ‘our side’ to win there. There just isn't enough dedicated Nazis .
 Not enough anti-Russian racist fascists exist, for that victory to be able to happen . Not enoughAnti-Russian fascist fascists exist. Not enough Anti-Russian fascists exist .
 Poroshenko-Kolomoisky-Obama-Yatsenyuk has already gone by more than a month . But they were beyond Poroshenko’s promised limit, ‘Not Months’ and yet they still were actually losing their war .
 His extermination-program ran out of money, long before the people who live there ran out out of their will to fight it .
 The main people who pay the price for this are the people whose lives were snuffed out, and who were crippled by it, and whose homes were destroyed by it .
 Western taxpayers and beneficiaries of government services won’t suffer nearly that much. Western taxpayers will not suffer nearly as much as the government services .
 The West's aristocrats are doing everything they can to weaken Russia’s economy, in order to win the bigger Cold War . Obama's coup in Ukraine restarted, and the West is trying to win it .
 The owners of U.S. armaments-firms are especially booming as a result of Obama’s Ukraine-gambit .
 Obama's Ukrainian war installed nazis, Obama's Ukraine war installed them . It's especially worth noting, in this context, that whereas WWII was fought against nazi, Obama’s Ukrainian war was fought with naz is not .
 Ukraine might have become what in WWII had been our nemesis . America might have come full-circle with Ukraine, and become a full- circle with Ukraine .
 Obama, in his actions not his words, continues the George W Bush tradition . Obama's actions continue the Bush tradition.