 Atlanticists seeking a closer relationship with the United States and the Western World in general . Imperialists, seeking a recovery of the semi-hegemonic status lost during the previous decade . Neo-Slavophiles, promoting the isolation of Russia within its own cultural sphere .
 The promotion of Yevgeny Primakov to Minister of Foreign Affairs will mark the beginning of a more nationalistic approach to foreign policy .
 Vladimir Putin's presidency lasted from January 2000 until May 2008 and again from 2012 . Putin's first presidency was in January 2000 and again in May 2008 .
 Putin made increasingly critical public statements regarding the foreign policy of the U.S. and other Western countries .
 No one can feel that international law is like a stone wall that will protect them. Because no one can feels that international laws are like a Stone wall that protects them .
 Putin proposed certain initiatives such as establishing international centres for the enrichment of uranium and prevention of deploying weapons in outer space .
 Putin said Russia is in favour of a democratic multipolar world and of strengthening the system of international law . In a January 2007 interview Putin said he was keen to strengthen international law.
 Putin is often characterised as an autocrat by the Western media and some politicians . His relationship with former U.S. President George W Bush, former Brazilian President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, former Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder
 Putin's relationship with Angela Merkel is reported to be "cooler" than his partnership with Gerhard Schröder . Putin accepted job with Russian-led consortium after vacating office .
 In the wake of the 11 September attacks, he agreed to the establishment of coalition military bases in Central Asia before and during the US-led invasion of Afghanistan .
 Russian nationalists objected to the establishment of any U.S. military presence on the territory of the former Soviet Union . They had expected Putin to keep the United States out of Central Asian republics .
 Putin opposed Washington's move to invade Iraq without the benefit of a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of military force .
 President George W Bush asked the United Nations to lift sanctions on Iraq after the end of the war .
 Putin supported lifting of the sanctions in due course, arguing that the UN commission first be given a chance to complete its work on the search for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq .
 Vladimir Putin with former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, 2008 .
 The Commonwealth of Independent States is seen in Moscow as its traditional sphere of influence . The EU and NATO have grown to encompass much of Central Europe and, more recently, the Baltic states .
 Putin twice visited Ukraine before the election to show his support for Ukrainian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych . He congratulated him on his anticipated victory before the official election returns had been in .
 Crises also developed in Russia's relations with Georgia and Moldova . Both former Soviet republics accuse Moscow of supporting separatist entities in their territories .
 Russo-Estonian relations deteriorated further as a result of the Bronze Soldier controversy . In 2007, Russo- Estonian Relations deteriorated further.
 Putin took an active personal part in promoting the Act of Canonical Communion with the Moscow Patriarchate . Putin signed 17 May 2007 that restored relations between the Moscow-based Russian Orthodox Church and Russia outside Russia after the 80-year schism .
 Putin announced plans to declare a moratorium on the observance of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe by Russia until all NATO members ratified it and started observing its provisions .
 Putin argues that as new NATO members have not even signed the treaty so far, an imbalance in the presence of NATO and Russian armed forces in Europe creates a real threat and an unpredictable situation.
 NATO members said they would refuse to ratify the treaty until Russia complied with its 1999 commitments made in Istanbul . Russia should remove troops and military equipment from Moldova and Georgia .
 Russia has suspended its participation in the CFE as of midnight Moscow time on 11 December 2007 . Russia has not participated in CFE since December 2007.
 NATO's primary concern arising from Russia's suspension is that Moscow could now accelerate its military presence in the Northern Caucasus . NATO's main concern is that Russia could now accelerated its military activity in the region .
 months following Putin's Munich speech were marked by tension and a surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic .
 Vladimir Putin said at the anniversary of Victory Day, "these threats are not becoming fewer but are only transforming and changing their appearance"
 This was interpreted by some Russian and Western commentators as comparing the U.S. to Nazi Germany . This was seen by some as comparing America to Germany .
 American journalist Anne Applebaum wrote that he intends to reassert Russian influence in the former communist states of Europe .
 British academic Norman Stone compared Putin to General Charles de Gaulle .
 Both Russian and American officials always denied the idea of a new Cold War . Hastings continues that a return to the direct military confrontation of the Cold War is unlikely .
 Putin publicly opposed to a U.S. missile shield in Europe . President George W Bush presented President Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 .
 Putin expressed readiness to modernize the Gabala radar station, which has been in operation since 1986 . The station has been operating since 1986.
 Putin proposed it would not be necessary to place interceptor missiles in Poland then . But interceptors could be placed in NATO member Turkey or Iraq .
 Putin suggested also equal involvement of interested European countries in the project . Putin suggested that the project was also a project .
 Putin admitted that if part of the United States’ nuclear capability is situated in Europe, it will have to take appropriate retaliatory steps . Putin said that our military experts consider that they represent a potential threat .
 The end of 2006 brought strained relations between Russia and Britain in the wake of the death of a former FSB officer in London by poisoning .
 The Russian constitution prohibits the extradition of Russian nationals to third countries . The constitution prohibits extradition of Russians to third nations .
 Miliband's statement was widely publicized by Russian media as a British proposal to change the Russian constitution . Miliband said he wanted to change Russian constitution to be more democratic .
 62% of Russians are against changing the Constitution in this respect . According to VCIOM, 62% are against change the Constitution .
 British Ambassador in Moscow Tony Brenton said that the UK is not asking Russia to break its Constitution . He said that he would interpret it in such a way that would make Lugovoi's extradition possible .
 Litvinenko allegedly accused Putin of directing the assassination in a statement released shortly after his death by his friend .
 Critics have doubted that Litvinenko is the true author of the released statement .
 Putin announced on 17 August 2007 the resumption on a permanent basis of long-distance patrol flights of Russia's strategic bombers that were suspended in 1992 .
 11 ships, including the aircraft carrier Kuznetsov, will take part in the first major navy sortie into the Mediterranean since Soviet times . The resumption of long-distance flights of Russia's strategic bombers was announced by Russian Defense Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov .
The sortie was to be backed up by 47 aircraft, including strategic bombers . The sortie would be backed by 47 planes .
Serdyukov: This is an effort to resume regular Russian naval patrols on the world's oceans . The Russian media says this is an attempt to resume normal naval patrols .
Military analyst from Novaya Gazeta Pavel Felgenhauer believes that the accident-prone Kuznetsov is scarcely seaworthy and is more of a menace to her crew than any putative enemy .
 Putin became the first Russian leader to visit Indonesia in more than 50 years . In September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia and in doing so became first Russian president to visit the country in 50 years.
 Putin also attended APEC meeting in Sydney, Australia where he met with Australian Prime Minister John Howard and signed a uranium trade deal .
 Putin visited Tehran, Iran to participate in the Second Caspian Summit . He met with Iranian leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad .
 Other participants were leaders of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan . Other participants included leaders of Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, and Azerbaijan .
 This is the first visit of a leader from the Kremlin to Iran since Joseph Stalin's participation in the Tehran Conference in 1943 . The visit is a first since Stalin participated in the conference in 1943. This is a visit to Iran by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 During summit it was also agreed that its participants would let any third-party state use their territory as a base for aggression or military action against any other participant .
 This newly proposed institution is expected to monitor human rights violations in Europe . It will contribute to development of European democracy . The institution will monitor human Rights violations and contribute to democracy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and ex-U.S. President George W Bush failed to resolve their differences over plans for the planned missile defense system based in Poland and Czech Republic .
 Putin says he does not agree with the decision to establish sites in Eastern European countries . Russia and the U.S. said they recognized that the era in which each had considered the other to be a "strategic threat or enemy" was over .
 The summit was the final meeting between Bush and Putin as presidents . It follows both leaders' attendance at last NATO summit in Romania 2 April 2008 – 4 April 2008 .
 The summit highlighted differences between Washington and Moscow over U.S.-backed proposals to extend the military alliance to include the former Soviet republics of Ukraine and Georgia . The summit also highlighted differences in the United States and Russia .
Fareed Zakaria suggests that the 2008 South Ossetia War turned out to be a diplomatic disaster for Russia . Russia opposes the proposed expansion, fearing it will reduce its own influence .
 He suggests that it was a major strategic blunder, turning neighboring nations such as Ukraine to embrace the U.S. and other Western nations more .
 George Friedman, founder and CEO of private intelligence agency Stratfor, takes the opposite view . He argues that both war and Russian foreign policy have been successful in expanding Russia's influence .
 The mid-2010s marked a dramatic downturn in Russian relations with the west, with some even considering it the start of a new Cold War .
 The U.S. and Russia back opposing sides in the Syrian Civil War . Washington regarded Moscow as obstructionist regarding its support for Bashar al-Assad government .
 In 2013, for the first time since 1960, the United States cancelled a summit with Russia after the latter granted asylum to Edward Snowden . The U.S. cancelled the summit in 2013 after Snowden was granted asylum .
 The greatest increase in tensions came during the Ukraine crisis that began in 2014, which saw the Crimean peninsula annexed by Russia .
 Russia also inflamed a separatist uprising in the Donbass region, though Moscow continues to deny its involvement . Russia also has been accused of inflaming a separatist rebellion .
 The United States responded to these events by putting forth sanctions against Russia . Most European countries followed suit, worrying about Russian interference in the affairs of central and Eastern Europe .
 Russia, after years of supporting the Syrian government indirectly, directly intervened in the conflict . October 2015 saw Russia intervene in the Syrian conflict, turning the tide in favor of the Assad regime .
 Russia's relations with Turkey, already strained over its support for the Assad regime, deteriorated further during this period . The Turkish Air Force shot down a Russian jet fighter on 24 November 2015 .
 Russia also formed the Eurasian Economic Union with Armenia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus . In 2015, Russia also joined the Eurasia Economic Union.
 The Russian government also remains bitter over the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe . Western leaders promised that NATO would not expand beyond its 1990s borders .
 The dispute between Japan and Russia over the ownership of the Kuril Islands has hindered closer cooperation between the two countries . Since 2017 high level talks involving Prime Minister Shinzō Abe have been ongoing in an attempt to resolve the situation .
Botswana and the Soviet Union initiated diplomatic relations on 6 March 1970 . Botswana and Soviet Union started diplomatic relations in 1970 .
 Despite its pro-Western orientation, Botswana participated in the 1980 Summer Olympics . Botswana was a member of the African nation of Africa .
 The present-day relations between the two countries are described as friendly and long standing . The two countries have a long standing relationship .
 In March, the two countries celebrated the 35th anniversary of establishing diplomatic relations . The two countries also celebrated the anniversary of the first diplomatic relations.
 Russia was one of the first countries to establish full diplomatic relations with Botswana . According to the minister of Foreign Affairs, Russia was the first country to establish diplomatic relations .
 Trade and economic cooperation between Russia and Botswana are stipulated by the Trade Agreement of 1987 and the Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation of 1988 .
 The Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Botswana signed the Agreement on Cultural, Scientific and Educational Cooperation in September 1999 . The Government of Russia and Botswana also signed the agreement in 1999 .
 Russia and Botswana have had fruitful cooperation in a variety of fields, particularly in human resource development . Russia, Botswana are the two countries in the world's largest economies .
 Botswana also one of the countries where Russian citizens do not require a visa . Botswana is one of three countries where Russia does not need a visa.
 Russia has an embassy in Gaborone, while Botswana covers Russia from its embassy in Stockholm . Botswana has an honorary consulate in Moscow, while Russia has a consulate in Stockholm and an Embassy in Moscow .
 Diplomatic relations between Burkina Faso and the Soviet Union were established for the first time on 18 February 1967 . Diplomatic ties between the two countries were established in 1967 .
 Burkina Faso recognized Russia as the USSR's successor after the breakup of the Soviet Union . Russia was recognized as Russia's successor.
Financial reasons have shut the embassies between the two nations . Financial reasons have been cited for the closure .
 The embassy of the Russian Federation in Ouagadougou was closed in 1992 . In 1996, the embassy of Burkina Faso in Moscow in Moscow was closed .
 Relations improved when Burundian relations with the west deteriorated . Relations with the West improved when the country's relationship with the western countries deteriorated .
 Russia has an embassy in Yaoundé, Cameroon has an Embassy in Moscow . Cameroon has a embassy in Moscow, Russia has a consulate in Moscow.
 Ethiopian ambassador to Russia is accredited to Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan . Ethiopian ambassador also accredited to Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan and Belarus .
 Russia supplied mountain guns the Ethiopian army used in the Battle of Adwa . Russia supplied the mountain guns in the battle .
 The Soviet Union was a major source of military and economic aid under the Derg and during the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia . More recently, the Soviet Union has been a key source of economic aid .
 Relations are somewhat unsure owing to Russia's close ties with Ethiopia's neighboring rival, Sudan . Russia's relationship with Ethiopia is somewhat unsure.
 Diplomatic relations were later established once again after the breakup of the Soviet Union . Diplomatic ties were also established after the break-up of the USSR .
 In 2008, assurances from Russia's ambassador to Ghana concerning assistance to sustain the fight against mosquitoes and environmental pollution in the region were very much appreciated .
 Guinea-Bissau has an embassy in Moscow, and Russia has a embassy in Bissau . The country has an Embassy in Moscow .
 The help is sometimes done from the Russian embassy in Abidjan, but is also done from Accra, Ghana .
 Russia regarded the outcome of the extraordinary summit held in Dakar, Senegal, of the Economic Community for West African States .
 Russia sharply criticised the NATO-led military intervention in the Libyan civil war . Russia chose not to use its veto power on the United Nations Security Council to block it .
 Russian President Dmitri Medvedev said that although Moscow opposed the military operations, it believed Gaddafi should leave power .
 Russian envoy Mikhail Margelov was received in Benghazi, the de facto headquarters of the Libyan opposition .
Margelov's stated objective was to broker a truce between anti-Gaddafi forces and the Gaddafi-led government . Margelov: "I want to break a truce"
 Libya's sole legitimate representative, which it did on 1 September 2011 . He left Benghazi with an invitation from the NTC for Russia to open a representative office in the city . It opted not to do so before recognising the council as Libya's only legitimate representative .
 The establishment of diplomatic relations between Madagascar and the Soviet Union started on 29 September 1972 . Madagascar and Soviet Union began diplomatic relations in 1972 .
 He said force is of concern and runs counter to democratic principles . He also said Russia's support of the African Union's position is also a concern .
 Russia has an embassy in Nouakchott, and Mauritania has an Embassy in Moscow . Mauritania also has a embassy in Moscow.
 The Soviet Union and Mauritius established diplomatic relations on 17 March 1968 . The two countries were the first to establish diplomatic relations .
 Russia has an embassy in Port Louis, and Mauritius has a embassy in Moscow . Mauritius was opened in July 2003, and Russia has a consulate in Moscow.
 Russia began to support the struggle of Mozambique's Marxist-oriented FRELIMO party against Portuguese colonialism in the 1960s .
 Diplomatic relations were formally established on 25 June 1975, soon after Mozambique gained its independence from Portugal . Diplomatic ties were established in 1975 .
 In June 2007, both Russia and Mozambique signed an agreement on economic cooperation . Both countries signed a deal in June 2007 .
 Russia has an embassy in Maputo while Mozambique has an Embassy in Moscow . Russia has a embassy in the country's capital city of Moscow . Mozambiques has a consulate in Moscow.
 Namibia has an embassy to Russia in Moscow and Russia has an Embassy to Namibia in Windhoek . Namibia also has a embassy to Moscow in Moscow. Namibia is located in Namibia.
 Relations between Namibia and Russia were considered "excellent" in 2006 by then-Namibian Minister of Education Nangolo Mbumba . Russia expressed a desire for even stronger relations, particularly in the economic field .
 In 2006, the Namibia-Russia Intergovernmental Commission on Trade and Economic Cooperation was officially opened during a visit by Russian Natural Resources Minister Yuri Trutnev to Windhoek . Also in 2006.
 Russia is interested in investing in oil, hydro-electric power and tourism . During said visit, the Minister said Russia was interested in Investing in oil.
 In 2007, Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov held discussions with Namibian Deputy Prime Minister Nahas Angula and President Hifikepunye Pohamba . Namibia's uranium deposits could be developed to create a nuclear power plant in the country .
 In 2008, Trutnev returned to Namibia to meet with the Intergovernmental Commission . In 2008 he returned to Swakopmund, Namibia, to meet at the third annual Intergovernmental commission .
 Top foreign ministry official Marco Hausiku and his deputy Lempy Lucas represented Namibia in discussions with Trutnev .
 The Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with Senegal on 14 June 1962 . The Soviet U.S. established diplomatic ties with Senegal.
 Diplomatic relations between Seychelles and Soviet Union were established on 30 June 1976 . The island nation gained its independence from the United Kingdom in 1976 .
 Seychelles is represented in Russia through its embassy in Paris and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg . The country is also represented in France and Saint Petersburg, Russia .
 Russia has an embassy in Pretoria and a consulate-general in Cape Town . The country has an Embassy in South Africa and an embassy on South Africa .
 South African Department of Foreign Affaires about the relation with Russia . South Africa's relationship with Russia has been described as "strange"
 Russia and Sudan have maintained a strong economic and politically strategic partnership for decades . For decades, the two countries have maintained an economic and political partnership .
 Sudan declared neutrality and instead chose membership in the Non-Aligned Movement throughout the Cold War . Sudan was the first country to declare neutrality in the non-aligned movement .
 diplomatic cooperation between the two countries dramatically got back on track during the late 1990s and early 2000s . Vladimir Putin was elected the President, and then the Prime Minister of Russia, and along with Hu Jintao opposed UN Peacekeepers in Darfur .
 Russia strongly supports Sudan's territorial integrity and opposes the creation of an independent Darfurian state . Russia also supports Sudan.
 Russia is Sudan's strongest investment partner in Europe and political ally in Europe . Russia has repeatedly and significantly regarded Sudan as an important global ally in the African continent .
 Sudanese collegians have been studying in Russian universities for decades . For decades there have been Sudanese colleges studying in Russia .
Both countries have signed diplomatic missions on 11 December 1961 . Russia has an embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania has an Embassy in Moscow . Both countries have embassies in both countries .
Russia-Zimbabwe relations date back to January 1979, during the Rhodesian Bush War . Russia-Z Zimbabwe relations date from January 1979 to 1979 .
 The Soviet Union supported Joshua Nkomo's Zimbabwe African People's Union . Robert Mugabe's attempts to gain Soviet support were rebuffed, leading him to enter into relations with Beijing .
 Robert Mugabe had strengthened his relations with both Beijing and Moscow as a result of intense western pressure on him . Mugabe's relationship with Moscow has strengthened after the end of the white regime in Zimbabwe .
 Russia maintains strong economic and political ties with Zimbabwe . Both countries had vetoed the UN resolution imposing UN sanctions on Zimbabwe .
 The Russian Federation and Barbados established formal diplomatic relations on 29 January 1993 . Russia and Barbado established formal relations in January 1993.
 In 2018 both nations celebrated 25 years of diplomatic ties and pledged closer collaboration . In 2018, both countries pledged closer cooperation .
 The two nations discussed cultural exchanges and Russia working with Barbados' light oil and gas industry . The two countries also discussed cultural exchange and cultural exchanges .
 Russia is represented in Barbados, through its embassy in Georgetown, Guyana . Russia is also represented in Guyana through its Embassy in Georgetown .
 Belize recognized Russia as the USSR's successor after the breakup of the Soviet Union . Belize immediately recognized Russia's successor as the country's successor .
 Russia is represented in Belize through its embassy in Mexico City and an honorary consulate in Belized City . Russia is also represented in Mexico and Belize City through its consulate in Mexico.
 Bolivia's focus on relations with Russia is mainly economic, as opposed to political and strategic, as an agreement to invest in Bolivia's natural gas fields shows . The focus is on economic, strategic, and political, as well as economic .
 2008 saw as a first step to re-establish ties with Russia . Bolivian government had plans to purchase a small batch of helicopters .
 Ambassador Leonid Golubev said he would like to see Russia's ties to Bolivia one day "approach the level" of its growing partnership with Venezuela .
 Brazil–Russia relations have seen a significant improvement in recent years . Brazil-Russia relations are characterized by an increasing commercial trade and cooperation in military and technology segments .
 Brazil shares an important alliance with the Russian Federation, with partnerships in areas such as space and military technologies, and telecommunications . Brazil is one of the most powerful countries in the world.
 Russia has an embassy in Brasília and consulates-general in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo . Russia has a consulate in Brazil and a consulates general in Brazil .
 Canada and Russia benefit from extensive cooperation on trade and investment, energy, security and counter-terrorism, northern issues, and cultural and academic exchanges .
 Russia has an embassy in Ottawa and consulates-general in Montreal and Toronto . Russia has a consulate in Montreal, Canada and a consulate general in Toronto .
 Chile has an embassy in Moscow and two honorary consulates in Saint Petersburg and in Vladivostok . Chile has a consulate in Moscow, two honorary Consulates inSaint Petersburg .
 Russia can stay in Costa Rica for a maximum of 90 days with a tourist visa . Costa Rican authorities will accept Russian nationals with a visa stamp for the European Union, Canada, USA, South Korea, or Japan .
 In order to get a tourist visa, the person needs to apply for it in the closest Costa Rican embassy to where the person is living .
 Holders of a Costa Rican passport also need a visa from Russian authorities . Holders in Costa Rican passports also need visas from Russia .
 Relations between the two countries suffered somewhat during Boris Yeltsin administration . Cuba was forced to look for new allies, such as China, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 Relations improved when Vladimir Putin was elected as the new Russian President . Relations improved after Vladimir Putin's election as President .
 Putin and Medvedev emphasized re-establishing strong relations with old Soviet allies . Putin, and later Dmitry Medvedeva, emphasized strong ties with former allies .
In 2008, Medvedev visited Havana and Raúl Castro made a week-long trip to Moscow . In 2008, the Russian president visited Havana.
 Russia sent tons of humanitarian aid to Cuba in the same year the two governments signed multiple economic agreements . In that same year, the two countries signed several economic agreements and Russia sent tonnes of aid .
 Cuba gave staunch political support for Russia during the 2008 South Ossetia war . Cuba, meanwhile, gave staunch support for Russian during the war .
 Relations between the two nations are currently at a post-Soviet high . Talks about potentially re-establishing a Russian military presence in Cuba are even beginning to surface .
 Dominica and Russia have established diplomatic relations on 19 May 1995 . Dominica. Russia and Dominica have been in contact since May 1995.
 Russia is accredited to El Salvador from its embassy in Managua, Nicaragua . Russia is also accredited to the United States from its Embassy in Nicaragua .
 During the New Jewel Movement, the Soviet Union tried to make the island of Grenada to function as a Soviet base . It also tried to get supplies from Cuba .
 U.S. President Ronald Reagan maintained that United States Marines arrived on the island of Grenada . Grenada was considered a Soviet-Cuban ally that would export communist revolution throughout the Caribbean .
 Grenada could be used as a staging area for subversion of nearby countries, for intersection of shipping lanes, and for transit of troops and supplies from Cuba to Africa, and from Eastern Europe to Central America .
 The U.S. Marines discovered a large amount of documents when they landed on the island . They recorded minutes of Committee meetings, and reports from the Grenadian embassy in Moscow .
 Diplomatic relations between Grenada and the Soviet Union were severed in 1983 by the Governor General of Grenada .
 In 2002, Grenada re-established diplomatic relations with the newly formed Russian Federation . Eventually in 2002, the country re-established relations with Russia .
Guyana is represented in Russia by its High Commission in London, United Kingdom . Guyana is also represented in the United Kingdom by the United States .
 Both countries signed diplomatic missions on 18 October 1979, a few months after the Sandinista revolution . Both countries sign diplomatic missions.
 Russia is represented in Paraguay through its embassy in Buenos Aires and an honorary consulate in Asunción . Russia is also represented in Argentina, Paraguay and Argentina through its embassies .
 Russia's acting foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, declared to soon open a resident embassy in Paraguay's capital .
 The nations have begun discussing cooperation in the areas of agriculture, fishing, shipbuilding, education, along with trade .
 Surinamese foreign minister Yldiz Pollack-Beighle visited Moscow for talks on military and law enforcement training . In October 2013, the Surinamee Foreign Minister visited Moscow.
 Sergey Lavrov and Knowlson Gift signed the protocol on the political consultations between the two Ministries in 2004 . In 2004, Sergey Lavrov signed the protocols on political consultations .
 The Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Russian Federation and the Chamber of Industry and Commerce of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago signed the cooperation agreement in April 2005 .
 Russian Cossack folk dance had nine concerts in Port of Spain, San Fernando, Couva, and Tobago . In 2004, the Russian COSSack folk danced at nine concerts.
 The U.S. has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Vladivostok and Yekaterinburg .
 Russia has an embassy in Montevideo and Uruguay has an Embassy in Moscow . Uruguay has a embassy in Moscow. Russia has a consulate in Moscow and an embassy is in Monte video .
 The project's presentation took place at the Russian Embassy recently . The diplomat said Uruguayan officials had shown interest in a floating nuclear plant .
 The cost of the first plant is estimated at US$400 million, but could later be reduced to $240 million . The first plant could be built in the next few years .
 This year marks the 150th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Russia and Uruguay . The two countries have been in diplomatic relations for 150 years .
 Afghanistan and Russia have shared a highly varied relationship from the mid-19th century to the modern day . The two countries have been at odds over the past century .
Afghanistan became the first country to recognise Afghan sovereignty in 1919 . The new Soviet Union established more cordial relations with Afghanistan .
 Relations between the two nations became complicated following the 1978 communist coup known as the Saur Revolution . The two nations were involved in the 1978 revolution.
 The new communist Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was highly dependent on the Soviet Union . The Soviet support for the Soviet regime led to great hatred for the Soviets in much of the Afghan population .
 The Soviets occupied Afghanistan in the face of a bitter ten-year insurgency before withdrawing in 1989 . The Soviets occupy Afghanistan for ten years before withdrawing.
 The Soviet Union provided massive support to the embattled DRA government, reaching a value of $3 billion a year in 1990 . Even following the withdrawal of Soviet forces.
 This relationship dissolved in 1991 along with the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself . However, this relationship remained intact .
 On 13 September 1991, the Soviet government, now dominated by Boris Yeltsin, agreed with the United States on a mutual cut off of military aid to both sides in the Afghan civil war beginning on 1 January 1992 .
 The post-coup Soviet government then attempted to develop political relations with the Afghan resistance . The Soviet government tried to develop diplomatic relations with Afghanistan .
 The Soviets agreed that a transitional government should prepare Afghanistan for national elections . In mid-November it invited a delegation of the resistance's Afghanistan Interim Government to Moscow .
 The Soviets did not insist that Najibullah or his colleagues participate in the transitional process . The Soviets didn't insist that the Soviets participated in the process .
 Najibullah's faction torn government began to fall apart in April 1992 . The city of Kabul fell to the Mujahideen factions in 1992 .
 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev announced in 2009 that he wanted to be more involved in Afghanistan . In 2009, he announced that he would support development of infrastructure and the army .
 relations between Afghan President Karzai and U.S. President Obama reached a low . This came as relations between the two countries reached an low .
 It is estimated that there are between 2,500,000 and 2,900,000 Armenians in Russia .
 Azerbaijan has an embassy in Moscow and a consulate-general in Saint Petersburg . Azerbaijan also has an Embassy in Moscow .
 Azerbaijan also announced that it will open another consulate-general in Yekaterinburg . Azerbaijan will also open a second consulate- general in the country .
 Relations can be traced back to 1971 during the independence war . The Soviet Union sympathised with the Mukti Bahini cause and offered their assistance .
 Bangladesh established ties with all the former Soviet Republics including Russia and began diversifying into other areas such as education, cultural, military and energy .
 China has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Kazan, Khabarovsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and Yekaterinburg . China also has a consulate in Russia, Russia and Russia .
 Russia has an embassy in Beijing and consulates-general in Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Shanghai and Shenyang . Russia has a consulate in Beijing, consulates in Hong Kong and Shanghai .
 Russia was one of the first countries to recognise East Timor’s independence . Russia took part in nearly all UN aid programs, providing food and relief personnel .
 Russian ministry expresses concern over the attempt on the life of the East Timor president .
 India and the Soviet Union enjoyed a strong strategic, military, economic and diplomatic relationship . During the Cold War, India and Russia enjoyed strong strategic and economic relationship .
 India continued its close relations with Russia after the collapse of the USSR . India improved its relations with the West but it continued its relationship with Russia .
 In 2004, more than 70% of the Indian Military's hardware came from Russia . Russia is the chief supplier of arms for the Indian military .
 Russian Ambassador to Indonesia Ludmilla Georgievna serve as the First Female Russian ambassador to Indonesia since 2018 . She is the first female Russian ambassador in Indonesia .
 Indonesian president Sukarno visiting Moscow and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visiting Jakarta . Both countries had very strong relations in the Cold War .
 When Sukarno was overthrown by General Suharto, relations between the two states were significantly deteriorated . It was likely due to Indonesia's enforced anti-communist policy following the 1965 unrest .
Relations with China during Suharto's rule were not suspended and remained intact . However, unlike the previous regime, the diplomatic relations with China remain intact .
 Indonesia is also one of many countries that boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympics . During this time, Indonesia was also a member of the Soviet Union . The 1980 Moscow Games were held in Moscow .
 Indonesian President Suharto will travel to the Soviet Union in September for his first visit to Moscow since taking power more than two decades ago . The government announced Wednesday that the visit will be Suharta's first since he took power .
 Relations between the Soviet Union and Indonesia grew tense 20 years ago after a failed communist-inspired coup attempt . But a thaw began when Gorbachev came to power when he became power .
 The USSR under Gorbachev began to develop closer ties with Indonesia alongside other Southeast Asian countries . relations between the two states were improving once again since the formation of the modern-day Russian Federation .
Under Boris Yeltsin and later Vladimir Putin, relations were generally stable and continued to the present day . Under Boris Yeltin and then Vladimir Putin. Under Vladimir Putin the relationship was generally stable .
 On 17 May 1948, the Soviet Union officially granted de jure recognition of Israel . Israel became the second country to recognise the Jewish state and the first country to grant Israel de jury recognition .
 Japan has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Khabarovsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk . Japan also has a consulate-general.
 Russia has an embassy in Tokyo and consulates-general in Niigata, Osaka and Sapporo . Russia has a consulate in Tokyo, consulates in Osaka and Tokyo .
 Diplomatic relations between Russia and Kazakhstan have fluctuated since the fall of the Soviet Union . Both nations remain particularly strong partners in regional affairs and major supporters of the Collective Security Treaty Organization .
 Kazakhstani-Russian relations have been strained at times by Astana's military and economic cooperation with the U.S. The two nations retain high-level military andEconomic cooperation .
 Kazakhstan sells oil and gas to Russia at a significantly reduced rate . Russian businesses are heavily invested in Kazakhstan's economy .
 Kyrgyzstan has more often wished for more attention and support from Moscow than it has been able to obtain . The other Central Asian republics have sometimes complained of Russian interference .
 Kyrgyzstan remains economically dependent on Russia, both directly and through Kazakhstan . For all the financial support that the world community has offered, KyrgyZstan remains financially dependent on Russian .
 In 1995, Askar Akayev attempted to sell Russian companies controlling shares in Kyrgyzstan's twenty-nine largest industrial plants . Russia refused an offer that Russia refused .
 The ""Artillery Square" in Beirut witnessed battles involving Russian naval forces that were brought to the port of St. "St. St. "Artillery Square" witnessed battles between the Russian forces .
 George to fight alongside the people who rose up against the Turkish rule . George was a member of the Turkish parliament.
 The naval forces set up their artillery at Beirut Square, which still bears the name "Artillery Square" The soldiers were buried in the cemetery of the Orthodox Church of St.Meter .
 Diplomatic relations between the two countries began even before the Lebanese independence . Diplomatic ties between the countries began before independence .
 The Soviet Union was the first country in the world for the first time in the history of the UN veto-wielding to support Lebanon and Syria's total independence .
 Russia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia has an Embassy in Moscow . Malaysia has a embassy in Moscow, and Russia has its embassy in Malaysia .
 Relations between Mongolia and the Russian Federation have been traditionally strong since the Communist era . Soviet Russia was the closest ally of the Mongolian People's Republic .
 Mongolia has an embassy in Moscow, three consulate generals, and a branch in Yekaterinburg . Mongolia also has an Embassy in Moscow .
After the disintegration of the former Soviet Union, Mongolia developed relations with the new independent states . After the collapse of the Soviet Union.
 Links with Russia and other republics were essential to contribute to stabilisation of the Mongolian economy . Links with Russian and other nations were crucial to stabilising the economy .
 The primary difficulties in developing fruitful coordination occurred because these new states were experiencing the same political and economic restructuring as Mongolia . Mongolia is experiencing a similar political, economic restructuring.
 Mongolia and Russia successfully negotiated both a 1991 Joint Declaration of Cooperation and a bilateral trade agreement . Despite these difficulties, the two countries successfully negotiated a joint declaration of Cooperation . The agreement was signed in 1991 .
 1993 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation establishing a new basis of equality in the relationship . This was followed by a 1993 Treaty. This was following a 1993 treaty of friendship and Cooperation .
 Mongolian President Bagabandi visited Moscow in 1999, and Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Mongolia in 2000 . The 25-point Ulaanbaatar Declaration reaffirmed Mongol-Russian friendship .
 China and Russia once vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution designed to punish Myanmar . The resolution was aimed at punishing Myanmar's leaders .
 Relations with the west deteriorated following the Rohingya crisis . Relations improved even more when relations with the West deteriorated .
 Nepal and the Soviet Union had established diplomatic relations in 1956 . Nepal and Soviet Union established diplomatic ties in 1956.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Nepal extended full diplomatic recognition to the Russian Federation as its legal successor .
Since then numerous bilateral meetings have taken place between both sides . Since then numerous meetings have been held between the sides .
 Since 1992 numerous Nepalese students have gone to Russia for higher studies on a financial basis . Many students have been studying in Russia since 1992 .
 Foreign ministers of both countries met in October 2005 to discuss cooperation on a variety of issues .
 Russia has an embassy in Kathmandu while Nepal has an Embassy in Moscow . Russia has a embassy in Nepal, while the country has a consulate in Moscow.
 Russia–DPRK relations are determined by Russia's strategic interests in Korea . The goal of preserving peace and stability in the Korean peninsula is to preserve peace, stability .
Russia's official position is by extension its stance on settlement of the North Korean nuclear crisis . Russia's official stance on the North Korea nuclear crisis has been by extension .
 Singapore maintains an embassy in Moscow and Russia has an Embassy in Singapore . Singapore maintains a diplomatic presence in Moscow .
Singapore and the Soviet Union entered into full diplomatic relations on 1 June 1968 . Singapore and the Soviets entered into diplomatic relations in June 1968.
 Singapore and Russia strengthened ties after the start of Vladimir Putin's term . They participated in a number of regional meetings such as the ASEAN-Russia Summit and the A SEAN Regional Forum .
 South Korea has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and a consular office in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk .
 Russia helped Sri Lanka by providing education on battle field tactics to Sri Lanka Army . Sri Lanka Armed Forces and Tamil Tigers fought in Sri Lanka's war between the two sides .
 Sri Lanka also reacted in favor of Russia during the Ukrainian crisis . Sri Lanka acknowledged concerns of Russia as justifiable .
 Russia has an embassy in Damascus and a consulate in Aleppo, and Syria has an Embassy in Moscow . Russia has a embassy in Syria and has an consulate in Damascus .
 Russia enjoys a historically strong and stable friendly relationship with Syria . As with most of the Arab countries, Russia has a history of strong relations with Syria. Russia is also a strong ally of Syria .
 Since 1971, Russia has leased port facilities in Tartus for its naval fleet . Russia has been leasing port facilities since 1971 .
 Between 1992 and 2008 the port's facilities were much in disrepair . Works have commenced concurrent with the 2008 South Ossetia war to improve facilities to support the Russian Navy .
 Russia has been strongly supporting Syria in the Syrian civil war, especially since the start of an air campaign in 2015 . Russia has also been strongly supported by Russia in the past .
 Taiwan has exported many ferric materials to Russia in 2004-2005 . Since the formation of the Russian Federation, Taiwan has export many materials .
 In 2005, the total amount of the trade between the two economies was $2,188,944,473 . The total number of trade between both economies was more than $3,000 .
 Russia also has a representative office in Taipei, and Republic of China has a representation office in Moscow . The Republic ofChina also has an office in Beijing .
 According to the data, Russia keeps a positive balance in its trade relations with Taiwan . The data is based on crude oil, cast iron and steel, nonferrous metals, petrochemical products, ferroalloys, coking coal, timber and timber .
 Russia imports mostly electronics and electronic parts, computers and computer parts, and home appliances . Russia imports most electronics and electrical parts, including computers and computers .
 The two countries cooperate closely and intensely by establishing unofficial diplomatic relations since 1993~1996 . The two nations have been at odds for years .
Until 2005, Russia had 11,000 border guards manning the Tajik frontier with Afghanistan . Until 2005, Russian border guards were on the border with Afghanistan.
 Russia and Tajikistan have reached an agreement on what Russia will pay for its bases in Tajikistani . The agreement will extend the lease to 20 or 29 years .
 The bases are used for 9,000 Russian troops of the 201st Motor Rifle Division . The bases have been used for the Russian troops for more than a decade .
 The new deal with Tajikistan makes it worthwhile for Russia to upgrade the four army camps and one air base they occupy .
 Russia agrees to sell Tajikistan weapons and military equipment at a sharp discount . The deal will also train Tajik officers in Russian schools for free .
 Russia has an embassy in Ashgabat and a consulate-general in Türkmenbaşy . Russia also has an Embassy in AshGabat.
 Russian-Turkmenistan relations have revolved around Russia's efforts to secure natural gas export deals from Turkmenistan . Recently, Russia has been trying to secure deals with the country's energy industry .
 Russia is competing with China, the European Union, India and the U.S. for access to Turkmenistan's rich supply of hydrocarbons . Russia is also competing with India, China and the United States.
The two countries often lock horns over price negotiations for gas exports to Russia . The two countries have been locked horns over gas exports for years .
 Turkmen president Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow has agreed to help supply and expand the Russian-backed Pricaspiysky pipeline . No action has yet occurred towards this goal .
 In May 2005, Uzbekistan demanded that the United States leave the base at Karshi-Khanabad .
 In November 2005, both presidents Islam Karimov and Vladimir Putin had signed a mutual cooperation agreement .
 On 30 January 1950 the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics established an embassy to North Vietnam . The embassy was set up in North Vietnam.
 Bosnia is one of the countries where Russia has contributed troops for the NATO-led stabilization force . Bosnia is a member of the European Union's "Stabilization Force" Bosnia is part of the EU's "stabilization force"
 Russia has an embassy in Brussels and a consulate-general in Antwerp . Belgium has an Embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg .
 Russia was the first country to recognize Bulgaria, and greatly helped Bulgaria in its war of independence from Ottoman Turkey . Russia was also the first nation to recognize Bulgarian .
 Croatia has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Kaliningrad . Croatia also has a consulate in Moscow .
 The present day relations between the two countries are at their best . Many agreements have been signed, and many agreements are signed .
 Russia has also reduced its oil deliveries to the Czech Republic . Russia also has further reduced its deliveries to Czech Republic.
 Denmark has an embassy in Moscow, a consulate-general in Saint Petersburg . Denmark also has an Embassy in Moscow .
 Russia recognised Estonia via the Tartu Peace Treaty on 2 February 1920 . Russia recognises Estonia via Tartu peace treaty in 1920 .
 Russian-Estonian relations were re-established in January 1991 . Boris Yeltsin of RSFSR and Arnold Rüütel of Estonia signed a treaty governing the relations of the two countries after the anticipated independence of Estonia from the Soviet Union .
 Russia re-recognised the Republic of Estonia on 24 August 1991 after the failed Soviet coup attempt . Estonia was one of the first countries to do so .
The Soviet Union recognised the independence of Estonia on 6 September . The Soviet Union recognises the country's independence .
 Estonia's ties with Boris Yeltsin weakened since the Russian leader's initial show of solidarity with the Baltic states in January 1991 .
 Germany tries to keep Russia engaged with the rest of the Western world . Germany is trying to keep the world engaged with Russia .
 The future aim is to promote a stable market-economy liberal democracy in Russia . Russia is part of the Western world .
 Diplomatic relations between the two countries were first established in 1920, following the conclusion of a Soviet-Latvian peace treaty on 11 August 1920 .
 The treaty was ratified by the Latvian Constituent Assembly on 2 September, and by theLatvian government on 25 September .
 On the Russian side, it was ratified by the Pan Russian Central Executive Committee on 9 September .
 Ratification letters were exchanged between the two governments in Moscow on 4 October .
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian government recognized the independence of Latvia .
 Russia expresses concern for how Latvia's language and naturalization laws effect Latvia's Russian-speaking population . Russia expresses concerns for how the laws affect Latvia.
 Latvia is interested in welfare of ethnic Latvians still residing in Russia . Latvia is also interested in the welfare of those still living in Russia.
 The latest Russian census shows about 40,000 still living in Russia . Source: Given the probability of an undercount, Latvians in Russia probably number about 50,000-60,000 .
 Norway has an embassy in Moscow and a consulate-general in Saint Petersburg . It also has a consulate in Murmansk . Norway has two embassies in Russia and one in Russia .
 Russia has an embassy in Oslo and consulates-general in Barentsburg and Kirkenes . Russia has a consulate in Oslo, and a consulate-general.
 Poland responded with strong disapproval towards the 2008 Georgian Crisis, in which a military invasion of Georgia was led by Russia . Poland responded to the 2008 crisis with a strong disapproval .
 Poland is a former USSR republic, Poland was a member of the Eastern Bloc, and Poland condemned Russia's actions . Georgia is a ex-Soviet republic and Poland has stated its support for Georgia .
 The Polish believed the invasion was carried out by the Russians in an attempt to reestablish and reassert its dominance over its former republics . The Polish believe the invasion is a bid to reassert the dominance of the former nation .
 The former Polish president died in a plane accident in 2009 . Since 2009, relations with Russia have somewhat improved despite the incident .
After the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation the relations deteriorated again, as Poland strongly condemned Russian actions against Ukraine .
 Poland has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Kaliningrad and Saint Petersburg . Poland also has a consulate in Russia and a consulate in Russia .
 Russia has an embassy in Belgrade and a liaison office to UNMIK in Pristina . Russia has a embassy inBelgrade and an embassy to Belgrade .
 Diplomatic relations between the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union were established on 24 June 1940 . Serbia and the Russian Federation recognize the continuity of all inter-State documents signed between the two countries .
 There are about 70 bilateral treaties, agreements and protocols signed in the past . There are more than 70 bilateral treaty agreements, agreements, protocols signed.
 Serbia and the Russian Federation have signed and ratified 43 bilateral agreements and treaties so far . Serbia and Russia have agreed to sign and ratify 43 bilateral agreement and treaties in diverse areas of mutual cooperation .
 Switzerland opened a consulate in Saint Petersburg in 1816, upgrading it to a legation 90 years later . Switzerland opened its consulate in the city in 18 16, 1816 .
 The two countries broke off diplomatic relations in 1923, when Russia was going through a period of revolutionary turmoil . They were not resumed until 1946 .
 Switzerland has an embassy in Moscow and since 2006, a Consulate-General in Saint Petersburg . Switzerland has a consulate-general in Moscow .
 Russia has an embassy in Kiev and consulates-general in Kharkiv, Lviv and Odessa . Russia has a consulate in Kiev, consulate-general.
 Ukraine has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Rostov-on-Don, Saint Petersburg, Tyumen and Vladivostok . Ukraine has a consulate in Moscow, consulates in Saint Petersburg.
 United Kingdom has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Saint Petersburg and Yekaterinburg . The UK also has a consulate general in Russia and a consulate general in the Russian capital .
 Nauru's banks are said to have provided services to the mafia in Russia during the 1990s . About 70 billion United States dollars owned by Russian mafia were held in NaurU banks .
 In 2009, Nauru became the fourth country to recognize the states of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . In 2010, Georgia became the third country torecognize the states.
 Russia reported to be giving Nauru $50M in humanitarian aid in exchange . Russia was reported to have given $50m in exchange for $50 million .
 New Zealand has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Vladivostok . New Zealand also has a consulate in Moscow .
 Palau and Russia have had diplomatic relations since 28 November 2006 . Palau have had established diplomatic relations with Russia since 2006 .
 The Kingdom of Tonga and the Soviet Union established formal diplomatic relations in 1976 . The kingdom and the USSR established formal relations in 1975 .
 The USSR was dissolved in 1991 and was succeeded by Russia as the successor state . Russia was replaced by Russia in 1991 .
 The Russian Federation and the Kingdom of Tonga ST T Tupou exchanged telegrams offering congratulations on the occasion of 30th anniversary of establishing diplomatic relations between the two nations .
 heads of foreign ministries of Russia and Tonga expressed confidence in further development of Russian-Tongan relations in the interests of the peoples of both countries .
 Russia and Tuvalu established diplomatic relations with Russia on 25 September 2011 . Russia andTuvalu establish diplomatic relations on 25 Sept 2011 .
Vanuatu authorised Soviet vessels to fish within Vanuatu's Exclusive Economic Zone in 1987 . In 1987, Soviet vessels were allowed to fish in exchange for economic aid . The vessels are now in the Exclusive Economic zone .
 Pew Research Center indicated that only 4 surveyed countries have a positive view of Russia . Only 4 of four surveyed countries in Russia are positive about Russia .
 Reference to "Russian aggression" is common in Western media where it is used to criticize Russia .
 It has been used to refer to both Catherine the Great's 18th century agenda and 21st century Russian policies . It has also been used as a reference to Catherine's agenda .
 NATO-sponsored analysts have described what they call a cybernetic "Russian aggression" against Ukraine in the 2010s .
 NATO and Russia signed the NATO–Russia Founding Act on 20 May 1997 . It was hoped it would provide the basis for an enduring and robust partnership between the Alliance and Russia .
 This agreement was superseded by the NATO–Russia Council that was agreed at the Reykjavik Ministerial . It was unveiled at the Rome NATO Summit in May 2002 .
 On 24 June 1994, Russia and the European Union signed a partnership and cooperation agreement . The agreement was signed in 1994 .
 NATO members in Eastern Europe, especially Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, and Poland, feel threatened by Russia . In recent years, tensions have heightened, as NATO members feel threatened.
 European Union imposed sanctions on Russian businesses and individuals in 2014 . The sanctions relate to the annexation of Crimea and alleged support for separatists during Donbass War .
 The non-Russian countries that were once part of the USSR have been termed the 'near abroad' by Russians . They were once known as the 'Near abroad'
 Russian leaders have been referring to all 15 countries collectively as "Post-Soviet Space," while asserting Russian foreign policy interest throughout the region . More recently, they have been calling all 15 nations collectively "post-Soviet space"
After the USSR was dissolved by the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, Russia tried to regain some sort of influence over the post-Soviet space . Russia created the Commonwealth of Independent States in 1991 .
 CIS republics began to drift away from Russia, which at that time was attempting to stabilize its broken economy and ties with the West . Most of these agreements were not fulfilled and most of them were not met .
 One of the major issues which had an influence on the foreign relations of Russia was the remaining large Russian minority populations in many countries of the near abroad .
 This issue has been dealt with in various ways by each country . This issue is dealt with by each individual country .
 Some Russians are calling for these areas to be absorbed into Russia . They have posed a particular problem in countries where they live close to the Russian border .
 Russians in the near-abroad do not favor active intervention of Russia into the domestic affairs of neighboring countries .
 The three Baltic states have signaled their desire to be outside any claimed Russian sphere of influence . They joined both the NATO alliance and the European Union in 2004 .
 Close cultural, ethnic and historical links exist between Russia, Belarus and Ukraine . Russia and Ukraine have close cultural and ethnic links .
 This manifested itself in lower levels of nationalism in Belarus and Ukraine, during the Soviet Union's disintegration .
 Few Ukrainians accept a "younger brother" status relative to Russia . Putin's endorsement of a candidate for the Ukrainian presidency in the last election is contentious .
 Russia maintains its military bases in Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, and Tajikistan . Russia also maintains its bases in Belarus, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Moldova .
 Russia's relationships with Georgia are at their lowest point in modern history due to the 2008 Russo-Georgian war . Georgia broke off diplomatic relations with Russia and has left the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 Russia's relations with Ukraine are at their lowest point in history as a result of the pro-Western Euromaidan revolution in Ukraine . The 2014 Crimean Crisis, the 2014 Crimean crisis and the pro/Russian insurgency in Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk regions are also at the lowest
 Ukraine, like Georgia, has introduced a bill to the Verkhovna Rada to withdraw from the Commonwealth of Independent States . Kiev has begun the process of doing so .
 Russia maintains relations with Bulgaria, Czech Republic, part of the former East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia . Albania, Albania and Albania also maintain relations with Russia .
 Russia continues to maintain friendly relations with Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam as well as third world and non-aligned countries of Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Cambodia, Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, India, India and Iraq .
 The Soviet Union held Russia's UN seat before 1991 . Russia will continue its membership at the United Nations and all other UN organs .
 Russia has played an important role in helping mediate international conflicts . Russia has been actively engaged in trying to promote a peace following the Kosovo conflict .
 Russia's foreign minister claimed on 25 February 2008 that NATO and the European Union have been considering using force to keep Serbs from leaving Kosovo following the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence .
 Russia is a co-sponsor of the Middle East peace process . It supports UN and multilateral initiatives in the Persian Gulf, Cambodia, Burma, Angola, the former Yugoslavia, and Haiti .
 Russia is a founding member of the Contact Group and a member of G8 . Russia is also a founding members of the G8 and member of Russia's Contact Group .
 Russia has contributed troops to the NATO-led stabilization force in Bosnia . Russia has affirmed its respect for international law and OSCE principles .
 Russia has accepted UN and/or OSCE involvement in instances of regional conflict in neighboring countries . Georgia, Moldova, Tajikistan, and the de-facto Republic of Artsakh are among the countries involved .
 Russia supported, on 16 May 2007, the set up of the international tribunal to try the suspects in the murder of the Lebanese Prime Minister, Rafiq Hariri .
 The Kuril Islands dispute concerns the islands of Iturup, Kunashir, and Shikotan and the Khabomai group . All of which had belonged to the Japanese Empire until the Soviet-Japanese War when the Soviet Union occupied them .
 The disputed territory is currently administered by the Russian Federation . The majority of inhabitants of the disputed territory are supportive of Russian administration .
 The dispute between Russia and Latvia regarding the Pytalovo area of Pskov Oblast, Russia, was settled in the 27 March 1997 border treaty .
 Disputes over the boundary with the People's Republic of China were finally resolved on 21 July 2008 .
 Foreign Ministers of the two countries signed an agreement in Beijing . The agreement was signed on the same day as the deal was signed .
 The territory transferred comprised Tarabarov Island and approximately half of Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island . The territory was transferred.
 The settlement of their border dispute followed over 40 years of negotiations . The settlement was reached after a decade of negotiations. The border dispute has been resolved over 30 years .
 The Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation was concluded on 2 June 2005 . It was signed by Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov .
 There is now no border dispute between Russia and China along their 4300 km border . The two countries are 4300km from each other .
 Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among all littoral states . The sea is not yet defined among all states .
 Russia has no common land or Caspian-sea border with Turkmenistan and Iran, which do not agree with the Caspan Sea settlements . Russia has not agreed with the settlements .
 Territorial issues between Estonia and Russia regarding some territories of Pskov and Leningrad Oblast of Russia are still unresolved . Estonian and Russian territorial issues still unresolved.
 The 2005 treaty on Estonia–Russia border was not ratified by the Russian side . The treaty was not signed by Russia .
 Negotiations were reopened in 2012 and the Treaty was signed in February 2014, but ratification is still pending .
 Russia has made no territorial claim in Antarctica and does not recognize any other nation . Russia has not made any territorial claims in Antarctica .
 Disputes over the boundary with Georgia relating to Russia's recognition of Georgian regions, South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states due to the 2008 South Ossetsia war .
 The Russian Federation refused to recognize Ukrainian sovereignty over Sevastopol as well as over the surrounding Crimean Oblast . The city was never practically integrated into the Ukrainian SSR because of its military status .
Both Crimea and Sevastopol belong to Ukraine . This claim was relinquished in the bilateral Peace and Friendship Treaty . The treaty confirmed that both Crimea and Crimea belong to the Ukraine .
 A separate treaty established the terms of a long-term lease of land and resources in and around Sevastopol by Russia . The treaty was established by a separate treaty .
 Crimea was annexed by Russia in early 2014 . In the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation of early 2014 Crimea was annexed by Russia .
 Crimea and the city of Sevastopol are currently under dispute between Russia and Ukraine . Ukraine and the majority of the UN members consider Crimea to be an autonomous republic of Ukraine . Russia and other UN members, on the other hand, consider Crimean to be a federal subject of Russia and Sev
 On 31 March 2014 the State Duma approved the denunciation of the above-mentioned Peace and Friendship Treaty and long-term lease of land in Sevastopol .
 Putin's speech in English Archived 4 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine, 10 February 2007 . The speech is Putin's first in English.
 Russian navy to start sorties in Mediterranean on December 5, 2007 . Russian Navy to startsorties in the Mediterranean .
 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . This article includes the text of this source .
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to International relations of Russia . The Russian government has not commented on the issue .
Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov. Back to the Future?, July 2007 article by Russian Minister of foreign affairs Sergey Lavrov .