 Revolution, War, and the Far-Right in Ukraine, the Ukrainian edition of which is forthcoming in Krytyka Press .
 The conflict on parts of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblast is already continuing into its third year . It has turned out to be the biggest military, political, social and humanitarian crisis in Europe .
 This is true at least for the period after the breakup of Yugoslavia – or even since the end of WWII, judging from a different perspective . This istrue at least at least in the period of the breakup, or even after WWII .
 The Russian-Ukrainian conflict confronts politicians, diplomats, the international community as well as social scientists with a series of difficult questions .
 The troublesome participation of right-wing radicals in military operations on both sides of the front has attracted a great deal of attention in society .
 The combatants openly use neo-Nazi symbols, shocking a public confronted with photos exposing such symbolism .
 It seems as if the combatants, with their ideology-induced inclination towards violence, savor the atmosphere of arbitrariness and impunity, which prevails in the conflict zone .
 Close observers are seriously concerned about the fact that holders of contemptuous ideologies have access to a wide range of resources, in particular.
 Criminal records regularly testify that those weapons are not only used within the conflict zone .
 The ultra-nationalists’ active participation in the conflict allowed for the accumulation of symbolic capital, which in the future could ultimately legitimize their presence in the political and social life in both Russia and Ukraine .
Free and competitive political process is absent in Russia. However, this is especially relevant for Ukraine, since it is not a free and competitive process .
 Both Russian pro-regime and opposition politicians benefit from playing out the “Ukrainian topics’ or “Donbas aid’s aid” card. At the same time, apparently both Russian pro and opposition leaders benefit from the card .
Marginal extremist organizations and their activists were completely unknown to the wider public until the outbreak of the conflict . The media tends to sympathize with both sides of the war .
 Social networks are playing an increasingly important role in socio-political information strategies . This process is accompanied by the popularization of a corresponding structure in social networks, which is playing a role in social media .
 The organizations gain access to previously unreachable media spaces, and win a certain level of support in society . Gradually, the organizations become known, gain access.
 Most known organizations are considered as groupings participating in military operations rather than holders of contemptuous ideologies . This support stems from the fact that the most known groups are considered to be groupings .
 It goes without saying that the glorification of individual ideologists, in principle, makes it easier to legitimize them in public discourse .
 Neo-Nazi symbolism and attributes become something familiar and acceptable for society . They start to be associated with “heroic defenders’ rather than street thugs who organize raids on foreigners .
 The right-wing conservative discourse creates favorable intellectual conditions for the spread of ultranationalist ideologies . The conservative discourse, which comes naturally in times of conflict, creates favorable conditions, says author .
 So far, it is difficult to assess the magnitude and factual threat of these processes for society and statehood .
 Russia and Ukraine already affect socio-political reality in Russia, Ukraine . However, it is clear that they already affect the socio- political reality in both countries .
 Despite popularity of the topic “Neo-Nazis at war’ in the media sphere, it has not aroused the attention of the scholarly community so far .
 Neither is there a complete scientific bibliography or consensus on the terminology used . There is no consensus on how to use the terminology .
 This considerably complicates my task within the scope of the outlined issue . This significantly complicates the task. This considerablycomplicates mytask within thescope of the issue .
 The existence of several dazzling journalistic portraits of combatants with radical-national views does not really change the situation, says the author .
 The demand on the expert community for an immediate reaction is very challenging . When discussing events, which take place right before our eyes, the demand on experts is challenging .
 This is especially true in areas where the information space is filled with unconfirmed and inaccurate reporting or even deliberative disinformation . This is particularly true in parts of the U.S. Information space is full of misinformation .
 Be it voluntarily or out of negligence, the researcher becomes a part of propagandistic campaigns . Each word can be used by one of the parties involved – with far-reaching consequences .
 Since the first days of the conflict, the portrait of “Fascists’ fighting “on the other side’ has been an important part of the mobilization of active support for the “own’s audience.
 The relevance of this factor in the context of the “hybrid warfare,’s ‘hybrid Warfare’ can’t be overstated, says the author .
 In the face of a threat, models of aggressive behavior are considered as natural . The threat is perceived as very real, according to experts .
 Use of violence is regarded as reactive behavior or, at least, as a kind of preventive action . In such instances, the use of violence has been seen as proactive behavior .
 This behavioral model, which almost inevitably stirs up the cycle of inter-group violence, is particularly deemed as natural when the real or imagined treat emanates from a dehumanized enemy . The real and imagined treat comes from a "dehumanized enemy," says author
 He is perceived as a stereotyped, inhumane marker of negative attributes . He has been described as a 'trendy' and 'inhumane' man .
 The information strategies, which played their part when preparing the ground for the Russian invasion and its propagandistic deception, require a separate analysis .
 Media is always unintentionally constructing a separate reality, simply by addressing certain topics while ignoring others . Media often chooses subjects, conducting interviews with heroes, emphasizing certain aspects and shaping the mental pictures of the audience .
 In other words, it is creating a narrative, especially in emotional situations such as during conflict . In other terms, it's creating a narratives, especially during emotional situations .
 I do not expect to deal exhaustively with the topic, but rather intend to outline the boundaries of the topic . I don't want to deal with the issue, but instead intend to outlines the boundaries.
 The ultra-right's near-term political perspectives in the context of their participation in the Russian-Ukrainian conflict are important, says the author .
 As the war must be classified as a “hybrid one, it is difficult to precisely define its chronological scope . The war has been described as a "hybrid"
 Radical Ukrainian nationalists were among the groups that participated in the protests from the very beginning .
 Some members of Ukrainian neo-Nazi groups even joined the ranks of so-called titushky1– hired fighters who attacked protesters .
 Thereby, those Maidan-opponents who were able to articulate some kind of ideology, mainly expressed views of Russian nationalism . Thereby: Those Maidan Opponents who had varying degrees of radicalism .
 The Russian invasion gave a new impetus to the development of Ukrainian national radicalism . But the Russian invasion was not the first time the country had seen radicalism.
 Almost immediately after the protest movement's victory in the Ukrainian capital, the Crimean Peninsula experienced Russian armed intervention .
 The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, announced the decision on the occupation and the disintegration of the Autonomous Crimean Republic from Ukraine during a meeting with heads of the “Special Forces and the Ministry of Defense in the night of 23rd February .
 Based on numerous indirect indicators, it could be concluded with a certain degree of confidence that at least the active preparation for the invasion had been launched much earlier .
 The Russian Federation breached its international legal obligations by its Armed Forces in 1997, according to the agreement between Ukraine and the Russian Federation . The agreement was signed on 28th May 1997 in order to block Ukrainian military units .
 Russian aggression entered into its open stage on the night of February 27th .
 This could have been considered as the latest possible date for the beginning of the military intervention .
 Russian troops seized the buildings of the Crimean Parliament and Council of Ministers and blocked the connection with peninsula .
 There was no large-scale fighting on Crimea . But that day could be dated as the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War .
The following days witnessed the active cross-border transfer of military units and equipment . The following days saw the activeCross-border transfers of military forces and equipment.
 A high amount of allegedly civilian fighters arrived on Crimea . Retired soldiers, veterans from the Afghan war as well as the so-called local armed conflicts .
 Ukrainian military bases were blockade of Ukraine's military bases . They acted as the ‘local population’ during the mass rally in front of the Crimean Parliament .
 The Russian President declared the independence of the Republic of Crimea on March 17th .
 The annexation of occupied Crimea was approved in terms of an international agreement . The next day, a formal decision about the annexation was approved . It stipulated the integration of Crimea and Sevastopol into Russia .
 The President of Ukraine issued an order on the withdrawal of Ukrainian military units from the territory of the peninsula .
 The Russian invasion on the peninsula and in eastern Ukraine is one single process, he says . The beginning of the aggression back to February 2014, he adds .
 The main actors of the aggression were regular members of the Russian Army .
 Militants and paramilitary activists, along with members of radical right-wing groups, recruited via various channels, lent support . Militant groups, including members of the paramilitary groups, were recruited by various channels .
 There was no documented action of hypothetical Ukrainian radical nationalists aimed at countering the aggression .
 The occupation and annexation of Crimea happened in a very short time – in less than a month . The occupation of Crimea and annexation happened in just a month.
 Independent media, NGOs, Human Right Groups and independent observers on Crimea were paralyzed from the very beginning of the aggression . A lack of open accessible information about the mechanisms of the intervention was blamed .
 The Donbas became the real theater of the Russo-Ukrainian War . The narrative of a non-violent “Anschluss of the peninsula is, of course, a propagandistic fabrication .
 The Russian aggression against Ukraine began on Crimea, I will focus on the east of the country hereinafter .
Opponents of the new government initially showed up in various cities in southern and eastern Ukraine in late February – early March . The opponents of the government initially appeared in several cities in the country .
 The opponents of the revolution participated in rallies, occupied squares for permanent action, attacked local Euromaidan supporters and seized administrative buildings . The opponents took part in rallies and occupied squares.
 The "Antimaidan" rallies were organized by remnants of the former government with the help of administrative resources . They were partly for the purpose of imitating popular support, and partly for forced oppression of the protest movement .
 It has been established that the civil activists of the Antimaidan’s militant section were handed out at least several a dozen automatic weapons from police warehouses . Many protesters were killed by the weapons .
 After the victory of the Revolution of Dignity, the bulk of groups involved in the militant section of the Antimaidan were disbanded .
 Some regions have become more violent due to the inertia of some regions . However, due to some regions, further confrontation became inevitable .
 The major digital media outlets, which at that time were controlled by the ruling party, were controlling the media . The major media outlets at the time were also controlling the public's fears among the audience .
 The “anti-Fascist hysteria’ was picked up by regional and Russian media. After the victory of the revolution, the ‘anti-fascist’ hysteria was pick up by the Russian media .
 Reports that “Banderites’ had seized power in Kyiv prompted a number of ideologically motivated activists to take to the streets in the south-eastern regions .
 The ‘Ribbon of Saint George’ turned into a visual expression of anti-Fascist consolidation of the populace . The “Ribbons of SaintGeorge’s’ turn into the visual expression for anti-fascist consolidation .
 The Orange Revolution in 2004 turned out to be victorious and deeply frightened the Kremlin . It was disseminated in Russia in 2005 as a symbol of the “50th anniversary of the Great Victory’s Great Victory.’
 The Antimaidan has been in turmoil since the 1980s . The region's former regime has been accused of crimes and human rights abuses . The former regime is believed to have been involved in a number of crimes .
Local elites were interested in imitating the disobedience of the regions, says the author . It is obvious that, claiming to be the only power able to guarantee local control, the local elites were keen on imitating disobedience .
This can be regarded as a form of blackmailing of the new and still weak government . This can be seen as an attempt to blackmail the new government .
 Regional clans made clear that any lack of guarantees for their personal well-being would inevitably lead to chaos and loss of control in regions disloyal to political forces .
 The illusion of local elites about the imitation of “superficial’s separatism quickly dispersed . But the illusion of the local elites quickly dispersed.
 Control over the process could not be maintained, both because of the unmanageable situation in the country as a whole, and the Russian interference .
 The ‘professionals’ headed towards various cities from Donetsk to Odessa . The “professional’s” headed to various cities.
 They had specialized in informational, organizational and financial activities, or in the performance of military sabotage tasks . They had specialized in informational and organizational activities .
 They were nowhere near being permanent official employees of Russian law enforcement agencies . They are not permanent employees of Russia's law enforcement agency .
 The information that can be compiled from public sources does not allow for a definite assessment of the extent to which the power structures were monitoring the activities of the professionals .
 The main task of both “saboteurs’ as well as “spin doctors” was the organization and coordination of the activities of local pro-Russian participants . In any case, during the first six weeks of the aggression, that is until
 This entailed both members of far-right and neo-Nazi groups and imperialist patriots and people with implicit political views . This entails both members and people who have implicit political beliefs .
 By mid-March, after the completion of the hottest phase of the occupation of Crimea, part of the militants went through Russian territory to Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv . The militants are located from there immediately went through Russia's territory .
 "anti-Banderite" rallies in Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv were largely carried into Ukraine by buses from neighboring Russian regions such as Belgorod .
 If our unit had not crossed the border, it all would have finished the same way it did in Kharkiv or Odessa, it would have done the same .
 It was in fact our unit that gave the war, which continues up to this day, its momentum . It was the unit that gives the war the momentum, which continued up to today .
 On the same day, a similar sabotage unit, which also participated in the occupation of Crimea, brought Kramatorsk under control .
 This proves the systematically planned nature of the aggression and the coordination of various groups on the side of the Russian aggressors . This certainly proves the systematic planned nature. This certainly shows the systematic plan of the aggressors.
14th April is the latest date to fix the beginning of the Russian-Ukrainian War in Donbas . Since a formal state of war was never introduced, martial law was never declared .
 The political structure of those regions, which fell beyond control of the Ukrainian government, changed . The Ukrainian government's political structure changed .
 The original plan of the Kremlin stipulated that the eight south-eastern regions of Ukraine should disintegrate from Ukraine . According to evidence, which I consider as credible, the original plan is credible .
 The ideological foundation of this project was the concept of a “Confederation of Novorossiya,’ which was even formally proclaimed in May 2014 . But following the failure of Russia’s plans outside Donbas and the cessation of hostilities, came to a halt in spring
 The territory under control of pro-Russian terrorists shrank almost threefold in the summer of 2014 . The ATO was conducted by the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 Mariupol was liberated, as was Sloviansk and Kramatorsk, where the Russian aggression in Donbas and many other villages had started in April 2014 . Mariupl was liberated as was Kramatork and Slovianiansk, which was liberated .
Ukrainian troops already stood in the outskirts of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 Ukraine lost control over a considerable part of its border with Russia . Large numbers of volunteer fighters and military experts crossed the border .
 Russian Army units had stopped progress made by Ukrainian Armed Forces . By late August 2014, the direct intervention of the Russian Army had stopped the progress .
 The Minsk Accords should have frozen the conflict by September 2014, says the EU .
 Heavy fighting near Donetsk airport and Debaltseve in winter 2014 and spring 2015 . There was heavy fighting near the Donetsk airport.
 The front line, separating Ukrainian troops from Russian forces and pro-Russian militants, remained almost unchanged as of August 2014 . However, the front line remains almost unchanged.
 The intensity of the confrontation has decreased significantly since spring 2015 . The intensity has decreased dramatically since spring 2014 .
 By spring 2016, full-fledged fighting has almost ceased, although occasional incidents still occur . By spring 2015, fighting has nearly ceased, but occasional incidents remain .
Translated from Ukrainian by Johann Zajaczkowski and copy edited by Teresa Wigglesworth-Baker . Translated from Ukraine by JohannZajacZkowski and from Ukrainian .