 The United States and the European Union announced Friday an expanded package of sanctions against the Russian financial, energy, and defense sectors . The U.S. and the EU announced the expanded package on Friday .
 The new measures were enacted as part of an ongoing campaign to place economic and military pressure on Russia . A continuing ceasefire in Ukraine between the Kiev regime and pro-Russian separatists in the east is still ongoing .
 Banks affected by the new economic restrictions include Russia’s largest lenders Sberbank, Gazprombank and Rosselkhozbank .
Western banks and individuals will be limited to purchasing short-term debt with a maturity of 30 days from five Russian financial firms . Western banks and people can purchase short- term debt with 30 days to buy .
 The sanctions also limit Western funding to Russian defense companies Oboronprom, the United Aircraft Corporation, and Uralvagonzavon . The sanctions are also limiting funding to Russia's defense companies .
 Russian state-owned oil firms Rosneft, Transneft and Gazpromneft will be subject to the new financing restrictions as well .
New round of sanctions targeted at scuttling Russian Arctic and shale oil exploration projects . Exxon Mobil, BP, and Shell are partnering with Russian energy firms .
 The Western energy firms will be prohibited from providing technology and services to Russian energy corporation projects in the Arctic .
 In addition to the economic sanctions, two dozen more Russian and Ukrainian citizens have been made subject to a travel ban and asset freezes .
 Alexander Zakharchenko is the Ukrainian leader of the Donetsk People's Republic . He is the leader of Ukraine's Donetsk People’s Republic .
 The fighting in eastern Ukraine has been used as a pretext by the U.S. and its European allies to increase economic and military pressure on Moscow .
 NATO and the United States have repeatedly accused Russia of directly controlling the separatists and intervening in eastern Ukraine . Without presenting any convincing evidence, NATO and U.S. have repeatedly claimed Russia has directly controlled the separatists .
 The imposition of a ceasefire and accompanying peace plan, worked out between Russian President Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, has halted fighting in the Donbass region .
 He stated that he found the new sanctions ‘odd’ in the face of the peace plan . He said he found it “odd” in the faces of the Peace Plan .
 Poroshenko hailed the expanded Western economic sanctions against Russia as a sign of unity and solidarity with Ukraine .
 Poroshenko announced that Ukrainian and European parliaments would ratify an association agreement between the European Union and Kiev on Tuesday . Poroshenko said that “Europe simply can’t be the EU without Ukraine’s Ukraine,’ he said .
Ratification of the association agreement would move Ukraine further out of Russia’s economic sphere of influence and closer to EU member status .
 European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso announced that Ukraine could maintain current tariffs until early 2016 .
 Russia had threatened to block trade between Russia and Ukraine if trade barriers with Europe were dropped as stipulated in the original agreement . The original agreement was signed by Russia in 2008 .
 Other economic and political measures required by the association agreement would still go into effect immediately . Other economic, political measures needed by the agreement would continue to be implemented .
 In February, the United States and its European allies supported a far-right coup that ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych refused in late 2013 to sign the EU association agreement .
 Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves was speaking at the Yalta European Security conference . Ilves took the opportunity to denounce and further antagonize Russia . The Estonian president also spoke at the conference .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea is compared to Hitler's seizure of the Sudetenland in 1938 . Ilves described 2014 as an “annus horribilis for Europe’s Europe.
 Poroshenko will travel to Washington DC next week to meet with President Obama .
 U.S. military advisers have already been sent to assist in improving Ukraine's military capabilities .
 The Defense and State departments have established a program to train and equip a battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard . The program is aimed at training and training a battalion.