 It began in February 2014 following the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity . Initially focused on Crimea and the Donbas, internationally recognised as part of Ukraine .
 The first eight years of the conflict included the Russian annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas . The conflict included naval incidents, cyberwarfare, and political tensions .
 Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022 . Russian military build-up on the Russia–Ukraine border from late 2021 .
 Following the Euromaidan protests and the removal of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, pro-Russia unrest erupted .
 In April 2014, demonstrations by pro-Russian groups in the Donbas escalated into a war between the Armed Forces of Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists of the self- declared Donetsk and Luhansk republics .
 In August 2014, unmarked Russian military vehicles crossed the border into the Donetsk republic . The border was closed in August 2014 .
 An undeclared war began between Ukrainian forces on one side, and separatists on the other . Russia attempted to hide its involvement .
 The war settled into a static conflict, with repeated failed attempts at a ceasefire . The war ended with repeated attempts to end the conflict .
 In 2015, the Minsk II agreements were signed by Russia and Ukraine, but a number of disputes prevented them being fully implemented . The Minsk agreements are signed by both countries .
 By 2019, 7% of Ukraine was classified by the Ukrainian government as temporarily occupied territories . The Ukrainian government classified the territory as temporary occupied territories.
 In 2021 and early 2022, there was a major Russian military build-up around Ukraine's borders . In 2011 and 2012, there were major Russian build-ups in Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin criticized the enlargement of NATO as a threat to his country . Putin demanded Ukraine be barred from ever joining the military alliance .
 He also questioned Ukraine's right to exist, and wrongfully stated that Ukraine was established by Vladimir Lenin . He also expressed irredentist views, questioning Ukraine'sright to exist and said Ukraine was founded by Lenin .
 Russia officially recognised the two self-proclaimed separatist states in the Donbas . Russia openly sent troops into the territories in February 2022 .
 Much of the international community has condemned Russia for its actions in Ukraine . It has accused Russia of breaking international law and violating Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Many countries implemented economic sanctions against Russia, Russian individuals, or companies, especially after the 2022 invasion . Many countries implement economic sanctions on Russia .
 November 2014 escalation 2.2. 2015 and ceasefire 2.3. 2015–2022 frozen conflict phase 2. 3. 2015-2022 Frozen Conflict 2. 2.2015-20 22 frozen conflict 2.1. 2015 – 2022 Frozen conflict phase 1.
 Ukraine and Russia maintained close ties after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Russia–Ukraine relations See also: Historical background of 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Post-Soviet context and Orange Revolution .
 In 1994, Ukraine agreed to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-weapon state . Ukraine is now a Non-proliferation state .
 Russian leaders described this expansion as a violation of Western powers' informal assurances that NATO would not expand eastward . The 2004 Ukrainian presidential election was controversial .
 opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned by TCDD dioxin during the election campaign . He later implicated Russian involvement .
 In November, Viktor Yanukovych was declared the winner, despite allegations of vote-rigging by election observers .
 During a two-month period which became known as the Orange Revolution, large peaceful protests successfully challenged the outcome . The Orange Revolution was held during the first two months of 2014 .
 Supreme Court of Ukraine annulled initial result due to widespread electoral fraud . Second round re-run was held, bringing to power Yushchenko as president and Yulia Tymoshenko as prime minister .
 The Orange Revolution is often grouped together with other early-21st century protest movements, particularly within the former USSR, known as colour revolutions . The Orange revolution is often called the Orange Revolution .
 Russian military officers viewed such colour revolutions as an attempt by the United States and European states to destabilise neighbouring countries and undermine Russia's national security .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin accused organisers of the 2011–2013 Russian protests of being former advisors to Yushchenko . Putin described the protests as an attempt to transfer the Orange Revolution to Russia .
 The response among NATO members was divided . Western European countries opposed offering Membership Action Plans . President George W Bush pushed for their admission .
 Putin voiced strong opposition to Georgia and Ukraine's NATO membership bids . Putin voiced support for Ukraine and Georgia's bid for membership .
 By January 2022, the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO remained remote . The possibility of joining NATO remains remote .
 In 2009, Yanukovych announced his intent to again run for president in the 2010 presidential election, which he subsequently won . He subsequently won the election .
 In November 2013, Yanukovych's sudden decision not to sign the EU–Ukraine Association Agreement led to a wave of large, pro-European Union protests . Yanukovych chose closer ties to Russia and the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition signed a settlement agreement that called for early elections . The Ukrainian parliament had overwhelmingly approved of finalizing the agreement with the EU .
 Yanukovych fled from the capital ahead of an impeachment vote that stripped him of his powers as president . The following day, Yanukovych fled.
 On 23 February, the parliament adopted a bill to repeal the 2012 law which gave Russian language an official status . The bill was passed by the parliament in February .
 The bill was not enacted, however, the proposal provoked negative reactions in the Russian-speaking regions of Ukraine . Russian media said the ethnic Russian population was in imminent danger .
 The following day, Yanukovych resurfaced in Russia and declared that he remained the acting president of Ukraine . The next day, Russia was beginning its overt military campaign in Crimea .
 Leaders of Russian-speaking eastern regions of Ukraine declared continuing loyalty to Yanukovych . The 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine caused by pro-Russia unrest in 2014 .
 At the onset of the conflict, Russia had roughly 12,000 military personnel in the Black Sea Fleet, in several locations in the Crimean peninsula .
 In 2005 a dispute broke out over control of the Sarych cape lighthouse near Yalta . A number of other beacons were also involved .
 Russian presence was allowed by the basing and transit agreement with Ukraine . Russia was allowed to be in Ukraine by the agreement with the Ukraine .
 Under agreements the Russian military in Crimea was constrained to a maximum of 25,000 troops . Under the agreements, the military was required to respect the sovereignty of Ukraine, honor its legislation and not interfere in the internal affairs of the country .
 Operations beyond designated deployment sites were permitted only after coordination with the competent agencies of Ukraine . Operations beyond designate deployment sites are permitted only by coordination with competent agencies .
 Russia was allowed to have its military bases in Crimea until 2017 . It would evacuate its portion of the Black Sea Fleet out of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 A Russian construction project to re-home the fleet in Novorossiysk launched in 2005 . As of 2010, the project faced major budget cuts and construction delays .
 The constitutional provision on ""-existing bases"" was revoked in 2019 . Russia had already annexed Crimea and withdrawn from the basing treaties unilaterally .
 No formal declaration of war has been issued in the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War . Declaration of military operations has not yet been issued .
 When the Kremlin announced the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, it claimed to commence a "special military operation" It side-stepped a formal declaration of war . The Kremlin said it would launch a special military operation .
 The statement was regarded as a declaration of war by the Ukrainian government . It was reported as such by many international news sources .
 Ukraine has not issued a formal declaration of war on its behalf . The Ukrainian parliament refers to Russia as a "terrorist state" in regards to its military actions in Ukraine .
 This section may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling . History this section may need to be updated for grammar and style .
14 Russian annexation of Crimea. 14 Russian annexed Crimea . For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Crimea by the Russian Federation .
 Russia began an annexation of Crimea in February 2014 . Russian troops blocked the Ukrainian military base in Perevalne on 20 February .
 Russian troops and special forces began moving into Crimea through Novorossiysk. On 22 and 23 February, Russian troops began moving in Crimea .
 Russian forces without insignias began their advance into the Crimean Peninsula on 27 February . On 27 February, Russian forces started their advance.
 They took strategic positions and captured the Crimean Parliament, raising a Russian flag . The Crimean Parliament was captured by the rebels .
 Security checkpoints were used to cut the Crimean Peninsula off from the rest of Ukraine . Russian soldiers secured key airports and a communications center in the following days .
On 1 March, the Russian legislature approved the use of armed forces, leading to an influx of Russian troops and military hardware into the peninsula . Cyberattacks also enabled Russian access to the mobile phones of Ukrainian officials and members of parliament .
 In the following days, all remaining Ukrainian military bases and installations were surrounded and besieged . The Southern Naval Base in Ukraine was the last military base in Ukraine .
 Russia formally annexed the peninsula on 18 March . Ukrainian military bases and ships were stormed by Russian forces .
 On 24 March, Ukraine ordered troops to withdraw; by 30 March, all Ukrainian forces had left the peninsula . All Ukrainian forces were ordered to leave the peninsula.
 Ukrainian parliament declared Crimea a territory temporarily occupied by Russia . On 15 April, Ukraine declared Crimea temporarily occupied.
 Russian government increased its military presence in the region and made nuclear threats to solidify the new status quo on the ground .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin said a Russian military task force would be established in Crimea . Putin said that a Russian task force will be established.
 In November, NATO stated that it believed Russia was deploying nuclear-capable weapons to Crimea . For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the war in Donbas. For a chronicle of the conflict, see the timeline .
 The first protests across southern and eastern Ukraine were largely native expressions of discontent with the new Ukrainian government . Combatants of the war in Donbas and List of equipment used by Russian separatist forces of the conflict .
 Russian involvement at this stage was limited to voicing support for the demonstrations . The emergence of the separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk began as a small fringe group of protesters .
 Russia launched a co-ordinated political and military campaign against Ukraine, as part of the broader Russo-Ukrainian War . Russia went on to take advantage of this, however, and launched aCo-ordination political andMilitary campaign .
 Putin gave legitimacy to the nascent separatist movement when he described the Donbas as part of the historic ""New Russia"" region . The region had become part of Ukraine in 1922 with the foundation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .
 By April 2014, Russian citizens had taken control of the separatist movement . The movement was supported by volunteers and materiel from Russia .
 DPR commander Igor Girkin says the movement would have fizzled out without this support in April . The movement had also fizzed out in Kharkiv and Odessa .
 The disputed referendum on the status of Donetsk Oblast was held on 11 May . These demonstrations followed the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation .
 SBU claimed key commanders of the rebel movement during the beginning of the conflict were Russian agents . Igor Strelkov and Igor Bezler were key commanders during the conflict .
 The prime minister of Donetsk People's Republic from May to August 2014 was a Russian citizen, Alexander Borodai . All top positions in Donetsk and Luhansk were held by Ukrainian citizens .
 Russian volunteers are reported to make up from 15% to 80% of the combatants . Many are said to be former military personnel .
 Recruitment for the Donbas insurgents was performed openly in Russian cities using private or voyenkomat facilities . Economic and material circumstances in Donbas had generated neither necessary nor sufficient conditions for a locally rooted, internally driven armed conflict .
 The role of the Kremlin's military intervention was paramount for hostilities to begin . The Kremlin's role in the military intervention is paramount.
 The Donbas status referendums in May 2014 were not officially recognised by the Ukrainian government or any UN member state .
 The deployment was likely used to threaten escalation and stymie Ukraine's response to unfolding events . The deployment is likely to be used as a threat to escalate the situation .
Concerns were expressed that Russia might again be readying an incursion into Ukraine following its annexation of Crimea .
In April, armed conflict began in eastern Ukraine between Russian-backed separatist forces and Ukrainian government . This threat forced Ukraine to divert force deployment to its borders instead of the conflict zone .
 The separatists declared the People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk . The separatists have declared the people's republics. The separatists are in the Donetsk region .
 Militants occupied government buildings in many cities and took control of border crossings to Russia, transport hubs, broadcasting center, and other strategic infrastructure . From 6 April, Militant occupied government building in many city cities .
 Ukrainian military and security services were poorly prepared and ill-positioned and quickly stalled . By the end of April, the Ukrainian Government announced it had no full control of the provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukrainian campaign focused on containing the separatists by securing key positions around the ATO zone . Ukraine's national mobilization is complete once Ukraine's government completes .
 conflict between separatists and Ukrainian government escalated in May . Russia began to employ a "hybrid approach" to support the separatists and destabilise the Donbas region .
 From June Russia trickled in arms, armor, and munitions to the separatist forces . Russia's separatist forces.
 Donetsk and Luhansk cities are cutting off supply routes between the two . By the end of July, they were pushing into Donetsk, and thought to restore control of the Russian border .
 By 28 July, the strategic heights of Savur-Mohyla were under Ukrainian control . The town of Debaltseve, an important railroad hub, was under control .
Ukrainian media have described the well-organised and well-armed pro-Russian militants as similar to those who occupied Crimea during the Crimean crisis . American and Ukrainian officials said they had evidence of Russian interference in Ukraine .
Militants in Krasnyi Lyman used Russian-made AK-100 series assault rifles fitted with grenade launchers . Such weapons are only issued in the Russian Federation .
Militants in Sloviansk arrived in military lorries without license plates . Militants arrived in Slovakia without licenses or licenses .
 A reporter from Russia's Novaya Gazeta has visited separatist artillery positions in Avdeyevka . He wrote that in his opinion it's impossible that the cannons are handled by volunteers .
 Russia dispatched what it called a "humanitarian convoy" of trucks across the Russo-Ukrainian border in mid-August 2014 . Donetsk and Luhansk separatists united under the banner of "Novorossiya" Russian President Vladimir Putin used to describe southeastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council published a report on the number and contents of these convoys . It claimed they were arriving almost daily in November and their contents were mainly arms and ammunition .
 Russian servicemen arrived in Donbas in August 2014, according to Igor Strelkov . The Ukrainian "Anti-Terrorist Operation" was able to vastly shrink the territory under the control of pro-Russian forces .
 Igor Girkin urged Russian military intervention in Donetsk Oblast . He said combat inexperience of his irregular forces had caused the setbacks .
 Russia abandoned its hybrid approach, and began a conventional invasion of the Donbas region .
 Ten Russian paratroopers of the 331st Guards Airborne Regiment captured in Dzerkalne . They were captured after their armoured vehicles were hit by Ukrainian artillery .
Paratroopers claimed they crossed Ukrainian border by accident in the night of 23 August . The Security Service of Ukraine reported the capture of paratroopers .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine labeled the conflict an invasion on 27 August 2014 . The conflict has been dubbed an invasion by the Ukrainian government .
 A column of Russian tanks and military vehicles reported to have crossed into Ukraine in the southeast . The area had not seen a pro-Russian presence for weeks .
 Russian forces captured the city of Novoazovsk . All Ukrainians who did not have an address registered within the town were arrested and deporting .
 Pro-Ukrainian anti-war protests took place in Mariupol which was threatened by Russian troops . The protests were held in the city of Mari upol .
 The UN Security Council called an emergency meeting to discuss the situation . The situation has been described as a 'serious situation'
 The 76th Guards Air Assault Division based in Pskov allegedly entered Ukrainian territory in August and engaged in a skirmish near Luhansk, suffering 80 dead . Residents of Kyiv with Sich Battalion volunteers on 26 August 2014.
 Ukrainian Defence Ministry says they seized two of the unit's armoured vehicles near Luhansk city . Another three tanks and two armoured vehicles of pro-Russian forces were destroyed in other regions .
 Russian media highlighted that the medal is awarded exclusively for combat operations . A large number of soldiers had died in Ukraine just days before, but their burials were conducted in secret .
 Some Russian media, such as Pskovskaya Guberniya, reported that Russian paratroopers might have been killed in Ukraine .
 Journalists traveled to Pskov, the reported burial location of troops, to investigate .
Pskovskaya Guberniya revealed transcripts of phone conversations between Russian soldiers being treated in a Pskov hospital . Multiple reporters said they had been attacked or threatened there .
 The Russian military leadership paid soldiers to resign their commissions and fight in Ukraine in the early summer of 2014, an opposition newspaper in Russia said .
 This reporter mentioned knowledge of at least one case when soldiers who refused were threatened with prosecution . This reporter was asked to explain why soldiers refused to be prosecuted .
 Valentina Matviyenko, a top politician in the ruling United Russia party, also praised ""volunteers" fighting in Ukraine . Matvyenko also praised "our fraternal nation" in Ukraine.
 Russian state television for the first time showed the funeral of a soldier killed fighting in east Ukraine . The funeral is the first of its kind for the soldier killed in Ukraine .
 State-controlled TV station Channel One showed the burial of paratrooper Anatoly Travkin in the central Russian city of Kostroma .
 Travkin had not told his wife or commanders about his decision to fight alongside pro-Russia rebels battling government forces .
 Sky News team filmed groups of troops near Novoazovsk wearing modern combat gear typical for Russian units .
 Specialists consulted by journalists identified parts of the equipment as currently used by Russian ground forces and paratroopers . Ukrainian President Poroshenko said he had reached a ""permanent ceasefire"" agreement with Russian President Putin .
 Russia's Permanent Representative to the OSCE, Andrey Kelin, had said it was natural pro-Russian separatists "are going to liberate" Mariupol . Poroshenko then backtracked from his previous statement.
 Ukrainian forces said Russian intelligence groups had been spotted in the area . Ukrainian forces stated that Russian intelligence Groups had been seen in the region .
On 5 September 2014, the ceasefire agreement called the Minsk Protocol, drew a line of demarcation between Ukraine and separatist-controlled portions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . A NATO officer said there were several thousand regular Russian forces operating in Ukraine .
 NATO reiterated the prevalence of Russian troops in November . U.S. general Philip M Breedlove said Russian tanks, Russian artillery, Russian air defence systems and Russian combat troops were sighted .
 Lithuanian Mission to the United Nations denounced Russia's 'undeclared war' on Ukraine . The Lithuanian mission to the U.N. denounces Russia's war on Ukraine.
 Journalist Menahem Kahana took a picture showing a 1RL232 ""Leopard"" battlefield surveillance radar system in Torez, east of Donetsk . Dutch freelance journalist Stefan Huijboom took pictures which showed the 1 RL232 traveling with the 1RL239 ""Lynx
 Committee of Soldiers' Mothers warned about conscripts being sent to east Ukraine . On 23 January 2015 the Committee of soldiers' Mothers issued a warning on 23 January .
 NATO said it had seen an increase in Russian tanks, artillery pieces and other heavy military equipment in eastern Ukraine . NATO said over 30 Russian military units were taking part in the conflict in Ukraine .
 The Russian side also frequently employed electronic warfare systems that Ukraine lacked . Ukraine also often employed electronic Warfare systems thatUkraine lacked .
Numerous reports of Russian troops and warfare on Ukrainian territory were raised in United Nations Security Council meetings . Similar conclusions were voiced by the Conflict Studies Research Centre .
 The United Kingdom accused Russia of intentionally constraining OSCE observation missions' capabilities . OSCE observers were allowed to monitor only two kilometers of border between Ukraine and Russia, the UK says .
 Ukraine declared Russia-backed separatist republics from eastern Ukraine to be terrorist organizations . Ukraine declared the Russia- backed separatist Republics to be terror organizations .
 He abbreviated his visit to the World Economic Forum in Davos because of his concerns at the worsening situation . He shortened his visit due to his concerns about the worsening conditions in the world .
 It reported on an intensified movement of unmarked military trucks, covered with canvas . The military said it had seen increased movement in recent days .
 A new package of measures to end the conflict, known as Minsk II, was agreed on 15 February 2015 . The new package was agreed in February 2015. It is called Minsk 2 .
 On 18 February, Ukrainian forces withdrew from Debatlseve, the last major battle of the Donbas war . Russian supplied drones and electronic jamming have ensured Ukrainian troops struggle to counter artillery fire by pro-Russian militants .
 In February, Russian separatists forces numbered around 36,000 troops, of whom 8,500–10,000 were Russian soldiers .
 The independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta obtained documents allegedly written by oligarch Konstantin Malofayev and others . It provided the Russian government with a strategy in the event of Viktor Yanukovych's removal from power and the break-up of Ukraine .
 The documents outlined plans for the annexation of Crimea and the eastern portions of the country . The documents describe the events that actually followed after Yanukovych's fall .
 The documents also described plans for a public relations campaign which would seek to justify Russian actions .
 Sergey Glazyev gave direct instructions to various pro-Russian parties in Ukraine to instigate unrest in Donetsk, Kharkiv, Zaporizhia, and Odessa . In August 2016, the Security Service of Ukraine published the first batch of telephone intercepts from 2014 .
 Glazyev pointed out that the "peninsula doesn't have its own electricity, water, or gas" and a "quick and effective" solution would be expansion to the north . In further calls recorded in February and March 2014.
 Ukrainian journalists say plans for military intervention in Donbas to form a Russia-controlled puppet state of Novorossiya were discussed long before the conflict actually began .
 A report by Igor Sutyagin published by the Royal United Services Institute in March 2015 stated that a total of 42,000 regular Russian combat troops were involved in the fighting . A peak strength of 10,000 in December 2014.
 The direct involvement of the Russian troops on Ukrainian territory began in August 2014 . Ukrainian military successes created the possibility that the pro-Russian rebels would collapse .
Cases of Russian soldiers killed and wounded in Ukraine were widely discussed in local Russian media in the republics from which they originated . Similar conclusions were voiced by the Conflict Studies Research Centre .
Recruitment for Donbas was performed rather openly via veteran and other paramilitary organisations . Recruitment was performed more openly via veterans and paramilitary organisations.
 Vladimir Yefimov, leader of one such organisation, explained in detail how the process worked in the Ural area .
 The organisation recruited mostly army veterans, but also policemen, firefighters, firefighters and police officers .
 The cost of equipping one volunteer was estimated at around 350,000 rubles plus the cost of the volunteer's salary . The volunteers were issued a document claiming their participation was limited to "offering humanitarian help" to avoid Russian mercenary laws .
 The recruits traveled to the conflict zone without weapons, which they receive at their destination . The recruits received the weapons at the destination .
 Russia also reinforced its military presence on the eastern border with Ukraine as well as near Belgorod, which is close to Kharkiv .
 Bato Dambaev, a Russian contract soldier from Buryatia, fought in Ukraine while in active service in the Russian army . Russia refused to allow the OSCE to expand its mission .
 In January 2015, thousands of tons of cargo declared "high explosives" were sent by railway from various places in Russia into Uspenskaya, a small train station on a line crossing from Rostovskaya oblast' into a separatist-controlled part of Ukraine . 2016 escalation of
 Russian security agency FSB claimed it had prevented ""Ukrainian terrorist attacks" and that two servicemen were killed in clashes in Armiansk .
 Ukrainian government denied that the incident took place . Russian media reported that one of the killed soldiers was a commander of the Russian GRU .
 Ukrainian official claims Russian soldiers deserted but had not entered into Ukraine . skirmishes broke out between Russian intelligence officers and border guards .
 Russia used the allegation to engage in a rapid military build-up in Crimea, followed by drills and military movement near the Ukrainian border . Russia also used the allegations to engage with the Ukrainian military in Crimea .
 Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko warned that Russia was preparing for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine .
 The Kerch Strait incident offers a critical link for Ukraine's eastern ports in the Azov Sea to the Black Sea . Russia gained de facto control in the aftermath of 2014 .
 Ukraine appealed to court of arbitration over the use of the strait in 2017 . Russia had built a bridge over it, limiting the size of ships that could transit it . Russia imposed new regulations, and subsequently detained Ukrainian vessels .
 Three Ukrainian boats traveling from Odessa to Mariupol attempted to cross the Kerch Strait in November 2018 . Russian warships fired on and seized the Ukrainian boats; 24 Ukrainian sailors were detained .
 Ukrainian lawmakers overwhelmingly backed the imposition of martial law along Ukraine's coastal regions and those bordering Russia in response to the firing and seizure of Ukrainian naval ships by Russia near the Crimean peninsula .
 In May 2019, the newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy took office promising to end the War in Donbas .
 In December 2019, Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists began swapping prisoners of war prisoners . In December 2018, the Ukrainian government and separatists began exchanging prisoners.
 50 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the conflict between Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed separatists in 2020, Ukrainian authorities say .
 U.S. paratroopers of 2nd Battalion, 503rd Infantry Regiment depart Italy's Aviano Air Base for Latvia, 23 February 2022 .
 From March to April 2021, Russia commenced a major military build-up near the Russo-Ukrainian border . Second building-up between October 2021 to February 2022 in both Russia and Belarus .
 The Russian government repeatedly denied it had plans to invade or attack Ukraine . Those who issued the denials included Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov in November 2021, Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov in January 2022, Russian ambassador to the United States Anatoly Antonov on 20 February 2022,
 The U.S. released intelligence of Russian invasion plans in December 2021 . Satellite photographs show Russian troops and equipment near the Ukrainian border .
 The intelligence reported the existence of a Russian list of key sites and individuals to be killed or neutralized upon invasion . The list was compiled by a Russian intelligence agency .
 The United States continued to release reports that accurately predicted the invasion plans . The Ukrainian government did not adequately prepare for a large invasion, an analyst says .
 Russian officials accused Ukraine of inciting tensions, Russophobia, and repression of Russian speakers in Ukraine . In the months prior to the invasion, Russian officials said Ukraine was inciting tensions and Russophobia .
 These actions were described by commentators and Western officials as attempts to justify war . The actions are described as attempt to justify the war .
 Putin incorrectly described the country as having been created by Vladimir Lenin, who carved a Soviet Republic out of what Putin said was Russian land . Putin Joseph Stalin supplemented Ukrainian lands with lands from other eastern European countries .
 Putin falsely accused Ukrainian society and government of being dominated by neo-Nazism . He also invoked the history of collaboration in German-occupied Ukraine during World War II .
Analysts have described Putin's rhetoric as greatly exaggerating the influence of far-right groups within Ukraine . There is no widespread support for the ideology in the government, military, or electorate, analysts say .
 The Poroshenko administration enforced the law condemning the Soviet Union and the Nazis in 2015 . The law was enforced by the government in 2015.
 Ukrainian president Zelenskyy said his grandfather served in the Soviet army fighting against the Nazis . Three of his family members died in the Holocaust .
 A U.S. intelligence assessment map and imagery on Russian military movement near the Ukrainian border, as on 3 December 2021 .
 During the second build-up, Russia issued demands to the U.S. and NATO, including a legally binding arrangement preventing Ukraine from ever joining NATO .
 NATO members in Central and Eastern Europe had joined the alliance because their populations broadly preferred to move towards the safety and economic opportunities offered by NATO and the EU .
 The demand for a formal treaty preventing Ukraine from joining NATO was also seen as unviable by Western officials . NATO showed no desire to accede to Ukraine's requests to join .
 Alleged clashes in Donbas escalated significantly from 17 February 2022 onwards . The violence began in February 2012 .
 The Ukrainians and the Russian separatists each accused the other of firing into their territory .
 Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics ordered mandatory evacuations of civilians from their respective capital cities on 18 February . Full evacuations would take months, observers noted .
 Ukrainian media reported a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas . The Russian government intensified its disinformation campaign in the days leading up to the invasion of Ukraine .
 Many of the disinformation videos were poor and amateur in quality . Evidence showed that the claimed attacks, explosions, and evacuations in Donbas were staged by Russia .
 Putin's address to the nation on 21 February at 22:35 . Putin announced that the Russian government would diplomatically recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics .
 The 21 February intervention in Donbas was condemned by several members of the UN Security Council . None voiced support for it .
 Ukraine's parliament proclaimed a 30-day nationwide state of emergency and ordered the mobilisation of all reservists . The Federation Council unanimously authorised Putin to use military force outside Russia .
 He also refuted Russia's claims about the presence of neo-Nazis in the Ukrainian government . He said he had no intention of attacking the Donbas region .
 Ukrainian representative, Sergiy Kyslytsya, called on Russian representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to "do everything possible to stop the war" or relinquish his position as president of the UN Security Council . He refused .
 The invasion began on the morning of 24 February, when Putin announced a "special military operation" to "demilitarise" Ukraine .
 Minutes later, missiles and airstrikes hit across Ukraine, including the capital Kyiv . It was followed by a large ground invasion from multiple directions .
 Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy enacted martial law and a general mobilisation of all male Ukrainian citizens between 18 and 60 . Russian attacks were launched on a northern front from Belarus towards Kyiv .
 Russia announced that its forces in southern and eastern Ukraine would be placed under the command of General Aleksandr Dvornikov . Some units withdrawn from northern Ukraine were subsequently redeployed to the Donbas .
 Russian forces near Kharkiv had withdrawn following a Ukrainian counter-offensive . By 13 May, Russian forces had withdrawn from the Ukrainian border .
The invasion was internationally condemned as a war of aggression . Mariupol fell to Russian troops following a prolonged siege of the Azovstal steel works .
 A United Nations General Assembly resolution demanded a full withdrawal of Russian forces . The International Court of Justice ordered Russia to suspend military operations and the Council of Europe expelled Russia .
 Humanitarian situation during the war in Donbas and Russian war crimes § Ukraine The war has been accompanied by violations of human rights . The war is accompanied by human rights violations .
 The right of movement was impeded for the inhabitants of the conflict zone . The right to movement was also impeded.
 Arbitrary detention was practiced by both sides in the first years of the conflict . Arbitrary Detention was practiced in both sides of the war .
 It decreased after 2016 in government-held areas, while in separatist-held ones it continued . It decreased in the separatist- held areas after 2016 .
 The investigation into the abuses, including torture, made little progress . The investigation was conducted by both sides .
 The closure of three TV channels amounted to a violation of the freedom of expression, says OHCHR . OHCHR says the closure of the three channels amounts to a violations of the free speech .
Major Russian natural gas pipelines to Europe remain the main transit route for Russia . Russia earns Ukraine about $3 billion a year in transit fees, making it the country's most lucrative export service . Nord Stream, Nord Stream 2, and Russia in the European energy sector are major issues .
Following Russia's launch of the Nord Stream pipeline, which bypasses Ukraine, gas transit volumes steadily decreased .
 During the Ukrainian crisis, starting in February 2014 with the Russian annexation of Crimea, severe tensions extended to the gas sector .
 The outbreak of war in the Donbas region forced the suspension of a project to develop Ukraine's own shale gas reserves . The Yuzivska gas field had been planned as a way to reduce Ukrainian dependence on Russian gas imports .
 A terrorist explosion damaged Russia's Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline in Ukraine in May 2014 . EU commissioner for energy Günther Oettinger was called in to broker a deal securing supplies to Ukraine and transit to the EU .
 Another section of the pipeline exploded in the Poltava Oblast on 17 June 2014 . Russia limited the supply of gas to Ukrainian customers due to non-payment .
 Ukraine's Interior Minister Arsen Avakov said the explosion had been caused by a bomb . Russia planned to completely abandon gas supplies to Europe through Ukraine after 2018 .
 Gazprom and Ukraine agreed to a five-year deal on Russian gas transit to Europe at the end of 2019 . The deal is expected to be completed at end of next year .
 In 2020, the TurkStream natural gas pipeline running from Russia to Turkey changed the regional gas flows in South-East Europe . In May 2021, the Biden administration waived Trump's CAATSA sanctions on the company behind Russia's Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany and its chief executive .
 Ukrainian President Zelenskyy said he was ""surprised"" and ""disappointed" by Joe Biden's decision .
 The deal aimed to prevent Poland and Ukraine from being cut off from Russian gas supplies . The deal aims to prevent the two countries from being cutting off Russian gas supply .
 Ukraine will get a $50 million loan for green technology until 2024 . Germany will set up a billion dollar fund to promote Ukraine's transition to green energy to compensate for loss of the gas transit fees .
 U.S. and Germany said that if the Kremlin used gas as a weapon, there would be an appropriate response . Vitrenko stated that a joint statement from the United States and Germany.
 The Russo-Ukrainian conflict has also included elements of hybrid warfare using non-traditional means . Hybrid warfare has also been used in the conflict .
 Cyberwarfare has been used by Russia in operations including the Ukraine power grid hack in December 2015 and 2016 . The U.S. claimed it was the largest known cyber attack in the world .
 Ukrainian operations have included the Surkov Leaks in October 2016 which released 2,337 e-mails in relation to Russian plans for seizing Crimea from Ukraine and fomenting separatist unrest .
 The Russian information war against Ukraine has been another front of hybrid warfare waged by Russia . Russia has been waging a hybrid warfare against Ukraine .
 Vladimir Solovyov voiced support for his country's invasion of Ukraine . Russian information war against Ukraine and Russian disinformation in the post-Soviet era .
 In April 2014, Russian news channels Russia-1 and NTV showed a man saying he was attacked by a fascist Ukrainian gang on one channel . The other channel said he was funding the training of right-wing anti-Russia radicals . The man was on the other channel
 In May 2014, Russia-1 aired a story about Ukrainian atrocities using footage of a 2012 Russian operation in North Caucasus . The story was aired on Russian TV .
In June 2014, several Russian state news outlets reported that Ukraine was using white phosphorus using 2004 footage of white phosphorus being used by the U.S. in Iraq . In the same month, the Russian news network Life presented a 2013 photograph of a wounded child in Syria as a victim of
 In July 2014, Channel One Russia broadcast an interview with a woman who said that a 3-year-old boy who spoke Russian was crucified by Ukrainian nationalists in a fictitious square in Sloviansk that turned to be false . In 2022, Russian state media told stories of genocide and
 One set of graves outside Luhansk was dug when intense fighting in 2014 cut off the electricity in the local morgue .
 On 4 March 2022, Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish "fake news" about the Russian military and its operations . Some media outlets have stopped reporting on Ukraine .
 Russia's opposition politician Alexei Navalny said the "monstrosity of lies" in the Russian state media is "un unimaginable"
 Putin and Russian media have described the government of Ukraine as being led by neo-Nazis persecuting ethnic Russians . Ukraine's President Zelenskyy is Jewish, despite being Jewish .
 Russian aircraft flying over the Baltic and Black Seas often do not indicate their position or communicate with air traffic controllers . This poses a potential risk to civilian airliners .
 NATO aircraft scrambled many times in late April 2022 in order to track and intercept these aircraft near alliance airspace . NATO aircraft scrambled many times.
 The Russian aircraft intercepted never entered NATO airspace . The intercepts were conducted in a safe and routine manner .
 British Prime Minister Boris Johnson rejected Lavrov's allegation that NATO is fighting a 'proxy war' in Ukraine .
 Ukraine blocked the North Crimean Canal, which provided 85% of Crimea's drinking and irrigation water . Russia's annexation of Crimea led to Crimea's annexation .
 Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov accused Russia of "provoking a conflict" by backing the seizure of the Crimean parliament building and other government offices on the Crimean peninsula .
 Russian troops occupied parts of the Republic of Georgia and the breakaway enclaves of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . He compared Russia's military actions to the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, when Russian troops occupy parts of Georgia .
 Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs was established by Ukrainian government on 20 April 2016 to manage occupied parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and Crimea regions . Acting President Oleksandr Turchynov placed the Armed Forces of Ukraine on full alert and combat readiness .
 NATO's efforts to reassert its military presence in central and eastern Europe that began in April 2014 . Operation Atlantic Resolve, European Deterrence Initiative, NATO Enhanced Forward Presence, and Russia–NATO relations are part of the effort . The U.S. Army
 On 4 March 2014, the United States pledged $1 billion in aid to Ukraine . The U.S. pledged the aid in March 2014 .
 Russia's actions increased tensions in nearby countries historically within its sphere of influence . The Baltic and Moldova are among the countries in the region .
Russian troops are stationed in the breakaway Moldovan territory of Transnistria . All have large Russian-speaking populations, and Russian troops are in the Moldovan region .
 Many requested increased support from the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Some devoted resources to increasing defensive capabilities . The U.S. and North Atlantic Organization had joined in recent years .
In addition to diplomatic support in its conflict with Russia, the United States provided Ukraine with US$1. billion in military aid during the 2010s . The conflict "reinvigorated" NATO had been created to face the Soviet Union, but had devoted more resources to
 The U.S. House of Representatives passed a provision blocking any training of Azov Battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard by American forces in 2018 . In 2018 the United States House of Representative passed the provision .
 The U.S. House of Representatives passed amendments banning support of Azov between 2014 and 2017 . The amendments were quietly lifted due to pressure from the Pentagon .
 Financial markets tumble after initial reaction to escalation of tensions in Crimea . Russian and European stock markets tumble .
 The Swiss franc climbed to a 2-year high against the dollar and 1-yearhigh against the Euro . The intervention caused the Swiss franc to climb to a two-year highs against the euro .
 The Euro and the U.S. dollar both rose, as did the Australian dollar . The Australian dollar also rose .
 The Russian stock market declined by more than 10 percent . The Russian ruble hit all-time lows against the U.S. dollar and Euro .
 The Russian central bank hiked interest rates and intervened in foreign exchange markets to the tune of $12 billion to try to stabilize its currency . The central bank intervened in the foreign exchange market to try and stabilize its currencies .
 Ukraine is a major exporter of wheat and grain. Prices for both crops rose after the Crimea annexation in March 2014 .
 Other observers considered that the positive reaction of the global financial markets on Monday 17 March 2014, after the announcement of sanctions against Russia by the EU and the US, was positive .
 In early August 2014, the German DAX was down by 6 percent for the year, and 11 percent since June, over concerns Russia, Germany's 13th biggest trade partner, would retaliate against sanctions .
 A poll of the Ukrainian public, excluding Russian-annexed Crimea, was taken by the International Republican Institute . 89% of those polled opposed 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine .
78% of those polled from Eastern Ukraine opposed said intervention, along with 89% in Southern Ukraine, 93% in Central Ukraine, and 99% in Western Ukraine . As broken down by region, 78% of Eastern Ukraine oppose said intervention .
 A joint poll conducted by Levada and the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology from September to October 2020 found that in the breakaway regions controlled by the DPR/LNR, just over half of the respondents wanted to join Russia . Less than one-tenth wanted independence and 12
 It contrasted with respondents in Kyiv-controlled Donbas, where vast majority felt the separatist regions should be returned to Ukraine .
 70% of those in the breakaway regions said their territories should become part of the Russian Federation . In January 2022, roughly 70% said they should be part of Russia .
 Russian public opinion has shifted considerably since 2014, according to a survey by the Levada Centre .
 Many Russians supported the "special military operation" has to do with the propaganda and disinformation, according to some sources .
 Some respondents did not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences . In addition, it has been suggested that some respondents didn't want to be asked about negative consequences.
 On 28 April 2022, President Joe Biden asked Congress for an additional $33 billion to assist Ukraine . The U.S. President asked for $20 billion to provide weapons to Ukraine .
 On 21 May 2022, the U.S. passed legislation providing $40 billion in new military and humanitarian aid to Ukraine . The legislation marks a historically large commitment of funds .
 Ukraine claims 20 February 2014 as "the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia" In 2015 Ukrainian parliament officially designated the date as such .
 President Putin in a bravura performance before the world's media at the end of the Nato summit . He warned President Bush and other alliance leaders that their plan to expand eastwards to Ukraine and Georgia didn't contribute to trust and predictability in our relations .
 A CNN team in the area encountered more than one pro-Russian militia checkpoint on the road from Sevastopol to Simferopol .
 Checkpoints were put up at all entrances to Sevastopol last night . borders are guarded by groups of people, police units, and traffic police .
 Belarus To Host Talks Between Ukraine and Russia. www.interpretermag.com .
 President Petro Poroshenko considers the government's anti-terrorist operation against separatists as Ukraine's patriotic war .
 Tanks, artillery and infantry have crossed from Russia into an unbreached part of eastern Ukraine . Ukrainian and Western military officials are calling a stealth invasion .
 Unidentified, heavily-armed strangers with Russian accents have appeared in an eastern Ukrainian village . Moscow's denials that its troops have deliberately infiltrated the frontier . Residents' suspicions have aroused residents' suspicions .
 "russian build-up in and around ukraine" has been described as a 'russian building-up' in Europe .
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine constitutes the crime of aggression under international law . Russia's annexation of Ukraine is a violation of international law, according to the Russian government .
 Eighty-two percent of those polled said they fully supported Crimea's inclusion in Russia . Another 11 percent expressed partial support .
 A total of 82% of Crimea's population fully support Russia's annexation of the peninsula, according to a poll carried out by the GfK Group research institute in Ukraine .
 Another 11% of respondents said that they rather support the annexation of Crimea . 4% were against it .