 Since the start of the Ukrainian crisis in November 2013, Western media and politicians have accused Russia's in its role in the Ukraine crisis . Russia has acted aggressively without any provocation, they say .
 Russia has been a victim of regular provocations over the last few years . Despite these aggravations, Russia has not acted bellicosely, but instead continued to search for a diplomatic solution to the current crisis .
 The first myth stipulates that Russia deliberately attacked Ukraine without any reason, annexing Crimea and destabilising eastern Ukraine . The firstMyth stipulates Russia deliberately attack Ukraine without a reason .
 Debunking this myth is crucial, as many other false statements about Russia originate from the assumption that Russia acted belligerently .
 The West triggered Russia into reacting the way it did. However, the truth is that the West triggeredRussia into reacting.
Since 2004 the West continuously supported and injected finance into pro-Western groups in Ukraine . Despite warnings from Russia to not destabilise Ukraine, the West has continued to support pro-West groups .
 The European Union was blackmailing former Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich into signing an Association Agreement, a deal that would be of grave consequences to Russian economy due to Western products flooding the Russian market .
 Former Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich decided against signing the agreement . The West decided to support a violent coup of a legitimately elected President .
 Ukrainian opposition and its Western backers did not adhere to the agreement signed by Yanukovich and the opposition on 21 February 2014 . Thirdly, Ukrainian opposition, its Western backer did not comply with the agreement .
 Russia realised that the West was not looking to find a compromise and a diplomatic solution that would benefit all sides . At this point, Russia realised it would be a good solution .
 Petro Poroshenko initiated an “anti-terrorist’ operation that resulted in many ethnic Russian civilians dying in eastern Ukraine . The operation was a grave provocation towards Russia .
 The second assumption by the Western media claims that Russia is aiming to re-create the Soviet Union and is not going to stop its “expansion’s in Crimea .
 There is virtually no evidence that Russia was bent on taking Crimea, much less any other territory in Ukraine, before the crisis began .
 Putin's actions in Crimea appear to have been a spontaneous reaction to Yanukovich's ouster . President Putin’s actions appear to be a spontaneous response to the ouster of Yanukovich .
 The Kremlin had no choice but to take Crimea, a peninsula President Putin feared would host a NATO naval base if Ukraine decided to join the military alliance .
 Western media like to point to Russia’s short war with Georgia and claim that this was the first illustration of Russia's attempt to re-conquer the former Soviet Union . Western media say this was first illustration.
 Russia's conflict with Georgia would be to re-write history, argues Russia . However, to argue that Russia initiated the conflict would be a re-written history .
 Georgia launched a large-scale military offensive against South Ossetia in August 2008 . Georgia launched an attempt to reclaim the territory .
 The Georgian attack caused casualties among Russian peacekeepers, who resisted the assault along with Ossetian militia .
 Russia reacted by deploying units of the Russian 58th Army and Russian Airborne Troops into South Ossetia . One day later, Russia launched airstrikes against Georgian forces in the region .
 It is now well established that the majority of experts, monitors and ambassadors agreed that the war was started by Georgia . It is well established.
 Russia was never interested nor is considering conquering or annexing any land . Ultimately, Russia was not interested nor was considering annexing or conquering any land.
 President Putin’s response to events in Ukraine has been defensive, not offensive . President Putin's response to the Ukraine crisis has been not offensive, according to CNN .
 Western leaders and its media have good reason to portray Russia as the aggressor . Russia has been accused of being aggressive in recent years .
 NATO has used the apparent belligerence of Russia as an excuse to carry on with their expansion that they started after the end of the Cold War .
 NATO has continued to provoke Russia with the recent announcement that about 1,300 troops from 15 countries – including the United States and other NATO members – have begun a military exercise near Lviv in western Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Defence Minister Valery Heletey said NATO countries had begun arming his nation . In addition, Ukraine's Defence Minister said that NATO countries have been arming his country .
 The U.S. would react if a Russian-backed alliance carried out military exercises in Mexico or Canada, for example .
 Russia will have to adopt any measures that achieve its own safety from external threats . When it comes to its own national security, Russia will need to adopt its own measures to protect itself .
 Western media may brand these measures as examples of aggression, but it is evident that it is the West that has acted and continues to act in a hostile manner towards Russia . The Kremlin has no choice but to take defensive and precautionary measures .