 These voters voted disproportionately for candidates and parties that supported closer ties with Russia . These voters vote disproportionately for parties that support closer ties to Russia .
 This article quantifies the changes to the electorate and projects the likely partisan impact . This article is based on an article published in the New York Times .
The changes decisively tip the Ukrainian electorate away from the east and south . The changes decisively tipped the Ukrainian voters away from east and South .
 Ukraine's government could seek to prolong these voters' exclusion, while Russia could actually seek to end the occupation to get them reincluded .
 The implication is that various actors could try to “gerrymander’ the entire Ukrainian state . The phenomenon has only been explored at the district level, within states .
 This raises the question of how electoral effects shape the many territorial disputes around the world . This raises a broader question about the impact of electoral effects on territorial disputes .
 Two parts of Ukraine, Crimea and a portion of the Donbas have been occupied by Russian or Russian-supported forces since 2014 . Neither occupation appears likely to end in the foreseeable future .
 Much of the discussion of this conflict has focused on the territorial dimension of the problem . The conflict continues to defy resolution .
 Russia's occupation of Ukraine has separated many citizens and voters from Ukraine . Russia’s occupation has also separated people and voters.
 The occupation has reshaped the Ukrainian electorate, what the likely electoral impact is, and how this might shape efforts to return the territory to Ukraine . This article asks how the occupation reshapes the Ukraine electorate and how it might shape the future of Ukraine .
 The regions now occupied by Russia or Russian proxies contained roughly 12 percent of the voters in the 2012 parliamentary elections . The regions were occupied by 90 East European Politics and Societies and Cultures in the 2010 presidential election .
 The removal of these regions disproportionately undermines those forces nationally, says the author .
 Some uncertainty is created by the displacement of many of the regions’ citizens . We can estimate the potential change by looking at past voting behavior .
First, it will be nearly impossible for a candidate with support based primarily in eastern and southern Ukraine to win the presidency, as has happened in the past .
 A candidate or party with strength concentrated in the center and/or western parts of the country will naturally triumph . Second, however, we cannot conclude that a candidate or Party with strength in the centers and western parts will triumph .
 The country is still quite evenly divided, and western Ukraine–based forces have been able to unify only for the very brief period before and during the 2004 Orange Revolution . Ukraine is still very evenly divided .
 The findings have important and paradoxical consequences for attempts to resolve the conflict . They raise broader questions about the relationship between territory and statebuilding .
 The truncation of the electorate disproportionately removes voters who support closer ties with Russia . It may well be in Russia's interest not to annex the territory, as many have assumed its goal to be to see it reintegrated into Ukraine .
 Pro-western Ukrainians may want the territory to remain excluded in order to remove its voters from the electorate .
Politicians’ views on reintegrating the territory may be shaped by whether their parties tended to perform well or poorly in occupied regions .
 Ukrainian leaders unlikely to accept Minsk formula, even if they pay lip service to it . Russia has insisted on implementing the Minsk agreements, which assume reincorporation of the territories into Ukraine .
 A few in Ukraine now openly advocate not bringing the territories back in. These electoral effects show why many in Ukraine are now openly advocating not bringing back territories .
 A recent encyclopedia of territorial disputes runs to over twelve hundred pages2 . Questions raised here are important far beyond Ukraine .
 This case presents a unique opportunity to observe how the state balances the territorial and political-community aspects of the nation-state .
The next section overviews the intersection of territory with voters and elections in Ukraine . The next section includes the election of Ukraine's president and the Ukraine's parliament .
 The subsequent sections examine in detail how Ukrainians have voted in recent elections . The sections focus on the territories that are now occupied .
 One compares the presidential election of 2010 and parliamentary election of 2012 with those afterwards . In 2014, the election of 2014 was held in the same year as the 2012 election .
 A second analysis looks at the line of control, which stabilized after 2015, as of January 2018 . It shows what the elections of 2010 and 2012 would have looked like without those territories and voters outside the control of Ukraine’s government .
 The analysis then considers the impact of internally displaced persons on these results . It also looks at recent polling data as a separate indicator of change .
 Subsequent sections go on to consider the paradoxical implications of these findings . The findings were published in a new book on the book, published in September 2013 .
 Russia may have a larger incentive to see the territories reintegrated into Ukraine than we have understood . Russia may also have a bigger incentive to reintegrate the territories into Ukraine.
Some Ukrainians may perceive both partisan advantage and national interest in continuing to leave Ukraine . Some Ukrainians may see both partisan and national interests in leaving the territories .
 The implication is that the conflict may be even harder to resolve than we have thought . The conflict may have been more difficult than we thought .
 In the United States, drawing electoral districts to include or exclude voters with particular tendencies is an old tradition and a highly refined art and science .
 The concept of gerrymandering to the case of Ukraine stretches the concept a bit . The question is not simply rearranging voters, but excluding some .
 The techniques have in common trying to move some voters out of one area in order to shape electoral outcomes . But the techniques are often used to try to move voters from one area .
 Ukrainian and Russian governments have not been articulated as a strategy by either the Ukrainian or Russian governments . To be clear, such a deliberate effort to reshape the electorate is not a strategy .
 Ukraine's status quo in Ukraine after early 2015 has created such a scenario de facto . It raises the question of how hard Ukraine will try to get the territory and its voters back .
 Historically, states have focused on territory, where more is always better, rather than on voters . subtraction might yield partisan advantage for some or make a polity more governable .
 Kimitaka Matsuzato asserts that while reintegration was welcomed in Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, it would be much harder in Transnistria, where it would have a significant impact on Moldovan politics .
 The relative stability of state borders, combined with Weberian conception of states as having fixed territories, has led scholars to neglect the study of how particular borders are established and legitimated .
 O'Leary, Lustick, and Callaghy on Right-Sizing the State. One exception to this tendency is the work by O’Leary and Lustick . The three are known for their work on the State .
 The authors focus on the fact that changes in borders have happened repeatedly throughout history, including recent history, often without war . They examine the different reasons for this .
 Kyiv has deepened the hostility of the region’s de facto elites to rule from Kyiv . But it has also deepened its hostility to the region.
 Ian Lustick argues that before a state can agree to cede territory, it must first come to regard that territory as “inessential,’ or even as a colony . Lustick: Before a state agrees to cedes territory, the territory must first be considered “
In contemporary Ukraine, it is still considered politically untenable to advocate surrendering the territory . The issue has been raised increasingly publicly .
 If there are cases where leaders have sought to jettison territory for partisan electoral purposes, they are rare . It is rare to see such a move in partisan politics .
Several recent examples illustrate reluctance to pursue partisan gains via territorial reduction . Several recent examples of territorial reduction show reluctance.
 Conservatives in the UK opposed the secession of Scotland, even though it would have removed a significant portion of Labour voters from the electorate .
 Czechoslovak President Václav Havel strongly opposed the Slovak secession .
 In these cases, territory seems to have trumped electoral calculations .
 If Ukraine were to surrender Crimea and/or the occupied Donbas, it would be highly unusual . Thus, if Ukraine would voluntarily surrender Crimea.
 Ukraine can choose how hard it tries to get the territories back, including what kind of concessions it might make . Russia has taken the question out of Ukraine’s hands.
 The Ukrainian leadership will continue to voice support for regaining the occupied territories, but not try very hard to actually bring it about . We can imagine that the Ukrainian leadership.
 In interviews conducted in Kyiv in the summer of 2018, several elites asserted that while Ukraine cannot declare a policy of surrendering the territory, recent changes in law and in practice indicate a de facto policy of stabilizing the status quo rather than trying to reverse it .
 With Russia having annexed Crimea, it seems certain that residents of Crimea will not vote in Ukrainian elections for the foreseeable future .
 There is less certainty about the specific demarcation between Russian and Ukrainian territories . That would appear to be true in the occupied Donbas .
 The lines of control in the region have substantially stabilized since 2015, despite ongoing violence . It is hard to predict the future of the conflict.
 Several authors have pointed out that this will have an impact on election results in Ukraine .
 Colton used data from Ukrainian elections to hypothesize what might happen if Crimea, the Donbas and Galicia were no longer part of the country .
 Erik Herron, Michael Thunberg, and Nazar Boyko examined the impact of the conflict . They examined the challenge of holding the 2014 elections and on the outcomes .
 The following analysis builds on that work by seeking to quantify the actual impact on the electorate, based on the line of control that has stabilized since 2015, and by exploring the political implications .
An important question is how the change in the electorate will shape debates in future elections . An important question therefore, is how to change the electorate.
 The events of 2013–2014 caused broader changes in political attitudes and partisan preferences in Ukraine .
 The focus of this article is only one of the ways in which the ongoing conflict is shaping elections . These changes will interact with those resulting from territorial change, so it is important to recognize the effect of territorial change .
 None is likely to shape incentives on resolving the conflict the way that the change in the electorate will .
 A first cut compares the results of presidential and parliamentary elections conducted in 2014 with the 2010 presidential election and the 2012 parliamentary election . The first cut is based on results of the 2014 presidential election in Crimea and the outbreak of conflict in the Donbas .
 A second cut begins with the line of control as it was in early 2018, and asks, counterfactually, how the voting outcomes in 2010 and 2012 would change if those regions and their voters were excluded .
 This helps us to isolate the territorial impact of the conflict from the partisan impact . This helps we to isolate the impact from the political impact of conflict .
Following the departure of Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, presidential elections were scheduled for May . The Impact on 2014 Presidential and Parliamentary Elections was scheduled for the May elections .
 The elections were conducted in chaotic conditions, and therefore yield limited insight on future voting behavior . The election was conducted in a chaotic conditions. The elections are held in chaotic circumstances .
 Herron, Thunberg, and Boyko demonstrate considerable partisan effects of the conflict on the 2014 Presidential election .
 Petro Poroshenko won the election in the first round with 54. percent of the vote . Yuliya Tymoshenko finished second with only 12.8 percent .
 In 2014 parliamentary elections, single-member district elections were not carried out in 27 districts in Crimea and the Donbas . Voters in those regions did not vote in the proportional representation portion of the ballot either .
 Third, those same districts did not vote in the PR portion of the ballot, influencing those results . Third, the same districts didn't vote in that part of the vote .
 This reflects political upheaval that took place between the two elections . This reflects the political upheaval in the past two years .
 Of those twenty-nine seats, twenty-seven were won in the PR portion of the ballot . Of those 20-9 seats,Twenty-seven of those seats were won by the PR part of the vote .
 Most of that difference can be accounted for by those who lived in areas that did not vote in 2014 . Most of the difference is attributed to those who live in those areas that didn't vote .
 The CPU ended up with 612,000 or 3. percent, leaving them 176,000 votes short . The CPU had a total of 3.4 million votes, leaving it with 611,000 .
 At the same time, in oblasts entirely free from Russian intervention, the party had done well in 2012, such as Kherson and Zaporizhzhya, CPU percentages also collapsed .
 Third, with the party out of government and its leaders having fled to Russia, it likely suffered from a lack of resources, which were especially important in a patronage-based system .
 The Batkivshchina party of Yuliya Tymoshenko appears to have benefitted decisively . In contrast, the Batkvshchine party of the Yulya Tymchenko party appears to be benefiting decisively .
 Batkivshchina’s popularity plummeted between 2012 and 2014, but it benefitted from the change in the electorate . Like the CPU, the CPU's popularity plummeted from 2012 to 2014 .
 Batkivshchina won only 3.5 percent of its nationwide vote in the occupied areas . The vote was concentrated rather than diluted, according to the government .
 The vote totals from the 2014 elections likely overstate the decline in eastern Ukraine’s voting power . There was a significant drop in turnout in the 2014 parliamentary elections that may not be repeated in the future .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts that did vote in the 2014 elections. The number of votes cast dropped dramatically, perhaps because of ongoing conflict, and perhaps because residents were skeptical of the legitimacy of the elections .
 The number of votes cast in the Presidential election in unoccupied Donetsk in 2014 was only 11 percent of what it was in 2010 . Only 18 percent of the votes cast were cast in un occupied Luhansk in 2014 .
 In the 2014 parliamentary election, turnout increased, but only to 39 percent of the 2010 level in unoccupied Donetsk . In unoccupied Luhansk, turnout rose to 33 percent in the unoccupied region .
 In the presidential election, 232,000 more votes were cast in 2010 than 2014 . In the parliamentary election, 984,000More votes were voted in 2012 than 2014, according to the BBC .
 The lines of control have changed and stabilized, so future elections will likely be held in more districts than in 2014 . Participation rates in other parts of the oblasts are likely to rise toward the previous levels .
 The territorial effect of the events of 2013-2014 is being separated from the political effect of 2013–2014 . The approach is to separate territorial effect from political effects of the year's events .
 In Donetsk, Artemivs’k and Kramators'k were regained, while Starobesheve was lost . The Donetsk city is the city of Donetsk .
 The 2010 election would go from a narrow Yanukovych win to a Tymoshenko landslide . Under the territorial configuration of January 2018, the election would be held in Ukraine .
 Tymoshenko would win by 11,231,565 to 9,226,078, or 55. to 45. percent . Theoshenko would be the first woman to win by more than 10,000 votes .
 The eastern-based strategy worked in 1991, 1994, and 2010 . The implication is that it will be much harder in the future for a candidate to win an election with the eastern- based strategy .
 Controlling parliament solely by appealing to eastern/southern Ukraine is no longer a viable strategy . Controlling the parliament solely is no more viable strategy than appealing to Ukraine's eastern regions .
 Forces supporting close ties with Russia also had much to lose in the proportional representation portion of the ballot . Forces support close ties to Russia also lost much in proportional representation part of ballot .
 The weight of the eastern-based parties would be reduced. It is difficult to know how these results would affect the subsequent coalition structure of the parliament .
 Its share of the PR vote falls from 30. percent to 29. percent, and its number of SMD seats falls by 11. percent . The number of seats in SMD is down by 11 .
 The CPU would lose 0. percent of the PR vote and Batkivshchina would lose0. percent . Neither would lose any SMD seats .
 The implication is that a Ukraine without Crimea but with the Donbas reintegrated could still elect a president who supports closer ties with Russia . Ukraine could still control the country, and that eastern Ukraine may still control it .
 In electoral terms, the occupied Donbas, because of its much larger population, is much more important than Crimea . Crimea is a much larger region than Crimea, as it is in electoral terms .
 At least two caveats are in order, connected to the two inferential steps this kind of analysis is based on . The analysis was based on an analysis of data collected by the National Security Council .
 We assume territory is excluded from elections, and voters in it are excluded as well . We assume that when territories are excluded, the voters are excluded .
 Regional patterns have been robust in Ukraine, but they do not fully explain voting behavior . Other factors may dramatically change voting preferences since 2014, including changes in Ukraine .
 The magnitude of the effects discussed above will be reduced to the extent that people from the occupied regions resettle and vote in other parts of Ukraine . People from occupied regions will be able to vote and resettle in Ukraine .
 We know something about the first two questions, but little about the third . The first question is about how to answer the third question .
 The effects of relocation will likely be small in the short to medium term, as IDPs have difficulty voting . Overall, the effects of relocated will be small, according to experts .
 In late 2017 and early 2018, Ukraine's Ministry of Social Policy’s weekly updated estimate of IDPs hovered around 1. million . The Ukrainian government's weekly update of its weekly estimate ofIDPs is 1.1 million .
 UNHCR uses a “triangulated IDP figure’ of 800,000 to 1 million, taking into account that some registered IDPs may have returned home .
 The UNHCR reported in late 2017 approximately 450,000 asylum seekers from Ukraine . Almost all of them were in Russia, almost all of whom were in Ukraine .
 This would reduce the scale of the effects discussed above by between 11 and 21 percent . This would be a reduction of 11 to 21 percent. This would also reduce the size of the impact of the effect on the environment .
 It is likely that some IDPs do not come from occupied areas at all, but rather from areas controlled by the government but near the conflict zone .
 In any event, these must be regarded as rough estimates . That would reduce the numbers somewhat, but it would be a good thing .
 The bigger question is whether these displaced persons will be able to vote, and that seems unlikely in the short term . The larger question is if these displaced people will be allowed to vote .
 Ukraine's voter registration laws focus on one’s place of legal residence . As long as one claims residence in an occupied region, one will not be able to register elsewhere .
 Survey shows low degree of support for allowing IDPs to vote in places to which they have relocated . Second, surveys show low level of support of IDPs voting in the places they have moved .
 Ukraine’s current rulers are unlikely to want to bring them back into the electorate . Third, because of these voters’ presumed policy and partisan preferences, Ukraine's current rulers aren't likely to want them back .
 The potential for IDPs to vote in future elections is unlikely to dramatically underline the findings in this article . For all of these reasons, it's unlikely to be dramatically underlined in the near term .
 A limitation of this approach is that it might lead to the oversimplified view that the territorial change will be the only thing changing voting between 2010–2012 and 2019, which clearly is not the case .
 A survey that includes the entire pre-2014 territory of Ukraine is impossible. Because of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea, it is impossible, the survey says .
 2010 and 2014 are the most recent years to look retrospectively at 2010-2014 . That is a major reason to approach the question by looking retrospectively .
We can look both at studies based on post-2014 data and at survey data itself . With that limitation in mind, we can look at both.
 Much of research since 2014 focuses on general political attitudes, rather than elections, than elections . Much of this year's research has focused on general attitudes.
 Ukraine's traditional cleavages play a strong role in predicting attitudes toward reform, study finds . A separate study finds a greater degree of attitude change, especially in the salience and definition of national identity .
 Opposition Bloc tied with another eastern-based party, Za Zhyttya, for second place in a highly fragmented field . Just 7 percent of respondents said they wanted to vote for the opposition Bloc .
 The vote in eastern/southern Ukraine is more fragmented than it was prior to 2014, and that basing a national strategy on eastern Ukraine is a much less viable strategy than it is previously .
 Two caveats (displaced persons and other sources of changes in voting behavior) into account do not significantly alter the findings . Taking these two caveats into account does not significantly change the findings.
 Given the size of the populations in the occupied territories, the impact of territorial change is still likely to be large . The impact of the change is likely to still be large, says the author .
 partisan drift in Ukraine has been in the other direction, as the 2014 election showed . The displacement of voters from occupied regions to other parts of Ukraine might reduce the damage done to easternand southern-based parties .
 The impact of territorial revision on electoral outcomes is potentially decisive, because Ukraine’s elections have tended to be closely contested . Overall, these caveats do not undermine the finding, because the number of votes involved is large .
 A potentially decisive shift in the Ukrainian electorate has taken place in Ukraine’s political landscape .
 Crimea and parts of the Donbas will likely make it impossible for a politician or party to win elections relying entirely on eastern Ukraine .
 The electoral balance in Ukraine has been shifted away from the east and south and toward the center and west .
 The 3.75 million voters removed from Crimea and the occupied Donbas constituted about 16 percent of the 2010 voters, and 87 percent of them voted for Yanukovych .
 A quarter of the Yanukovych electorate lived in territory that is now occupied by Russia .
 The candidate that won a majority and the east and south won the presidency . In four of Ukraine’s six presidential elections, the candidate that wins a majority won the president .
 Such a candidate will now have to generate support in the center and/or the west as well . That is still possible, but such a candidate would have to be a candidate to get support .
It will be much harder to build a parliamentary majority on votes won in the east and south . It will be more difficult to win a majority in the south and east .
 A party that dominated eastern and southern Ukraine would continue to be powerful, as the population of these areas remains substantial . Even with the voting base diminished, a party that dominates these areas would remain powerful .
 Ukraine could enter second round of presidential election with no candidate explicitly based in eastern Ukraine or catering to those supporting closer ties with Russia and/or improved status for the Russian language in Ukraine .
 If it becomes normal in 2014, it might have two very different impacts . That has happened before only in 2014 and if it became normal, it may have two different impacts.
 It might compel candidates with bases in other regions to tailor their messages to eastern Ukraine . It could erode the regionalization of Ukraine’s elections .
 It might leave many eastern Ukrainians feeling alienated, further exacerbating Ukraine's problems . It might also leave many feeling alienated.
 The change in the electorate could drive a restructuring of the party system in Ukraine . The broader implication is that the change could drive the country's political system .
 Candidates or parties that can add votes in the east to their central or western bases will be at a distinct advantage . The new coalitions or alignments will develop for that purpose .
More generally, the incentive to build parties or alliances that reach across Ukraine’s regions may be strengthened . More generally, it may be the incentive for building parties and alliances .
 One major question going forward is whether parties based outside the Donbas can win over a significant number of voters in non-occupied areas .
 These changes do not automatically mean a decisive shift toward candidates and agendas supported in the west . However, these changes don't automatically mean the change in the West .
 The change in the electorate will diminish the advantage of the south and east, but not enough to tip the balance decisively in favor of the west and center . The change will be seen as a result of the change in electorate .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts and the rest of eastern and southern Ukraine still contain a huge number of voters . The unoccupied parts of Donetsk andLuhansk Oblasts still contain many voters .
Western-based force will likely be able to prevent western-based forces from coming to dominate Ukrainian politics . These regions and their voters are likely to prevent Western-based power from dominating Ukraine .
Support for Opposition Bloc and Za Zhyttya parties nearly equals that of the two leading central/western-based parties, Solidarnist and Batkivshchyna .
 Two periods illustrate the fissiparous nature of central and western Ukraine . Two periods in particular illustrate the fissiparship  nature of the country .
 The first was immediately after independence, when Rukh and other “national democratic’s” parties broke into multiple competing factions .
 Viktor Yushchenko was ousted from Ukraine after the Orange Revolution . The forces who had supported Viktor Yanukovych fell out so bitterly that they created room for Yanukovych’s comeback .
 The alliance between Petro Poroshenko and Arseniy Yatseniuk that was formed in 2014 lasted less than two years, as did Poroshenko’s alliance with former Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili .
 Yuliya Tymoshenko was campaigning actively against Poroshenko and demanding early elections so that he could be unseated . By 2017, Yulya Tymenko was campaigning for early elections .
 The absence of a unified force pushing for closer ties with Russia does not mean a unified pro-western force . In sum, the absence of an anti-Russian force doesn't mean the presence of a pro-Western force .
 With the east and south diminished and less unified, and the center and west showing no signs of unity, a parliamentary majority may be harder to form in Ukraine than ever before .
Until 2010, Ukraine struggled to build a functioning coalition in parliament . Until 2010, the country's parliament was unable to form a government .
 The parliament has returned to its more fragmented earlier state, and seems likely to remain that way . The parliament is expected to return to a more fragmented state .
 In the 1990s, fragmentation of the parliament was one justification for the consolidation of presidential power under Leonid Kuchma . The 1990s was the first time the parliament had been fragmented .
 The Minsk agreement focuses on reintegrating the occupied Donbas into Ukraine . It gives the regions considerable autonomy, which is one strategy for managing ethnic differences .
 Russia's influence on Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts would give it direct input into Ukrainian politics . Many have pointed out that due to Russia’s influence on the leaders of Donetsk andLuhansk Oblasts, reintegration would help Ukraine .
 Less widely recognized is how reintegration would shape the electorate in ways likely to favor Russia . Russia is likely to be the most powerful country in Russia .
 The implications for both Russian and Ukrainian strategies toward the occupied territories are counterintuitive . The implications of both Russia and Ukraine's strategies toward occupied territories is counterintuitive.
For Russia, occupying Donbas did not make much sense if the goal was to influence democratic politics in Ukraine . For Russia, it means that occupying Don Bas did not made much sense .
 Russia needs not to perpetuate its occupation but to find a way to get those votes back into Ukraine . Going forward, it means that Russia needs to find an way to return those votes .
 Ukrainian leaders have promised to regain the territory of Ukraine . Despite promises to regain territory, current leaders have much to gain by ensuring it does not happen .
 Colton pointed in 2010 to a hypothetical “expulsion’ strategy that would help unify Ukrainian society . Colton said it would eject the more pro-Russian Donbas and Crimea .
 Ukraine would be better off without two of its eastern provinces, Luhansk and Donetsk . The case for down-sizing may be especially compelling for Ukraine .
 Public opinion polls show they are the least supportive of Ukrainian independence . They are most supportive of union with Russia, according to polls .
 Kyiv’s industrial base consists of hopelessly outdated plants, factories, and coal mines . Kyiv is an enormous economic drain on Kyiv's ragged resources .
 The level of pollution in both regions, and thus of health problems, is among the highest in the world .
 Yurii Andrukhovych argued in 2010 for either ejecting Crimea and Donbas from Ukraine or holding a referendum in which residents would have to choose either to pursue European integration along with Ukraine or to secede .
 This tumor can be eliminated only by surgical intervention, and nothing else . This tumor is a tumor that can only be eliminated by surgery and surgery .
 As in other countries, they appear to prioritize territorial integrity over partisan advantage or political unity . At least they perceive the need to be as doing so .
Only 4 percent wanted the occupied regions of the Donbas to become part of Russia, and only 2 percent wanted them to become independent states .
 A third, however, supported the occupied territories remaining part of Ukraine but with greater autonomy, which fits Russia’s position . A third supported the occupation of the territory but with more autonomy .
 Half supported the territories remaining part of Ukraine “as before crisis,’44 though it is difficult to see how this might be brought about . Half supported remaining parts of Ukraine as before crisis .
 Letting the territory go would strongly contradict the emphasis that leaders around the world have generally placed on gaining and retaining territory . Letting a country go would be a sign that leaders generally place on gaining, retaining territory.
 It remains unclear how these internal political consequences will influence the strategies of Ukraine and Russia in dealing with the future of the occupied regions .
 This article has focused on Ukraine, the questions it raises are likely to be present among the many border disputes in the world .
 An important question for future research is how the issues currently being raised in Ukraine operate in the many other states around the world .
Previous versions of this article were presented at the Harvard Postcommunism Seminar, October 2017, and at the ASEEES Annual Convention, Chicago, November 2017 .
 I am grateful to the participants for the numerous helpful suggestions I received . Erik Herron, Oxana Shevel, and Kateryna Zarembo provided extensive comments on various drafts . I am also grateful to Erik Herrons, Oxan Shevel.
 Eugene and Daymel Shklar Research Fellow at Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute . He was Eugene Shkler Research Fellow in the fall of 2017 .
Outbreak and Deadlock’s paper is presented at the ASEEES Annual Convention .
 Stephen E Hanson, “Russia, Ukraine, and the Borders of Europe’s” paper prepared for the American Political Science Association Annual Conference, San Francisco .
 The East European Politics and Societies 19, no. : 412 . East European politics and Society 19,No.
 The Host Community Perspective,” in Agnieszka Pikulicka-Wilczewska and Greta Uehling, eds., Migration and the Ukraine Crisis: A Two-Country Perspective, 29.
 Post-Soviet Politics 34, no. 34, is a post-Soviet politics. Grigore Pop-Eleches and Graeme B Robertson, “Identity and Political Preferences in Ukraine’s Ukraine,’
 O’Leary: “The Elements of Right-Sizing and Right-Peopling the State’s State.’ The Elements of right-sizing and right-peopling. State .
 The Minister of Education under Yanukovych, Dmytro Tabachnyk, had pointed to a policy of expelling Galicia as the outlier that prevented Ukrainian unity . Colton shows that the Minister of education under Yanukovych had, when a member of parliament, pointed to
 Youth Perceptions of Territoriality in War-Time Ukraine,” East European Politics and Societies 32, no. .
 He is currently writing a book on the long-term sources of the war between Russia and Ukraine . He has also written a book about the conflict in Ukraine .