 The Annex should be amended and the entries for three deceased persons should be deleted . The Annex must be amended .
 Article 1 Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 shall be amended as set out in the Annex to this Regulation . The Annex will be amended to this regulation .
 Article 2. This Regulation shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
 This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States . L 67/2 EN Official Journal of the European Union 12.3.2016 This Regulation will be binding. L 67-2 is the EU's official journal for the EU .
 List of PERSONS Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 1. List of 1.5 reasons for listing .
 Sergei Valerievich Republic of Moldova khovna Rada on 27 February 2014 AKSENOV in the presence of pro-Russian gun. Beltsy .
 Oleksandr Turchynov AKSYONOV was elected president on 1 March 2014 . His ‘election’ was decreed un­ constitutional by the acting Ukrai­ Serhiy Valeriyovych nian President .
 He was one of the co-signa­ tories of the ‘treaty on Crimea's ac­ cession to the Russian Federation’ of 18 March 2014 .
 Crimea MPs were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea . He publicly recognized that the MPs from Crimea were the initiateators of the move .
 Currently First Deputy Governor of the Kurgan Oblast and Head of the delegation of the Government of the Russian Federation to Government of Russian Federation . Currently First deputy governor of KurganOblast and head of the government delegation .
 Makiivka (Donetsk seizure and occupation of the re­­ Пушiн), oblast) gional administration. Makivka is a Russian city in Donetsk .
 Zaporozhye is responsible for the systematic and ex­ pedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Sevastopol . The city is located in the southern part of the Russian city of Crimea .
Currently assistant to Sevastopol Mu­ nicipal Council Deputy Mikhail Cha­ luy . Currently assistant to  Sevastopol Mu­nicipal councillor Mikhail Cha Cha luy.
 Sloviansk Vyacheslav Ponomariov called on Vladimir Putin Volodymyrovich to send in Russian troops to protect PONOMARYOV . He later asked him to sup­ (В'ячечeча
 Remains active in supporting separatist actions or poli­ Цаp cies. RemainsActive in (Олег Анат    ’s ‘’ “’t
 Debalcevo says they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country .
 Tsypkalov has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has also supported policies that undermine the sovereignty of Ukraine.
 Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.5 . So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minis­ 12.9.9 .
 Dzhankoy has been involved in the organization and imple­ mentation of the 16 March dum in Crimea on unification with Russia .
 Sergey Yurevich So called Commander in Chief of the 16.2.2015 IGNATOV .
 KUZOVLEV has actively sup­ ported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, he says . He has also taken on and acting in this capa­ city.
 Former Director of the Main Opera­ tions Department and deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 'Port Feodosia' is a limited liability company. Re-re-re­ gistered as limited liability firm .
 The Ukrainian government forces in the Eastern Ukraine have been fighting against 25.7.2014 People's Militia . They are called ‘Donbass Illegal armed separatist group’ The group is responsible for fighting against the government forces .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 of the City of rainian law . State Unitary Enterprise was transferred to the State Unite Enterprise .
 The Government of Sevastopolski morskoy (Пра­  Sevastopol) is a Russian city in Sevastopol . It is the capital of the city's largest port city .
 Limited Liability The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Company ‘Kerch rainian law.’
 In terms of volume of trade, it is the sec­ predpriyatiye ond biggest commercial seaport in Crimea .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 of the Republic of rainian law. State Unitary Enterprise was transferred.
 2016 Name Reasons Date of listing 16.3. L 67/16 EN Official Journal of the European Union .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Enterprise ‘Sanatorium rainian law.’ The ownership was transferred to the Federal State Budgetary .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Enterprise ‘Productionrainian law.’