 The rising accommodative narrative of the 2014 pseudo-referendum on Crimea is mistaken, it is said . The rising accommodation narrative is mistaken.
 There is a broader trend rising today in certain European political circles towards the acceptance of the Crimea annexation .
 Kremlin-supported narrative of near-universal and enthusiastic support for annexation among the local population . But this ignores details that are questioning the Kremlin- supported narrative of allegedly near- universal support for annexing .
Christian Lindner's statement came in summer 2017 . The German Bundestag election campaign was rocked by an unexpected statement from Lindner .
 Lindner only expressed a view which can be heard among many politicians, diplomats, and journalists in Germany and other Western countries .
 Lindner has been not the most accommodative towards Kremlin expansionism . In fact, he has not been the most accommodatingative towards the Kremlin .
 Alexander Gauland is deputy chair of the new right-wing populist Alternative for Germany party . Gauland said this summer that “Crimea is ultimately ancient Russian territory and cannot go back to Ukraine’s Ukraine” – thereby fully embracing the Kremlin”
 The leader of the radical left Die Linke Sarah Wagenknecht had already called for Germany to accept the result of the Crimea ‘referendum’ to legitimise the annexation of Crimea even before the event .
 Lindner's approach is symptomatic for larger trends within the EU’s political establishment to go soft on Russian imperialism .
 The Kremlin-supported narrative of allegedly near-universal and enthusiastic support for annexation among Crimeans often creeps into mainstream Western discourse .
 Europe's Russlandversteher in business circles, armchair punditry and radical parties. Such a narrative is a particularly popular argument of Europe’s Russlandersteher .
 It is a truism in the government-guided public discourse of the Russian Federation . It is also a truist in the Russian government- guided public discourse .
 A covert military operation that had, in late February 2014, preceded and conditioned Crimea’s following secession from Ukraine and annexation to Russia . This argument ignores not only the fact of a covertMilitary operation, but also the fact that Crimea's following secession was preceded by the
 The March 2014 Russia-organised “referendum’ also call into question the myth that there was an overwhelming demand for “re-unification’ of Russia and the peninsula among Crimeans .
 The Russian Presidential Council's report estimates that the referendum's turnout was not 83. percent, as officially reported by the Kremlin-installed authorities on Crimea . But rather around 30 to 50 percent, it says .
 Less than a third of the overall Crimean population actually cared to vote in support of annexation . Even allowing for a considerably higher turnout and larger real support for annexation in Sevastopol .
 The various polls that have been conducted after Russia’s military and political take-over of the peninsula seem to show large support for annexation .
 The more recent polling results reflect partially the effects of the shrill and fear-mongering defamation campaign against Ukraine in the Kremlin-controlled media . The only major source of mass information that has been left since March 2014 .
 Some of the polls also do not address the familiar popular bias towards support for the status quo . It had earlier favored the peninsula's continuance in Ukraine .
 Most post-annexation pollsters seem to ignore the considerable stakes involved in Crimea’s return under Kyiv control, or even mere indifference with regard to this issue .
 Disapproval of the annexation is politically and legally highly stigmatized by Moscow . Moscow and its Crimean proxies are ruthless in their persecution of political dissident and even of mere sympathy for Ukraine .
 Russia-organized pseudo-plebiscite cannot serve as justification for an accommodative approach to Russia with regard to Crimea’s annexation . To return to the developments in spring 2014, there are further reasons why reference to the Russia-organized pseudo-plesite cannot be used
 The preparations, procedure, and wording of the ‘referendum’ were so demonstratively biased that this voting procedure can serve as a text-book case of electoral manipulation, says the author . The preparations and procedure were so biased, the author says .
 Crimea’s citizens to publicly, pluralistically, and freely discuss the choices they would be given in the alleged plebiscite on 16 March 2014 . The date of the referendum was changed twice .
 The first option promised Crimeans “re-unification’ of Crimea with Russia’s Russia . The first offered Crimeans the first option.
 Crimea had been part and parcel of both the tsarist empire and the Soviet Union . The word "Russia" in the referendum apparently implied that the word “Russia’s” was implied .
 Crimea had only been united with an empire sometimes called “Russia’s“ From 1783 until 1991, Crimea only was united with a non-existent Russian nation-state .
 The larger part of today’s entire Ukrainian territory – and not only Crimea – once belonged to this empire as much as most of the current Russian Federation .
 Crimea belonged, within the tsarist empire, to the Tauric Gouvernment that included the peninsula, but also most of today’s southern mainland Ukraine . Crimea belonged to the government that included not only the peninsula but also the peninsula .
 Crimea could not have been separated from “Russia’s’ in 1991, and an ‘reunited’ with it in 2014 . Crimea had not belonged to an exclusively Russian state, separate from dry land Ukraine .
 Both agreements were ratified by the Russian parliament, and signed into law by Russia’s presidents .
 Had this second option won in the “referendum,’ it would have been left to the powerholders to choose among these two different basic laws . The second option was the second option in the 'refere referendum'
 Many Western observers who actively comment on Crimea’s past, annexation and future seem to not know some or even most of them .
 The Kremlin’s apologetic narrative is still widespread of a perhaps somewhat roughly initiated referendum that led to a decision allegedly supported by the vast majority of Crimeans . Instead, the Kremlin's apologetic narratives are still widespread .
 Andreas Umland is Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation in Kyiv . He is a senior research fellow at the International Economic Cooperation Institute .
 It first appeared in the ‘Wider Europe Forum’ of the European Council on Foreign Relations . It was the first time the Forum had been held by the Council on foreign relations .