 The man-made famine of 1932-1933 killed millions of Ukrainians during the Stalin regime . The Russian Federation, the continuing legal personality and successor state of the Soviet Union, stroke again .
 This time it came in the shape of a naval battle, or more accurately, a unilateral attack since there was no return of fire . This time the battle was in the form of a unilateral battle . The battle was the first of its kind since the end of the
 Russian FSB border guard ships attacked two Ukrainian artillery boats and a tugboat in the Kerch Strait off the coast of occupied Crimea . Six Ukrainian sailors were wounded and all three vessels with a total of 23 crew members on board .
 The Ukrainians were already on their way back to Odessa from the Kerch Strait when they were fired upon and seized by Russia .
 The agreement proves Ukrainians to be right. Unfortunately for the Kremlin, there is an agreement that proves Ukrainians are right .
 The Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov are shared territorial waters between Russia and Ukraine . It was signed in 2003 by the then Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma and Vladimir Vladimirovich himself .
 The Ukrainian Parliament has greenlighted a decision to impose martial law in 10 regions along the Russian border and Transnistria . The martial law entered into force at 9m on 28 November and last until 27 December .
 The initial proposition looked at imposing the martial law for 60 days . It would have caused a postponement in the elections, scheduled for 31 March 2019, as martial law rules out elections .
 The term was decreased to 30 days, which would allow holding elections as planned . However, after a compromise reached with the political parties, the term was reduced to 30 Days .
 President Poroshenko stressed that martial law will not infringe upon civil liberties of Ukrainians . In Parliament, he repeated that they will be limited only in case of an intervention .
 The masterminds of Kremlin propaganda claim that this ‘provocation’ is solely aimed at imposing martial law in Ukraine . The President Poroshenko is the main beneficiary of this “provocation.’
Stakeholders of the other side accuse Russians of violation of sovereignty and open aggression . Stakeholders say Russians are violating sovereignty, open aggression and violating sovereignty .
 Poroshenko's popularity has been dropping and his re-election is not set in stone . It's no secret that Poroshenko’s popularity is dropping and he's not set to win .
Ukrainian Orthodox Church granted autocephaly by Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople . He is still far from being the favourite candidate for the election .
 His campaign slogan “Army, Language, Faith” addresses the national pride of citizens . But he is not the only one to play this card .
 As of October, 66% approved of Putin’s performance, down from 82% in April .
 The percentage of those who “trust’s Putin fell from 59 to 39%, and the percentage of people not trusting Putin doubled . The percentage that those not trust Putin doubled.
 This could be a game changer for the response of the international community . This is the first time this has been seen as a major international community response to the crisis .
 The Baltic States along with Poland were quick in condemning Russian behaviour . EU and NATO statements were followed by EU, NATO statements .
 United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley's condemnation was noticeable for how late it was . President Trump framed Russian aggression as a ‘both-sides issue’ and refused to openly criticise Putin .
 This is indeed a moment of truth for the West the Kremlin wants to know how much it can get away with . This is a moment for the Kremlin to know what to do with .
 The Black Sea is a critical intersection for trade and security and it needs to be properly protected . The Black sea is an important intersection.
 NATO and the U.S. should send in naval ships in the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea to guarantee that it stays open to international shipping as well as provide military equipment to Ukraine .
 The Eastern part of Ukraine’s Black Sea coast, with cities like Mariupol and Berdyansk, is now practically cut off from shipping . Much of their trade now functioning by rail, at higher cost .
 The EU should consider special assistance programmes to soften this effect . The EU is considering special assistance programs to soften the impact of these programmes .
 Russia has made a bold act and moved this war closer to its doorstep. What is important for the European Union to realise is that Russia has moved this battle closer to the doorstep .
 A safe and secure Ukraine is essential for the security of Europe and a unified response from the member states is crucial for the respect of international law . Ukraine is an important part of the European Union and the United States .
 Achieving consensus on military intervention inside NATO is rather difficult, but tougher economic sanctions and suspension of the Nord Stream 2 could be steps in the right direction .