 Ukraine’s government can do almost nothing to reverse the grip of Russian forces and their proxies on the southern zone of Donetsk and Lugansk provinces .
 Ukraine’s economy in recession, and with no money to lure Donbas’ people to Kyiv's side in the conflict, Kyiv also lacks an economic solution .
 Russia holds a veto in the “Minsk process,’s most active forum for efforts to negotiate a solution . Diplomacy also cannot solve this, notably as Russia has a veto on the ‘Minsk Process’
Russia holds the cards, and until its drive to divide Ukraine subsides, Donbas will remain occupied and in political purgatory . Russia holds the card, and will continue to hold the cards.
 The solution may come in early 2016, but until then, the chance of Donbas remaining a “frozen conflict’s” is 80 percent . The solution is likely to come early 2016 .
 Expect tension between the government and the oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi .
 Kolomoyskyi, the banking billionaire, was appointed governor of the critical province of Dnipropetrovsk in 2014 . He is a banking billionaire .
 His financing of the Ukrainian army was critical to the war effort, which made him “Public Enemy Number One’s with the Kremlin . He was ‘Public Enemy number one’ with the Moscow Kremlin .
 Poroshenko and Yatsenyuk needed Kolomoyskyi when Russia was actively on the military offensive . Poroshenko was in charge of the Russian military when it was on the offensive .
 Ukraine will see him as weighty cargo that needs to be jettisoned before Ukraine can arrive in Europe . But now they will be seeing him as weightsy cargo.
 Kolomoyskyi's faction in the new parliament withheld support in last week’s vote on the budget . Tensions are already on, as Kolomoysskyi’'s faction withheld support last week .
 It's only a matter of time before Kolomoyskyi goes into open opposition against the reforms that Kyiv is pushing . It’s only a few months before KolmoyskyI goes into opposition against reforms that the government is pushing.
 Kolomoyskyi's role in keeping Dnipropetrovsk solidly on the government's side represents a huge “get out of jail free’s card.”
 The trick for Poroshenko and Yatsenyuk will be to contain Kolomoyskyi to Dnipropetrovsk while taming his ambitions to influence other provinces .
 The chance of greater tensions between the government and Kolomoyskyi is 75 percent . So the chance of more tension between the two is 75 per cent .
 The back-channel efforts by President Barack Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry to improve relations with Moscow will produce no major successes in 2015 .
 Even attempts to separate the annexation of Crimea from the war in the Donbas will yield little result as they are easier to do on paper than in practice .
 Obama has entered the lame-duck stage of his presidency . The president has lost both Houses of Congress .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin isn’t particularly warming toward improved ties with the White House . Putin's new economic woes don't mean he's warming toward improving ties with White House.
Public perceptions of one another will remain at their worst since the Cold War . Obama might not unilaterally lift some sanctions against Russia .
The chance of US-Russian relations NOT significantly improving is 65 percent . The chance of U.S.-Russian relations not significantly improving was 65 percent.
 Ukrainian local elections in October will produce many new regional leaders and parties . Ukraine's local elections will be held in October .
 The exact election system to be used in nationwide local polls remains in limbo . The mood of the electorate is such that a tidal wave of change is likely .
 The potential for decentralization leading to local budget control and decision making will encourage new leaders to enter politics, say experts .
 The success of the newly formed Samopomich party and the Opposition Bloc in last October’s parliament elections is a sign that new parties have real opportunities to score breakthroughs in mayoral and city council races this year .
 Andriy Sadoviy in Lviv, Vitaliy Klitschko in Kyiv, and Serhiy Odarych in Cherkasy are likely to win re-election, they will be the exceptions rather than the rule .
 The chance of local elections producing a crop of new, regional leaders is sixty percent .
 The chances are decent that some of the sanctions may be relaxed or removed . Still, the chances are good that some may be eased or removed from Russia .
 The Obama administration and the Europeans have been reluctant from the beginning to impose the sanctions . The EU has been sending signals that the sanctions can be relaxed at the slightest gesture from the Kremlin .
 If Donbas stays quiet for the next few months, if Putin plays nice on the playground and pulls back some of his troops from the border . If he makes some conciliatory gestures such as promising not to supply the Donbas terrorists with more weapons, then expect the West to melt
 Sanctions against individuals are likely to stay in place, but for economic reasons, the others will begin to be lifted . Sanctions on individuals will continue to remain in place .
 The West will pat itself on the back at having stood up to Putin, while Putin will chuckle about how Westerners are so naïve . The West is so naïve that Putin will laugh at the West's naiveness .
 This year's predictions for 2015 are likely to be shaded by a development that won’t fully mature until 2016 . This year’s predictions will likely be shading by the development that will not fully mature.
Early elections may be called for 2016 as part of a broader compromise to end the standoff in Donbas . Discussion already is underway among political elites in Kyiv about the new parliament “not lasting long’s’t lasting long.
 The pain of a slashed government budget and a shrunken war economy means the public will tire of the current government this year . The pain is the result of a reduced government budget.
 The economic reforms to be imposed for longer-term recovery won’t produce new economic growth any time soon . The reforms will not produce new growth in the long-term.
 Russia will play a “new elections’ card in the fight over Donbas. That will help improve the chances for Russia to play a new elections card . That will also help improve chances for the Russian government to win the election .
In 2007, new elections were a way out of the deadlocked power struggle between then-President Viktor Yushchenko and parliament . In 2007, then-president Viktor YUSHchenko was elected to parliament .
 Snap elections last year created the way out of the impasse following the departure of President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The official rhetoric of the Kremlin will be about empowering eastern Ukraine to ensure its representation in government, and about bringing an end to the war .
 The Kremlin's real goal will be to secure a more Russia-friendly parliament for Ukraine than the one now in power . But the Kremlin’s real goal is to secure more Russian-friendly Parliament .
 The Kremlin folded on 2014’s election but is planning to “double down’ on elections in 2016 . The Kremlin simply folded on the 2014 election.
 The idea of new parliamentary elections for Ukraine is not very exciting right now . It does reduce the chance of Donbas becoming a permanent ‘frozen conflict’ from 85 percent to potentially 25 percent .
 The chance of snap parliamentary elections in 2016 is 45 percent . Thus, the chance of a snap parliamentary election in 2016 was 45 percent, according to CNN .
Ukrainian constitutional reform and decentralization face an uphill battle . Ukrainian constitutional reform is a major issue for the country .
 The governing coalition must persuade two of the other four factions to get the needed votes for reform . That means that the governing coalition needs to persuade two other factions to vote on reform .
 Ihor Yeremeyev might be the ‘low-hanging fruit’ on the persuasion tree. Let’s assume that the pragmatic IhorYeremeYev might have been the “low-Hanging Fruit”
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi, oligarch Dmitro Firtash and/or former Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko. That still leaves the government needing to win support from the oligarch and former PM .
 Any of them will extract massive concessions in exchange for supporting the constitutional reforms . Any of those who want to support the reforms will have to make concessions .
 As of now, the chance of constitutional reform and decentralization passing is 40 percent . The chance of a constitutional reform is 40 per cent .
 Putin renews the shooting in Donbas, but probably avoids expanding his war against Ukraine .
 Despite Putin’s inscrutability, a broad consensus is coalescing that the war is winding down . A broad consensus has been coalescing in recent weeks .
 Russia is feeling the economic pain of the collapses in the price of oil and the ruble’s value . The battles in Donbas have lessened since early September, and Russia has lessened .
 Putin has seen political risks for him at home of heavy casualties among his troops . Putin also has seen the political risks of his troops at home .
 Putin has excelled in doing the unexpected in 2014 and nothing suggests a change in his character . Still, Putin has done the unexpected.