 President Oleksandr Turchynov's 'election' was decreed unconstitutional by the acting Sergei Valerievich now Republic of Ukrainian President . He is now President of the Republic of Ukraine .
 He actively lobbied for the 'referendum' of 16 March 2014 . He was one of the co-signatories of the 'treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Serhiy Valeriyovych Federation' of 18 March 2014.
 He was appointed acting AKSYONOV (Сергiй 'Head' of the so-called 'Republic of Crimea' by President Putin .
 They have no official or legal status in the form they are published. They are published here . They have been published here.
 He lobbied actively for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Remains active in supporting separatist actions or policies. 2/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union has been named .
 Sevastopol to become a separate entity of the Russian Federation Sevastopoulos following a referendum on 16 March 2014 . Moscow or Moscow or  Sevastopol to become a separate entity after a referendum .
 He was one of the Oleksiy Mykhaylovych co-signatories of the 'treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian CHALYY' of 18 March 2014 . He was a member of the Russian Federation .
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State order 'For Merit to the Fatherland' - first degree . He has been given a first degree by the European Union for his involvement.
 This included information on renamed back to (Петратро Анатат  -Maidan activists and human rights defenders of Crimea. This includes information on rename back to  Пeтрет
 He played Bakhmut, a relevant role in preventing Ukraine's authorities from controlling the Donetsk Oblast, territory of Crimea .
Former SBU officers of Crimea proclaimed the formation of an independent Ukraine Security Service of Crimea in March 2014 .
 Simferopol Konstantinov threatened him with dismissal with dismissal . He has been in charge of a project in the past.
 Khakassia on 1 March 2014 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Klishas publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian forces have been deployed in Ukraine since March 2014 .
 Klishas sought to justify a Russian military intervention in Ukraine by claiming that the Ukrainian President supports the appeal of the Crimean authorities to the Russian Federation .
 North Ossetia publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian forces have been deployed in Ukraine since 2009 .
 Leningrad region Initiator of the bill allows Russian Federation to admit in its composition . The bill is under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, territories of a foreign country without consent of that country or an international treaty .
 Petersburg Actively supported use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea . Petersburg also supported Russian military action in Crimea .
 Currently Deputy Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the State Duma of the Russian Federation . Currently Deputy Chairman of the foreign affairs committee .
 Currently Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the State Duma of the Russian Federation . Currently Chairwoman of the foreign Affairs Committee.
 Siva, Perm presence in Crimea is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine . USSR assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against a referendum and incorporation into Russia .
 Aide to the Minister of Defence since 19 January 2017. 8/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information .
 On 1 March 2014, publicly supported, 21.3.2014 MATVIYENKO (born Shepetovka) in the Federation Council, in the Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Khmelnitsky is a region in the Ukraine. KhmelNitsky, Ukraine, is the country's most populous region . The region is known for its culture and culture .
 Publicly supported the deployment of 21.3.3 2014 NARYSHKIN Russian forces .
 St Petersburg reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law are part of a federal law . St Petersburg, Russia, has been reunited since 1998 .
 The European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information is 26. 9/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is a permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council.
 Moscow Central figure of the government propaganda supporting the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . Dmitrii Konstantinovich has been deployed to Ukraine .
Solntsevo, by which local Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining Ukrainian authorities in Crimea .
2014 MALYSHEV the Crimean referendum. Responsible for administering 21.3.3 2014 MALySHEV .
2014 MEDVEDEV the Crimean referendum. Responsible for administering 21.3.3 2014 MEDVedEV the Crimea referendum .
 Bui, Kostroma countries to join Russia without their central authorities’ prior agreement . Bui and Kostromia countries joined Russia without the central authorities' prior agreement.
 Bandurovo, annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation, is annexed by Russia . The Crimea was annexed by the Russian government in March 2014 .
Currently Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the North Caucasus Federal District . Currently PlenIPotentiary representative of the president of the Russia Federation .
 SAVELYEV annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation into the Russia Federation . The 29.4.4-year-old Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014 .
 Member of the Security Autonomous SSR, Council of the Russian Federation .
 Li Van Chol is a member of the Press Council of the European Union . He has been named as the first person to be named by the EU's Press Council .
 Donetsk Oblast Serhiy Hennadiyovych is a member of the 'People's Council of the Donetsk People's Republic'
 Former 'Minister of Defence' of the so-called 'Donetsk People's Republic'
 Russian nationalists who support the separatists in eastern Ukraine. Igor STRELKOV Ihor Organised, on 4 November 2016, a Russian March in Moscow .
 Alekseevka, annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into Russian Federation, annexed Crimea .
 The annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation is part of a new Russian law .
Simferopol, Oleh Hryhorovych Crimea or Zaporizhia currently assistant to Sevastopol Municipal Council Deputy Mikhail Chaly . Simferopol is the current assistant to the Municipal Council deputy.
 The Press Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information .
 Remains Viacheslav Vladimirovich active in supporting separatist actions and policies . Remains active in support of separatist actions, policies .
 Simferopol, building and building seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district in the town of Horlivka, Crimea .
 The Peoples' Deputy of Ihor Mykolayovych BEZLER the Horlivka's Municipal Council Volodymyr Rybak . He has links to Igor Strelkov/Girkin under  Ihor's command he was involved in the murder of
 Igor Evegenevich KHAKIMZYANOV is a member of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information . He is also a former member of The Press Council .
 Remains active in supporting separatist actions or policies, according to Russian media .
 Oleg Anatolevich TSARYOV Remains active in supporting separatist actions or policies . He is still active in support of separatist actions.
 Roman Viktorovych LIAHIN Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies . Roman Viktor Yanukovych LIAHin remains active in support of separatist actions .
 Alexander Sergeevich MALYHIN is an award-winning author of the book, "The Best Book of the Year"
 Ukraine implemented Russia's annexation of Crimea in Crimea . The region was part of Ukraine's Crimea region .
 SSR or Yevpatoria is currently First Deputy Chairperson of the Committee for Security and Ukrainian SSR countering corruption of the State Duma of Russia .
 Actively implementing Russia’s annexation of 12.5.5 years ago . Russia's annexation of Crimea was announced in March .
 Crimea 22/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information . Sevastopol, Crimea, is Crimea.
 Involved actively in recruitment and training of 'volunteers' sent to fight in Donbas . Involved in recruitment, training and training.
Remains active in KHODAKOVSKYY supporting separatist actions or policies . Remains active. Support for separatist actions and policies .
 Oleksandr Vitaliyovych KHRYAKOV is a member of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 66.
 Army of the South-East says presidential elections in the 'Lugansk People's Republic' cannot take place due to the 'new' status of the region .
 He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He was a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs .
 Nikolai Platonovich DOB 11.7.1951 Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian 25.7 . He is a former member of the National Security Council .
 Leningrad was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He also helped shape the Russian government's policy on Ukraine .
 Perm Security Council provides advice on and coordinates national affairs . He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Zhetikara was involved in Kazakh Soviet shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial Socialist Republic integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Boris Vyacheslavovich is a former member of the Security Council of the Russian 25.7.6-year-old . He was a member of Russia's National Security Council . He has been in charge of Russia for 20 years .
 Vladivostok on and coordinates national security affairs . He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity .
 Kuibyshev is a member of the Duma . He announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ in Moscow .
 Currently Chairman of the Russian State Duma Committee on Physical Education, Sport and Youth Affairs . Currently chairman of the Russia's Duma committee on physical education, sport and youth affairs .
 The Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea said that Tkachyov was one of the first to express his support to the new 'leadership'
 Sievierodonetsk Pavlo Yuriyovich GUBARIEV threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or undermine or threaten Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 Gubarev was responsible for recruiting people for armed forces of separatists . He was also responsible for recruitment of people for military forces .
 Kateryna Yuriyivna has supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, she says .
 Remains active in supporting GUBARIEVA separatist actions and policies . Remains in support of separatist actions .
 Donetsk responsible for actions which undermine or threaten Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Donetsk has been accused of undermining or threaten the territorial and sovereignty of the Ukraine .
 Berezin has supported actions and Fedir Dmytrovych BEREZIN policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Odessa acting in this capacity he has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
Valeriy Volodymyrovych Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies . Valeriy has been involved in fighting against separatist actions .
 KAUROV is the name of the European Union's press council . The press council has named a number of reasons for choosing to name a date .
 Vinnytsia has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Novosibirsk Vladimir Iurievici responsible for security and law enforcement . He is responsible for the security of the country and its citizens .
 Vadim Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies, according to a report .
 Spokesperson of the so-called ‘government’ of the ‘Lugansk 30.7.2014’ who made declarations justifying, inter alia, the Oksana Aleksandrovna shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages
 Crimea undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine Sergiy Vadymovych ABISOV . Simferopol, on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has  ‘Ministers
ROTENBERG's level of success is attributable to the influence of key decision makers . He was favouring him in the award of public contracts .
Public relations campaign was designed to persuade Crimean children that they are now Russian citizens living in Russia . Russian Government's policy to integrate Crimea into Russia.
 Puschino, 'Prime Minister' of the 'Donetsk People's Republic' met with Mr Aksyonov during the period of the Crimean annexation process .
 Mr Malofeev is acting in support of the destabilisation of Eastern Ukraine . He is acting to support the destabilised region of Ukraine .
 Yuriy Valentinovich DOB 25.7.1951 Mr Kovalchuk is a long-time acquaintance of Putin .
 Leningrad (St. Leningrad) together an influential group of individuals around President Putin . The group is based around the Russian President .
 He is benefiting from his links with Russian decision-makers . He has been in Russia for years .
 Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group which in turn controls television stations which actively support the Russian government's policies of destabilisation of Ukraine .
 Belarus together an influential group of individuals around President Putin . Belarus together a group of people around the Russian President .
 Zakharchenko has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Oleksandr Volodymyrovych Ukraine .
 ZAKHARCHENKO is the name of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 97.
 Gorsky commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April 2014 . Gorsky has promised to solve the strategic task of repelling Ukraine's military aggression .
 Kononov has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of KONONOV Ukraine . Kononova has also supported actions which undermine Volodymyr Petrovych's sovereignty and sovereignty .
 RUDENKO says they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country . He has, inter alia, stated 12.9.9 2014 RUDenKO that they will continued their fighting. He has also stated that he will continue to fight in
 Debaltsevo supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Debaltevo therefore supported actions that undermine territorial and sovereignty .
 Andriy Yuriyovych PINCHUK policies undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.
 Moscow conduct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems from the Ukrainian armed forces . Moscow conduct the guerrilla war .
 One of the leaders of the “Union of Donbas volunteers’s” ‘The European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information is 103 .
 Republic of Moldova supported actions which undermine territorial integrity, Alexandru CARAMAN sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity.
 He has supported actions and Komi ASSR policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has also supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
 Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.1971 Member of the State Duma . He was elected from the illegally annexed 12.9.9 years ago .
 Dzhankoy is the former so-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister’ of Crimea .
 Sheremet Mykhaylo Serhiyovych played a key role in the organisation and implementation of the 16 March SHEREMET referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia .
 At the time of the referendum, Sheremet reportedly commanded the pro-Moscow pro-Russian forces .
 Duma deputy from illegally annexed Crimean Peninsula. Elected on 18 September 2016 as a Duma Deputy from illegal annexed Crimea .
 Yuri Leonidovich DOB 2.2.1948 Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . He was the first Russian to be elected to the top level of the council .
 Krasnoyarsk has been deployed to Ukraine by Russian forces in Ukraine . It is the first time Russian forces have been deployed in Ukraine by Ukraine .
 Viktor Petrovich DOB 19.8.1957 Chairman of the Union of the Russian and Foreign Cossack 12.9.9 . VODOLATSKY (Russian and Russian Forces) and deputy of the State Duma .
 Stefanidin Dar admitted that Russian Cossacks were actively engaged in the Rostov region Ukrainian conflict on the side of Moscow-backed separatists .
 Currently Chairman of the Russian State Duma Committee for CIS Affairs, Eurasian Integration and Relations with Compatriots . Currently chairman of the Russia State Dumas Committee.
 The Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and the City of Federal Status Sevastopol are new federal subjects the republic of Crimea.
 Pavlov-on-the-the Russian Federation of the Republic of Neva Crimea and the formation within the Russian Federation of new federal subjects the republic of Crimea .
 He is the commander of the 76th 12.9.9 2014 NAUMETS airborne division . The division has been involved in the Russian military presence on the territory of Ukraine .
 Rosoboronexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, has supported the integration of Crimean defence companies into Russia's defence industry . It has also supported the annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 He is a prominent member of ‘United Russia’ and a businessman with heavy investments in Ukraine and in Crimea .
 These ‘elections’ were in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal .
 KOZYAKOV has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 AKIMOV has actively supported Ukraine's actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Ukraine supports actively actions and policies undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 These ‘elections’ are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal. AIRAPETYAN: These 'elections' are in breaches of Ukraine law .
 Romodanovskiy supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, Ravil Zakariyovych rayon, USSR sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised KHALIKOV Ukraine .
 Moscow Dmitrii Aleksandrovich has actively supported actions SEMENOV and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Sverdlovsk, supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, BUHROV . Luhansk sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Dobropillia Rayon has actively supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and independence . The Donetsk oblast supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Sumy Nikolayevich has supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and independence, he says .
 Serbian has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Eduard Oleksandrovych has supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity . He has also supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Chairman of the ‘Central Election Commission’ of the so-called ‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ since October 2015 .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has actively supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Tambov oblast has supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity . Michurinsk has also supported policies which undermined Ukraine's sovereignty and independence .
 Kateryna Volodymyrivna supported actions which undermine territorial integrity, FILIPPOVA sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Nevinnomyssk has supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity . He also supported policies which undermined Ukraine's sovereignty and independence .
 Kherson has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised the Ukraine .
 Olha Ihorivna BESEDINA has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Krasny Luch has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity of Ukraine . He has also supported actions which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and independence .
 Anatoly Ivanovich DOB 15.5.1955 Former Deputy Minister of Defence and in that capacity, involved in 16.2.2015 ANTONOV (Анатолий supporting Russian troops in Ukraine)
 Omsk participated in shaping and implementing the policy of the Russian Government .
Currently employed by Rosatom. Currently employed by the European Union . The date of listing information is 149 .
 The General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is the head of Russia's Armed Forces . The Russian Federation has been in charge of the armed forces since 2007 .
 Actively involved in shaping and implementing the military campaign of the Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian forces are in Ukraine.
Currently First Deputy Chairman of the State Duma Committee on Culture. Currently First Deputy chairman of the state Duma committee on Culture . The European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 151 .
Bekabad, Uzbekistan SSR Deputy Chairperson of the Duma Committee on ethnic affairs . Bekabad is the head of the UzbekistanSSR's ethnic affairs committee .
 Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee on Financial Markets . Simferopol is a member of the Duma committee on financial markets .
 He has been awarded with the order ‘For loyalty to duty’ by the ‘authorities’ of ‘Republic of Crimea’ The order was issued by the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information .
 Russian State order ‘For duties to the motherland’ — II degree. For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State Order ‘ for duties to motherland'
 Ukrainian SSR Member of Duma Committee on Financial Markets . Simferopol is a member of the Ukraine's SSR Committee on financial markets .
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with a medal ‘For the defence of Republic of Crimea’ by the local ‘authorities’ for his involvement.
 Belogorsk is a Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee on Culture . He is a member of the UkrainianSSR Committee on culture .
 She has been awarded with Russian State order ‘For duties to the motherland’ — II degree in 2014 . She has also been awarded ‘for loyalty to duty’ by the ‘authorities’ of ‘Republic of Crimea’ in 2015 .
 Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee for CIS Affairs, Eurasian Integration and Relations with Compatriots . Simferopol is a member of the Russian SSR .
Siemens Gas Turbine Technologies OOO to OAO VO Technopromexport, to be installed in Crimea . Andrey Vladimirovich Vice-Minister for Shares responsibility for the decision to transfer gas turbines that had 04.08.08
 Salair, Kemerovskaya Oblast 68/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 159 .
 Evgeniy Petrovich Head of Department Responsible within the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation for 04.08.2017 GRABCHAK in the Energy the development of electro-energetic projects in Crimea .
 Ministry of the Russian Federation contributes to establishing an independent power supply for Crimea .
 Ust-Labinsk, Krasnodar Region 69/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 160 .
 Sergey Anatolevich TOPORDirector General of In his capacity as Director General of OOO ‘VO TPE’ He led the 04.08.2017 GILKA OAO ‘ VO T PE’ until negotiations with Siemens Gas Turbine Technologies
 He was responsible for the transfer of the gas turbines to Crimea . He was also responsible for  the transition to Crimea .
 The Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Republic of Crimea listed 2. 71/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 2.
 Responsible for organising the illegal referendum on 11 May 2014 . The referendum was held in London on May 11, 2014 .
 It is also involved in the recruitment to the separatist 'Army of Southeast' and other illegal armed separatist groups . It has been listed as part of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing .
 The so called 'Donetsk People's Republic' 25.7.2014 Republic' Constitution was declared on 7 April 2014 . The composition of the Supreme 'Донецкая' was declared .
 It is also involved in the recruitment to illegal armed separatist groups, thus threatening stability or security of Ukraine .
 German PROPOKIV is responsible for taking part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Ukrainian Security Service .
 The 'government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk' is responsible for the separatist 'governmental' activities of the so called 'government' of the people .
 Prospect Zasyadko. 78/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 11 .
 The Ukraine government forces are responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening stability or security of Ukraine .
 Actively participated in the military operations resulting in the seizure of Donetsk Airport .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.7 . City of Sevastopol, 'Sevastopol contrary to the Ukrainian law'
 The Government of Sevastopol . 80/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 14. The Government.
 State Unitary Enterprise of the Aeroflotskaya Street 5, 295024, transferred 25.7.2014 'Republic of Crimea' 'UniversalSimferopol' contrary to Ukrainian law .
 The Ministry of Transportation of the 'Republic of Crimea' lists 16 reasons for the list . The list is based on information from the European Union.
 Federal State Budgetary The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 . Enterprise ""Sanatorium contrary to the Ukrainian law.
 The Administration of the President of the Russian Federation lists 17 reasons for the list . The list includes 17 reasons.
 Crimean Republican Enterprise 40 Zeleznodorozhnaya str., The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.7 . 2014 'Azov distillery plant' contrary to Ukrainian law, according to the law .
 Managed by Sinergiya. 84/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons.
 The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.7%. The ownership was transferred to Crimea, Yalta, Massandra .
 Federal state budget institution 298600, Kirov Street 31 Yalta, Crimea was transferred 25.7.2014 for science and research 'Allcontrary to the Ukrainian law'
 State enterprise of the 298032, Crimea, Sudak, urban village was transferred 25.7.7 . The ownership of the entity was transferred to the Crimean state enterprise .
 The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Crimea listed 21 reasons for listing 21 . The Ministry Of Agriculture of Crimea was named as the Government of Crimea .
Vereiskaya, Moscow 121471, Almaz-Antey is a Russian State-owned 30.7.7-year-old .
 Russian authorities have been providing heavy weaponry to separatists in Eastern Ukraine, contributing to the destabilisation of Ukraine .
 These weapons are used by the   separate separatists, including for shooting down (a.k.a. a.a.)
 As a State-owned company, ALMAZ-ANTEY; Almaz-Antey contributes to the ALMAz-antey CORP;k.a. destabilisation of Ukraine .
 The European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 22 of the 22 reasons listed .
 DOBROLET aka Airline code QD Dobrolet is a subsidiary of a Russian state30.7.2014 owned airline . The airline is based in Russia and is owned by the Russian government .
 House 31, building Crimea Dobrolet has so far exclusively operated flights between Moscow and Crimea . House 31 has sofar operated flights from Moscow to Crimea .
 RNCB supported materially and financially the actions of the Russian government to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation, thus undermining Ukraine's territorial integrity . RNCB also supported the action of the government to integration Crimea into Russia .
 Donetsk Republic (Public Public ""organisation" presented 29.11.2014 organisation) candidates in the so called ""elections" of the so-called ""Donetsk People's Republic" on 2 November 2014 .
 Headed by Igor PLOTNITSKY. 91/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 26.
 People's Union (Narodny Public) presented 29.11.2014 Soyuz candidates in the so called ""elections" of the so-called ""Luhansk People's Republic" 2.2  "Elections" were held in November .
 In participating formally in the illegal "elections" it has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Luhansk Economic Union presented 29.11.2014 (Luganskiy Ekonomicheskiy candidates in the illegal so called ""elections"" Soyuz) of the so called "Luhansk People's Republic" 2 November 2014 .
 Cossack National Guard Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 has actively supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence .
 Reportedly part of the so-called ‘2nd Army Corps’ of the ‘Lugansk People’s Republic’
 Sparta battalion Armed separatist group has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Somali battalion Armed separatist group has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence .
 Zarya battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Prizrak brigade Armed separatist group has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . 94/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons of listing destabilise Ukraine .
 Kalmius battalion Armed separatist group has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Death battalion Armed separatist group has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Crimea and Sevastopol as a means of supporting their separation from Ukraine . This contributes to establishing an independent power supply for Crimea .
 Limited Liability Company Registration date: 8.5.2014 ‘VO TPE’ transferred the gas turbines to be ‘Foreign Economic installed in Crimea.’