 Three Ukrainian military ships entered the Kerch Strait, a narrow waterway linking the Azov and Black seas in eastern Europe . A recently completed bridge connects Crimea with the Russian mainland .
 The ships veered into Russian territorial waters, ignoring warnings from the Russian side .
 Ukrainian vessels uncovered their artillery guns and rotated them into firing position . The Ukrainian vessels were rotated into firing positions .
 Poroshenko called on NATO to deploy war ships to the Azov Sea . He also called on the U.S. to deploy warships to the sea .
 Ukraine’s right-wing, NATO-armed regime staged a dangerous provocation, according to a report .
 There's every reason to believe this was done with Washington’s prior knowledge and approval . Washington's prior knowledge, approval and approval are key to the decision .
 In 2014, a coup actively supported by Washington overthrew Ukraine’s legally elected government . The coup took place in Ukraine in 2014 .
 Kiev has issued an unending torrent of threats against Russia, allied itself with NATO, banned workers’ organizations . Since then, Kiev has waged a bloody war against the Donbass region at the cost of over 10,300 lives .
 Some of the first measures enacted by the new regime were meant to strip the country's Russian speakers of their language rights . The majority in eastern and southern Ukraine are Russian speakers .
 In a 2014 referendum held there, people voted overwhelmingly to leave Ukraine and rejoin the Russian Federation .
 Moscow accepted the vote, while Ukraine and its Western allies still refuse to recognize it . Moscow accepts the vote.
 Ukraine's economy has become dependent on International Monetary Fund loans . Since breaking off its historic trade relations with Russia, Ukraine’s economy has been dependent on IMF loans .
 These are contingent on deeply unpopular austerity measures that benefit U.S. and western European capitalists . The measures are not expected to benefit the United States and Europe .
 U.S.-dominated NATO military alliance trains and ‘advises’ Ukraine’s military. Meanwhile, the United States-dominated NATO is training and “advising” Ukraine's military .
 Poroshenko couldn't dream of carrying out such a dangerous maneuver, risking open conflict with the more militarily powerful Russia .
 Poroshenko is one of a small circle of oligarchs who enriched themselves off the suffering of Ukrainian workers and farmers after the destruction of the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
With little domestic support and stiff opposition from ultrarightists, he’s eager to prove himself useful to his masters on Wall Street .
 Washington has been ratcheting up the conflict in Ukraine to draw attention away from the crimes of the Pentagon and U.S.-backed rebels there .
 Ukraine's Kerch provocation was another step in U.S. imperialism’s long march to surround and ultimately break up the Russian Federation . The goal was pursued relentlessly by both Republican and Democratic administrations since the early 1990s .
 Russia's capitalist government has opposed U.S. aggression in Syria and Ukraine as a matter of survival . Russia’s capitalist government is based on the counterrevolution that overturned socialism in the USSR .
 Ukrainian parliamentary deputy Ivan Vinnik admitted an intensification of behind-the-scenes talks between officials in Kiev and Washington on the establishment of a U.S. military base in eastern Ukraine . Poland's Kerch incident led to an intensified talks between the two countries
 It is the anti-fascist, anti-imperialist resistance waged by the Donbass republics and inside Ukraine that deserves our support. It is anti-fascism and anti- Imperialist resistance, says the Ukrainian government .
 We need money for better-paying jobs, health care and schools, infrastructure repairs and environmental cleanup, says John Sutter . Sutter: Not more military bases and provocations that threaten to pit workers against each other for the benefit of war profiteers .