 This paper documents these trade policy restrictions and embargoes imposed by Russia . This paper provides some first indications of their impact on Russia .
 The immediate impact on trade flows, especially for agri-food products, has been substantial, though with some leakage through Belarus . The immediate effect on trade has been significant, but there has been some leakage .
 The main instrument for the Russian measures has been allegations of non-conformity with Russian technical standards . The Russian technical agencies are following political guidelines dressed up as scientific evidence .
 Georgia already has taken significant steps in this direction, since the Russian sanctions date back to 2006 . These measures also push the three states into diversifying their trade marketing efforts in favour of the EU and other world markets .
 The AA/DCFTA was ratified by both the Rada in Kyiv and the European Parliament . It will lead to its full and definitive entry into force when the 28 member states have also ratified it .
 Putin made an abusive interpretation of the 12 September understanding . Putin followed the day after with a letter to Poroshenko making an abusiveinterpretation .
 The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent any institution with which he is affiliated . The views in this article are those from the author .
 Moldova. Moldova is home to the world's largest city, Moldova . The country's capital city is the capital of the Moldova region .
 Georgia is a state of Georgia. Georgia is one of the most populous states in the country .
 The present note documents these measures and discusses the trade policy issues . The present notes also discuss the issues of trade policy.
 Russia's punitive measures mostly affect Ukraine and Moldova . Georgia experienced similar measures some years ago, but they have been only partly lifted .
 The measures taken from July to October 2013 contributed to the decision by President Yanukovich to renege on signing the AA/DCFTA at the Vilnius summit in November 2013 .
 Further measures were taken after Yanukovich fled Ukraine and an interim pro-European government was installed on 27 February 2014 .
 President Poroshenko signed the AA/DCFTA on 27 June . They were substantially intensified in the period from April to August 2014 .
 Most measures concern agri-food produce, for which the Russian regulatory agency produced allegations of non-conformity with required standards . Most measures concerned agri food produce .
 Russia stopped for several weeks the import from Ukraine of railcars on grounds of alleged technical defects . However, Russia also stopped for a few weeks the imports of rail cars .
 This is a major, long-standing category of Ukrainian manufactured exports to Russia . This is the first time Ukraine has exported to Russia in over a decade .
Gas supplies from Russia were completely stopped in June 2014 and to date have not been resumed . In addition, gas supplies from the country were completely stop in June.
 Russia has seized significant Ukrainian gas fields in Crimea and its territorial waters . Russia has also seized Ukraine's territorial waters in the Crimea region . Russia is also trying to compensate Ukraine for its seizure of gas fields .
 Russia has made several announcements about import substitution policies for Ukrainian exports . The two most important machine building products are in the military sphere and in rail transport .
 Russian safety control service Rospotrebnadzor declared that sweets failed to satisfy food safety checks . It accused producer of violating labelling requirements .
 Ukraine contested the justification of these measures at meetings of WTO Committees on technical barriers to trade and sanitary and phytosanitary regulations . Ukraine has contested the problems at meetings of the committees .
 The Russian customs office classified all Ukrainian exports as belonging to a ‘high risk category’ That provoked extensive border controls and de facto stopped exports for several weeks .
Ad hoc enhanced control measures have been occasionally reported by exporters . Later on, exports resumed, but ad hoc enhanced controls have been reported by exorters .
 Russia banned imports of Ukrainian railcars, refusing to recognise certificates of conformity for some types of railcars from three producers . Russia also refused to recognise certificate of conformity.
 certificates were reactivated for about half of these products . In several weeks, certificates were reactedivated for some of the products .
 Rospotrebnadzor suspended the certificate for MHP, one of Ukraine’s largest poultry producers .
 Rospotrebnadzor prohibited imports of cheeses produced by five Ukrainian companies due to alleged food safety concerns .
 Rospotrebnadzor prohibited imports of potatoes from Ukraine due to alleged food safety concerns .
 This is by far the most important action economically, but it is in a quite different category, since it is tied up with disputes over the price and payments for gas, and debt for past supplies .
 Energy security risks are now of a very high order, according to experts . The gas supply stoppage is coupled with endangered access to coal stocks due to military conflict in parts of the Donbass region .
 Rospotrebnadzor prohibited imports of Ukrainian milk and dairy products due to alleged food safety concerns .
 Rospotrebnadzor prohibited imports of Ukrainian alcoholic products, mainly beer, produced by three large Ukrainian companies .
 The Russian government published a draft regulation 1 regarding the possible revocation of the tariff-free trade preferences that exist under the Russia-Ukraine CIS Free Trade Agreement . The same non-preferential tariff levels as for regular WTO member states .
 Approximately 25% of Ukrainian exports to Russia in 2013,2 including a wide range of agricultural and industrial products including meat, dairy products and vegetables .
 The authorities announced the stoppage of military cooperation with Russia . It implies cessation of the supply of military goods .
 Security and Defence Council to stop exporting dual-purpose products . This decision was announced by the government in early April 2014 .
 At the end of August, the president signed the decree prohibiting exports of military and double-purpose products .
 The ban on exports of military and doublepurpose products has not been completely obeyed, in particular by private entities . As of September, it seems that the ban on military anddoublepurpose products is not entirely obeyed .
 Naftogaz filed a case against Russia’s stateowned energy company Gazprom regarding gas price and debt issues for arbitration in Stockholm . In June, Ukraine's national oil and gas company Naftogsaz filed the case against Gazprom .
 In September 2014, the president signed a law on sanctions that could be used to cease economic relations with Russia . The law was signed in September 2014 .
 The list contains 25 possible measures including freezing assets, trade and transit restrictions, suspending economic and financial liabilities, revoking licenses and permits, and visa bans . The list also includes a list of possible measures that include freezing assets and trade restrictions .
 Ukraine has been regularly raising specific trade concerns at the WTO regarding Russian actions since autumn 2013 . Since autumn 2013 Ukraine has raised specific trade issues with Russia .
 Ukraine will continue to use WTO-compliant instruments to compensate losses . Valeriy Pyatnitsky, appointed Trade Representative of Ukraine on 21 August 2014, stated that Ukraine would continue to using the instruments .
 A volunteer movement with slogan ‘Don’t buy Russian’ has emerged in the country . Also, a volunteer movement has emerged.
 According to opinion polls, the movement was successful in reducing consumer demand for Russian products . The movement is based in Russia .
 Ukraine's exports to the EU grew by 14.9% in the first half of 2014 compared to a year earlier . exports to Russia dropped by 23.3% over the same period .
 share of exports to the EU reached 33.1% of total exports compared to 27.3% a year before . The share of export to Russia dropped to 19.9% compared to 24.7% in 2013 .
 The likelihood that Russia will implement its threat to revoke its CIS Free Trade Agreement with Ukraine was temporarily abated at the tripartite meeting in Brussels of the EU, Ukraine and Russia on 12 September 2014 .
 At this meeting it was decided to postpone the ‘provisional implementation’ of large parts of the Association Agreement, including the DCFTA, until January 2016 .
 At the same time, the EU pledged to prolong its autonomous trade preferences for Ukraine over the same period .
 The intervening period of over a year is expected to see continuing talks with Russia over its trade concerns . Russia is also concerned about technical barriers to trade and sanitary and phytosanitary regulations .
 Russia had drawn up a long paper on its requests for the tripartite meeting . The full text appeared in the Ukrainian media before the meeting .
 The TBT and SPS issues are, in the present authors’ opinion, matters for constructive discussion if the overall political context becomes sufficiently conducive . The T BT and S PS issues are.
 The delay gives Ukraine more time to prepare for tariff liberalisation towards the EU and to adopt many EU regulations .
 Ukraine commitments for Ukraine have in most cases quite long implementation delays, often of three, five, or seven years, and in a few cases even 10 years . In any case, these commitments for Ukrainians have in any case quite long delays, according to experts .
 EU's tariff liberalisation in favour of Ukraine is already in force and will not be changed . Meanwhile, the EU’s tariff liberalization in favourof Ukraine is in force .
 At the same time the Russian side agreed not to go ahead with its threatened suspension of the CIS Free Trade Agreement . The Russian side also agreed to not go ahead.
 Russian media has been prompted to declare that this was a great breakthrough for Russian interests . But at the same time the Russian media have declared that it was a good breakthrough for Russia .
 This interpretation is supported by the continuing pressures by Russia on Ukraine . This interpretation was supported by continuing pressures on Ukraine, says the author .
 Russia's government will pass the resolution revoking the tariff-free trade preferences for some of Ukraine's exports . Ukraine and the EU Parliaments simultaneously ratified the Association Agreement .
 The EU and Ukraine will not implement the DCFTA in 2015, he said . The resolution's implementation could be postponed till the end of 2015, if the EU and Ukrainian provide guarantees .
 The document contains the list of tariff lines proposed to be removed from the DCFTA liberalisation schedule . Russia's interest in the spheres of TBT, SPS, energy and customs procedures are also protected .
 It is now for the EU side to reflect on the 12 September agreement, which is being abusively reinterpreted by the Russian side . It is also for the European side to reflecting on the agreement, also now .
 The decision to postpone the provisional application of the DCFTA has to be made by the Council upon proposal of the Commission .
 CIS trade preferences would have binding effect, given all the other restrictive trade measures that Russia has already been taking . It is also questionable from the Ukrainian standpoint how far the removal of CIS trade preference would have effect .
 The majority of these measures have concerned agri-food products . They were based on allegations of non-conformity with Russian safety requirements .
 The first measures in September 2013 were timed to discourage Moldova from initialling the AA/DCFTA with the EU . The EU actually took place at the Vilnius summit in November 2013 .
 Similar measures followed in April and July 2014,e.e. shortly before and after the signing of the AA/DCFTA on 27 June .
 Russia broadened its punitive measures by suspending the tariff-free preferences under the 2011 Russia-Moldova CIS Free Trade Agreement for 19 categories of mainly agri-food products . On 31 August, Russia broadens its punitive Measures by suspending tariff- free preferences .
 Russia claimed recourse to a general provision in Annex no. to the CIS FTA agreement that states conditions ‘damaging or threatening to damage’ industries of the Russian-led customs union may be used to justify scrapping the tariff preferences and to impose the MFN tariffs applied to WTO
 Russian wine exports to Russia have been prohibited since September 2013 . Rospotrebnadzor has been accused of non-compliance with quality rules set by the Russian government .
 Rosselhoznadzor blocked supplies from the Moldovan meat producing company ‘CARNE SUD’ on the grounds that the products derived from materials with stamps issued by the EU countries .
 Russia had previously restricted imports of all pork meat produced in Europe because of reported African swine fever infections . Russia had already restricted imports.
 Moldova signed the AA/DCFTA with the EU on 27 June . The closing to the Russian market for canned vegetables followed soon after the signing .
 Apples, pears, quinces, apricots, cherries and sour cherries, peaches, nectarines, plums and blackthorn were banned . Russian phytosanitary experts said to have found pests by Russian phyllosanities .
 Russian government resolution cancels zero duties on Moldovan products for 19 categories of commodities . Russia-Moldova CIS Free Trade Agreement signed on 18 October 2011 .
 The restrictive measures applied by Russia have created problems for Moldovan producers . The Moldovan market is dependent on the Russian market, which leads to the European market .
 Moldovan producers are often not competitive, have difficulties in promoting their products on the very demanding European market, and are experiencing financial liquidity problems . However, any major changes have not yet proved possible, because they are not competitive .
Companies need urgent investment to bring their products into conformity with European standards and technical regulations . It takes time and financial resources to comply with European regulations .
 EU's decision in August to cut tariffs for fruit products is too early to assess their effectiveness, says the EU .
 Belarus-Russian-Kazakh customs union. There were attempts to re-export Moldovan apples to Russia .
 The deliveries were made on the basis of Belarus phytosanitary service documents that certified the products originated in Belarus .
 Belarus phytosanitary service and Rosselhoznadzor agreed to increase control over re-exporting products prohibited by Russia . As a result these attempts to deliver Moldovan apples as Belarus products to Russia were stopped .
 Moldovan fruit is not allowed in Russia, but it is exported freely to Belarus . Belarus has not agreed to follow Russia’s restrictive trade policies .
 Russia has applied its restrictive measures in favour of the pro-Russian Moldovan autonomous region of Gagauzia . Russia has also applied its restrictions on alcohol exports to the region .
 Moscow may be expected to keep its market open to fruit and other products from Gagauzia . Moldovan exports are banned from Moscow .
 Gagauzia authorities are conducting negotiations with Moscow with this objective in mind . GagAUzia officials are conducting talks with Moscow.
 The Russian measures are currently aimed at influencing the outcome of the parliamentary elections in Moldova at the end of November .
 The Eurasian Economic Union is a solution to their economic needs and a means of avoiding becoming another Ukraine .
 In addition, the composition of the exports changed, with large increases in cereal products, animal feed, vegetal oil and fats, and organic chemicals .
 Moldovan exporters are effectively targeting the EU market and understand the sectors where they are most competitive . This shows that Moldovans are effectivelytargeting the EU markets and understand their sectors .
 Georgia Russia started to introduce trade restrictions on Georgian agricultural products at the end of 2005 .
 By the first half of 2006 there was a complete embargo on all Georgian agricultural products . The embargo was in place for the first time since 2006 .
 Russia introduced a manifestly political embargo on all agricultural products, which lasted for more than six years . Russia used pretexts of sanitary and phytosanitary standards and health concerns .
 Russia claimed Georgian agricultural produce was damaging the health and safety of Russian citizens . WTO SPS rules require citizens in the EU, US, Central Asia and other parts of the world consumed growing quantities of Georgian products .
 The Russian embargo contributed to a healthy trend of diversification in Georgian exports, according to a report .
 Georgian producers had entered 15 new markets, including China, Poland, Germany and Singapore . Before the embargo Georgian wine was exported to 36 countries .
 Georgia’s agricultural sector also continued to remain attractive to foreign direct investment despite the Russian embargo . Georgia's agricultural sector continues to be attractive to foreigners despite embargo .
 Despite mounting tension between the two countries and their 2008 war, Georgia never introduced restrictions in trade or investment . Russia's occupation of roughly 20% of Georgia resulted in Russia’s occupation of about 20%.
 FDI from Russia never faced sanctions from the Georgian side . Even in the absence of diplomatic relations between the two countries after the war, imports and FDI were not subject to sanctions .
Georgia wanted to demonstrate that it is a ruleabiding trade partner that acts according to international and WTO norms and principles . Georgia wanted to show that it was a rule abiding trade partner .
 The Georgian case could be a positive example for Moldova and Ukraine . Moldova, Ukraine and Moldova show the advantages of not changing course in their foreign and trade policy .
Georgia never asked Russia to lift the trade embargo, even in the framework of its WTO accession negotiations with Russia . Georgia never asked the Russian government to lift its trade embargo .
 Talks over lifting it began only after the change of government in Tblisi in 2012 .
 The Russian embargo is counter to WTO rules and the Georgian-Russian FTA, its full lifting has not been achieved . Trade is not yet back to normal and trade is still not back tonormal .
 Russia partially lifted the embargo on Georgian agricultural products in 2013 . Some agricultural exports resumed in 2013.
 It started with wine, followed by mineral water and some fruits and vegetables . It was then followed with mineral water, some fruits, vegetables and wine .
 The lifting of the embargo has been proceeding product by product, and company by company . The lifting has been proceeded product byproduct, andCompany by company.
 Georgian companies have to formally address Russian authorities and obtain permission to enter the market . This means that if Georgian companies want to export a new agricultural product to Russia, they must formally address the respective Russian authorities .
 Russia requested a meeting with Georgian officials to discuss possible implications of the DCFTA for Georgian-Russian trade . Russia requested the meeting.
 One such meeting took place in Prague in early July 2014 at the senior official level . The meeting was held at the highest level in Prague .
 At the end of July there were reports that Russia was planning to unilaterally suspend the Free Trade Agreement with Georgia . Georgia has been in force since 1994 .
 No specific actions followed, and so far the government of Georgia has not received any notification regarding the suspension . Georgia's government has not been notified about the suspension.
 The Russian market is opened and closed depending on its political leadership and Russia’s desire to show strength .
 Russia may revert to such measures when it wants to exert greater political leverage on Georgia . Russia may be trying to exert more political leverage when it seeks to exert political leverage .
 Official Georgia is ‘quiet’ at present and even very mild in its statements on Russian behaviour in Ukraine .
 In parallel, former Georgian government officials and party elites are being prosecuted and jailed . Russia sees as being in its interest so that they do not return to power .
 Russia exerts no strong trade pressure on Georgia, but this may change . Unlike Ukraine and Moldova, at the moment Russia is exerting no strong pressure on Russia .
 Belarus has not followed Russian sanctions against Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia . Belarus has been in the customs union with Russia .
 Belarusian government clearly indicates that it is not going to do so in the near future . Also, the Belarusiangovernment clearly indicates it will not do so.
 Belarus has become the largest importer of Moldovan wines and the second-largest importer in the country . The Moldovan prime minister expressed his gratitude to Belarusian authorities that helped increase Moldovan food exports to Belarus .
 Belarus is becoming a hub for trade in food products from Moldova and Ukraine . As a result, Belarus has become a hub in the trade of food products.
 Russia has officially recognised this as long as the 'rules of origin' are followed properly . This scheme of reexport does not contradict the principles of the common customs territory of Belarus and Russia .
 Belarusian RUSSIA’s PUNITIVE TRADE POLICY MEASURES TOWARDS UKRAINE, MOLDOVA and GEORGIA . There may well be an increase in the illegal re-export of restricted goods to Russia .
 Belarus foreign trade data for January-June 2014 indicates substantial increases in imports from Moldova and Ukraine to Belarus .
 Moldovan trade statistics register a 37% increase in agri-food products to Belarus over this period . This is confirmed by Moldovan Trade statistics that register a37% increase.
Ukrainian trade data tell a contradictory story, with some decline in exports to Belarus . However, Ukrainian trade data show some decline to Belarus, according to the data .
 It is so far unclear whether these developments will lead to lasting changes in the customs union of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan .
 Russia's policies in these three cases lend themselves to the following general assessments . Conclusions Russia’s policies in this case lend themselves.
15 Evidently the crime committed by these three countries has been to refuse to join the Russian-led customs union and to sign instead the AAs/DCFTAs with the European Union .
 It is not credible that the technical conformity of products from these three countries should oscillate in correlation with Russian geopolitical postures .
 The technical agencies are performing political tasks dressed up as technical-scientific issues . The political agencies are also performing political-scientific tasks .
 This manipulation of technical standards is counter to WTO rules, which require that such trade restrictions be supported by transparent presentation to the trade partners of their scientific bases . This manipulation is counter-to WTO rules .
 Russia’s measures are already having a material impact, reducing trade flows with Russia and pushing the DCFTA states to make intensified marketing efforts in the EU and other world markets .
 Russia has accumulated reputational negatives as a trade partner . This is likely to lead to enduring changes in trade structures, according to a report .
 The redirection of trade flows towards the EU has to overcome the strict technical standards that apply . The EU must overcome the technical standards.
 These standards are strict in a proper technical sense, and are administered free of political intervention . The standards are not political intervention, but are free of politics .
 Exporters from these three countries have to make big efforts in quality upgrading and branding of their products to succeed in this diversification . Exporators from these countries have been making big efforts to improve their products .
 Russia has free trade agreements with Ukraine and Moldova under the aegis of the CIS dating from 2011 . Most trade is duty-free, and Georgia a free trade agreement that dates back to 1994 is still legally in force .
 Russia and other members of the customs union can suspend free trade preferences in the event that they damage, or threaten to damage, Russian economic interests . The newer CIS agreements contain an Annex 6, which allows Russia and others to suspend freetrade preferences .
 EU exports to Russia have largely consisted of high value branded products that could not suddenly become ‘made in Ukraine’
 ‘threats’ of damage can be of the most subjective and speculative nature, and for this reason they have to be proved if invoked under the WTO Safeguards Agreement . ‘ Threats of damage’ can be ‘definitely’
 Ukraine and Russia agreed to postpone the ‘provisional application’ of large parts of the AA/DCFTA by Ukraine .
 Russia agreed not to go ahead with revoking its CIS Free Trade Agreement . In exchange Russia agreed to not to revoking the agreement .
 Russia explicitly says it will take a decision on this point as soon as Ukraine may start to implement the DCFTA . Putin apparently followed up on 17 September in a letter to Poroshenko that any measure taken in the meantime would trigger immediate retaliation .
 The full implications of the decision to delay the provisional application of the Association Agreement and DCFTA by a year are not yet evident . The decision is not yet yet evident.
 The concession once pocketed by Russia is abusively reinterpreted and followed up by pressure for yet further concessions . What initially was seen as a low-cost cooperative gesture by the EU and Ukraine, now appears more like an act of appeasement .
 The EU Council was only empowered to agree to make a proposal to the Council . This raises the question whether the EU Council should adopt the 12 September trilateral meeting .
Free trade versus customs union has led to the conflict, says the paper . The paper should not conclude without due reflection on the gravity of the conflict .
 Yanukovich's reneging on signing the AA/DCFTA with the EU under pressure from the Kremlin was the trigger for the Ukrainian civil tensions that were tragically exacerbated by Russia’s inter-state aggression against Ukraine .
 Russia’s forcing a choice between free trade with the EU and the Russian-led customs union was a totally unnecessary and economically disadvantageous construction .
 It is perfectly possible for the common neighbours to have high quality free trade with both the EU and Russia . It is also possible for both countries to have free trade between them .
 The mantra from Moscow that ‘they have to choose’ is not warranted as either an economic or political proposition . The mantra can only be read as a unilateral statement of crude realpolitik .
 For Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, their political and economic interests in having good trade relations with both the EU and Russia are clear and rational . For Ukraine and Moldova, they are absolutely clear andrational .
 The EU would surely welcome these countries having high quality CIS Free Trade Agreements with Russia and its customs union .
 Putin’s calamitous choice was not only to make the customs union issue a litmus test, but also to escalate the conflict around it with propaganda and military intervention to the point of war, with tragic consequences .
 Centre for European Policy Studies is widely recognised as the most experienced and authoritative think tank operating in the EU today .
 CEPS acts as a leading forum for debate on EU affairs, distinguished by its strong in-house research capacity . CEPS has an extensive network of partner institutes throughout the world .