 March 18, 2014 was a day of triumph for Vladimir Putin, the sixty-one-year-old president of Russia . He was then serving his third term in that office .
 The Russian president asked the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation to pass a law annexing the Crimea . George’s Hall of the Kremlin is a venue for meeting foreign delegations and holding most solemn ceremonies of state .
 The reaction of the audience, which greeted the speech more than once with explosive applause, left no doubt that the law would be passed without delay .
 Only three days later, the Federal Assembly declared Crimea to be part of Russia . The Crimea was declared part of the Russian Federation .
 He referred to the disintegration of the Soviet Union as an expropriation of Russia . He repeatedly called the Crimea a Russian land and Sevastopol a Russian city .
 He claimed Crimea had as much right to secede from Ukraine as Ukraine had to secee from Russia . He claimed that the Crimea had the right to leave Ukraine .
 The annexation of the Crimea opened a new page in the post-Soviet history of Ukraine and Russia alike . The annexation is the first time Crimea has been annexed .
 The former imperial power was back, not only using its virtual monopoly on the supply of oil and gas but also its military power to redraw the map of the region and rewrite the history of the Soviet collapse . It was followed by Russian intervention in eastern Ukraine, where Russian mercenaries, volunteers
 It now proceeded to the direct annexation of the territory of a sovereign state . The annexation is now part of the sovereign state. It is the first time the territory has been taken over by the government .
 Ukraine in the midst of the most severe East-West crisis since the end of the Cold War . In 1991, Ukraine found itself at the center of a dramatic transformation of Soviet post-space .
 For Ukraine, Russian aggression raised questions about its continuing existence as a united state, its independence as a nation, and the democratic foundations of its political institutions .
 Ukraine's nation building project includes role of history, ethnicity, language, and culture in forging of Ukraine's political nation .
 Most of the Ukrainian population answered all these questions in the affirmative . Most of Ukraine's population answered the questions in affirmative .
 The events leading up to what became known as the “Ukraine Crisis of 2014 began in February 2010 . Viktor Yanukovych was the main target of the Maidan protests of 2004, Yanukovych .
 The new president began his tenure by changing the rules of the political game . The president has been in office since 2009 .
 His ideal was a strong authoritarian regime . He tried to concentrate as much power in his own hands and those of his family as possible .
 He rewrote the constitution by forcing parliament to cancel the 2004 amendments and yield more power to the presidency . The constitution was rewrote by the former president in 2004 .
 Yulia Tymoshenko was put on trial and then jailed in the summer of 2011 . That was followed by the imprisonment of his main political opponent, YuliaTymoshenko, who was jailed in 2011 .
 Yanukovych's appointees focused their attention on the enrichment of the ruling clan . With power concentrated in his hands and the political opposition silenced or intimidated, Yanukovych and his appointees focus their attention.
 Yanukovych and his family and entourage accumulated huge fortunes, transferring up to $70 billion into foreign accounts . By the autumn of 2013, the state found itself on the verge of default .
 Ukrainian society once again pinned its hopes on Europe. With the opposition crushed or coopted, Ukrainian society pinned its hope on Europe again .
 Ukraine had begun negotiations with the European Union on an association agreement . The agreement includes the creation of a free economic zone and visa liberalization for Ukrainian citizens .
 The hope was that, once signed, the agreement would save and strengthen Ukraine’s democratic institutions, protect the rights of the opposition .
 The EU association agreement was supported by some oligarchs who feared the growing power of the president and his clan . They wanted to protect their assets by establishing political and economic rules .
 Big business also wanted access to European markets and dreaded being swallowed by its Russian competitors if Ukraine were to join the projected Russia-led Customs Union .
 Everything was ready for signing ceremony at the EU summit in Vilnius scheduled for November 28, 2013 . The signing ceremony is expected to take place at the European Union summit .
 Ukrainian government suddenly changed course, proposing to postpone signing of document . But then, a week before summit, the Ukrainian government changed course .
 If European leaders were disappointed, many Ukrainian citizens were outraged . Many Ukrainian citizens are outraged. If the European leaders are disappointed, they are outraged .
 Official promises to the country’s citizens given throughout the previous year had been broken . hopes for a better European future were dashed .
Men and women camped out on the Maidan, Ukraine’s independence square, on the evening of November 21 . The government announced its refusal to sign the agreement .
 Yanukovych's aides wanted to put an end to the protests as soon as possible in order to head off a new Orange Revolution . Yanukovych’s aides also wanted to end the protests by end of the protests .
 On the night of November 30, riot police brutally attacked the students camping on the Maidan . The students were camping in the city's capital, Maidan.
 More than half a million Kyivans poured into downtown Kyiv, turning the Maidan and its environs into a space of freedom from the corrupt government and its police forces .
 What had begun as a demand to join Europe turned into the Revolution of Dignity . It brought together diverse political forces, from liberals in mainstream parties to radicals and nationalists .
 In mid-January, after weeks of peaceful protest, bloody clashes began between police and government-hired thugs on the one hand .
 In three days, at least 77 people were killed. 9 police officers and 68 protesters were killed .
 The killings caused a sea-change both in Ukraine and in the international community .
 The threat of international sanctions forced the Ukrainian parliament to pass a resolution prohibiting the use of force by the government . Many feared that the sanctions would affect them as well .
 President Yanukovych fled Kyiv on February 21, with parliament against him and the riot police gone from downtown Kyiv . Yanukovych fled revolutionary Kyiv.
 The Ukrainian parliament voted to remove Yanukovych, appoint an interim president, and install a new provisional government . The new government will be headed by the leaders of the opposition .
 The protests in Kyiv surprised political observers, as they presented an unusual case of mass mobilization inspired by issues of foreign policy .
 The protesters wanted closer ties with Europe and opposed Ukraine’s accession to the Russia-led economic union .
 Russian aspirations to dominate Ukraine were an important factor in the protests on the Maidan . Russia was an important part of the protests in Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin had led the Russian government since 2000, first as president, then as prime minister, and again as president . Putin had gone on record characterizing the collapse of the USSR as the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century .
 Putin proclaimed the reintegration of post-Soviet space as one of his primary tasks in 2012 . Putin returned to the presidential office in 2012.
 Putin wanted Yanukovych to join the Russia-led Customs Union . The union is the basis for a more comprehensive economic and political union of the post-Soviet states .
 Yanukovych made concessions to Russia by prolonging the Russian lease of the Sevastopol navy base for 20 years . He was not eager to join any Russia-led union .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is preparing to sign an agreement with the European Union . He has been trying to counterbalance growing Russian influence and ambition with the EU .
 Russia responded in the summer of 2013 by closing its markets to some Ukrainian goods . Russia responded to a trade war with Ukraine and closed its markets in Ukraine .
 The promise of a $15 billion loan to save the cash-strapped and corruption-ridden Ukrainian government from imminent default .
 The first tranche of that money was delivered once Yanukovych refused to sign the EU association agreement . The first Tranche was delivered when Yanukovych refused the EU agreement .
 The protests on the Maidan and the ouster of Yanukovych changed the Kremlin’s plans . But the protests on Maidan changed the Putin's plans .
 On February 27, 2014, Russian commandos in unmarked uniforms left the Russian navy base in Sevastopol and took control of the Crimean parliament . The Crimean parliament was taken into control by the Russian military .
 Russian intelligence services engineered the installment as the new prime minister of the Crimea . The new leader of a pro-Russian party had obtained only 4 percent of the vote in the previous parliamentary elections .
 Russian troops, along with mercenaries and Cossack formations brought from the Russian Federation, blocked Ukrainian military units at their bases with the assistance of locally recruited militias . Then Russian troops and mercenaries blocked Ukrainian troops, and local militias .
 Kremlin sped up preparations for a complete takeover of the peninsula by hastily organizing a referendum on its fate . New Ukrainian government struggled to take control of police and security forces previously loyal to Yanukovych .
 The new government of the Crimea cut off Ukrainian television channels, prevented the delivery of Ukrainian newspapers to subscribers, and unleashed propaganda for the separation of Crimea from Ukraine . The Crimea government cut off Ukraine's TV channels, and banned Ukrainian newspapers .
 Many of the Crimean Tatar minority were intimidated or kidnapped . Opponents of the referendum, many of them belonging to the Crimean minority, were intimidated .
 In mid-March 2014, the citizens of the Crimea were called to polling stations to vote for reunification with Russia .
 The results of the Moscow-endorsed referendum were reminiscent of Brezhnev-era polls, when the turnout was reported as 99 percent . The same figure was given for the percentage of voters supporting government candidates .
 97 percent of voters supported unification of Crimea with Russia, it was claimed .
 The total turnout was declared to be 83 percent, but according to the Human Rights Council . Less than 40 percent of registered voters had taken part in the referendum .
 The Ukrainian government in Kyiv did not recognize the referendum but was in no position to do much about it . The Ukraine government did not recognise the referendum .
 It ordered its troops to withdraw from the peninsula, unwilling to risk war in a country still divided by the political turmoil of the Revolution of Dignity .
 The Ukrainian army had been underfunded for decades and had no experience of warfare . The well-trained and equipped troops of the Russian Federation had fought a prolonged war in Chechnia and mounted the Russian invasion of Georgia .
 Kyiv was also busy trying to stop Moscow’s destabilization of other parts of the country .
 The Kremlin demands the “federalization’ of Ukraine, with the provision that every region has veto power over the signing of international agreements . The Kremlin demanded the ‘federalized” of Ukraine .
 Russia did not just want the Crimea but was trying to stop Ukraine’s movement toward Europe by manipulating local elites and populations in the east and south of the country .
 If Ukraine refused to follow the Russian “federalization’s scenario, there was another option . The partition of the country could turn eastern and southern Ukraine into a new buffer state .
 A Russian-controlled polity called New Russia was supposed to include Kharkiv, Luhansk, Donetsk, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhia, Mykolaiv, Kherson, and Odesa oblasts .
 In April 2014 only 15 percent of the population of the projected New Russia supported unification with Russia, while 70 percent were opposed .
 30 percent of those polled supported unification with Russia, and low in Dnipropetrovsk oblast, where supporters of Russia accounted for less than 7 percent of the population .
 It was from the Donbas that Russian intelligence agencies began the destabilization of the rest of Ukraine in April 2014 . The Donbas is the area where Russian intelligence agency began destabilization .
 The Donbas also stood out as one of the most economically and socially troubled regions of Ukraine . The region is one of Ukraine's most socially and economically troubled regions .
 Donetsk, the main regional center, was the only major city outside the Crimea where ethnic Russians constituted a plurality . Donetsk, Ukraine's main city, is home to 48 percent of the population .
 Many citizens of the Donbas were attached to Soviet ideology and symbols . monuments to Lenin were largely demolished in central Ukraine in the course of the revolution .
Paramilitary units often trained and financed by Russia showed up in the Donbas in April 2014 . Paramilitary units were often trained by Russia .
 The Donbas is an appanage principality under the flag of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics . Rinat Akhmetov is a business partner of the ousted President Yanukovych and Ukraine's richest oligarch .
 Russian nationalists and local activists launched an anti-oligarchic revolution . They miscalculated, and by the end of May had lost control of the region to Russian nationalists .
 People in Donetsk were fed up with corruption, but many in the Donbas oriented itself on Russia, not Europe . Many hoped not for a corruption-free market economy, but for a Soviet-era state-run economy .
Pro-Russian insurgents imagined themselves as participants in a broader ‘Russian World’ and their war as a defense of Orthodox values against the advance of the corrupt European West .
 The loss of Crimea and the turmoil in the Donbas, as well as Russian efforts to destabilize the situation in Kharkiv and Odesa, led to a new mobilization of Ukrainian civil society .
 Tens of thousands of Ukrainians joined army units as well as new volunteer formations and went to fight the Russia-led insurgency in the east .
 volunteer organizations sprang up all over Ukraine, collecting donations, buying supplies and delivering them to the front lines . The government was able to supply the soldiers only with weapons .
Ukrainian society was taking up the task that the Ukrainian state was not in a position to perform . Ukrainian society was taken up the role that the state was in a role to perform.
 Between January and March 2014, the share of those who supported Ukrainian independence jumped from 84 percent to 90 percent of the adult population . The Kyiv International Institute of Sociology released data from January to March .
 Share of those who wanted Ukraine to join Russia fell from 10 percent in January 2014 to 5 percent in September . The share of those wanting to join Ukraine fell to 10 percent last year .
 Even most of those polled in the Donbas see their region as part of the Ukrainian state .
 The percentage of “separatists’ wanting either independence or union with Russia grew from under 30 percent to more than 40 percent between April and September 2014 . Most pro European Ukrainians hope of retaining those territories, but also pointing to future problems in forming a common national identity .
 Petro Poroshenko is one of Ukraine’s most prominent businessmen and an active participant in the Maidan protests . In May 2014, voters gave a first-round victory to the forty-nine-year-old.
 Ukraine is ready to stand up to both open and covert aggression . Ukraine was ready to fight back against the ouster of Yanukovych .
 Russia began to supply the insurgents with new armaments, including anti-aircraft missiles . In a desperate attempt to stop the Ukrainian advance, Russia started to supply them with new arms .
 The victims came from the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia, Indonesia, Britain and other countries . The Ukrainian conflict is a truly global character .
 The tragedy of the Malaysian airliner mobilized Western leaders in support of Ukraine . It led them to impose economic sanctions on Russian officials and businesses directly responsible for the aggression .
 Moscow sent regular troops into battle along with mercenaries in mid-August . Russian-backed separatist republics found themselves on the verge of defeat .
 The Kremlin saved the self-proclaimed republics from collapse but failed to realize its original plan of creating a New Russia . The New Russia would be a Russian-controlled polity extending from Donetsk to Odesa in the west .
 Russia also failed to stop Ukraine from enhancing its political and economic ties with the West . Russia also fails to stop the country from enhancing it's political and financial ties with West .
 The war in eastern Ukraine turned into a prolonged conflict with no end in sight . Ukraine refuses to accept any loss of its territory or give up its goal of political, economic, and cultural integration with the West .
 By early 2015, more than 5,000 lives had been killed and more than 10,000 wounded . More than one million people had to flee their homes in the Donbas .
 The unrecognized Donbas republics began their descent into the political, economic, and social abyss of a frozen conflict . About five million people found themselves trapped in no man's land .
 At stake for Ukraine and most of its people in the current conflict are democracy, human rights, and rule of law . But at stake for Ukrainian people are the values that they associate with the European Union .
 Also at stake is the independence of their country and the right of its citizens to make their own choices regarding its domestic and foreign policy . The right of citizens is also at stake.
For centuries, such values and ideas have inspired people all over the world to pursue freedom for themselves and their nations . For centuries, these values have inspired others to pursue their own freedoms .
 The outcome of the current war cannot be foreseen, but it is certain to transform Ukraine in more ways than one .
 Russian aggression sought to divide Ukrainians along linguistic, regional, and ethnic lines . Russian aggression seeks to divide Ukrainian people along linguistic and regional lines .
 Ukrainian society united around the idea of a multilingual and multicultural nation united in administrative and political terms . While that tactic succeeded in some places, most of Ukrainian society did not .
 Ukraine's history of internal divisions is based on a tradition of coexistence of different languages, cultures, and religions over the centuries .