 The Helsinki process, formally titled the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, traces its origin to the signing of the Helsinki Final Act in Finland on August 1, 1975 . The conference was held in the United States and Canada .
 As of January 1, 1995, the Helsinki process was renamed the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The membership of the OSCE has expanded to 56 participating States, including the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia .
 The OSCE Secretariat is in Vienna, Austria, where weekly meetings of the participating States’ permanent representatives are held . The meeting is held in the Austrian capital .
 specialized seminars and meetings are convened in various locations . In addition, specialized seminars are held in different locations .
 Periodic consultations are held among Senior Officials, Ministers and Heads of State or Government .
 The Organization is focused on initiatives designed to prevent, manage and resolve conflict within and among the participating States . The OSCE continues to engage in standard setting in the fields of military security, economic and environmental cooperation, and human rights and humanitarian concerns .
 The Organization deploys numerous missions and field activities located in Southeastern and Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia . The Organization is based in the Caucasus.
 The Commission consists of nine members from the United States Senate, nine from the House of Representatives . One member each from the Departments of State, Defense and Commerce .
 The positions of Chair and Co-Chair rotate between the Senate and House every two years, when a new Congress convenes . The positions are the same as that of the House of Representatives .
 The Commission gathers and disseminates relevant information to the United States Congress and the public by convening hearings .
 The Commission contributes to the formulation and execution of U.S. policy regarding the OSCE . The Commission also contributes to member and staff participation on OSCE meetings .
 Members of the Commission have regular contact with parliamentarians, government officials, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and private individuals from participating States .
 Jonas Wechsler, Senior Adviser, U.S. Department of State, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe . He is a senior adviser to the United States.
 Ivanna Bilych, Co-Founder and President of VOLYA Institute for Contemporary Law and Society, is co-founder of the Ukrainian American Bar Association . Andriy Klymenko, Chief Editor of Black Sea News, Economist, Bohdan Yaremenko and
 Russia's forcible and illegal occupation of Ukraine's sovereign territory of Crimea in March 2014 resulted in a deplorable human rights situation . Russia’s forcible occupation of Crimea has resulted in other serious consequences .
 Changes in government and legal framework in Crimea following the attempted annexation have had a toxic impact on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
 Violations of civil, political, social, economic and cultural rights are widespread, especially against those who oppose Russian occupation, including Crimean Tatars .
 Crimea has not been in the news all that much lately, certainly not compared to the months immediately following Russia’s occupation .
 This egregious act of aggression stands in flagrant violation of both bilateral Russian/Ukrainian and numerous international agreements and international law . Now, this egregious act is in violation of several international agreements, international law.
 The international community has not recognized the attempted annexation . The International community has been unable to recognize the attempt .
Both the U.S. and Congress have addressed the Russian occupation of Crimea in various ways, including through legislation and through sanctions .
 Vice President Biden repeatedly vowed that the United States will never recognize Russia’s occupation of Crimea .
 The Helsinki Commission has addressed this issue, repeatedly stressing that Russia’s invasion and subsequent behavior has violated not one, not two, but all ten core OSCE principles enshrined in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act .
 The resolution passed by a substantial margin, despite fierce Russian opposition . The resolution was approved by a large margin .
 A follow-up to Senator Cardin’s resolution of 2014, which also passed despite Russian opposition, also passed .
 Russia and its proxies continue to flaunt the Minsk agreements, or to the humanitarian crisis that has resulted from Russia’s aggression, or for that matter, the whole issue of combating corruption, Ukraine's greatest internal threat .
 Crimea people suffer under Russian misrule. But it’s important for us not to forget what is also happening to the people of Crimea .
 Four experts, including three who reside in Ukraine, to help shine that light . We're very pleased to have with us today. So we’re very pleased with them.
 Some have said Crimea is the peninsula’s colonization and militarization . The peninsula has been accused of the peninsula's colonization.
 Russian human rights abuses have been reported in the past. And we’ll also hear directly from someone who himself has been a direct victim of Russian rights abuses .
 Jonas Wechsler is a State Department senior adviser at the Helsinki Commission . He is also a senior adviser to the State Department in Helsinki . He will be introduced by his colleague Jonas WeChsler .
 The Case of Crimea was prepared by an international team of lawyers that was led by her and supported by the VOLYA Institute and the Ukrainian American organization Razom .
 Ivanna's briefing was really her brainchild. Let me at the outset thank Ivanna as this briefing wasreally her brain child .
 Ivanna and Bohdan Pechenyak are both at the U.N. on Wednesday .
 She represented Viktor Smalyy, an attorney prosecuted hy the former regime, the Yanukovych regime, in Ukraine . She represented him as an attorney .
 She’s a former hoard memher and general counsel of Razom . She's a co-founder and president of the relatively newly established VOYLA Institute .
 He’s chairman of the board of the Ukrainian nonprofit organization Maidan for Foreign Affairs . He is also the head of the Ukraine's Maidan For Foreign Affairs organization .
 Andriy Klymenko is the chief editor of Black Sea News and a prominent economist . He is originally from Crimea and is a prominent Crimean economist .
 He was fortunate to escape the persecution of self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities .
 Report was produced on the first anniversary of the Crimean invasion back in March . The report was produced in March.
 Yuriy Yatsenko is an activist of the Revolution of Dignity . He was illegally imprisoned in Russia on political grounds in May 2014 .
After refusing to cooperate with the Russian FSB, he suffered brutal torture and criminal prosecution . After his refusal to cooperate, he was tortured and prosecuted .
 He was released after a year imprisonment thanks to the coordinated work of a lawyer, human rights organizations and international pressure . He was sentenced to a year in prison .
 Yuriy Yatsenko became a speaker of the Let My People Go campaign . He was the first rescued person from the list of Ukrainian nationals persecuted on political grounds in the Russian Federation .
 The Helsinki Commission is hosting a very important roundtable . I am deeply grateful to Helsinki Commission, its leadership and our moderator, Orest Deychakiwsky .
 Even as a 10-year-old child growing up in Soviet Ukraine, I always knew of the Helsinki Commission .
 Back then I could not possibly know what exactly it did, but I knew it was something bigger than I could possibly comprehend back then . Back then, back then, I could no longer comprehend what exactly happened .
 It stands for democracy and human rights, rule of law and simply, morally, morally the right thing . It is for democracy, human rights and rule of Law .
William Allen White said that “Wherever a free man is in chains, we are threatened also.’s words of one of the greatest men, William Allen White .
 Franklin Roosevelt once said that “Freedom means the supremacy of human rights everywhere.’
 Our support goes to those who struggle to gain those rights and keep them . Our support comes from those who are trying to keep those rights .
Coauthors for their outstanding work and dedication to human rights, international law, global peace and security . Thank you to the esteemed coauthors.
 I would like to extend my sincere and deepest gratitude to a very special woman who couldn’t attend today . I would be grateful for the woman who could not attend today.
 David Glasgow is assistant director for the Public Interest Law Center . He has been in charge for more than 20 years . He is also the director of the Public interest Law Center.
 Matthew Mosner and Ethan Burger have been working on a new book for the next season . The book is being written in New York City, New York, for the first time . The first book is due to be published in September .
 The second edition of the second edition has been published . The first edition of this edition was published in September 2013 . It was the first time we had a second edition since the first edition .
VolYA Institute's second edition of the report was published in 2012 . It is the first edition of this year's edition . The second edition will be published in 2013 .
 The Razom partners presented their support and understanding of the importance of the issues presented today . Razom's partners thanked them for their support.
 A year ago, at a different venue in the United Nations, we gathered to discuss the legal dimensions of Russian actions in Ukraine . We also discussed the occupation of Crimea and its illegal attempts to annex the Ukrainian territory .
 Russian Federation continues to occupy sovereign Ukrainian territory in Crimea . To this day, the Russian Federation has violated international law by illegal seizing the Ukrainian peninsula .
 The Russian Federation in Ukraine has been accused of violating Ukraine's sovereignty . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin has called for a resolution to restore Ukraine's sovereign territory . Putin says the Russian Federation's actions have been illegal .
 The practice of human rights in occupied Crimea is dire and continues to deteriorate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the practice is "deteriorating"
Every day, Ukrainian citizens in occupied Crimea face unprecedented oppression and limitations of their rights . Every day, Ukraine citizens inoccupied Crimea face oppression and limited rights .
 Serious and consistent violations of the civil, political, social, social and cultural rights of Crimeans have been well documented by a variety of organizations .
 The illegitimate, self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities target those ethnic, religious and national groups that oppose the occupation .
 Indigenous Crimean Tatars are frequently suspected of anti-Russian activity . They are often suspected of this sort of broadly defined anti- Russian activity .
 The purpose of the report is to assist individuals in Crimea, Ukraine, as well as around the world . The purpose is to help people in Crimea to understand the nature of the human 4 rights violations .
 We analyzed the human rights situation in occupied Crimea . It placed it within the context of applicable international standards, conventions and treaties . It also included specific abuses by self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities .
 The authors examined the historical and legal context, defined the primary rights that are being violated . They also gave recommendations on what steps people in Crimea can take .
 Crimea's transfer in 1954 to the so called March 16, 2015 referendum to unify with the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation’s use of force to occupy Crimea in 2014, post World War international agreements and treaties on state sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 We outlined and examined 21 distinct human rights that are provided by the international and domestic laws . We examined 21 different human rights provided by international and Domestic laws .
 We analyzed each right individually with respect to international, Ukrainian and Russian law . We analyzed every right individually .
 The report focuses on civil, political rights, social, economic and cultural rights . The report was released on Tuesday .
 We discussed suggested remedies for individuals whose human rights have been violated, suppressed, encroached or otherwise denied . We discussed the suggested remedies.
General and specific remedies include the use of international and Ukrainian and Russian Federation legal instruments . The general andspecific remedies include use of International andUkrainian and Russian legal instruments.
 We concluded the Russian Federation’s illegal occupation and attempted annexation of Crimea has created a continuous stream of human rights violations . The Russian Federation's illegal occupation has created an ongoing stream of violations, we concluded .
 The Russian Federation fails to comply with its obligations as an occupying power . Russian Federation failed to comply as an occupied power .
 Ukrainian government is not paying enough attention to the human rights abuses in Crimea, Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has not been paying enough Attention to the abuses .
 Remedies applying international law are not always available to victims with limited resources due to complex procedures, limited jurisdiction and lengthy proceedings . Remedying applying international laws is not always possible to victims .
 Our findings demonstrate the insufficiency of existing remedies for human rights violations . Our findings are based on the current system of human rights protection with respect to Crimeans .
 The following recommendations are for those entities that can help ensure human rights enforcement and protection in Crimea . The following recommendation is for those organizations that can assist in the Crimea .
 We address the Ukrainian government, the self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian Federation’s authorities, the international community and NGOs and civil society advocates on ground .
 Existing national and international remedies are ineffective against such massive human rights violations as are occurring in Crimea, Crimea . Existing international and national remedies are not effective against the violations .
 Self-proclaimed Russian Federation’s authorities deny responsibility and Ukrainian Government claim the lack of ability and resources to respond properly .
 For this reason, the concerted efforts of governments and institutions worldwide are critical, says the author .
 Human rights organizations have reported extensively on human rights violations in Crimea . They have recommended ways to address those issues .
 In addition to the recommendations published on April 15, 2014, we huilt up and extend it to an additional 61 recommendations . The recommendations were published in April 2014 .
 Ukraine, self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities, international community and civil society and activists will prompt a solution . Ukraine's human rights desire and support for unitary, sovereign country, Ukraine's territorial integrity and democracy .
 Ukraine continues to work closely with the United Nations and other states and the international community to ensure Russia's troop withdrawal from Crimea and from the eastern Ukraine border .
 We ask the addressees of our recommendations to work on these recommendations and tasks according to their respective roles, responsibilities, goals and objectives .
 The Ukrainian Government is advised to implement the recommended measures . The Ukrainian government has been told to implement recommended measures.
 The international community is encouraged to assist and monitor, and civil society to demand implementation of the measures and monitor the implementation . The International community is urged to help and monitor.
 The self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities should comply with international law, according to the U.S.
 A special international tribunal would help Crimeans store information about human rights abuses or just sensitive information . We suggest several key recommendations .
Coming back from Brussels and Strasbourg, we found out that something similar like that exists regarding Chechnya .
 A crucial part of this report is a Human Rights Protection Guide . We translated it into Ukrainian language, Grimean Tatar and Russian languages . The manual is designed to help residents of Crimea take steps to improve their current situation .
 Crimea people in Crimea are economically deprived and legally underserved, we conclude . They often know little about their rights and are unable to demand their application .
 The aim of the manual is to provide Crimeans of all ethnic and religious backgrounds with access to justice by explaining their rights .
 The manual includes a directory of Ukrainian international and Crimean human rights organizations where they can report and seek advice .
Ukrainian government says its recommendations are directed towards the state-building and having a true democracy and building a true democratic and prosperous Ukraine .
 John Prendergast said that the biggest roadblock to action on genocide and other human rights crimes is ignorance . He said: “The biggest road block to action is ignorance.
 Russia’s actions are striking at the heart of international law and order and the principles and values that helped to prevent war since World War Second . Russia's actions have been described as 'unprecedented' in the world .
 Ukraine has been in occupied Crimea since Crimea was occupied by Ukraine in March 2014 . Ukraine is now in the Crimea region of Crimea . Crimea is the region of Ukraine in Crimea, Crimea is in Crimea .
 The report was an overview of quite a comprehensive report. As you could see, that was a quite comprehensive report . It was published by the World Economic Forum .
 A manual, a practical manual, is a useful guide to hoth recommendations and a hoth recommendation . It's especially useful in that it's action-oriented in terms of hoth Recommendations and a manual .
 Bohdan Yaremenko is the next speaker for our next speaker . Yaremanko is a former speaker for CNN.com .
 It’s a great honor for me to he to he here and to address this outstanding congressional body . It's a great honour for him to be there and toaddress this outstanding Congress body .
 The only Ukrainian institutions that summarized the picture of the aggression and published the comprehensive Crimea regain strategy . It is still the only one existing in Ukraine and it was done last year .
 The situation in Crimea and eastern Ukraine is directly connected and should be kept in the same frame for political analysis . We are convinced the situation in the Crimea and east Ukraine is linked .
 The picture will still be incomplete without analyzing the Russian intervention into Ukraine, aside of what is happening in Transnistria, Moldova, Abkhazia and Georgia .
 The issue of human rights in Ukraine and in particular in the occupied Crimea should not and cannot be properly addressed without broader overview of the political, military, security, economic and social situation .
 Andriy Klymenko will cover the general issues in order to allow his friend and colleague to concentrate fully on the issues of the human rights .
Political preferences of the inhabitants of Crimea were not the reason for occupation and illegal annexation of the Crimean Peninsula . So political preferences of Crimea's inhabitants were not a reason for the annexation of Crimea .
 The local parliament elected in the year 2012 included only three deputies out of 100, who represented the pro-Russian movements and organizations .
Fear was an additional factor to reinforce the overall concerns of the citizens. This fear was an added factor to reinforcing the overall fears of the residents .
 The main propaganda messages, directed towards the citizens of Ukraine from the Russian side, covered the issues of the quality of life and quality of government .
 The media has created the illusion of greater efficiency of the Russian authorities compared to Ukrainian ones compared to the Ukrainian ones . The media also created an illusion of the readiness of the state to ensure the better socioeconomic life conditions without any efforts made by the citizens of Ukraine .
 First, presence of Russian citizens, including military personnel from the intelligence agency, are Russian citizens .
 Together with the pro-Russian activists among the local residents and citizens of Ukraine, they organized rallies, fights, massive disturbances, violent confrontations with patriotic, pro-Ukrainian citizens .
 Second, a premeditated escalation used as an excuse for creation of the self-defense units . Both local residents and Russian citizens infiltrated specifically for such purposes .
 Three, in eastern Ukraine, seized administrative buildings and paralyzed the activity of the state bodies . In some cases, the actions supported anti-state actions, according to the Ukrainian government .
Self-defense units were a cover-up that was covering the covert operation of the Russian army . In Crimea, the self-defense unit was in charge of the special forces .
 The Ukrainian government seized the government agencies and blocked military bases of the Ukrainian army . They were the ones who seized the governmental agencies .
 Four, establishment of the pseudo government that took over the responsibility of the management over the occupied territories .
 The mentioned pseudo government imitated freedom of expression which was used as the justification of the expansion and explanation of the aggression . The mentioned Pseudo Government imitatedfreedom of expression .
 The inability and unwillingness of legitimate authorities to take matters for quick and decisive suppression of those trends were regarded as weaknesses . The attempt to calm down the protesters or aggressors were considered as weaknesses.
 Corruption, common business interests of the local and central authorities’ representatives with the relevant public and private bodies of the aggressor state were actively used as the mechanism to influence the political will for resistance and defense .
 The annexation of Crimea has become the first case of the invasion of territory in Europe since the Second World War . Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine since the end of the war .
 The national situation calls into question the existence of international law and the effectiveness of international security guarantees . The situation threatens the existing world order .
 The “hot face’ of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine is still ongoing. The ‘hot face of the conflict’ is still underway, according to the Ukrainian military .
 The so called Minsk agreements do not function as the ceasefire mechanism, at least as an effective mechanism, according to the U.S.
 Russia is effectively used by Russia as a tool of pressure on negotiating parties. They are effectively used to pressure parties to negotiate .
 The occupied areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions suffered from the large-scale destruction of the infrastructure and residential buildings resulting from the combat operations .
 An industrial infrastructure was particularly destroyed, plundered and transported to Russia . The industrial infrastructure is particularly destroyed .
 Defense enterprises were completely dismantled and transported to Russia . In particular, defense enterprises were totally dismantled .
 The current condition of the industrial infrastructure does not allow to predict the possibility of the restoration of the pre-war regional economy structure and the social structure of the population .
 About 2. million people, about the third of the overall number of inhabitants, became forced migrants and refugees . The most educated and active part of the society, mainly the most educated, became refugees .
 Prospects for resolving the situation in the east of Ukraine are uncertain . The problem of the specific areas of Donetsk and Lugansk region is uncertain .
About 40,000 people represented the most active and loyal citizens of Ukraine . In terms of displaced people and political fugitives from Crimea, about 40,00 people represented a majority .
 At the beginning of the Crimean occupation, the residents were fully satisfied with Ukrainian liberalism . Not satisfied with the quality of life, not satisfied with quality of government .
 Crimea residents have not received the improvement of the quality of government, it actually deteriorated . Residents of Crimea have lost Ukrainian legal liberalism .
 A phase of adaptation to the law of the occupying country is over, and the process of reclamation of the assets of the annexed territory is ongoing .
 The import of Russians, including the military personnel and their families, is still ongoing . Russian organized crime groups from the Northern Caucasian regions of Russia are still ongoing.
 The number of Russian immigrants in Sevastopol during the occupation was about 25,000 people or about 7 percent of the population .
 In the rest of Crimea, this rate is somewhat lower, 10,000 people or 0. percent of population . The rest of the Crimea, in Crimea, is about 0.% of population.
 The occupying authorities are developing Crimea mainly as a military base . Crimea has been occupied by the Crimean government for more than a decade .
 The number of troops is about 50,000 people, not including members of the security agencies or police .
The development process and increase of the military grouping has not yet been completed . The development process is not yet completed .
Number of Russian troops in Crimea can be increased to up to 100,000, 120,000 people, minister of defense of Russia says .
 The invaders turned the Crimea to a rehabilitation center for the militants fighting in the east of Ukraine .
 Training camps for training all the mercenaries later directed to fight against the armed forces of Ukraine in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions have been established in Crimea .
 Russia threatens both the southern regions of Ukraine and the existing Black Sea naval communications as well as the European countries — NATO member states, Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey . Russia has a powerful military base in Crimea .
 The road infrastructure in the occupied territories has been fully and largely destroyed because of the massive movement of heavy military vehicles, armored vehicles, battle tanks, so on . "The road infrastructure has been completely destroyed," says the author .
Intensive military building in Crimea led to accelerated destruction of roads. Intensive military buildings in Crimea.
 All programs of road construction of Russia in Crimea turned to be a usual patching work of a very poor quality .
 Without irrigation, agricultural soils lose fertility, while salinity is increasing . Without proper irrigation, the soils lose their fertility, and salinity increases .
 The unscrupulous extraction of the fresh underground water has led to the rise of the saline groundwater level in some areas . Kerch Peninsula has seen an increase of the soil salinity .
Military building in Bakchisarai area can lead to destruction of microclimate in the valleys .
About 200,000 jobs, primarily in tourism, restaurant and hotel business services, have been lost . The situation has developed in such a way that under systematic reduction of employment, according to our calculations .
 There are 2,000 vacancies of municipal officials in Crimea, as well as a large number of jobs in health care . There are also a number of health care jobs.
 Generally, it is difficult to fill the vacancies of ordinary employers in business structures .
Developments in eastern Ukraine are hard to predict because the “hot face of the conflict is still ongoing’s ‘hot face’ of the war .
 Russia as the state aggressor has sufficient resources to continue military actions. Russia has enough resources to continued military actions, Russia says . Russia as a state aggresser has sufficientresources to continue its military actions .
 Its probable political purposes in Ukraine and in Europe have not been achieved . It has not been successful in Ukraine or in Europe .
 The means of influence on Russia, such as international sanctions, are just beginning to influence the Russian economy . Russia's economy is being affected by international sanctions .
 The political will of the Russian Federation to continue their aggression is uncertain . But their duration in time is uncertain, according to the Russian government .
 In Crimea, the main trends affecting the current developments are as follows . The main trends are in Crimea, Crimea .
 First, the main priority is to develop the territory as the military base . The main priority for the territory is to developing the territory .
 Bulgaria, Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey are among the countries in the Black Sea region . The region is a key part of the European Union and NATO .
 Russia is not following for some time this international agreement . Change of the military balance is within the framework of the agreement on conventional forces in Europe .
 The possibility within the framework or the arrangements or the agreements in the field of the strategic nuclear weapons control is possible . The possibility in the framework is not clear .
 A persistent military threat to the entire southern coast of Ukraine with a purpose to implement the plan of setting up the land corridor between the Russian Federation, Crimea and Transnistria .
 Russian military presence in Syria and the consequent armed confrontation and civil war in that country . The Syrian conflict is the result of an armed confrontation with Russia .
 Further enforcement of the policy of forced loyalty towards the inhabitants of Crimea will lead to further violation of human rights, the pressure on the dissidents or disloyal groups or population .
 Implementation of strategic infrastructure building projects, like the bridge across the Kerch Strait, is a major project .
 The need to increase supply of building materials and equipment will lead to increased pressure on the road infrastructure and increased use of local natural resources, which in turn results in poor climatic balance .
 Second, lack of economic development strategy and lack of managerial human resources . Third, a lack of financial resources and a shortage of managerial resources .
 The set priority is to develop and support the larger companies mainly in the defense sector . The main focus is to support the smaller companies in the Defense sector .
 Increase of direct funding from the federal budget of Russia . Increase of the dependence on direct funding of the federal government .
 Redirection of the budget financial flows in Russia, financing deficits in other regions of the Russian Federation .
 Concealed contradictions and competition for obtaining funding between different regions of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation has been accused of corruption and corruption .
 Increase on prices, fewer choices for consumers, a lowering of the quality of food, increase of the social certification and increasing differences in living standards among the citizens .
Continuation of policy of excessive use of infrastructure and natural resources. Continuation of policies of excessive Use of infrastructure, resources .
 Three, continuation of the trends toward resettlements of the citizens with simultaneous degradation of democratic institutions, human rights and freedoms, increase of corruption criminalization of a daily life . Three, continues the trend of resettlement of citizens, according to the report .
 Ukraine is trying to create enforcement mechanisms to engage Russia in dialogue on the annexation of Crimea . Ukraine is going to greatly expand the policy of peninsula blockades .
 Ukraine will be working on the creation of mechanisms for establishing the communication with the population of Crimea . Ukraine will also be working to establish the definition of the legal status of the Crimea .
 Creation of the opportunities to exercise the rights and protect the interests of the citizens in the territory of Ukraine .
 Definition of the status of the self-government bodies of the Crimean Tatar people .
 Russia's illegal occupation of Crimea has been described as a 'human rights issue' Russia has been accused of human rights violations in the past .
 Mr Andriy Klymenko, editor in chief, The Black Sea News, is editor inChief .
 The Crimea annexation was noted by the specialized international bodies like Council of Europe or United States State Department . There were no significant human rights violations in Crimea prior to the annexation .
 There were no reports or any statements on the issue done by the Russian Federation .
 The existing problems in the field of the human rights were merely related to the underdeveloped, transitional, democratic or law enforcement system in Ukraine . The existing issues in the fields of human rights in Ukraine are related to Ukraine's transitional, transitional and democratic system .
 Ukraine citizens in temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea are deprived of a number of fundamental rights and technology possibility of their protection . International human rights organizations have drawn attention to their problems .
 Forcing citizens of Ukraine to join Russian citizenship is one of the tools for invasion of the occupied territory by Russia . Forcing Ukrainians to join Russia is a tool for invasion.
 The aggressor is implementing a large-scale program of forcing the residents of Crimea to loyalty . The aggressive program is being implemented in Crimea .
Potentially disloyal persons are considered to be first, journalists, civil activists, members of NCA . NCA's organizations and media were created prior to the occupation .
Third, ethnic Ukrainians, or persons of different ethnic origin with Ukrainian political identity . Third, religious leaders of the Ukrainian Orthodox church of Kyiv Patriarchate, Catholics, Greek Catholics, both Ukrainians and immigrants from Poland, Belarus and the Baltic states .
 The Crimean Tatars are put to systematic pressures as the most cohesive community that openly expressed its opposition to the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . The Tatars have been put to the systematic pressures.
 The number of secret service employees per capita in Crimea is three times higher than the similar rate for the rest of Russia . The number in Crimea was three times more than the same rate in Russia .
 Methods of their work are intimidation, total control of telephone calls, Internet communication and brainwashing through the media, they say . They are accused of separation of certain groups of citizens.
 Activists or citizens disloyal to Russia are called in for many-hours-long interrogations . Raids are carried out in the areas of compact settlement of the Crimean Tatars .
 Russia has developed a whole arsenal of intimidation methods in the republic of Ichkeria and other regions of the North Caucasus . The state authorities of Russia have developed an arsenal of intimidating methods .
 Crimea has declared trilingualism in Crimea . Russia, Ukrainian, Crimean Tatar is the language of the Crimea region .
 There are reported cases of public burning of books, schoolbooks, plates and inscriptions in the Ukrainian language in front of students .
 Russia makes efforts to establish information ghettos on the Crimean Peninsula in which citizens of Ukraine will be deprived of the opportunity to receive information from Ukraine . Russia is trying to establish ghetto on the peninsula in which residents of Ukraine are deprived of access to information .
 Ukrainian TV and radio channel broadcasting is complete cessation of broadcasting, disconnection of Ukrainian mobile operators and Internet service providers . These efforts include a complete cessation.
 All independent media maintaining pro-Ukrainian position ceased their existence and work in Crimea . Today, all independent media maintain pro- Ukrainian positions.
 They either disbanded or moved from Crimea to other regions of Ukraine . They either disband or move from Crimea or move to other areas .
 Ukrainian legislation did not require their registration, although they are equivalent to print media under the laws of the Russian Federation . This particularly has the impact on the online media since the law did not requirement their registration .
 As of today, the only propaganda media spread in Crimea has an openly pro-Russian orientation .
 The Russian Federation introduced the amendment to the criminal code which provides for a penalty of imprisonment from three to five years for disagreeing with the fact that Crimea belongs to Russia or for calls for its return to Ukraine .
 Public calls to commit actions aimed at violating the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation it’s called .
 Criminal procedures under the relevant article are initiated both against the citizens of Ukraine and the Ukrainian media that operates in the mainland Ukraine and are likely to be used for the persecution at the international level .
 The Russian authorities have eliminated the possibility of monitoring the compliance with human rights . Russian authorities eliminate the possibility.
International human rights organizations in occupied territories are not allowed to implement such monitoring . Independent international human rights groups in the occupied territories have not been allowed to do so .
 Russian authorities are actively working to organize visits of international delegations and media to Crimea for propaganda purposes . Instead, the authorities are trying to organize trips to Crimea to promote propaganda purposes.
 Actions of occupying power related to implementation of property rights are marred by massive violations of rules and practices accepted in the civilized world . Actions of the occupying power.
 There is a massive expropriation of all the state property of Ukraine in the territory of Crimea . It is called the “nationalization’ by the Russian propaganda .
 There are schemes of raider takeovers and changes in the company management board that have been implemented . However, there are schemes that have not been implemented by the company .
 The “Crimean self-defense’s’ units are used as a component of the forcible takeover in the course of such actions . The units are also used as part of the ‘crimean self defense’
 Such schemes are currently applied selectively to those owners who support the idea of territorial integrity of Ukraine and oppose the occupation . Such schemes have been applied selectively.
 The Q&A session is scheduled to take place on Tuesday night . The session will take place in New York City .
 Mr Klymenko. Thank you, very much, for your description of the truly deplorable human rights situation .
 Yuriy Yatsenko has been a prisoner of the FSB for a year . He has a very compelling personal story, and has been prisoner of FSB.
 I am Ukrainian citizen who was illegally arrested and detained by the Russian Federation for over a year for political reasons . I'm Ukrainian citizen. I am Ukraine citizen who has been illegally arrested by Russian Federation .
 Others who have suffered and continue to suffer the same fate are Nadia Savchenko, Oleh Sentsov and others of whom you probably have never heard .
 I was arrested in May 2014 in Kursk region of the Russian Federation, where I traveled together with my friend on a business trip . I was detained in May 2013 in the same region, where he was arrested .
 I was detained by the police during a routine document check that the Russian police often practice . The Russian police are known to practice the routine check .
An agent of FSB, Russian Federal Security Service, showed to me a photograph of himself taken during Euromaidan protests . He said he had found the photo on social media, which he suspects was posted online .
 The agent demanded that he and his friend provide false testimony about being recruited by the head of the SBU security service of Ukraine to commit acts of terrorism in Russia .
 At the time, I was just an ordinary student from western Ukraine . I simply couldn't believe that such absurd accusations were being made against me .
After we both refused to incriminate ourselves, they began beating us at regular intervals . They began beating each other after we refused to confess to each other .
 Russian TV channels were offered an option of giving a predetermined speech about being sent to Russia from Ukraine to commit subversive acts . But instead turning to the FSB for protection to save us from the Ukrainian authorities and their prosecution .
 Once again, we refused to give false testimony, so the harassment continued . The harassment turned into physical and psychological violence .
 Some special forces soldiers wearing masks put a bag over my head, took me into the woods and tortured me . Some soldiers wore masks.
 They hanged me by handcuffs for hours, beat me in the head, groin and other parts of the body, as well as strangled me . They hanged him by handcuffs, beat him in head and groin, and strangled him .
 The next morning, which was two weeks since his arrest, he used a shaving blade to cut his abdomen and the veins on his arms to stop this abuse . The next day, he cut the abdomen and veins in his arms with the blade .
Only then I was taken to the hospital from where I finally managed to inform my family about my whereabouts . Only then I had to be taken to a hospital where I told my family.
Only the skin on my arms, so there was swelling and pain, so I couldn't use my left arm for three months . They didn’t repair my veins, but only the skin in my arms .
Both my friend and I were illegally kept at a special detention center for illegal immigrants for three months . Despite the court decision about our deportation, both were kept at the center for 3 months . The court decision was not overturned .
My friend was released and taken to the Ukrainian border, while I was suddenly charged with the crime of possessing explosives . Only three months later, his friend was taken to Ukraine border, and charged with possessing explosives.
 The court found me guilty despite the absurdity of these accusations and absence of any evidence, the court found him guilty .
 At first, he was sentenced to two years of imprisonment, but a court reduced the sentence to nine months . The appeal court reduced his sentence to 9 months .
 Since by that time, I had already spent a year in detention, I was released . Since by the time, he had already been released, he was already in detention .
I had been regularly placed into punishment cells and solitary confinement. Through this year, I had been placed into the punishment cells . I had also been placed in solitary confinement .
 The fact I am free now is a testament to the efforts of the publicity campaigns, international pressure and coordinated work of human rights advocates and lawyers . The fact he is free is the result of the work of the human rights activists and lawyers.
 As of today, at least 13 Ukrainians are detained illegally in the Russian Federation . At least eight such prisoners are being held in occupied Crimea .
 Some of them have been deprived for over a year of their right to meet with an attorney or Ukrainian consul . Some of the victims have had to wait for a year to meet an attorney.
Russian state-sponsored propaganda has created the image of Ukraine as a mortal enemy of Russia . Their lives have become an instrument of the Russian state- sponsored propaganda .
 The Kremlin officials constantly look for the means and the reasons to justify their hybrid war against Ukraine .
Ukrainian citizens are proclaimed to be terrorists, spies and fascists . That is why innocent Ukrainian citizens are proclaims to be fascists and terrorists .
 It is a miracle that I managed to escape imprisonment and can tell you my story personally . It's a miracle he managed to get out of prison and tell you his story .
 "He will say a few more words and I will translate for him, interpret for him," she says . "And he will say more words," she adds .
 There are 13 people sitting in some decrepit Russian cell, waiting for their continuing punishment and not able to see anybody . So I just want to impress upon you that while we’re sitting here talking about all of this, there’s 13 people, which
 Ukraine, just to be part of the democratic freedom-cratic world, has paid the price of thousands of lives and continues to pay that price .
 I think we deserve, that Ukraine deserves the democratic world extends the hand of help, I say . I think it is a good step for Ukraine, and we deserve the world's help, says Putin .
 The Euromaidan SOS and Let My People Go campaign has been in the Eurom Maidan SOS campaign . The campaign aims to address and help people that are still imprisoned .
 This includes organizing open hearings in the European Parliament and other parliaments of the free and Western democracies . This includes organized hearings in Europe's parliament and the European parliament .
 It also includes providing information to the media and publicizing these cases of the people and their plight and to inform the world about sufferings .
 If you don’t punish these evil acts they will spread, they will continue to spread. Now, from my experience, I think it’s extremely important because it's extremely important to punish them .
 We're glad you survived your horrible ordeal and that you're here to bear witness and to speak out on behalf of others who have been unjustly imprisoned and suffering human rights abuses . We’re glad you survive your terrible ordeal.
Both Senate and House commissioners were led by their commissioners, says Sen. John McCain .
 Senator Ben Cardin and Senator Roger Wicker in the Senate passed resolutions earlier this year calling for the release of Nadia Savchenko and others .
 A House resolution passed several months ago that included language along the lines of what you spoke .
 It’s not calling for the addition of names to the Magnitsky list, but it's a step . It's not called for the additions to the list .
 The amendment was included by our Chairman, Chris Smith, and I have a copy of the resolution here . And actually this amendment was Included by our chairman, ChrisSmith, and he has a copy.
 At least there’s something on the record in the United States Congress on that .
 Ambassador Chaly is still on his way back from Kyiv where he had gone to accompany Vice President Biden .
 The Helsinki Commission held a briefing on Crimea and the ongoing Russia aggression . The panelists brought the important message of Crimea and Russia aggression to Washington .
 There's nothing more important to Ukraine, to the government, to civil society, the NGOs, to all citizens of Ukraine than stopping Russian aggression, the continued occupation of Crimea and human rights abuses .
 The gravity of what’s happening in Ukraine has really global magnitude. We must not allow this topic to fall off the radar and be out-shadowed by other crises of today, such as Iran, Syria or Ebola .
 This is the first time since World War H when an aggressor tries to redraw Europe’s borders by force .
 Mr Yatsenko and others must not be happening in today’s world. And things like what happened to him and others are happening to others must be happening.
 The Ukrainian Freedom Support Act passed last year, the 16 Crimea-specific resolutions both in the Senate and in the House . The bill was passed by the Senate last year .
 There’s executive orders imposing sanctions, Crimea-related sanctions, as well as numerous statements by Vice President Biden at the Rada .
 The sanctions have not been strong enough to make Putin change his course, he says . The problem is that these sanctions are not strong enough.
As the war in Ukraine and Crimea is less, there’s danger that sanctions might be rolled back .
 The sanctions must be ratcheted up to force the Kremlin to end its aggression and illegal occupation of Crimea . And our strong position is that these sanctions must remain.
Law would establish by law that it is the policy of the U.S. that it will never recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea .
 Mr Yatsenko spoke about what the West should do to help end the occupation of Crimea . I would like to ask the panelists to elaborate what he said .
 Some of us were born and raised in Ukraine and were fortunate enough to get an excellent education in the West in the best educational institutions in the U.S. Some of them were born.
 We do understand how Ukraine works and operates and maybe there is a reason why we live here and work on those issues . We do not know how Ukraine operates and operates, but we work on that issue .
 recommendations are aimed at building a truly stable Ukraine, democratic and prosperous Ukraine . The recommendations are very practical and we believe they are intended to build a trulystable Ukraine .
 There is a huge need in establishing an independent international tribunal in Crimea . Crimea has been subject to human rights abuses in Crimea, Crimea . There is also a need for an independent tribunal in adjudicating the abuses .
 The next step would be to adjudicate those human rights violations that happened at Maidan and those that are happening in the eastern part of Ukraine due to Russian occupation . The next steps probably would be the adjudicate of those violations .
 Ukrainian laws are being used in tribunal and international judges and experts being the judges . That is why we advocate for Ukrainian laws being used as judges .
 We informally talked with different judges and they don’t feel comfortable with adjudicating their peers, we say . We also talked with judges about how they feel about their peers .
 That could tap into other issues and have them to deal with other concerns, such as corruption and other things that they are dealing with .
 To build a database, for example, it would send a very strong message . To start a Database, to start a database would send an extremely strong message.
 Ukrainian citizen who lives in Crimea can send a copy of my deed to the property virtually to the database and use the Internet and store it . When everything is sorted out she can still use and exercise her right — it is a powerful message .
 Mayhe we're not ready to deal with everything and we’re trying to develop the methods . We’s trying to developed the methods, says Mayhe. Mayhe .
 The U.S. can provide their expertise to the other states . The other states can offer their expertise .
 He has to work and work and he wholly engaged, hut the expertise should he there .
 Ukrainian citizens cannot communicate, they have to use super-expensive means to communicate with their family in the mainland . I mean, it’s incomprehensihle that Ukrainian citizens can’t communicate, I mean. I mean .
 It’s going to cost us more and more in the future to deal with those issues, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It will cost us a lot more to solve those issues .
 Ukraine is a signatory to all World Health Organization treaties . Other things that can be done are, for example, the Ukraine is signatories to all the treaties .
 The people who are drug addicts could gracefully release their dependency on drugs by using methadone and other means .
 Those underprivileged and under-served people just disappeared, vanished, vanished . Those are so underprivilege and underserved people, they just disappeared .
 Some of them left for Russian Federation where they have to go cold turkey . Some ran to Ukraine, where they can get support .
 Russia has to renew its laws in Ukraine . It has to implement Ukrainian laws and has to restore those programs . Russia is occupying power .
Little things like that, they seem little, but they are very important and they influence each and every individual . They influence each, every individual, and they are important, says the author .
Ukrainian citizens have to return to Ukrainian sovereignty . Ukrainian citizens must return to their country .
 It has to come in totality of how — we have to look in totality. So it has to be looked at totality of those factors . We need to find out how to look at how to make the best decisions .
 The Russian Federation is working in the Russian Federation, according to the Russian government . The Russian government says it is working to improve relations with the country .
 No independent monitoring of human rights abuses on the territory of Crimea exists or can exist under today’s circumstances . The Crimea territory is the Crimea region of Crimea .
Third is the increase of the sanctions in order to create, according to the author . That’s why we only have one recourse, which is third, is to impose as big a price for these actions .
 The sanctions also can work as an ultimatum for the release of political prisoners and for desisting the persecution of other citizens. So at the same time, these sanctions can also be used to release political prisoners .
 The energy blockade that was instituted by the civil society in Ukraine in 20 days alone brought damage to the Russian economy . The Russian economy is one-seventh of a billion dollars .
 The money that went into the budget of Crimea from the Russian Federation increased between 70 to 80 percent .
 The law may be adopted with regard to sanctioning people who are involved in these acts of torture, says chairman .
 I would like to request that the people who were involved in my case and other cases of other people that are still imprisoned be added to the Magnitsky list . I would also like to see sanctions apply to those involved in the case .
 Bohdan Yaremenko wanted to add something very quickly before we move on . He wanted to make something very quick before we moved on .
 The Crimean Peninsula, occupation of Crimea is not the primary issue when we’re talking about the ways of resolving the situation . The Crimean peninsula is the Crimean Peninsula.
 Donbas, Transnistria, Abkhazia, Ossetia, is a region in the region . There are other cases of similar problems in the area .
 It is the case of the international community finding the way to address the country, the United Nations members, the U.N. security members and the countries which own the nuclear arsenals . It is to make it to respect international law, to respect the international order.
 Andriy says he would like to add there are existing sanctions. On the level of practical diplomacy, he wants to add to the list .
 Russian Federation has two packages of sanctions against Russian Federation . The sanctions include sanctions against Russia and sanctions against Ukraine .
 One package was introduced after the annexation of Crimea . Another was introduced because of the war in the eastern Ukraine .
 I have no doubts that they should be combined and united within one package. So I'm not worried about it, I'm sure they should do it .
 The Russian Federation will continue to think that as long as they would create some ceasefire situation in eastern Ukraine, it would mean that most of the sanctions would be lifted . Otherwise, the Russian Federation would continue to believe that some ceasefire situations would be better .
 The package of the sanctions that was introduced because of the Ukrainian occupation is nothing else but symbolic .
 The restrictions on the operation in the Western markets for 20, 30 Crimean-based companies . It's nothing to stop Russia.
 The most important part of the sanctions are those that are directed on the sectoral, on the different sectors of Russian economy . The rest of the world should send the sanctions to Russia, says the author .
 The regaining of Crimea is the competence and responsibility and duty of Ukrainian nation, he says . "I would like to clarify that, of course, I would want to clarify," he adds .
 The rest of the world could send the message to the Russian Federation that the sanctions will stay in place as long as you keep your troops in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea and in Transnistria .
 There is no way to resolve this situation or those situations one by one. There's no way of resolving this situation, but there's no solution to it .
 This is being transcribed. And what I'd ask you to do, you may want to line up, speak at the podium, and please use the mic .
 My question relates to the issue of forced citizenship upon the Crimea residents . The Crimea residents have been forced to leave Crimea .
 DCM Brisiuck. It’s hroad-hased and I’m sure that a number of you could speak to it, including DCMBrisiuck . A number of people have spoken to it.
In terms of their freedom to come and go and otherwise conduct economic and social activities. I know you spoke to some of the property issues, but in terms of its freedom to go and go .
 Crimean residents at the time were at least initially supportive of the Russian activities with thoughts that they’d see some economic and other improvement . And then furthermore, it has been noted that a number of Crimean residents.
 The situation in Crimea has only deteriorated all around in Crimea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A number of people are experiencing buyer's regret, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm sure now a number of these folks are experiencing buyers’s regret"
 Putin declared us all citizens of Russia on March 18, 2014 . About citizenship, on March 17, 2014 Putin declared Russia all citizens .
 Ukraine’s minister of justice declared that it does not fit any legal frameworks . Ukraine's justice minister said the country's legal framework is not suitable .
 Ukraine told its citizens in Crimea that it considers them citizens of Ukraine . Ukraine said it considers its citizens of the Crimea to be citizens .
Living in Crimea without Russian passport is impossible . Living in Crimea is impossible.
 You will not be given a job, you will not have your car registered or get any kinds of documents . You will also not be admitted to a hospital, your children won't be able to go to school and you won't have a car registered .
 The quantity of people who could register as residents, but not citizens, was limited to 5,000 people from the beginning .
 When you go to the government, when you get a government job, it is required to give up Ukrainian citizenship and take Russian passport .
Workers of the ministry of education are also requested to do the same . Unofficially, but yet rather assertively, they are also asked to do same .
 Majority of Crimea residents retained their Ukrainian passports . Majority of the residents of Crimea retained their passports .
 The decision of the civilized world to not give visas to those Crimean residents with Russian passports had a strong impact . The decision had a very strong impact on the decision .
 In Crimea, a very widespread expression for those who hold Russian passports, to call it Auschwitz . Auschwitz was the term in Nazi Germany, used inNazi Germany .
All responsibility for all spheres of life of citizens who reside in Grimea reside with the country occupant . As to what to do to help, according to international law and the Ukrainian law on occupied territories, all responsibility is to help .
 Ukraine can help its citizens only on the mainland Ukraine, not on the occupied territory . Ukraine can only help its people only on its mainland Ukraine .
 This help consists of the following, although it also has its own problem . This help includes a number of different types of help .
High school graduates can be accepted in universities in Ukraine . First of all, the high school graduates will be accepted.
Citizens who want to receive birth certificates for their newly born children can also do that on the mainland Ukraine .
 We cannot talk about any kind of help out of Ukraine on the territory of the occupied Crimea . It's just completely impossible, it’s just completely Impossible.
 Even for possessing a little Ukrainian flag, you can be detained by the police . The Ukrainian flag is a national flag .
 New citizens of Russia now have criminal charges against us on the territory of Crimea .
On March 6th of this year, I presented a report, together with the Atlantic Council, on the situation on human rights in Crimea . I presented the report on March 6, this year .
 FSB opened a criminal case against me for an attempt to disturb the territorial integrity of Russia on March 10 . On March 10, FSB open a case against him for attempting to disturb territorial integrity.
 Russia opened the case precisely for the reason that they consider me a citizen of Russia . They opened the cases for the reasons that they think I'm a citizen.
 The problem of citizenship is very wide and very complex and it calls for professionals, the legal professionals to take charge of addressing it .
 The Crimean Tatars are the main help that we can provide to the Crimeans . So we provide everything they need for that to happen in place .
 The children who were educated in Ukraine will now be serving in the Russian military, and so on . The children will now serve in the military .
 The life of refugees from Crimea, Ukraine, has been described as "a little bit more about the life of Crimeans throughout Ukraine"
This year I went to Ukraine twice and I’ve met many Crimeans and I've made friends with many crimeans . But this year I've gone to Ukraine two times and I have met many of the Crimeans .
 Many Crimeans live a very fulfilling political life and civil society life, says one of them . One of those Crimeans, many of them, is a former member of the British Parliament .
 She’s been very instrumental in even providing us with some materials. And she has been very helpful in providing some materials . She has also been instrumental in helping us with materials .
 She was a quiet spirit and that’s what I saw in many other Crimeans, amazing, inspiring people and true heroes . She was quiet spirit. She was the quiet spirit of many other crimeans .
We met more Crimeans at the Maidan of Foreign Affairs in Ukraine . It was just an amazing meeting, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They were so inspiring and so giving us more strength and inspiration to go and help to explain what’s going on there and to provide them the forum to do that .
 Those people who I in particular met, they just — they were a true inspiration, he says . But those people who he met, he adds, were a real inspiration .
 We met Mr Klymenko and that’s how we developed a friendship and a true working experience. And that's how we met him, that's what we met, he says .
First of all, I want to emphasize that we do not call ourselves refugees . First of all. I want the refugees to be called "refugees"
 Crimean political immigrants are political immigrants, but not political immigrants . We call ourselves political immigrants. And although this may be incorrect, we call ourselvespolitical immigrants .
 Those who left Crimea were those who understood that they could not continue their professional or civic activities or simply those people, Ukrainian patriots, who simply could not pretend, you know, hold themselves hack and pretend like nothing is going on .
 Fm from Yalta where Fm is now our colleague at the Maidan of Foreign Affairs . He is now a colleague of the Foreign Affairs. He is a member of the staff at the agency in Maidan.
 A dean of law schools comes from a brief vacation and comes hack to the building, seeing portraits of Putin everywhere .
In 10 minutes, he gives an order, in 10 minutes. Without hesitation, he gave an order. I want to see pictures of flowers from the botanical garden, he says .
 There are about 40,000 to 50,000 such individuals in different parts of Ukraine . There are more than 40,500 such people in Ukraine .
 The Donbas have about a million refugees from the Donbas . And perhaps you know that we also have about one million refugees .
 Those people line up at government agency offices to receive benefits and wait and demand help .
 Ukrainian patriots from Crimea and Donbas understand that Ukraine is undergoing very hard times right now . Ukraine is under a rule, as a rule.
 Ukraine is trying not to only help themselves, but also to do something to improve the situation in Ukraine . And they are trying to help themselves. And they're also trying to improve their country's situation .
At the same time, he says, we all of a sudden just have become poor. And at the same times, this is my concluding thought, that we all just have been poor .
 "The only way for me to deal with this is just to try to forget it," he says . "You know, you know, the only way ... is to try and forget it"
 There is an organization that’s been created of civic organizations supporting Crimea and resettled .
 There have been two conferences and it unites over 2,500 organizations from different parts of Ukraine . There are two conferences in Ukraine .
 Russia's aggression has been described as an example of the human impact of Russia’s aggression . Russia is known for its aggressive behavior .
 I think we have time for one or two more questions if anybody wants to please come up to the podium again and identify yourself Questioner . I think it is time to ask anyone who wants to come up for a question again and answer it .
 I'd like to go back to violation of the human rights in occupied Crimea. I’d like toGo back to violations of the Human Rights of Crimea, says Russian journalist .
 Russia does not comply with international law, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has to do so, he says, and Russia must do so .
 Russia's Duma adopted to law where it says that the domestic law overrules an international law . But recently, Russia’s Duma says that it says it overrules the law .
 Crimean law is not about Donbas law and it's not about Transnistria law. So it’s not about the Crimean law, it's about Don Bas law and not about transnistrian law . It's not just about Crimean law.
 It’s 22 about the country which is purposely violating international law and our ability as an international community to find an answer .
 Russian Federation in possession of nuclear weapons has a good excuse to do whatever it wants . It looks like that for the Russian Federation the fact that it is in possession is good excuse .
 The U.S. is the leader of the democratic world in Ukraine, like Moldova, like Georgia . The United States is looking upon the countries to assist us to find answers on those questions .
 The harsh reality is that we don’t know how to address this issue. They are very tough and the harsh reality, says CNN's John Sutter . "We don't know what to do," he says .
 Russian Federation has to talk to Russian Federation. But I think at home here we have to ask ourselves and look very deep into all those issues .
 We have to be very careful and not to — and with our terminology, with our definitions, and to think, to think . We must use our terminology and our terminology to make sure we are accurate .
 The Ukraine crisis is the latest in a series of events in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian government says it is trying to resolve the crisis in Crimea .
 Georgia is testifying with Lithuania and other countries that they witnessed firsthand what's going on in Ukraine . The U.N. says Georgia is a member of the European Union .
 The Moldova government says it's similar to Moldova's similar experience a year ago . They can testify that it's pretty much the same what they went through .
 Ukrainian author Ivan Franko wrote a very famous fairy tale about the sneaky fox who stole a chicken .
 He appointed himself a presiding judge over his own case. And then manipulated other animals to a point . He then appointed himself himself a judge over himself .
 We have to ask, we have to look into ourselves and look into our values, we say . And we need to look at ourselves, and look at our values .
 The author says he looked into those quotes and thought that’s what he believes . He says that's what he thinks .
 Ukrainians at Maidan stood for something very similar to what we believe here in the U.S. and in other developed countries . That’s why I do believe that Ukrainians in Maidan stand for something like what we think in the United States .
 Russian Federation people have to figure out what their value system is . It's usually the people of the Russian Federation have to Figure out what they're worth .
We have to work with them, but we cannot just be very arrogant and ignorant of those questions . We have to try, get over and wake up and not to deal with those questions. I mean, we have to also work with the people who ask questions .
 We need to change the format of the United Nations, the Articles 5 and 6 of the Atlantic agreement . The format of NATO should be changed .
 The sooner the civilized world understands that that’s what needs to happen and starts acting upon it, the sooner there will he real changes, the author says .
 I first want to thank Mr Yatsenko for talking about his case in public today . I first of all want to thanks him for speaking out .
 I know it must have been a difficult conversation, says the author . "It must be a difficult thing to talk about," he says .
 The situation in Crimea has deteriorated since the blockade and the blackout, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Since we don't have good sources of information about what's happening on the ground in Crimea, I was just curious .
 Crimea is the region of Crimea in Crimea . Crimea is a Crimea region in the Crimea region . Crimea has a history of political and political turmoil .
 I don't think we can rely on any sort of polling that’s coming out of Crimea these days. Because I don’t think we’re not able to rely on this sort of poll, he says .
 The population could be divided into three equal factions in Crimea . So in Crimea, the population could have been divided into two factions .
 One-third are those who wanted Putin and who wanted to die in Russia . So one-third were those who want Putin to die .
 Another third of the population are just what I would call regular consumers. And another third of those who are regular consumers .
 Another third of the population are conscious, so to speak, citizens of Ukraine . Ukraine is a country in Ukraine .
 The 300,000 consists of many different ethnicities, Russians, Ukrainians, Greeks and others . Half of them are Crimean Tatars and the other half are Ukrainians .
 One-third of the population now, for longer than a year, have been asking for this blockade . And this one-third has asked for it for a year .
 I personally received thousands of letters appealing, do something, stop feeding the occupant . And I personally receive thousands of Letters appealing. Do something.
 Ukrainian political Ukrainians in Crimea perceived this blockade as something that Ukraine is beginning to do for the de-occupation of Crimea .
 The mood of the first one-third of the population, the Putin supporters, we’re not interested in their mood . We’s not interested. The mood is the first. one- third of the people, the first .
 "Russia Today" channel is a propaganda channel, according to Russian TV . The second one-third of the consumer population is Russian TV.
 Ukrainian population says we will take this kind of pain in order to, you know, cooperate in the return of Crimea. So in this way, the political Ukrainian population say we'll take this sort of pain .
 The rest of the population are lamenting in various ways and praying for Putin . But of course, the rest are praying for the Russian leader .
 I think with that I want to thank the panelists for their very interesting, informative, insightful presentations and responses to questions . I think that with that he wants to thank them for theirvery interesting, insightful, insightful answers to questions, he says .
 Even as a ten-year-old child growing up in Soviet Ukraine, I always knew of the Helsinki Commission .
 Back then I could not possibly know what exactly it did, but I knew it stood for something bigger that I could comprehend and imagine . Back then, I could never know what happened to me, but it was something bigger than I thought .
I was right! — it stands for democracy, human rights, rule of law and simply morally the right thing . I was right. I was wrong! — It stood for democracy and human rights. I'm right!
Coauthors for their outstanding work and dedication to human rights, international law and order, global peace and security . Thank you to the esteemed coauthors.
 Professor Mary Holland supervised the project . Holland: "I would like to extend my sincere and deepest gratitude to her"
 David Glasgow is the Assistant Director of the Public Interest Law Center for his guidance and support of this pro bono project . The project is a pro-bono project.
 Matthew Mosner and Ethan Burger have made valuable comments to early drafts . I would like to thank them for their time and valuable comments. I would also like to say that they were good comments .
 A year ago at a different venue, in the United Nations, we gathered to discuss the legal dimensions of Russian actions in Ukraine . We also discussed the occupation of Crimea and its illegal attempts to annex Ukrainian territory .
 To this day, the Russian Federation continues to occupy sovereign Ukrainian territory in Crimea . The Russian Federation has violated international law by illegally seizing the Ukrainian peninsula .
 The Russian Federation in Ukraine has been accused of illegal actions by the Russian Federation of Ukraine . The Russian government has taken action to restore Ukraine's sovereign territory .
 The practice of human rights in occupied Crimea is dire and continues to deteriorate. What is very clear, however, is that the practice is dire, but it is still deteriorating .
 Serious and consistent violations of the civil, political, social, social and cultural rights of Crimeans have been well documented by a variety of organizations .
 The purpose of the report is to assist individuals in Crimea, Ukraine, as well as around the world, working in academia, governments, international organizations, businesses, and media to understand the nature of the human rights violations in the occupied territory .
 We analyze each right individually with respect to international, Ukrainian and Russian law . We analyze every right individually. We analyze the right individually .
 The general and specific remedies include the use of international, Ukrainian and Russian Federation legal instruments . The general, Ukrainian, Russian and Russian Federal legal instruments are used in Ukraine .
 We concluded that Russian Federation’s illegal occupation and attempted annexation of Crimea has created a continuous stream of human rights violations . We concluded Russian Federation's illegal occupation, attempted annexation and attempted annexing of Crimea have created a constant stream of violations .
 The Russian Federation fails to comply with its obligations as an occupying power . The Ukrainian government is not paying enough attention to the human rights issues in Crimea .
 Existing national and international remedies are ineffective against such massive human rights violations as are occurring in Crimea . NGOs, civil society and advocates on the ground are on the Ground .
 Self-proclaimed Russian Federation’s authorities deny responsibility, and Ukrainian government claims the lack of ability and resources to respond properly .
 Human rights organizations have reported extensively on human rights violations in Crimea . They have recommended ways to address issues affecting human rights in occupied Crimea .
 We concur with their recommendations, and provide additional recommendations . We also provide more recommendations .
 Ukrainian, self-proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities, civil society and international community are urged to implement the following recommendations .
 We expect our recommendations to Ukraine, Self Proclaimed Crimean and Russian authorities, international community and civil society and activists will prompt a solution . Ukraine’s territorial integrity and democracy will be honored, we say .
 We ask the addressees of our recommendations to work on these tasks according to their respective roles, responsibilities, goals, and objectives .
 The Ukrainian government is advised to implement the recommended measures . The international community is encouraged to assist and monitor the measures .
 The Manual is designed to help residents of Crimea take steps to improve their current situation directly .
 Crimea people in Crimea are economically deprived and legally underserved, we concluded . People often know little about their rights and are unable to demand their application .
 The Manual lists a number of fundamental rights that apply to Crimea . It also lists the articles of the Constitutions of Ukraine and the Russian Federation .
 The Manual includes a directory of Ukrainian and international human rights groups and advocacy groups . Crimeans know where to report violations and seek advice or explanation .
 John Prendergast: "The biggest road block to action on genocide and other human rights crimes is ignorance" PrenderGast: ‘The biggestRoad block toaction on genocide is ignorance.’
 Russia’s actions are striking at the heart of international law and order that has helped to prevent war since the World War II . If we allow ourselves to let it be, we run into much bigger risks, says the author .
 Ukraine has been in occupied Crimea since Crimea was occupied by Ukraine in March 2014 . Ukraine is now in the Crimea region of Crimea . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin is currently living in Crimea .
 The Black Sea News is the only Ukrainian institution that summarized the picture and published the Strategy of Returning the Crimea last year .
 The situation in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine is directly connected and should he keep in the same frame for political analysis . We are convinced that the situation in Ukraine and Crimea are directly connected .
 Honestly speaking the picture will still be incomplete without analyzing the Russian intervention into Ukraine, aside of what is happening in Moldova, Abkhazia and Ossetia .
 The issue of human rights in Ukraine and in particular in the annexed Crimea should not and cannot be properly addressed without broader overview of the political, military, security, economic and social situation .
 Andrii Klymenko will concentrate on the issues of human rights . With your permission I will cover the general issues in order to allow my dear friend and colleague Mr Klymanko to concentrate fully on the human rights issues .
 A fear of ethnic and interreligious conflicts has been artificially enforced by the Russian propaganda within a short period of time . This fear was an additional factor that reinforced the overall concerns of the citizens .
 Russian citizens, including the military personnel from the intelligence agencies, are in Russia . The military personnel are from the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ministry of Defense .
 Together with pro-Russian activists among the local residents and citizens of Ukraine, they organized rallies, fights, mass disturbances and violent confrontations with patriotic citizens .
 A premeditated escalation used as an excuse for creating the self-defense units that include both local residents and the Russian citizens infiltrated specifically .
 In the Eastern Ukraine, these units seized administrative buildings and paralyzed the activity of the state bodies . In some cases, the actions supported anti-state actions .
 In Crimea, self-defense units were a coverup that was covering the covert actions of special units of the army of the Russian Federa31 tion .
 They were the ones who seized the government agencies and blocked military units of the Ukrainian army . They were those who seized government agencies, blocking military units .
 Establishment of the pseudo governments that took over the responsibility over the management of the occupied territories .
The mentioned pseudo governments imitated a freedom of expression which was used as justification or explanation of the aggression . The mentioned pseudo government imitated the use of the freedom of speech .
 The inability or unwillingness of the legitimate authorities to take measures for a quick and decisive suppression of these trends was seen as weakness . An attempt to calm down the protesters or aggressors was regarded as weakness, encouraged the aggressor, demoralized the supporters .
 Corruption, common business interests of the local and central authorities with the relevant public and private bodies of the aggressor state were actively used as mechanisms for influencing and compromising the political will for resistance .
 The annexation of Crimea has become the first case of invasion of the territory in Europe since the Second World War . Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine since the end of the war .
 The mentioned situation calls into question the existence of international law and the effectiveness of international security guarantees, thus threatening the existing world order .
 A “hot phase’ of the armed conflict in the Eastern Ukraine is still ongoing. The Current State of Affairs says the current state of Affairs is a "hot phase" of the conflict .
 The so-called Minsk agreements do not function as a ceasefire mechanism, but do not provide a solution to the problem of the territorial integrity restoration of Ukraine . The Minsk agreement does not lead to the establishment of sustainable peace.
 The Donetsk and Lugansk regions suffered from a large-scale destruction of the infrastructure and residential buildings resulting from the combat operations .
 The current condition of the industrial infrastructure does not allow to predict a possibility of the restoration of the pre-war regional economy structure and the social structure of the population .
 About 2. million people, mainly the most educated and active part of the society, became forced migrants and refugees . About a third of the overall number of inhabitants, were forced to become refugees .
 Prospects for resolving the situation in the East of Ukraine are uncertain . The problem of “specific areas of Donetsk and Lugansk regions’s” is uncertain .
 forced migrants and political fugitives from Crimea represented the most active and loyal citizens of Ukraine . Forced migrants andPolitical fugitives were most active.
 At the beginning of the Crimean occupation the residents were fully satisfied with the Ukrainian legal liberalism . Not satisfied with quality of life and quality of government .
 32 residents of Crimea have not received the improvement of the quality of government . 32 have not got better quality of life, it actually deteriorated, have lost Ukrainian legal liberalism .
 A phase of adaptation to the law of the occupying country in Crimea is over . A process of reclamation of the assets of the annexed territory is ongoing . This process can be described as colonization .
 "Dilution of the Crimean population is taking place," says Russian official . "The import of the Russians" is still ongoing, he says . The military personnel and their families are among those affected .
 Russian immigrants in Sevastopol during the occupation were about 25,000 people, or about 7% of the population . The increase of number of Russian immigrants was about 7%.
 In the rest of Crimea, this rate is somewhat lower — 10 thousand people, or 0.5% of the population . In the other parts of the Crimea, the rate is less than 0.4% .
 The number of troops is about 50,000 people, not including members of the security agencies . The number is not included in the security agency .
 Training camps for training of the mercenaries later directed to fight against the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Donetsk and Lugansk regions have been established .
 Crimea has become a basic center of support of the Russian military grouping in Syria . Crimea has also become a central center for support of Russia's military grouping .
 The road infrastructure in the occupied territories has been fully or largely destroyed . The roads in occupied territories have been completely destroyed .
 All programs of road construction of Russia in Crimea turned to be a usual “patching work’ of a very poor quality .
 The unscrupulous extraction of the fresh underground water has led to the raise of saline groundwater level in some areas . It complicates the water supply to the population .
 There are 2,000 vacancies of municipal officials in Crimea, as well as a large number of jobs in health care . Generally, it is difficult to fill the vacancies of ordinary employees in the business structures .
Developments in Eastern Ukraine are hard to predict because the hot phase of the conflict is still ongoing . Developments in the region are difficult to predict.
 Russia as a state-aggressor has sufficient resources to continue military actions in Ukraine and in Europe . Russia's political will of the Russian Federation to continue the aggression is uncertain . Russia has not achieved the means of influence on Russia, such as international sanctions .
 Crimea has lowered the ability of Crimea to ensure the self-sustained food security . Crimea has been reduced to a level of security in the region .
 Continuation of the trend towards resettlements of the citizens with simultaneous degradation of democratic institutions, human rights and freedoms, increase of corruption and criminalization of a daily life .
 Ukraine is going to gradually expand the policy of Peninsula blockade . Ukraine is trying to create enforcement mechanisms to engage Russia in the dialogue on the annexation .
 The problems in the field of the human rights were merely related to the underdeveloped transitional democratic or law-enforcement system in Ukraine .
 Some noted occasional conflicts on the grounds of political affiliation, ethnic or religious routs were always created by pro-Russian activists, Russian neoNazis .
 The citizens of Ukraine residing in the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea are deprived of a number of fundamental rights and the possibility of their protection . International human rights organizations have drawn attention to their problems .
 The Crimean Tatars are put to systematic pressure as the most cohesive community that openly expressed its opposition to the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . The Tatars have been put to systematically pressure by Russian Federation.
 The number of secret services employees per capita in Crimea is 3 times higher than the similar rate for the rest of Russia . The number in Crimea has risen 3 times in a year .
 Activists or citizens disloyal to Russia are called in for many-hours-long interrogations . raids are carried out in the areas of compact settlement of the Crimean Tatars, the troops block the certain localities or settlements, the authorities organize deportation from Crimea .
 The State authorities of Russia have developed the whole arsenal of intimidation methods in the Republic of Ichkeria and other regions of the North Caucasus .
 Ukraine has declared trilingualism in Crimea invaders . In general any mention of Ukraine is not mentioned in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian schools and classes are being closed down . There are reported cases of public burning of books, schoolbooks, plates and inscriptions .
 Russia makes active efforts to establish “information ghettos’ on the Crimean peninsula . citizens of Ukraine will be deprived of the opportunity to receive information from Ukraine .
 Ukrainian TV and radio channels broadcasting, disconnection of the Ukrainian mobile operators and internet service providers . These efforts include a complete cessation of Ukrainian TV, radio channels and mobile operators .
 Criminal procedures under the relevant article are initiated both against the citizens of Ukraine and the Ukrainian media that operate in the mainland Ukraine .
 Actions of occupying power related to implementation of property rights are marked by massive violations of rules and practices accepted in the civilized world . Actions of the occupying power.
 The objects that belonged to Ukraine or to the trade unions and other public organizations have also been expropriated . The objects belong to the higher education institutions and the Academy of Sciences .
 As for the private enterprises, their formal expropriation was not carried out . The private enterprises were not formally expropriated .
 There are schemes of raider takeovers and changes in the company management board 37 that have been implemented .
 The Q&A session was held in London, London, on Tuesday night . The session was part of a Q&a session for the first time in a year .
 Ukrainian citizen was illegally arrested and detained by the Russian Federation for over a year . He was detained for political reasons, he says .
 Others who have suffered and continue to suffer the same fate are Nadia Savchenko, Oleg Sentsov and others who have never heard . Others have also suffered and continued to suffer same fate .
At the police department, an agent of the FSB showed to me a photograph of himself taken during the Euromaidan protests . He had found the photograph on social media, which he suspects was posted on Twitter .
 The agent demanded that he and his friend provide false testimony about being recruited by the Right Sector or personally by the head of the SBU (Security Service of Ukraine) to commit acts of terrorism in Russia .
 At the time, I was just an ordinary student from Western Ukraine . I could not believe that such absurd accusations were being made against me .
Russian law enforcement personnel harass me. By the way, my western Ukrainian origin became an additional reason for the Russian law enforcement to harass me .
 We were offered an option of going on Russian TV channels and giving a predetermined speech about being sent to Russia from Ukraine to commit subversive acts . Instead turning to the FSB for protection, to save us from the Ukrainian authorities and their persecution .
 Once again, we refused to give false testimony, so the harassment continued . It turned into both physical and psychological abuse, says the author .
 Ramzan Kadyrov threatened to hand me over to the head of the Chechen Republic. For example, he threatened to give him over to Ramzan.
 Some special forces soldiers, wearing masks and bearing no insignia on their uniforms, put a bag over my head, took me into the woods and tortured me . Some soldiers wore masks and wore no insignias on uniforms other than the colors of the Russian flag .
 They hanged me by the handcuffs for hours and beat me in the head, groin and other parts of the body, as well as strangled me . They hanged him by the handcuff for hours .
 The court found me guilty. Despite the absurdity of these accusations and the absence of any evidence, the court found him guilty .
 At first, he was sentenced to two years of imprisonment, but shortly afterwards, an appeal court reduced the sentence to 9 months . The appeal court said he should have been jailed for two years .
 The writer had been regularly placed into punishment cells and solitary confinement . He says he's been placed in solitary confinement and punishment cells .
 When I was in detention, I was visited by guards from time to time, he was told that another article about me appeared in the press . He was also told that a press-conference dedicated to his case was held .
 All public events in support of the prisoners are extremely important, says the author . They give a clear signal to the repressive regime that it is being watched closely .
 At least 13 Ukrainians are detained illegally somewhere in the Russian Federation . At least 8 such prisoners are being held in occupied Crimea, both Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars .
 The criminal cases against them are fabricated, most of them have been brutally tortured . Some have been deprived for over a year of their right to meet with an attorney or a Ukrainian consul .
 Russian state-sponsored propaganda has created the image of Ukraine as a mortal enemy of Russia . Ukraine has become an instrument of state- sponsored propaganda .
 There are no independent courts in Russia, that is why politically motivated cases have no chance of being decided fairly . There is no independent court.
Only international pressure can help achieve the release of those detainees . Only international pressure is needed to help achieve release of detainees .
We are waiting for the return home of Nadia Savchenko, Olexandr Kolchenko, and Oleg Sentsov . We are waiting to see the return of Nadie Savchenko .
 Akhtem Chyihoz, Ali Asanov, Mustafa Dehermendzhy, Yuriy Ilchenko and Mustafa dehermENDzhy are among the stars of the show .
 We may even be unaware of what other prisoners have been illegally detained . We may not even be aware of what others have been detained .
 We demand that the Russian Federation release all of the prisoners subject to politically motivated persecution . Nevertheless, we demand that all prisoners are released .
 I still remember my observing the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2004 . I counted on changes in this country, on genuine cooperation within our region and possibility to enjoy freedom and self-determination .
 All of those dreams were taken from Ukraine, and to some extent from whole our region . All of these dreams were taking from Ukraine .
 First after the Russian invasion on Georgia, and after annexation of Crimea, Russia inspired so called ‘green people’ towards the eastern parts, east and southern parts of Ukrainian territory .
I still remember this act of annexation signed by Vladimir Putin in Kremlin on March 18th end enormous audience to this performance or theatre . I still remember the act of annexment signed by Putin in Moscow .
 Before annexation of Crimea, local community enjoyed reasonable freedom, despite poverty of Ukraine and necessity to make a real jump to get closer to Western society .
 Crimean Tatars are starting to come back to their homeland, home territory . There were schools for minorities, there were free media and NGOs used to flourish . There are schools for minority groups, there are free media for minorities .
 Russia was not perfect arrangement for them after decades and centuries of migration to Russia . It was not a perfect arrangement after decades of migration.
 It was perpetrated, forced by Stalin, and earlier the rulers of Russia . It was also forced by the Stalin regime .
Ukrainian citizens have been elected to the chamber of Ukrainian Parliament . But they started to make their living, they had considerable possibility to elect their representatives . They started to live in Ukraine, but had little chance to elect representatives .
Tatar community leader Mustafa Cemilev has contacts with leaders of Tatar community . He has also contacts with the deputy to Verkhovna Rada.
 Tatar population of Crimea after annexation. They speak about atrocities imposed on Tatar residents of Crimea .
 Closing of schools, disappearing of youth, inability to move freely, unable to join their families living elsewhere, in other territories . closing of schools and inability to join family living elsewhere .
 The situation of human rights in occupied Russia territory of Crimea is reported to be of excellent quality . The Crimea region has been occupied by Russia since March 2014 .
 I was fortunate to participate in many debates here in the European Parliament including the presentation of the report . The report was presented by the EU Parliament .
 Russian Federation is used as a tool for oppression of their neighbors, says author . "I consider it extremely valuable," he says .
 All our thoughts, all our efforts are with this country and people of Ukraine fighting for their freedom . We consider it necessary to prevent freedom, independence of countries of whole region of Central and Eastern Europe .
 O 41 is an official publication of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe . It is a publication of a body of the European Security Council .
 Using the Commission’s electronic subscription service, readers are able to receive press releases, articles, and other materials by topic or countries of particular interest .