 US Air Force F-15C Eagles and C-130J Super Hercules arrive in Ukraine to participate in the international military exercises Clean Sky-2018 . The main base for the training of combat aircraft will be the airfield in Starokonstantinov Khmelnitsky region
In Britain, there is not enough power to resist Russia without using nuclear weapons . This is today, October 7, with reference to sources in the British security services, writes The Sunday Times .
 The Netherlands announced the deportation of four Russians suspected of cyberattacking by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World Anti-Doping Agency . The Dutch government also announced that the four Russians had been deported .
Russian President Vladimir Putin says he does not consider Russia as an aggressor . Putin says it's not just a tricky phrase, but he has a lot of friends in Moscow .
He also spoke about sociological research showing the attitude of Ukrainians towards Russia . He said that because I believe that this is an objective truth, he said .
 The confirmed number of dead and wounded wounds of Wagner mercenaries as a result of the clash of 07.02.2018 is already 58 people . In addition, the SBU reported information about Wagner's mercenary from Uzbekistan Mamadzhanova Dilshod Mashrabzhanovich .
 A soldier of the Bundeswehr was killed in an exercise in Lithuania as a result of a tragic event . The driver of the armored vehicle crashed into a tree during the maneuvering at the Pabrad landfill .
 The purpose of the maneuvers is to demonstrate that NATO troops are at the helm of the Alliance's eastern flank . After the annexation by Russia of Crimea, NATO decided to strengthen the Baltic States and Poland .
Training will become the largest in NATO during the past 16 years . So, among the participants of 29 Allies and two of its partners Finland and Sweden.
 NATO's multinational coalition carries out a large-scale military operation to liberate the illegally occupied northern part of the Kingdom of Norway . They successfully passed the stages of theoretical training and operational coordination .