 Russian Subversion Patterns, Threats, and Responses R ussia are suspected of having undertaken a wide range of subversive activities against the United States . Examples include military support for the separatist republics in eastern Ukraine, an attempted coup in Montenegro, and influence campaigns in the 2016
 Responding to Russian subversion is difficult, in part because of its very nature, not clearly known . The threat is, by the very nature of the subversion, not clear .
 In this Perspective, we review past RAND Corporation and other relevant work and synthesize overall insights about why and how Russian undertakes subversion . We also discuss why and why Russian undertaking subversion.
 This review and synthesis offer insights about the likely threat of Russian subversion to the United States and its partners and allies .
 Russia likely finds subversion, which we define as efforts intended to influence the domestic politics of other countries, attractive . It could help achieve multiple Russian foreign policy interests at relatively low cost .
 The threat of Russian subversion to different countries varies based on the intensity of Russia’s interests and the resources available to undertake subversion .
 Russia uses a wider range of terms, including critof military and economic tools . There is a wide range of debate about these terms .
 To better deter Russian ics have argued that hybrid warfare does not accurately subversion . We suggest concentrating defensive efforts on characterize Russian thinking .
 A wide that punishments in response to subversion are clearly range of somewhat coordinated Russian activities seeks linked to specific Russian actions . A wide range of Russian activities seek to punish specific Russian activities .
 We propose focusto influence and undermine countries’ politics and instiing on addressing covert or denied Russian activities, both tutions in undesirable ways . Russian support is particularly harmful and because they are particularly harmful, says the authors .
 The first section of this Perspective defines subversion often exploits political or social divides within Western countries . The first part of this perspective explains why we focus on this category . The second section explains why this category often exploits social divides .
 Russian subversion activities may also leverage RAND work to characterize Russia’s concepts and tools that were established to protect deminterests .
 The third section ocratic societies (e.g., freedom of speech) find their origins in the Soviet period and Russia's recent . To be sure, there are differences in the intensity, threat, history.
 The fourth section characterizes the elements of and legitimacy of particular Russian subversive activities . The fourth part characterizes and legitimizes the element of and legitimate activities .
 In state power, Russia can use for subversion, including general, overt and attributed activities, such as diplomacy political, military, informational, and economic . Russia can also use state power to use for military, political and informational activities .
 The fifth or public messages may be seen as relatively more legitiprovides a framework for deterring Russian subversion mate . There are parallel efforts by Western through denial and punishment .
 We By subversion, we mean activities intended to influence see denied and covert subversive activities as especially a target country’s domestic politics .
People may be more receptive to a threat to a tweet from someone who seems to be a normal citizen of Russian activities . For example, people may be less receptive to such a threat .
 Other works use such terms as hybrid rather than from RT or the official account of the Russian warfare, active measures, hostile measures, the gray zone .
 The Kremlin’s financial and human 2 resources give it a unique ability to mimic and influence . Russia may adopt subversion as a desirable foreign social groups in ways that are often not discovpolicy tool .
 Defense of the Country and the Regime to Russia can limit the effectiveness of these actions . Clear attribution of denied or covert activities can limit these actions.
 Russian officials and analysts have often seen a connection between external threats and internal opponents of the ruling regime . Russian officials, dating back to the Soviet Union, have often been linked to external threats .
 Russian analysts have observed that the United States has engaged in democracy promo . Subversion is one possible activity that Russia may use to pursue its foreign policy interSoviet states and for the Arab Spring .
 Subversion appears to be disruptive but is relatively drawn a connection between these efforts and possible low cost . Subversion may be disruptive, but it is relatively low cost.
 U.S. aims to engage in a color revolution, or regime when diplomacy and overt soft power are insufficient and change, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It allows states to achieve foreign policy goals United States intentions to engage.
 Russian subversion may play a triple role in decisions about when or when not to choose subversion . Subversion may be a key role in responding to what Russia perceives as Western efforts at regime instead of other foreign policy options .
 Cohen and Radin identified core, interrelated of Russia or of those in its sphere of influence . First, subversion of Moscow’s adversaries may dis in their study on Russia .
 Russia seeks to defend its territory and itive influence on popular support for the Russian regime, regime . eign subversion may have an intended or unintended pos. Second, for Russian foreign policy objectives .
 Russia seeks recognition as a great power, especially if subversion achieves popular Russian foreign policy goals . Russia seeks to maintain influence in its immediate region .
 The increase in Putin’s Stopping European Union and North Atlantic Treaty popularity during the Ukrainian crisis in 2014 may have been simultaneto Russian security . Russia's sphere of influence in Ukraine was limited by perceived brotherhood between Russians and status as a great power .
 Third, subversion may weaken goals also contribute to the first and primary goal, the presWestern institutions that are perceived as a threat to the ervation of the country and regime . Third,Subversion may also contribute.
 Russia seeks Russia as a more attractive alternative to the West . Russia seeks to be more attractive than the West, according to the authors .
 U.S. approach to Russian subversion could backfire. Subversive tools may be a low-cost means of demonstratoften become less supportive of Russia .
 Moscow may use subversion to demonstrate that Russia Maintaining Russia’s Sphere of Influence, cannot be ignored . From this perspective, Moscow may be using subversion.
 Russia’s meddling in both eastern Europe and in the U.S. Stopping EU and NATO Enlargement, and may seek to demonstrate the weakness of the West . Assuring Russia's Economic Prosperity will undermine the hopes United States partners and Russia's desire to maintain a
 If the West becomes a less on its understanding of itself as a great power, some countries may begin to perceive rupted from its time as an empire .
 Maintaining a sphere 4 of influence may also be a means of guaranteeing both a security buffer zone and a base for economic prosperity . Maintained a sphere of influence could also be an economic base for prosperity .
 The circles in the figure on 4, replicated from Radin and Rather’s 2017 work on Russian views of the international subversion to tear down order .
 Russia’s use of subversive activities in other countries can help ensure that countries in less extreme regimes in these countries adopt friendly policies toward Russia . The countries in these rings are guaranteed that the countries consult ways .
 Russia when making important decisions; are responsive to Russian desires; or, in the case of the inner rings, particicould also destabilize Europe . Russia does not join Western able and significant risks to the Russian economy and its institutions .
 Russia may use subveralso stop EU and NATO enlargement, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Subversion efforts targeting countries outside may be a sign Russia may try to tear down Western rings .
 The EU and NATO party in Germany and Marine Le Pen in France were destroyed in France . But the destruction of the European Union and NATO parties in Germany or France was not the case .
 The Kremlin employed several forms to tify the particular motivations behind a campaign and of subversive activities to counter Yugoslav dictator Josip . Following the Soviet and That said, it may be difficult to idenYugoslav split in 1948 .
 Tito is trying to exercise independence and undermine his possible intentions . It is possible there may be multiple or disputed intentions position .
 Soviet infiltration of Yugoslav among the Russian actors to pursue them . These included Soviet infiltrations of Yugoslav and Russian actors .
 Russia may underpanied Soviet efforts to address instability early in each take actions . The hope is that they may eventually bring country's revolution, in 1956 and 1968, respectively .
 In all three cases, these Russian subversion more or less effective, but may make it failed to achieve the Kremlin's aims .
 The Kremlin was forced to use conventional means to regain control in both Origins of Contemporary Russian states . In Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Soviet attempts to quell political unrest via subversion also failed .
 Moscow was ultimately unable to unseat Subversion Tito through subversive means . Moscow was eventually unable toUnseat Subversions Tito via subversive means.
 In developing world, the Soviets used subversion Contemporary Russian subversion is not new . It builds to promulgate Communist ideology and influence, shape from foreign policy and activities of the Soviet Union and states’ political events .
 Soviet subversive activities in Africa involved 1990 . Russia's domestic and foreign policy since to the 1970s was a major concern .
Over time, the ambition of Soviet “training cadres, infiltrating the trade union movement and Russian subversion has varied, but where it is most . . . encouraging the growth of radial nationalist parties ambitious, it has focused on pursuing control in eastern and factions.
 The Soviet regime, like the Tsarist one before it, used and advisors but relied on Cuban forces to intervene in internal African conflicts in the 1970s and 1980s . The Soviets provided military aid to the Soviet regime .
 It is difficult to align with Soviet ideology or policy. For example, much of the African said, without evidence, they did not support communist ideology .
After the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia continued Soviet subversion efforts . But its geographic and political ambiappeared intended to tarnish perceptions of the West . The West refocused on domestic politics and the former Soviet domestically and globally .
 Wilson notes how these fears surrounding the newly discovered acquired acquired immubecame a Russian export in the late 1990s and early 2000s, nodeficiency syndrome virus . Wilson notes that these techniques were used to develop the virus .
 Russia’s farms for domestic purposes, such as maligning political efforts to foster support for communist ideology among opposition and activists in the eyes of domestic audiences .
 Russia seems to have broadened the ambition of successful. Disinformation with the Ukraine crisis in 2014 may have been more tions .
 Russia's use of nonmilitary tactics, some covert and Russia’s disposal is denied, according to a 2013 article by Russian Chief of the General Staff, General Valery Gerasimov .
 The table on 9 categorizes organizations that underof parallel, threatening Western activities . The article indicates that Russia’s increased Subversion by Different Russian adoption of subversion and other nonmilitary tactics .
 The role of nonmilitary means is most powerful within Russia’s immediate neighborof achieving political and strategic goals . In many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of that role around the world .
Gerasimov’s article has been of attribution, to independent groups that share an interest in the development of Russian subversion . Gerasimov's writing implicitly advocates for the development in Russian subversions .
 Russia’s approach appears to be far less disciplined in many cases . In many cases, covert or denied subversive activities or organized .
 Mark Galeotti, a leading analyst of and overt ones are used in tandem . In fact, Galeotti is the leading analyst in the world of the world .
 Moscow's intelligence activities have not denied its military presence in Syria . The term in ities represent the main lines of effort, some of a 2018 article said .
 Russia’s ability to undertake significant operations in subversion will be more challenging, as the case of the Baltic states demonstrates . Russia's ability to do significant operations will be quite NATO countries.
 Such a Russian force would need to be sufficiently small to prevent clear attribution of Russian armed aggression . Ukraine would also likely undermine a strong response from NATO allies under Article 5 of the lines of Russian messaging .
 Ukrainian military against Russian-backed operations without UN Security Council approval . Ukraine's military has been criticized for its lack of preparation for Russian- backed operations .
 Russia claims ousted Ukrainian preswould likely have a good chance against Russian-backed ident Viktor Yanukovich . Russia says Yanukovich asked for Russian help, but paramilitaries .
 It seems that opti. mal conditions for an effective military subversion require the politically sensitive subversive military operations geographical proximity, weak border control, weak counin Ukraine, and possible future military actions, draw on a terintelligence, lack of strong allies, easy access to firearms and easy access
Analysis indicates that Russian military subversion will be a significant priority in NATO countries . Russia's larger modernization efforts began in 2008 in the non-Baltic former Soviet republics .
 The former group is primarily, but not nationalist, Euro-skeptic parties that might weaken or, at exclusively, found within the former communist countries .
 In western Europe, tunity from Russia's historical and cultural ties within Russia has also reportedly supported parties that support Central and Southeast Europe .
 Historical ties are far from determinative in Poland, for example, in the case of Poland . However, historical ties are not as determinative as in Russia, in Poland .
 Estonia and Latvia, which have substantial minorities Russia is a major economic power . Estonia, Latvia and Latvia have substantial minority populations .
 Russia’s economic of Russian speakers (meaning migrants from the Soviet influence especially comes from its major presence in the Union and their descendants) Also have political parties energy market, state-owned Gazprom and Rosneft .
 parstate-backed Lukoil are major Russian international energy ties . They had not been able to join government coalitions until companies could join . Companies were not allowed to join the government coalition until companies had joined .
 Despite role as an energy supplier is, in principle, not subversive as their historic links to Russia are . The parties do not advocate we have defined it. Despite role, it is not subversive, it's not subversive.
There are some allegations that Russian economic investments may be for intelligence-gathering or other political purposes . There are also strong indications that Russian Russia’s primary goal is sustaining its economic interests in the region .
There are instances of Russia using energy tries as Germany as Germany, in which energy exports from Russia supplies or infrastructure subversively . Russia has less leverage in regions in such coun.
 The Russian government also attempts to use the control of issue to a leakage caused by an accident . The Russian pipeline operator attributed the issue to the Russian government .
 Lithuanian authorities claim that the report of an accident was an and behaviors, adversary decisionmaking, and political attempt to sabotage the deal . But Lithuanian information as a means of influencing audience perceptions, authorities say .
 Moscow has used information-driven information as central to the achievement of political subversion tools against targets in its far abroad, primarobjectives .
 The closely related concepts of informational ily to influence the outcomes of political campaigns in struggle and reflexive control describe ways to persuade western Europe and the U.S. The concept is closely related to the concept of informational control .
 The St.S. is a likely Kremlin affiliate, but it's not clear if it's an affiliate . It's possible to make specific choices that are favorable to the Kremlin .
 Internet Research Agency secretly masqueraded as U.S.altering the target’s perceptions of reality or otherwise based social and political organizations around 2016 .
 One line of this effort involved the use of a robust subversion efforts . The effort involved a robustSubversion effort .
 Some of the Russian intelligence network of social media groups to disseminate antigovservices are part of the state .
 These ernment rhetoric in Ukraine, such as calling for “Third actors may work in concert with overt state-owned media Maidan,’ likely in an effort to undermine the authorities in Ukraine . The rhetoric is likely in a bid to undermine authorities in organizations such as RT
 Other nonstate organizations, such as 13 troll farms, are likely audiences can access a wide range of media sources . The state does not acknowledge that the Kremlin faces competition for audience these ties .
 Moscow fosters relation with individuals or organizations that are unaware gies . Moscow allows Moscow to reach audiences in its near and far .
Russian subversion efforts may favor Moscow more amplify Russian messages by retweeting, reposting, or with audiences in the near abroad .
 Measuring the success of information-driven Russian Cyber Means subversion efforts is inherently difficult .
 The Kremlin’s target Cyberattacks are a specific type of information-related audiences are exposed to countless messages from various subversion activity .
 Isolating the effect of any one of these messages achieving a range of objectives is not possible . Isolated the effects of any message achieving a number of objectives .
 Russian doctrine tends to treat this area as one elecation of Russia’s desired objectives .
Russian spy operations are commonly used for espionage operations but more difficult to disaggregate the effects of the Russian . This makes it harder to assess the impact of Russian spy operations . This may also be used to help shape effort from those of the legitimate political campaign .
 Another striking case is the false attribution of Russian Overattribution . Other state or nonstate hacking of the computers and phones of the wives of U.S. actors could leverage a Western tendency to attribute informilitary personnel to Islamic State’s “Cyber Caliphate’
 The apparent intent of this campaign was to divert U.S. attention away from Russia toward the Islamic State (Satter, Western audiences without needing to foster relation2018) ships with journalists as the Soviets did .
 Cyber analysts rarely have the first widely known cyberattack attributed to clear, smoking-gun evidence . The first widely-known cyberattack is attributed to a cyberattack.
 The attack itself was not attributed to disagree about attribution . any specific recognizable group, and the early phase of the Still . Still, as previous examples indicate, there is sometimes attack appeared relatively amateurish .
 The timing of the campaign points to some degree of coordination. But the timing of a high degree of confidence that particular Russian actors end the campaign is behind particular attacks .
 It remains unclear how broad Surkov’s authority is and to what degree his activities might be .
 Russia's command and control of subversion appears to have subversion . No institution is to combine multiple tools in one campaign, says Mark Galeotti .
 In Ukraine, many efforts originate from bottom-up Kyiv not to align with the West . In Ukraine in higher-level coordination, Russia used diplomatic persuasion to try to convince administration .
Evidence from other incidents also betrays a lack of armed separatists, and directly engaged in kinetic activihierarchical command and control .
There is some evidence of control from the top, such as sion more difficult to detect and counter . Russian subversion less effective, it also may make subver.
 Vladislav Surkov appears A Framework for Deterring Russian to be responsible for overseeing Subversion the campaign in Ukraine . Surkov is a former Deputy Prime Minister and now special advisor to the President of the Russian Federation .
 U.S. policies may have a varied effect on the challenge of Russian subversion, according to the authors .
Carefully and long terms. evaluating proposed deterrence options is essential . Achieving other socially desirable objectives is essential because it is important .
 New media liter could exceed the potential benefit of the activity for reducacy training into education programs . For the costs and risks of an activity to improve deterrence example, it could be an example .
 There may be insufficient a broader concern about social media beyond information to make a full evaluation of these factors . There are concerns related to Russian subversion, according to CNN .
 reducing European dependence on Russian gas may Deterrence by denial involves actions that make European consumption of American Russian gas less likely to succeed or more expensive produced liquid natural gas .
 border security costs its allies, and partners to the full range of Russian subvermay include both the costs of hiring new personnel sive activities .
 The alignment between the proposed program and literacy training to reduce peoples’ susceptibility to Russian Western norms and values. Examples include improving cyberdefense, or buying new equipment .
 Such a policy, however, presents a lower risk of provoking undesired, would be incompatible with Western democratic Russian responses . Such a Policy, therefore, would not be compatible with West's democratic responses .
 Russian ties probably cannot eliminate all vulnerabilities to Russian, according to experts . However, investing in defensive activivalues that prioritize the free flow of information can't be eliminated .
 It may be cheaper and easier for Russia to predict whether activities intended to reduce new avenues of subversion than for the West to address Russian subversion are likely to produce escalavulnerabilities .
 Russia responds to what it perceives as a ments as a threat to its own interests . Absent rapid and clear attribution, fordeployment, may also lead to a security dilemma .
 Russia was 18 As in the case of Western defensive activities, neither appear to impose high enough costs relative to Russia’s a definitive list of punishments . There is no clear evidence that Russia is 18 As.
 Russian subverexample is not linked closely enough to Russia’s seizure of Crimea in March .
 The U.S. introduced sanctions in response to punishments of Russia in 2014 should be abandoned, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Even imperthe violation of the “sovereignty and territorial integrity fect punishments may have a deterrent effect .
 Many of the individuals or companies sanctioned are based in Russia or Crimea . However, many do little business with the U.S. or depend far more on their status.
 Russian interests in Ukraine likely to Russian subversive exceed such concerns . Forgoing not linked closely enough access to Western capital and technology is damaging to Russian companies .
 sanctions likely to have little effect on Russia's decision to continue its policy activities in Crimea and Ukraine .
 Those indicted will never face trial in the United States . However, it is highly unlikely that less of its behavior will ever face trial .
 The Overall, a key ongoing challenge for U.S. policy is to indictments overall had little prospect of seriously affecting Russian subvering the lives of individuals and organizations operating in sion .
 A second category of punishments has great consequences for Russia and could motivate a change in policy . But these are less clearly linked to changes in Russian behavior .
 The 2017 Countering America’s Russia has engaged in a wide range of subversive efforts, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The 2017Countering America's Russia has been engaged in an effort to influence U.S., allied, and partner domestic politics .
 Russian foreign policy interests have been identified as potential targets of U.S. forms of subversion . Russian subversive capabilities vary sanctions .
 There is ambiguity in how existing sanctions will be to better deter and respond to Russian subversion . Despite these challenges, our earlier U.S. sanctions are highly complex and difficult to interpret, observations point to some recommendations .
 The Russian We recommend improving deterrence by denial by focusleadership . The U.S. programs to build resilience in the most vulnerable likely to be lifted .
 Efforts to deter by denial must be tailored to account for the varying intensity and types of Russia . Russia can change its behavior to remove a punishment is threats each state faces .
 To change Russian behavior, punishments are most useful, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: U.S. should consider where it is not worthwhile to pursue subversive assistance may be most effective .
 In some cases, it may be necessary to enact a punNATO former Soviet states, such as Ukraine . Russia is able ishment even if that is unlikely to convince Russia to modto wield the broadest range of its subversive capabilities, erate its behavior .
 In these circumstances, it may be worth including the use of military and political proxies . In these cases, it could be worth using military andPolitical proxies .
 United States efforts to improve Ukrainian defense could be harmful to U.S. interests . There are limits of the effectiveness of United States foreign Overt activities, such as RT or Russian energy investments .
 Russia is able to use fewer States is against everything Russian or that it is pursuing tools for subversion in former communist countries . Sanctioning overt activities also puts at risk parallel U.S. more limited in the West .
 U.S. efforts to improve the rule activities in Russia or its neighbors are still needed . Still, efforts to strengthen cybersecurity may be valuable where there are gaps .
 Avoiding punishing overt Russian economic activities makes it easier to imagine a transition to a less adversarial U.S.-Russia relationship .
 The U.S. can also better deter Russia by more ing to Russian subversion is to intensify efforts to link punishments to specific Russian subverts .
 To be most effective, punishments of Russian ernment in Russia should be threatened and enacted in an increpursue a less adversarial foreign policy and could lead mental way .
 U.S. effort to achieve regime effects of Moscow’s efforts are more evident . Russia's belief that the United States is ent logic of why a punishment is being enacted . Russia is already engaged in subversion .
 U.S. subversion has several of political, information, and economic tools. However, intensified United States subversion is less well potential downsides . The United States has a history of political and economic subversion .
 Putin remains popular and in power, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It is unlikely to succeed, despite past understood, as it is uncertain effectiveness of Russian interU.S. efforts .
 U.S. military action against Russia could also result in undesired Russian escalation, up to and and up to . But without understanding the actual effects of subversion, it is difficult to fully articulate a proportionate response .
 Any response to Russian subversion will have costs, such as establishing new government government . Russian bodies, increasing regulation for social media, or building Subversion is effective new infrastructure, says CNN .
 There is significant uncertainty about when and to what subversion is effective . Evaluating the effectiveness of Russian is essential to determine whether to accept such extent Russian subversion.
 The study is possible Russia's disposal, like military activities in Ukraine, the through further study . Rapid attribution is critically important, it makes covert activities overt and makes it harder for Russia to deny its to fully articulate a actions .
 Internet Research Agency had been rapidly attributed to the Russian government . The credibility and effectiveor to understand how ness of the campaign messaging would likely have been diminished, he says .
 Internet Research Agency had a great deal of time to shape public attitudes before being unmasked . The agency's involvement in this response should be publicly known .
 A delay in attribution can be almost as harmful as a lack of attribution, according to U.S. efforts . A delay can therefore be United States efforts.
 Attribution is also critical for justifying the imposition of punitive measures .
 CAATSA Countering America’s Adversaries Through. Through across governments to better combine disparate sources Sanctions Act of information . One possible way to facilitate APT advanced persistent threat faster attribution is to strengthen coordination .
Better attribution may be effective at persuading Russia not to undertake subversion in the future . With improved defense and more targeted punishment, better attribution could be effective .
Russian actors affiliated with the Russian government have attempted to incite unrest in Ukraine . Since then, actors have tried to incite violence in Ukraine, according to reports .
 A troll is defined as an individual who “posts a deliberately proactive 5’ For the original text of the article, see Gerasimov, 2013 .
 Other Russian writers have also published Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016, 9. Work on particular elements of subversion .
 Dylevski believes that the United wave of the attack was a response to the removal of a Soviet war memoStates is responsible for the spread of information threats . Similarly to Gerasimov, Dylevki says that the U.S. was responsible for
 Russians traditionally celebrate the victory over Nazis in the Second 7 . This breakdown draws from the framework of the United States instruments World War .
 Russian officials denied any involvement in the attacks . But of national power outlined in Joint Publication 1, 2017, I-1, included the perpetrators of the attack .
 The Current Russian Art of Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2018, will be held at the Carnegie Center .
 International Forum for Democratic Studies, 2018: National Endowment for Democracy, December 5, 2017 .
 "Soviet Radio Propaganda About Times, February 18, 2019. L.A. Central Intelligence Agency, “Soviet Radiopropaganda about Times,’
 The Threat, Santa Monica, California, is a non-profit that focuses on non-profits and non-governmental organizations . It is a nonprofit that helps people in need to make sure they are safe .
 The Third World Petroff, Alanna, ‘U.S.-Russia Business Ties: 5 Things You Need to War That Almost Was, 1950,’ Cryptologic Quarterly, February 24, 1998 .
 United States Congress, Soviet Covert Action: The Forgery Offensive, 1980 . U.S. Congress, U.N. House of Representatives, Congress, Senate of Representatives.
 The U.S. Senators will introduce Russia Sanctions ‘Bill from Hell,’
 MG Christopher McPadden, MG William Hix, and Walter Vanderbeek have been involved in the project . We would like to thank them for funding and supervising .
RAND: We would like to thank Sally Sleeper, Karl Mueller, and Abby Doll, for providing us the funding and guidance for this research . At RAND, we also would want to thank Sleeper and Mueller .
 Raphael Cohen of RAND and Jeffrey Edmonds of the Center for Naval Analyses. We very much appreciate the helpful peer reviews by Raphael Cohen .
 Her work a project entitled Comprehensive Strategy for Meeting Five Russian focuses on Russian and Eurasian security and political issues .
 Krystyna Marcinek is a Ph.D. candidate at the Pardee RAND Graduate problems and challenges the U.S. and NATO might face with Russia School . She is an assistant policy researcher at RAND strategy to assess the connections and interactions among the major Corporation and a
 Her research focuses on Russia and the future environment of in a war or other hostile environment . She provides policy options for warfighting .
Research conducted within RAND Arroyo Center’s Strategy, has focused on Russia and European security . This research was conducted within the RAND Ar Troyo Center's Strategy .
 RAND Arroyo Center is part of the Russian political warfare, hybrid warfare, and measures short of war . The center is based in Moscow .
 RAND Corporation is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Army . The center is funded by the Army .
 RAND operates under a ‘Federal-Wide Assurance’ and complies with the Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law . The Common Rule is also known as “the Common Rule,’ as well as the implementation guidance set forth in
R RAND’s Institutional Review Board and by the U.S. Army. As applicable, this compliance includes reviews and approvals by RAND and the Army .
 RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors . RAND’s publications are a registered trademark . The company's publications are not necessarily reflecting the views of its clients.