Putin is preparing a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, but in Kiev, this threat is underestimated .
 Russian press said it would take them three more years to prepare for the west . It was said in the Russian press that it would taken them three years to get enough weapons and train .
 It is possible that they will not attack, that everything they will do will place their weapons around and threaten the country simply by saying "We can break you tomorrow"
 Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov said that the task was to financially interest representatives of the ""family"" of Yanukovych . Ponomariov said he did not just confirm, but that it was the direct bribery .
 "At the very least, we expect Russia to continue to use propaganda, social media, arsonists, sympathetic speakers and other means of influence," says the director of the National Intelligence Agency .
 For the first time from Labitnangi, Oleg called that transfer and money to the account are not needed yet . Oleg said that transfer, money and transfer is not needed for the account .
 NATO provides strong political support, strong practical support to Ukraine . NATO also provides strong support for Ukraine, according to the EU .
 He lost power, and the country sharply swung "to the west, that is, it was not better, but worse," he says .
 One-time team was registered again, with this time the speed from the MVP3 was larger and continued to increase . After the second appearance of the specified one-time command, the crew shut off the autopilot .
The speed reading from the MVP1 continued to fall and after 34 seconds after the autopilot off, they began to equal 0.0 . All further flight was in manual mode . The MVP1 was in Manual mode when it began to fall .
 Yulia Tymoshenko resorted to statistical manipulation during an interview with one of the Ukrainian TV channels . The politician reported a substantial increase in the national debt and said it had occurred for four years .
 The Russian Federation has placed a very powerful military potential in the occupied Crimean territory .
 The Crimea is a very powerful military capability . It is only for defense only for the defense. They are concentrated in Crimea .
 We analyze the situation and see a danger not only to the north and east but also south it is also a fact .
Russia occupied the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in 2014 . Russia occupied the region in 2014. Russian military anti-diversion training took place in January 2018 .
 The game started with a good ending performed by the British who earned three points . The Russians recognized the defeat after seven days .
Hackers broke several FBI-related sites and posted thousands of federal agents to the network .