 The Art of Limited War Commentary was published in War on the Rocks last March . Lawrence Freedman considered Ukraine and the art of crisis management in May .
 My aim was to explore the relevance of the Cold War in relation to the unfolding drama of Ukraine . The challenge is to secure essential interests without triggering a wider war, he says .
 The crisis has been badly managed by Russia, not particularly well by the West and with great difficulty by Ukraine. I judged the crisis to have been badlymanaged by Russia .
 The consequences of the failure of crisis management lay not so much in expanding the area of conflict . Instead in continuing and unsettling violence within Ukraine, there is a sharp deterioration in relations between Russia and the West .
 The role of Russian forces within Ukraine was evident from the start of the crisis . But gradually became even more overt as indigenous separatist forces were unable to cope .
 This resulted in a shift in the character of the crisis over the course of 2014 . This led to a change in the characters of the Crisis over the year .
 It moved from an externally sponsored insurgency in eastern Ukraine to a limited war between Ukraine and Russia . It has some unique features.
 This was perhaps better described as a de-escalation, because the fighting did not stop . This is perhaps better called a "de-escalations" because the fight did not end .
 It was sufficient for attention to be given to the consequential political steps. It was, however, sufficient to give to the political steps .
 In this essay, I take up the story from early May to the start of October . In this article, I consider what, if any, strategic lessons might be drawn from this most recent stage in the conflict .
Like my last essay on the subject, I will expand this into a longer reflection in Survival . Like his last essay, I'll expand this to longer reflection on Survival .
 The next stage in the conflict over the political future of Ukraine will depend on how the issue of the governance of territory occupied by separatists is handled .
 If the conflict bursts out of its current limits then the next essay in this series will have an even more alarming topic .
 The most recent stage of the conflict has stressed the originality of Russian tactics, with regular reference to ‘hybrid war’ – combining overt and covert operations .
 Once Ukraine was able to put regular forces into its “anti-terrorist operation, this approach failed, writes David Frum .
 Any analysis relies on inferences about Putin’s objectives and calculations . Until more is revealed about Russian decision-making during the crisis, any analysis relies upon inferences .
 Putin's view is that the wider conflict with the European Union and NATO had reached an uncomfortable stage for Putin . Putin's views are that the broader conflict had reached a uncomfortable stage.
 Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has accepted a cease-fire in Ukraine . He could have taken more Ukrainian territory, but chose to accept the cease-fires .
 At the same time, by exuding menace towards Ukraine and Western Europe he sought to resist further pressure . He sought to resisted further pressure from the West .
 Russia's position depended on the possibility that it was prepared to continue escalation . Russia’s position depended upon the possibility of a further escalation .
 The West's response was shaped by an evident reluctance to escalate and anxiety about moving into a less contained conflict . The West’s response was seen as a reluctance to escalation and anxiety .
 In the end the power balances were still in the West’s favor. This was despite the fact that in the end, the West's favor was in its favor .
In Ukraine, the most effective forms of control involve regular armed forces and superior firepower . In terms of the theory of limited war, the case of Ukraine confirms that in disputes over territory, most effective form of control involves regular forces .
 The concept of limited war has an even longer history than that of crisis management . II. II the concept oflimited war has a long history. II.
 It requires that the belligerents choose not to fight at full capacity, so prevent a conflict gaining in intensity and expanding in both space and time .
This is different from the need to accept natural limits imposed by resources and geography . This is different to the need for natural limits to be accepted by geography and resources .
 A strong state employs only limited forces to deal with opponents with inferior capabilities . Nor is it relevant when a strong state uses only limited force todeal with opponents.
 The rise of colonialism demonstrated, as the rise ofcolonialism demonstrated . Against such opponents complete victories can still be achieved, as well as complete victories .
 The concept comes into play only when the limits have been chosen and accepted by both parties . The concept is only a matter of time when both parties have chosen the limits .
 As a distinctive concept, limited war depended on a contrast with total war . The term was popularized by the First World War, when the parties would push war to its extremes .
 This appeared as the logical conclusion of the Napoleonic period with the departure from the inherently limited conflicts of the eighteenth century . This appears as a logical conclusion to the transformation of war begun during the Napolesonic period .
 The old routines became obsolete with the expectation that the full resources of states would be pitted against each other in Darwinian struggles for survival .
 If both sides could accept that whatever was at stake was not worth an all-out confrontation, then any effort to protect interests would be governed by some sense of how far they were prepared to go .
 The conundrums this created were first thrown into relief during the Korean War of 1950-53 .
 The United States neither extended the war into China nor used nuclear weapons . In the end, the U.S. accepted an outcome that could be characterized as stalemate rather than victory .
 A compromise left one half of Korea under communist rule but the world intact . A number of new generation of civilian strategists sought to explain why this was a good rather than bad outcome .
 The U.S. would face a dilemma with a limited Soviet advance . If the United States was prepared to fight only total war and lacked a capacity for limited war, normally understood as strong regular forces .
Each slice of salami would appear not to be worth a major conflict . But cumulatively, the successive slices would eventually turn into the whole .
 Limited war capabilities meant being able to respond to a challenge in the terms in which it was posed and so dare the enemy to take the risk of escalating to the next and more dangerous level .
 The word ‘escalation’ entered the lexicon during the 1950s as a warning about why wars might not stay limited .
 Once forces of great size and complexity began to clash, it would be hard to exert control over the course of the conflict .
 Actions might be taken because of confusion, misapprehension, panic and passion. Actions may be taken due to panic and confusion .
 Once a conflict began, more would soon be at stake than the original matter in dispute . The original matter would be more at stake.
 The prospect of loss raised questions of reputation, credibility and pride . The effort might have to be increased to levels well beyond the original stake .
Escalation could describe a tragic process whereby belligerents ramped up the action in responses to each other . Escalation therefore could describe the tragic process of being belligerented .
 The original metaphor derived from the moving staircase that took you up to a place you might not want to go because you could not get off .
 The theorists of escalation resisted the idea of a loss of control, suggesting instead that it might be possible to find a level at which a war might be fought which suited one side’s capabilities .
 The issue of proportionality was always present in any discussion of limited war . The issue was alwayspresent in any talk of limited War .
Military commitments must reflect not only the value of whatever was in dispute, but also the logic of combat . It was also complicated, for military commitments to reflect the value in dispute .
In addition, somehow limits must be recognized, agreed to and enforced . In addition, some limits must also be recognized .
This required some sort of shared understandings about thresholds and boundaries . This required some kind of shared understandingings about boundaries and boundaries. This required a shared understanding about thresholds .
 There might be natural lines – set by geography or types of weaponry or targets – but to serve the purposes of limitation they would still need to be confirmed through forms of communication .
 Some diplomatic activity would be necessary if a conflict was to be kept limited . Some diplomatic activities would be needed if the conflict was kept limited.
 The rhetoric necessary to mobilize public opinion behind any operation could be scaled down when a threshold was reached or a deal had to be made . Another issue was whether the rhetoric needed to mobilizepublic opinion could be scale down .
 In the end the essence of a limited war is compromise, and this was always going to be difficult when the enemy has been described in the darkest terms, and the stakes raised to an existential level .
 With the end of the East-West confrontation, the issue of limited war became less pressing . The issue oflimited war was less pressing.
 The wars fought by western countries were inherently limited, and only rarely with another state . The wars in western countries are inherently limited .
 There were challenges in terms of time taken and resources expended, but their discretionary nature meant that if the demands of a campaign exceeded the value of the objective, an intervention could be drawn to a close .
 This year’s developments in Ukraine revived the question of limited war . The confrontation morphed into an inter-state war with high stakes and with one side a nuclear power .
 NATO of course was not directly engaged in the fighting, but it had to consider whether and how it might get involved, assess Russian objectives .
 Once the crisis broke, the immediate focus was on first Crimea and then the southeast of Ukraine, the most Russian part of the country .
Novorossiya is the name of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics . This was reflected in the revival of the historic name of Novorossya as proclaimed .
 Putin expressed astonishment that this area had been allowed to join Ukraine in 1922 . The transfer of Crimea and Sevastopol to Ukraine in 1956 was the first .
 Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity are challenged by Russia's claims . They also implicitly write off a large part of Ukraine as being beyond Russian influence .
 The EU's, and even NATO’s, enlargement could continue if the rest of the country were left alone . The rest of Europe is left alone, then the EU’'s, could continue .
 This was already present with the frozen conflicts in Moldova and Georgia, and the position of the Baltic States, notably Estonia . This is already present in the Baltic states, including Estonia .
 Some of Putin's rhetoric even unnerved his notional partners in the Eurasian Union, Belarus and Kazakhstan .
 Poland, Sweden and Finland will soon come into the frame for Russia's aggression . There could be further worries that once Russia moves into expansionist mode there would be few limits on its aggression .
 The Security Council has a permanent seat on the Security Council . It is a great power by virtue of its nuclear arsenal and permanent seat .
 It rebuilt its armed forces during recent years of economic growth . It would struggle to cope with a multi-front campaign or a prolonged occupation of a substantial hostile population .
Should NATO's Article V commitments be triggered, Russian forces would be outnumbered and face superior air power from the U.S. and other allies . If NATO’s Article V commitment is triggered, Russia would be out of control .
 Its GDP is close to that of Italy and its per capita GDP less than Poland’s . Poland's GDP is less than Italy's .
 Crimea is already struggling with Crimea and none of its frozen territories are economic success stories . It is already struggles with Crimea, but it's not a success story .
 Putin's dreams may be irredentist, but for the moment, practicalities limit that dream .
 In 1787, when Empress Catherine II visited Crimea after a devastating war, Grigory Potemkin sought to create an erroneous impression of a vibrant settlement . The region's governor tried to create a false impression of the region.
 This was achieved by fabricating villages on the banks of the Dnieper, populated by Potemkin's men .
 The Empress's barge would then be dismantled to be reconstructed further down the river . These would exist only as the Empress’s barge passed and would be dismantled .
 Russian practice has been a feature of Russian practice, even during the Cold War, to hide weakness by creating an impression of strength .
 A brief account of the pattern of Russian intervention in Ukraine demonstrates that it has been driven by weakness as much by strength .
 Putin's determination to set the future direction of Ukraine was obtained through an old-fashioned bribe in November 2013 . President Yanukovich rejected an association agreement with the EU and opted instead for the nascent Eurasian Union .
 The uprising centered on Kiev, ending with Yanukovich’s flight in February, led to an uprising . This led to the likelihood of the whole country pulling away from Russia, according to CNN .
 Russia's annexation of Ukraine has reduced Russia's influence over Ukraine, including the eastern parts . Russia’s annexation of this territory, however, further reduced Russia”s influence over the east .
 Those who wished for greater autonomy feared that the end result would be incorporation into Russia . Those who wanted greater autonomy were worried that Russia would be incorporated into Russia.
 The use of professional soldiers in uniforms without markings was first noticed in Crimea .
 Russian special forces were deployed again in April as indigenous separatists seized buildings and facilities in the Donbas area . The efforts centred on the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 At first these operations were successful, in part because the local response by Ukrainian security forces was weak .
 The rebellion has struggled to establish itself because of a lack of popular backing . Even with Russian backing, the rebellion struggled to established itself .
An attempt to hold referenda in support of separatism was farcical and soon barely mentioned . An attempt to support separatism in support was soon hardly mentioned .
 Resistance from workers in the Donbass helped push out separatists from weak positions in cities such as Mariupol .
 The Ukrainian military stepped up its effort against the separatists after the election of President Poroshenko in May .
 Russia began to move in more advanced equipment, including GRAD rockets and anti-aircraft weapons . Russia's "anti-terrorist operation" made inroads into separatist territory .
 The furor that followed added to Russia's isolation, not helped by Moscow’s refusal to accept any responsibility . Russia's refusal to take responsibility for the furor added to the isolation .
 Western sanctions, first introduced after the annexation of Crimea, were intensified after Crimea's annexation .
 It also distracted the separatists’ attention from the defense of their positions. It also distracts the separatists' attention from their positions .
Ukrainian forces pushed the rebels back to about half of their original holdings . Slowly but surely Ukrainian forces pushed them back to half of the original holdings.
 It looked likely that they would be pushed out of first Donetsk and then Luhansk . It looks likely that the Donetsk group would be pushing out of the city .
 At this point, a decision seems to have been taken in Moscow to get a grip on the situation . At this time, the situation seems to be under control .
 Donetsk and Luhansk Peoples’ Republics remain murky in internal politics . The separatist leadership changed, with the more obvious Russian placemen removed .
 In late August, Russian armed forces became involved in a more overt way . The Russian military became more overt.
 The starting point was an argument over a so-called humanitarian convoy to deliver assistance to the areas under siege . The argument was over a convoy delivering assistance to those under siege.
 tanks and troops moved into position to re-supply Luhansk, where they took the airport . Soon more important were the tanks, and troops moving into position .
More seriously, they seized the border town of Novoazovsk and threatened the port of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov . The border town is also threatened by the Russian army, which is now in Crimea .
 Denials of direct Russian involvement in support of separatists had long been implausible . But now they have little credibility .
 A further problem was opened up as Russian soldiers were killed fighting in Ukraine, leading to subterfuges to hide the real cause of death or explain their presence .
 It gave back ground in the Donbass and was forced to suspend the anti-terrorist operation to concentrate on defense . The anti-terrorism operation was suspended to focus on the defense .
 Ukrainian forces pushed back towards the coastal city of Mariupol . Ukrainian forces were pushed back into the coastal town .
 The cease-fire agreed on Sept. 22, with rebel leaders using ambiguous language originally proposed by President Poroshenko to promise some autonomy for the territory .
 An agreement on Sept. proposed a buffer zone to separate the forces . Later, an agreement was proposed to separate forces in the area .
 There were reports of a more private Putin-Poroshenko agreement with harsher terms . There were also reports of an agreement with tougher terms .
 Ukraine's borders at the time did not guarantee that Russia would achieve its main aims . The positions held by separatists created a serious problem for Ukraine .
 There was no land corridor to Crimea and the territory controlled by the separatists was too small to make much sense as a stand-alone entity . But it was still large enough to require a substantial subsidy if it was not to collapse internally .
 It would be surprising if they returned while there was still a possibility of open warfare . It would also be surprising to see them return while there is still an open warfare possibility .
 The separatists continued to expand their area of control after the agreement . The separatists are still expanding their areas of control .
 In practice, it was not so much a cease-fire as an agreed de-escalation that concentrated the fighting in specific places, notably around Donetsk airport .
 This was held by government troops and thus undermined the separatist claim to be in charge of the city . This was also undermined by the government troops .
 Russian cities such as Mariupol, Crimea, need a land corridor to Crimea . It is unlikely that without a return to even greater and more overt Russian support, it can be taken . It's unlikely that any Russian support will be taken without the return of Russian support
 Ukrainian elections scheduled for 26 October are likely to see Russian sympathisers in the Kiev parliament marginalised .
 Ukraine finds itself severely weakened, with its economy in freefall and key territories out of its control . Ukraine's economy is in a freefall.
 Poroshenko has accepted the need for compromise in terms of more autonomy for the troubled regions and respect for Russian concerns . Poroshenko accepts the need to compromise, in terms for more autonomy .
 NATO leaders up to and around the alliance’s Cardiff summit of early September 2014, taking place at the same time as the cease-fire negotiations in Minsk .
 NATO members were not going to get militarily involved in Ukraine. Its effect at the time was to signal to both domestic audiences and Ukraine .
 The cease-fire may well have convinced Poroshenko not to continue to push back militarily against Russia and the separatists .
 NATO countries have been prepared to supply forms of military assistance to help Ukrainians resist further Russian advances . At most, NATO countries are prepared to provide military assistance .
 This mantra was at one level self-evident but at another missed the point . This mantra is at onelevel self-Evident, but at a another level self.
 Wars are political struggles and therefore any solution will be marked by a political settlement . War is political struggles. Wars are also political struggles .
 The military situation on the ground, however, will hardly be irrelevant . The situation is hardly as irrelevant as the military situation in the world .
 September’s tentative settlement was far more advantageous for the Russian position as a result of its direct intervention than it would have been without it. In this case, September's tentative settlement is far more beneficial for Russia than it was without it .
 V In discussion of this intervention, V has focussed on two distinctive though related features of the Russian campaign . V has focused on the Russian election campaign .
 The first was the development of so-called ‘hybrid warfare’ involving the integration of local agitators along with regular “volunteers’ from Russia .
 A constant challenge was mounted to the claims made by Ukrainian and western opponents of Russian action . A competing narrative was developed based on the illegal and fascistic nature of the Kiev government .
 This narrative pushed the notion that the Kiev government was solely responsibility for the conflict . The Malaysian airliner shooting down of the Malaysian airliner and the shelling of civilian areas.
 The term ‘hybrid warfare’ gained currency after Israel was said to have been surprised and discomfited during the 2006 Lebanon War by the combination of guerrilla and conventional tactics adopted by Hezbollah .
 As with many similar concepts, such as asymmetric warfare, it has tended towards a wider definition of art .
 There are many examples in military history of combination of regular and irregular forms of warfare . It does not refer to a new phenomenon, for there are many other examples .
 The question begged by this is the one of political control and the presumption of a unified adversary . The question begs by this. The question is one ofpolitical control and a united adversary .
 It can be challenging enough to meld together different units of the same army, for example special forces and infantry battalions . But even more difficult where the forces coming together not only have different military tasks and methods but also distinct command structures and possibly diverging political interests .
Russian and separatist forces in Ukraine have been faced by the Russians and separatists in Ukraine . If not quite comparable with the traditional challenges of coalition warfare, such problems are faced by Russia and separatists .
 The purpose of the force structure has been to deceive, geared to the pretence that the fighting force is wholly indigenous and supplemented by no more than some friendly volunteers .
 Valery Gerasimov has been appointed as chief of Russia's general staff . Gerasim was appointed in early 2013 by the Russian president . He has been in charge of Russia’s general staff since 2009 .
In conflict in the Middle East there had been a progressive erosion of the distinctions between war and peace . He described how in conflict there has been a progress in the Western debate .
Military measures could be supplemented by covert and thus deniable military measures as well as offers of peace-keeping assistance as a means to strategic ends . These could be supplemented by covert military measures and peacekeeping assistance .
 All of this could be supplemented by firing up the local populace as a fifth column and by “concealed’s armed forces .
 This may have been the approach adopted by Russia during the first months of the crisis in Ukraine . This may well have been taken by the Russian government during the crisis .
 It appears preparations had been made for this contingency for some time . It appears that preparations were made for the situation .
 The separatist forces had a complex structure, including local agitators, militants who had learned their trade in Chechnya and Georgia . Coordination was often poor and political leadership at times eccentric .
 Russian-supplied equipment was used recklessly by local people . Their methods alienated local people and used the sophisticated Russian equipment .
 Ukrainian forces could not cope with regular Ukrainian forces once they were organized and prepared to deploy firepower more ruthlessly . They eventually had to be rescued by progressive and eventually quite overt Russian intervention .
 This case shows some limits of hybrid warfare, and in particular the difference between combining different approaches in the same force and combining forces which are different in approach .
Russian strategists judge these to be important as a means of challenging the claims made by opponents and shoring up support at home . Russian strategists say they will be important to challenge claims by opponents .
 Assertions were made about a fascistic and illegitimate Ukrainian government . A larger narrative was made about the greatness, exceptional quality, and legitimate interests of Russia .
 Ukraine has shifted away from links with Western Europe to intensified links with Asia . Economic sacrifices and the risks being run in Ukraine were justified as enabling a shift away from Western Europe .
 The increasing control over national media and internet providers, along with intimidation of dissenters, has made it possible to shape Russian opinion . The increase in control of national media, internet providers and intimidation of dissidents is a problem .
 Enormous efforts were made to harass perceived opponents of Russia, including an army of trolls . Russia Today is a Russian-controlled news network with branches across the West .
 The first lies in the contrast between the effectiveness at home and abroad . The first lie in the stark contrast between its effectiveness and its effectiveness.
 Putin rode a wave of nationalist sentiment, particularly with regard to the annexation of Crimea . Putin became extremely popular at home, and rode the wave of nationalism .
 Outside of Russia, its positions taken in a series of awkward Security Council sessions were widely disregarded .
 Its attempts to shift blame for the downing of the Malaysian airliner failed . The Malaysian airliner was carrying passengers and crew from Malaysia .
 Moscow no longer cared even for plausibility, it was as if Moscow didn't care even for plausible deniability . But the starting point for Russian operations was plausible deniable .
 The second issue lies in the consequences for a government that insists on fictional descriptions of situations . The government insists on a fictional description of situations.
 Jeff Michaels has called a ‘discourse trap’ whereby consistency with the fiction means that it must be upheld even when the result is to push policies to counter-productive and absurd positions .
 There is no agreed foundation for diplomatic intercourse. It also means that there is no agreement on a diplomatic foundation .
 When an interlocutor insists on an alternative reality, it is hard to engage even on minor issues . When an Interlocator insists on a alternative reality it is difficult to engage .
 The third issue concerns the durability of Moscow’s narrative in Russia .
 Nationalists have already been unnerved by possible betrayals of separatists . If separate territories are in any way re-integrated into Ukraine, allegations of betrayal may surface again .
 The prospects for the Russian economy remain grim, with living standards squeezed as the country faces a recession and inflation .
 The decline in oil and gas prices and the inability of Russia to attract inward investment will add to the challenges . Russia's lack of inward investment is also a challenge for the country .
 Some Russian responses to sanctions, notably banning some agricultural products from the EU, are damaging to longer-term Russian interests . Some Russian response to sanctions are also damaging to long-term Russia interests .
 A combination of sanctions and self-harm suggests that the Russian economy is about to enter a period of severe turbulence . The Russian economy has been hit by a series of sanctions.
 The fourth issue is that Russian propaganda effort successfully created a sense of menace that probably had an effect in deterring the West from supporting Ukraine as much as it might have done . The fourth problem is that Russia's propaganda effort created asense of menace .
 Russia has staged incidents such as kidnapping an Estonian officer and regular violations of Western airspace . This effort has combined not only rhetorical threats, but also staged incidents, such as kidnap of Estonian police officer .
 Western commentary has often accepted it at face value and compared it unfavourably with the feebleness of the Western support . By way of contrast to Russian bluster and braggadocio, instead of challenging the foundations of the self-promotion, Western commentary.
 The doves have shown sympathy for Russia's stance, accepting that the origins of the crisis lie in Western expansionism rather than Ukrainian self-determination .
 The crisis over Ukraine has reshaped the European security debate. Nonetheless, the crisis has reshape the EU security debate .
 NATO is paying more attention to the Baltic states, while neutrals such as Sweden and Finland are getting closer to the alliance .
 NATO adopted a ‘Readiness Action Plan’ to establish military bases in Eastern Europe and a rapid response force to protect its members from Russian incursions . NATO adopted the “Readiness action plan’s’
 It committed financial and material support to Ukraine and regular military exercises on its territory . It also committed financial support to the Ukraine andregular military exercises .
 NATO has an answer to what it needs to worry about as it leaves Afghanistan. If nothing else, NATO has a answer to the question of what it should worry about .
 Energy security is on the agenda and that will lead to a gradual reduction of dependence upon Russian sources . Energy security will be reduced to less reliance on Russian sources, according to experts .
 Russia will wish to reduce its dependence on Western markets by looking to Asia . For its part, Russia will also want to look to Asia for its part .
 China is largely taking advantage of its weakness to achieve attractive deals on oil supplies . But Japan has also imposed sanctions on China .
 The Russian foreign minister even recently floated the idea of a new “reset’s’ with the U.S. The idea has been floated by the foreign minister .
 Both sides must accept a new reality as preferable to the risks involved into trying to move to an even better reality . This requires that both sides accept that new reality is preferable .
 Both sides must convince themselves that they can live with the outcome of the vote . Both sides need to convince themselves they can survive the outcome .
 The problem with the position reached in September 2014 is that it is not durable . The problem is that the position is not a durable .
 The crisis is not yet over because the future of Ukraine remains uncertain . The future of the Ukraine is uncertain because the country's future is uncertain .
 The annexation of Crimea will not be recognized, but not much will be done about this . The focus will remain on Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The dilemma for Putin remains the risk of losing real influence over these territories . The dilemma is whether they should be re-integrated into Ukraine, or lose influence over Ukraine .
 Ukraine struggles with its own dire economic situation, aggravated by the costs of war, and the need to deal with problems of chronic corruption and incompetence .
 The most important task for the West is to strengthen Ukraine economically while helping it rebuild its armed forces . It remains the case that the West remains the most important issue for the country .
 This is not yet a frozen conflict along the lines of those in Moldova and Georgia . There appears to be a view in western capitals that the worst of the crisis is over .
 NATO and the EU have damaged but not defeated Russia. By sticking to economic rather than military sanctions, the EU and NATO have damaged and not beaten Russia .
 In the first instance, the advantage sits with the military, in a contest between these two forms of hard power, in the first time .
 A definitive solution cannot be imposed, as in this case, then over time the advantage will swing to the economic. But if a definitive solution is not imposed, then the advantage is likely to swing .
 The United States and its allies have learned in Iraq and Afghanistan . It is one thing to occupy territory with superior force, but it is another to administer and reconstruct, as the U.S. has learned .
 Russia has sustained a weak position and boosted its bargaining position by conveying a readiness to escalate . Russia has a strong position and a strong bargaining position, according to a report .
 Russian rhetoric has been a constant of Russian rhetoric, including reference to nuclear capabilities . This has been the constant of Russia's rhetoric .
 From the start there were menacing deployments of Russian forces along the border . Russian forces were deployed to the border from the start .
 The menace was validated to a degree by the invasion of Ukrainian territory . The invasion of Ukraine was validated by the attack .
 The threat of escalation has had an effect on Ukrainian calculations . Kiev's awareness of its own limited ability to escalate has been reinforced by Kiev’s awareness .
 Russian threats were not quite Potemkin Villages, in that they had real substance, they were still exaggerated . While the Russian threat was not quite potemkinVillages, it was still exaggerated.
 Claims that Russia could march with ease to Kiev or turn off gas supplies without a thought for the consequences or pivot to China could be challenged on the basis of the underlying economic realities of its position .
 The gloomy prognostications by many Western commentators on how Putin was determined to take on all neighboring states in some ways boosted this aspect of Russian strategy, making the country appear to be more powerful than is actually the case .
 Putin's power play in Ukraine has been impulsive and improvised, without any clear sense of the desired end state . Putin’s power play is impulsive, improvised, according to Russian media .
 Donetsk and Luhansk are left in some separatist limbo . It is not clear that either have the capacity to provide a viable future . It will serve neither Ukraine nor Moscow if Donetsk andLuhansk fall into disrepair .
 The separatists will not allow its re-integration into Ukraine while Russia cannot afford to annex . Russia will not be able to allow it back into Ukraine, according to the separatists .
 Second stage proved that in a struggle over territory, superior force makes a difference . The second stage proves that in the second stage, superior forces make a difference.
 Russia will struggle to transform seized territory into a viable political entity . However, without popular support, Russia will be unable to transform into a credible political entity.
Russia has achieved limited gains but at high cost. After many months of effort Russia has achieved some limited gains . Russia has reached a high level of success in recent months .
 Lawrence Freedman has been Professor of War Studies at King’s College London since 1982 . He has been at the college since 1982.