 The Russian Federation is ready to exchange Ukrainian serviceman and a people's deputy . If Ukraine acknowledges the validity of the sentence handed down to her by a Russian court, it will be given to her .
 Ukraine's leadership is making every effort to return to her home, mother Hope Savchenko says . However, the leadership of Ukraine is trying to return her home .
 "When I was at it, he said that the 24 hours thinking about Nadia and decide on how to get her back, "said Ukrainian mother. When I was in it, I said that he said he was thinking about her 24 hours.
 She's too proud and won't admit to it, as it was all fabrication to begin with, she says . She says she's not proud of it, but it's all fabrication .
 Mark Feygin, lawyer of Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko, unable to visit her in remand prison for two hours .
 Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko continues her dry hunger strike . She is kept in the Novocherkassk remand prison in Rostov region of the Russian Federation .
 Before the sentence she had been on a dry hunger strike for six days and she made it . She had gone on a six-day hunger strike.
 In order to give the deceitful dogs, who watch her with surveillance video cameras, she does not use the shower and does not come close to the sink .
 Nadiia Savchenko was sentenced to 22 years in prison in the Russian Federation . His lawyer Ilya Novikov is expecting good news about his client .
 He said live live on Chorne Dzerkalo TV show on Inter TV channel, Censor.NET reports .
 Good news may come in one of the next few days. But it comes down to the fact that good news may be coming in the coming days .
 According to Novikov's information, Savchenko will not be transported in the coming days . Savchenko is not expected to be transported.
 I can say that they are likely to move in the right direction, albeit more slowly than we would like . I have to be careful, but I can be careful. I have been careful.
 Nadiia is in a critical condition in Russia, according to Russian media reports . She is being held in a state-run hospital in Russia .
Novikov reminded that Savchenko went on a hunger strike three days ago . Novikov: Savchenko's hunger strike was three days before he went on hunger strike .
 Police detained three participants of pickets in support of convicted Ukrainian citizen Hope Savchenko . In the center of the Russian capital Moscow, police detained three people .
 The detention took place when protesters succeeded each other at the monument, one activist says .
 Halperin, Artem Zvyagin Michael Kadanera and released from office . Later, the site "ATS-Info" reported thatHalperin and ArtemZvyagin had been released .
 On Saturday during pickets in support Savchenko was detained near the building of the presidential administration .
 In the "China Town" section was taken Lyudmila Lyubomudrova Love Nowosielski . In the "China Town"" section is taken LyUDmilaLyubomUDrova. In the 'China Town' section was
 They were released from the police, a report on violation of the order of public events . Subsequently, they were released.
 The state of Hope Savchenko in the Russian prison has deteriorated sharply . The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine has stated that the state of hope Savchenko is deteriorating sharply .
 Russia will not allow for any Savchenko Ukrainian doctors or consular officers persons . Foreign Ministry stressed that Russia will no longer allow for Savchenko doctors .
 The Foreign Ministry believes Russia is trying to hide the real state of health Savchenko . Savchenko's health is a direct threat to her life, the Foreign Ministry says .
 The United States defense department announced its intention to buy from Russia 18 rocket engine RD-180 . The U.S. defense department will buy the engine from Russia .
 Congress banned use of Russian engines for military purposes until 2019 . It is noted that after the illegal annexation of Crimea, Congress banned the use of Russia's engines .
 The United States intends to purchase them before the time, until their will . However, the U.S. will not buy them before their will.
 The lawyer held in the Russian Ukrainians Hope Savchenko Mark Feigin called unsubstantiated talk of its imminent release . The lawyer said Savchenko was being held in a Russian Ukrainians.
 Ukrainian defender said that "fundamental news" is waiting for the next week . Ukrainian defender says that the news will be 'fundamental'
 Nicholas Hope Savchenko Polozova missed in prison for more than five hours . His sister Hope and Faith are not allowed to stay in prison .
 The blood is less viscous, but it is a palliative. Of course, drip effect on the test results, the blood became more viscous . The blood became less viscOUS, but the blood is more acidic .
 Water shortages in the body on the ninth day of dry hunger strike destroys the hopes of the internal organs .
 He said that after several days of pressure and demands of the Federal Penitentiary Service today gave consuls the test results . The results were taken from the Hope on Monday and today .
 The facility director Vera has refused to allow the facility director to allow Hope to be adopted . "I'm afraid that the refusal to allow Vera serve as a catalyst for the adoption of Hope," says the lawyer .
 Nadia Savchenko's lawyer Mark Feygin does not believe in fast swap of his client . He says Savchenko is not interested in a fast swap .
 Nadia Savchenko's condition is critical, she's completely exhausted . Her sister, Vira Savchenko, managed to persuade her into having intravenous infusions . Nadia's lawyer Ilya Novikov says his client has been put on a drip .
 I have repeatedly said I'm ready to set the wheels in motion so as to return Nadiia Savchenko and other Ukrainian citizens back to Motherland . I have also said I's ready to return the Ukrainian citizens. I've repeatedly said that I'm prepared to
 The president said he needs to "put aside all sorts of politics and ensure the return as soon as possible," he said .
 Poroshenko: "I guess we managed to agree on a certain procedure of releasing Nadiia" Poroshenko said .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko called illegally convicted in Russia Nadezhda Savchenko and persuaded her to stop the hunger strike . President of the Ukraine Petro poroshenko called on Savchenko to stop hunger strike.
 Savchenko said he spoke with Russian President Vladimir Putin yesterday . He said Savchenko details of his conversation with Putin . Savchenko was speaking with Putin on Sunday .
 Petro Poroshenko hinted strongly on Tuesday that he had reached an agreement by telephone with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, to secure the release of a Ukrainian pilot sentenced to 22 years in a Russian jail .
 Nadia Savchenko was detained in June 2014 by Russian-backed separatists in the breakaway region of eastern Ukraine .
 Lawyers say her health has deteriorated sharply since she went on hunger strike following the end of her trial last month . Her lawyers said her health had deteriorated sharply after the trial.
 Mr Poroshenko said the phone call with Mr Putin had been the Ukrainian president’s idea .
 She says she had to write a lot of letters to their destinations . "said runners," she says .
 Hope was holding a hunger strike and severely weakened, it could not reply to the letters of people who support it and write in prison .
 Once Savchenko little stronger, he sits down at the letter to respond to all these people . Savchenko sits down to respond.
 Russia has a month to give an answer to the request for the extradition of Ukrainian People's Deputy of Hope Savchenko . Russia has been asked to extradite Savchenko to Ukraine .
 The requested State has one month to respond, plus another month it may further request . By convention, the requested state has one year to respond .
Based on political decisions, these terms can be accelerated. But based on political decision, such terms can also be accelerated . It can be difficult to predict which political decisions will change .
 The only question is whether the Kremlin agrees to fulfill part of its obligations "," says Polozov .
 He added that there is no progress in the admission of both Ukrainian and German doctors to Savchenko . He also added that no progress has been made in Savchenko's case .
 Yulia Stepanova announced a hunger strike in solidarity with the Ukrainian aviatrix . Activist of "European Belarus" Yulia stepanova announced the strike on April 18 .
 The family and personally Peter Poroshenko Savchenko agreed to stop the hunger strike . The Belarusian activist plans to starve until 1 May, despite much persuasion .
 Stepanova ready to change only in the event that Hope Savchenko released . Stepanova's plans Stepanova prepared to change in the events that Savchenko has released .
 Yulia Stepanova now can't attend the rally in support Savchenko at the building of the Russian Embassy in Minsk . A young child brings a child to the rally .
 Russian Ministry of Justice has received a request for the documents required for the transfer to the National Deputy of Ukraine Hope Savchenko, convicted in Russia .
 Request the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine on the eve of the provision of documents entered by facsimile . Request the ministry of justice of Ukraine.
 At the same time the Ministry said that the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons of 1983 does not regulate the terms of consideration of requests .
 Ukrainian pilots Hope Savchenko sentenced to 22 years in prison in Russia . Savchenko was sentenced by the consul of Ukraine in a Russian court .
 @poroshenko Hope holds, and we do everything in our power, says Klimkin . She suspended a hunger strike at the request of @ poroshenko Hope .
 Russian court convicted Savchenko, awarding her '22 'imprisonment and a fine of 30,000 rubles' Savchenko was convicted on March 22 .
 The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution and recommendations of the discussion of the report on the humanitarian problems of people during the military conflict in Ukraine .
 Questions raised during the discussion of Ukrainian political prisoners in Russia and its annexed Crimea .
 In a resolution adopted by 65 votes, there is also a demand to the Russian authorities to immediately release the citizen of Ukraine . The PACE Hope Savchenko is a delegate to the PACE hope Savchenko .
 The document also refers to the strengthening of sanctions against Russia . The document was published in the summer of 2013 .
 The adopted amendment to the resolution proposed to the member states of the Council of Europe to impose additional sanctions . The amendment is proposed to impose more sanctions on the member state of the council .
 Similar measures should be considered in relation to other Ukrainian prisoners detained by the Russian authorities on trumped-up charges .
 Moscow and Kyiv have agreed to swap Ukrainian pilot, MP and member of the Ukrainian delegation for two Russian GRU officers . Alexander Alexandrov and Yevgeny Yerofeyev were convicted in Ukraine .
 Russian news agency RBC reports. They will be transferred to serve their sentence at home until the end of May .
 Moscow will transfer Savchenko to Ukraine to serve her sentence, source says . Kyiv will return two Russian nationals, convicted in Ukraine .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko expects Ukrainian aviator Hope Savchenko to be able to return to Ukraine for a few weeks . Savchenko is a Ukrainian citizen of Ukraine .
 "I think for me personally and for many Ukrainians it will be a big celebration," he said . "For many Ukrainians, it will have a big party," he added .
 Poroshenko urged politicians not to make statements on the case Savchenko . Poroshenko urges politicians to not make statements about the case .
After a few times it was before, when it was reckless comments of politicians harmed business and moved the resolution of this issue "," said the president .
 Lawyer Mark Feigin submits complaint to the European Court of Human Rights . Hope Savchenko is accused of human rights violations in Ukraine .
 She was sentenced to 22 th years in prison for the murder of Russian journalists . She was convicted of murdering Russian journalists in 2012 .
 The chief officer of Russia's Novocherkassk detention center has given Nadiya Savchenko a package of documents needed for her extradition to Ukraine .
 Vira Savchenko, the sister of the imprisoned Ukrainian pilot, spoke to the Ukrainian TSN news outlet after meeting with Nadiya .
Kalganov, the prison director, told her it is necessary for the extradition . Kalganov said it was necessary for extradition .
 Vera Savchenko is in the consulate, its fate is now being decided at the highest diplomatic level . The fate of the Russian ambassador to Ukraine is being decided by the consulate .
 Since she was in a car with diplomatic plates, guards could not keep her . She was in the car with a diplomatic plate .
 The consuls actually it recaptured the border guards, "said Novikov .
 The lawyer believes that her sister Vera Savchenko Ukrainian pilots' today or in the coming days will be able to leave the territory of Russia .
 US does not have a clear deadline with respect to the holding of elections in the Donbass . But they insist on full compliance with international standards .
 Ukraine's main concern is to conform to international standards and the Constitution of Ukraine . The Ukrainian government wants the country to meet international standards .
 Toner says it is important to fulfill two fundamental conditions . However, it is also important to fulfil two fundamental Conditions, he says .
 Federal Penitentiary Service has started collecting documents necessary to further address the issue of extradition to Ukraine . Hope Savchenko servicewoman convicted in Russia.
 TASS reported the press service of the department on Wednesday, May 4 .
 Russian Federal Penitentiary Service said it agreed to refer to the court for the issuance of documents Kiev Ukraine Hope Savchenko citizen only if the Ukrainian side assures the execution of the sentence .
Ukrainka was found guilty of the murder of Russian journalist Igor Korneliuk and Anton Voloshin and the attempted murder of their colleagues . Ukrainka is found guilty.
 The representative of Ukraine to the Dmitri Kuleba told the Council of Europe can be lifted sanctions against Russia . Hope Savchenko will be transferred to Ukraine after being illegally detained .
 Verkhovna Rada deputy of Hope Savchenko does not relate to each other . According to him, the lifting of sanctions against Russia after the transfer of Ukraine is not a connection .
 I do not think Russia is now very close to a weakening or lifting of sanctions, he said . Russia is making significant efforts to achieve this "," he said Kuleba channel.
 Good news about the fate of Ukrainian political prisoners may appear before the end of May .
 Nadiia Savchenko's fate will be announced by the end of month . Other political prisoners held in the Russian Federation Yurii Soloshenko and Hennadii Afanasiev are also held .
"I would like to note that the president keeps the issue of their release on personal control," she said .
 So far the process of their release is blocked as the militants demand amnesty, she says .
 Nadiya Savchenko, George Soloshenko and Gennadiy Afanasyev have been sentenced to illegally sentenced to Russia . By the end of May expected positive news regarding illegal sentences to Russia.
 Hope Savchenko and political prisoners held in Russia have been solved . The two political prisoners have been held for more than a year . Savchenko was found dead in March .
 Court of Savchenko sentenced to 22 years in prison for alleged murder of Russian journalists . The journalists were illegally in the east of Ukraine for information support of Russian fighters .
 Poroshenko said that Ukraine is ready to transmit RF detained in the Donbass Russian commandos Alexander Alexandrov Evgeny Erofeev and in exchange for Savchenko . Poroshenko says that Ukraine has been prepared to transmit the RF detained.
Ukraine's President even said that Vladimir Putin agreed with terms of release . Later, Ukraine's President said that Putin had agreed to release his son .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said that the head of the SBU Basil Hrycak instructed on the technical execution of all necessary legal conditions for this process . President Poroshenko has said that he is looking into the possibility of exchanging Ukrainian pilots .
 Poroshenko says he is ready to use any of its constitutional powers to return home hope . Poroshenko said that he is prepared to use his constitutional powers .
 The President also noted that during today's talks much of his attention was devoted to the liberation of Hope Savchenko .
 "There will be no politics involved, but our foreign partners, "he said . There will not be politics involved," he said .
 Hope Savchenko was sentenced to 22 years in prison in March 2016 . Savchenko has been sentenced to a prison term of 22 years .
 Lawyer Mark Feigin Ukrainian reported that on April 27 Savchenko got extradition papers . Savchenko was arrested in Ukraine on April 26 and charged with murder .
 Poroshenko also said today that is ready to sign a pardon Russian Alexandrov HRUshnykam Erofeev and if it will return to Ukraine Hope Savchenko . Poroshenko said that is also ready to signs a pardon for Russian Alexandov HRU
 Lawyers illegally convicted in Ukrainian Nadiya Savchenko not informed that in the coming hours may occur HRUshnykiv exchange for Russian . Lawyers were not informed about the exchange, says Savchenko .
Interfax: "I think you better turn to the official representatives of the state "" Interfax:"on Wednesday lawyer Savchenko Nikolai Polozov. I think youbetter turn to official representatives"
 Petro Poroshenko's plane will land at Rostov-on-Don airport in the coming hours, sources told Interfax . The plane is expected to land in the early hours of Wednesday .
 HRUshnyky Yerofeyev Eugene and Alexander Alexandrov are on board . It was reported that on board are HRUShnykyYerofyev Eugene.
President Poroshenko was filed petitions for clemency today . President Poroshenko is also filing petitions for HRUshnykiv Erofeeva Eugene and Alexander Alexandrov .
 Vera Savchenko, sister illegally convicted in Ukrainian Nadiya Savchenko has no official information about the possible exchange .
 If troops say they are here now will perform tasks, they will not do it. If they say they will do it, they won't do it . If, for example, are the troops and say they're here now, they'll not perform tasks .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko's plane will land at Rostov-on-Don airport in the coming hours . He expects to be sentenced in Hope Savchenko .
President Poroshenko was filed petitions for clemency today . President Poroshenko has been in charge of the Ukrainian government since 2007 .
 Lawyers Savchenko not informed that in the coming hours may occur exchange for Russian HRUshnykiv. LawyersSavchenko was not informed about the exchange .
 Lawyer illegally convicted in Hope Savchenko case is now located in Rostov-on-Don . Ilya Novikov promises to report important news for two hours . Lawyer allegedly convicted in hope Savchenko Ukrainian IlyaNovikov is now in Rostoov-On-
 The Ukrainian President's plane landed in Rostov city to take home Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko . Savchenko was illegally convicted and jailed in Russia .
 She is expected to be swapped for two Russian special forces servicemen, captured and convicted in Ukraine . She is believed to be in custody in Ukraine.
Ukrainian news outlet UNIAN has a reference to their source in Russia . This is reported by the Ukrainian news outlet. It is also reported by UNIAN .
 UNIAN quotes a source as saying Savchenko should be swapped today, on May 25 .
 Nadiia Savchenko’s release and return to Ukraine was the result of agreement reached by the leaders of Ukraine, France, Germany, and Russia during the telephone conversation on May 23 .
 The Elysee Palace announced on Wednesday, Censor.NET informs citing Interfax-Ukraine .
 The negotiation helped return Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko back to Ukraine, Hollande's administration reports .
 Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko has met with President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in Presidential Administration following her arrival in Ukraine .
 The meeting was also attended by Savchenko's mother and sister as well as Nadiia's fellows-in-arms .
 Most journalists were putting questions to Iryna Herashchenko at the time . Most journalists put questions to her at that moment .
Savchenko thanked all her supporters as well as enemies and indifferent people . Savchenko thanked her supporters for their support and support .
 Deputy Hope Savchenko Irina Yuzyk told how Hope was the first night in freedom and its future plans . Girlfriend liberated Ukrainian Deputy HopeSavchenko.
 Nadia says a 5:00 sitting in a paddy in a "glass" as the latter did not know where she was being taken .
 "Get ready, dear powers," says Yuzyk . For Lions also mentions more than once .
 Mama Hope Savchenko Maria Ivanovna said her daughter had not seen since 24 December . The daughter said that her daughter has not seen her since December 24 .
 She does not know about plans for Hope, including on rehabilitation, she said . She said she is not sure about plans.
 Russia sent Russian spetspryznachentsiv Alexander Alexandrov and Eugene Yerofeyeva to Ukraine . Savchenko took the presidential plane from Russia .
 US Vice President Joe Biden says Nadia Savchenko is an example for the Ukrainian people and all people .
 Russia sent Russian spetspryznachentsiv Alexander Alexandrov and Evgeny Erofeev to Ukraine . Savchenko took the presidential plane from Russia .
 The court illegally sentenced her to 22 years in prison for the death of two Russian journalists in eastern Ukraine . The court also fined her for illegal border crossing in June 2014 .
 Savchenko has repeatedly declared a hunger strike, including dry . Savchenko is protesting against the illegal detention of its jailed in Russia .
 One Russian soldier was killed and one wounded during a raid by the enemy reconnaissance group . The raid was carried out by the 11th Infantry regiment, Makiyivka .
 SBU denied access to UN team to visit its rayon offices in Donbas war zone . SBU chief Vasyl Hrytsak told journalists in Lviv May 26 .
 The team was allowed to visit pre-trial detention prisons where suspects are held but not the SBU offices in the war zone, he said .
 In the USA, you cannot visit CIA or FBI offices where operatives work and where secret documents are held, he says .
 The UN team on fighting torture cut short its visit to Ukraine when it was banned to visit the prisons where they believe, SBU holds suspects . The team is fighting torture in Ukraine .
 Interior Ministry has unveiled the details of yesterday's attack on the wife of Ukraine's NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov .
 As established, the attacker appeared to be Volodymyr Olentsevych, a resident of Donetsk and a lawyer .
 He is known for his claims to abolish the decrees on conferring Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych the title of Hero of Ukraine .
 Olentsevych sued Oleksandr Turchynov for the illegal dismissal of Viktor Yanukovych as the president .
 The attacker knew the woman only by photos from the Internet, showing her with short hair .
 Olentsevych assaulted another woman with a similar hairstyle . As a result, he assaulted another women with similar hairstyles .
Security officer knocked the knife from the criminal's hand and detained him . Hanna Turchynova started to scream, and a security officer made his appearance .
 Police found Hanna Turchynova's personal data and a copy of the decree by Acting President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchyov . The attacker planned to leave at the crime scene, police say .
 Olentsevych has had contacts with "government members" of the so-called ""DPR" and leaders of propagandist media in Ukraine .
 President Vladimir Putin reckons with the opinion of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko after all . Putin of Russia reckons that Poroshenko is a Ukrainian President .
 Nadiia Savchenko's lawyer Mark Feygin said at a press conference, Censor.NET reports citing Vlada.io .
 Mark Feygin commented in such a manner that affected Nadiia Savchenko's release . Savchenko was released from prison on Sunday night .
 In his opinion, it was the night talks in the Normandy format that determined the fate of the pilot . The pilot's fate was decided by night talks.
 Russia, unlike Ukraine, has no law enabling to pardon people, lawyer says . Earlier, lawyer said that Russia, like Ukraine, had no law allowing people to pardon .
 Nadiia Savchenko was a kind of exception to the general rule . The decision on Savchenko is a type of exception.
 Former representative of Ukraine in the UN Human Rights said the Kremlin freed hostage Hope Savchenko has to appeal to the European Court of Human Rights . Former representative Vladimir Vasilenko said that the Kremlin had to appeal .
 May 25, 2016 Ukrainian pilots that zaґratamy illegally detained in Russia finally liberated in Russia .
 On the morning of the presidential plane flew to Rostov for Hope Savchenko . Savchenko is a former Ukrainian president .
 Two Russian aircraft HRUshnykamy, previously spared the president, headed for Moscow . Instead of two Russian aircraft, the president was headed to Moscow .