 Gleb Pavlovskiy is the founder and director of the Effective Politics Foundation . He worked for many years during the ""managed democracy"" period as an expert presenting political ideas .
 The author has studied the mechanisms for taking decisions very well. And who has for this reason studied this well, he says .
 The seizure of Crimea and the "suspended" instability in Southeast Ukraine remove the threat of NATO bases appearing in Sevastopol . Ukraine will not want to accept a country burdened with territorial problems, with a nuclear neighbour, and the very difficult problems of overcoming its disintegration .
 It is impossible to note anything more positive in the Kremlin's gains in its current Ukrainian policy . All of the other numerous consequences look like complete and utter losses .
 Not to mention what it is quite terrifying to talk about the prospects of a non-camouflaged war, at the very least on a European scale .
 We believe this theoretically, but we do not much like encountering it in fact, and Putin does not like it either . We believe that this theoretically. But we don't like it. We do not like encountering this.
 Ukraine appeared in general to be comprehensible and took place within the bounds of Ukraine and the previous world order . What shook Ukraine more or less up to the second half of January the beginning of February was comprehensible .
 Everything went wrong, not as usual. But then, to the general amazement, everything somehow proceeded wrongly . It's not asusual .
 Many people are arguing about whether there was a revolution in Ukraine or not . Many are arguing over whether there were a revolution or not.
 This really spontaneous revolution took everyone unawares, in particular those who were playing in the Kyiv field . The Kyiv revolution took place in the early hours of the morning .
 Putin was playing on this field and at that moment he was already "up to his ears"
 The mould was broken when the Ukrainian president jumped out of his own dacha in Sevastopol .
 Russia and the EU have been involved in a tender between Yanukovych and the Maydan . The tender was organized by Yanukovych between Russia and EU, and afterwards by the EU .
 I mean that now the position of "let's put everything back in its place and do as our grandfathers did" will not work. I mean  now that now, "let’s putEverything back in their place" will no longer work . I
 Even if all the world leaders meet at Yanukovych's dacha near Kyiv, they will not restore previous status quo .
 Putin himself reacted for too long, and in general everyone reacted . In fact, Putin himself reaction was too long .
 The poor quality of European politicians was just registered with the Crimean improvisation . The poorquality of European politician is just registered.
 A moral evaluation of Russian actions in March in Crimea in Crimea will not suggest anything now about what to do in September .
 The decision on the "annexation" of Crimea was taken not by Kyiv, not by Obama, but by Putin, says Putin .
 responsibility for the consequences of this decision and for what to do in September lies in the first instance with us. So responsibility for this decision lies in this case with us .
 As far as who takes the decisions is concerned, that is an interesting question in general . The decision was made by the president of the United States .
 Putin in his third term has ascended to a level where he is almost invisible . But everyone is forced to discuss only him .
 We understand that his decisions have a strong influence on everything but we do not really know which decisions or about what. We do not know what decisions are made or how they are made .
 It is obvious not only from the twists and turns but even from the style of the wording that they are prepared in different places . It is also obvious from the twist and turns that the wording is different .
 The secretariat certifies copies of Putin's decisions . It's like a system for authorizing Putin's various decisions operates in the Kremlin .
 Putin is spread thinly throughout this system but you can surely not take a step without a signature stamp . Putin is Spread thinly throughout the system but can't be taken seriously without a stamp .
 I am already finding it difficult to distinguish his personality, where he is there himself, and who is really operating . I am finding it hard to distinguish him from his own personality .
 And I cannot see this process slowing down it is continuing and will evidently progress further. And I can't see it slowing down, it will obviously progress further, I say .
 The circle is very well defined and has been narrowed downas far as possible, but beyond that it is no longer clear . The circle has been narrowing down as well as possible .
 In the USSR the politburo did actually know that it was the only institution of succession . But in the USSR it did not know it was only the only institutions of succession.
 Everyone in the hall of fame is immortal there now. And we do not have this in the Hall of fame either .
 It has become unfashionable to have your own opinion on principle. Incidentally that is why it has become fashionable to have a own opinion .
 Since it is not the accepted thing to pit yourself against Putin and you do not know what opinion Putin has in each individual case, it is better not to do this at all .
When someone opposes on principle -in relation to any issue - the very fact that he has voiced an opinion causes hostility . When someone opposes a person's opinion, it causes hostility, he says .
 We see people becoming tense even when you are at war with Sobyanin's deputy, it is the same thing as being at war. It is like being in war with Putin.
 It is clear that only Putin could have taken the final decision on Crimea . It's clear only Putin would have taken a final decision.
 It is not for nothing that the myth about the two versions of the speech, which he kept in his pocket, is so popular . The two versions are so popular that they are both popular .
 I think there was nevertheless one speech, but not everything was actually clear until the last moment . I think that there was still one speech. I think the speech was still not clear, but there was also one speech .
 The decision was ultimately no longer dictated by concern about the fate of the regime . However sad it might be, by fear, it may be, according to the author .
 The regime was in general placed in a very difficult position after March . The regime is now in a difficult position .
 Fear that our system would not be able to control any of the moderate decisions . Fear that we would be unable to control the decisions of moderate people .
 The Kremlin knows very well that it controls nothing but that it is able to function in conditions where everyone expresses loyalty to it . The Kremlin already knows that it, generally speaking, controls nothing .
 A moment of fear arose that, they said, we will not be able to deal with this . So in actual fact, they say, they will not. So in fact, it is a moment of concern.
 Fear then prompted a wrong decision -include it and then we will see. And the fear then prompted the wrong decision .
 Russian rules include removing the problem of control, according to our Russian rules . Russian rules also include means removing the issue of control .
 If something is part of the Russian Federation it is inevitably controlled, it will be controlled . If something's part of Russian Federation is inevitablycontrolled, it is inevitable .
 In Kyiv back under Yanukovych, the regime took the initiative of setting the so-called "titushky" - effectively unofficial security detachments -loose on the streets .
 It first pushed the opposition into self defence, and then the relevant detachments emerged . The opposition was first pushed into self-defence, then it became more important .
 I do not now want to look into the situation inside Ukraine although it is very interesting in itself . I don't now want the situation in Ukraine to be looked into .
 A large number of "discoveries" were made in Ukraine and then exported to us with our Russian help . But I want to say that a large number of ""findings"" and "discoveryies"" were made by Ukraine .
 There is a front without a frontline here, where groups using force, defined neither by territory nor by form, nor by ideology, hold clubs in some cases, bogeymen in others . But in actual fact there is no frontline here.
In Ukraine, our propaganda has made to look like his personal position . In the first instance, a position in Ukraine, which our propaganda makes it seem like his position .
 Ukraine's president is the country's most influential figure in the country . Ukraine's President is the most powerful country in the world . Ukraine has been a key part of Ukraine's political process .
 We had got used to this, it was more convenient for us to exert influence like that -via the president and his staff .
 A power vacuum arose in Kyiv under which new forms of influence could have been organized if this had been necessary . The power vacuum was caused by a power vacuum .
 The old elite, who are very well-known to us, started there after the flight of the president . It's been a war among the elite since after the president's flight .
 We get the world reaction, however, for something that changes the borders in Europe . It's an unusually mild one .
 This is also an interesting point that for some reason is not being noticed . This is not the first time this has happened in the past .
 Despite all the national fervour, which all forms of Ukraine's media are demonstrating, the real will to resist was low . Ukraine's national media is demonstrating.
 While everything there was stolen, the mice have eaten everything. Yes, while everything there were stolen, everything was stolen .
 There was not really any mass willingness to defend Ukraine since there was too diverse an idea of what Ukraine was and over all the past 20 years no-one inside the country had bothered about how to sew it together .
 Kyiv was boring out the horizontal -transit. While people were fighting for the vertical of power in Kyiv, Kyiv is boring out.
 The fight for proximity to the pipeline and to the financial allocations from it. The fight is over the financial allocation from the pipeline .
 This proved to be a fatal fact for us because we were sucked in further than we wished . We are not happy with the result of this. This is not the first time we've been sucked in more than we wish .
 Europe is growling at us here about Crimea but if there is a problem in the south east then they will forget about Crimea . Europe is growingled at us about Crimea, but there is no problem in south east .
 Russian citizens are filtering through and joining so-called pro-Russian groups that initially, generally speaking, had little influence . The source of their support is not clear .
 They are the people who did not go through the mangle of the managed democracy of our previous decade . They are people who didn't go through a managed democracy. They are those who did NOT go through this time.
 For a long time they were not admitted to anything, they were outside the mainstream, outside of Putin's consensus . They were not admitting anything for a longtime .
 There were not heard on the television, and if they were admitted into someone's office it was by the back entrance . No-one saw them, and in such a way that no-one heard them .
People excluded from the meagre political process and from any of the pathetic political debates. They were excluded from any political debates, says the author .
 By the end of the era of managed democracy, several people had been cautiously brought out into the open . Prokhanov and several others -here, they said, are some stupid people .
 During this time many different mutations arose, and we are now seeing these mutations in the east of Ukraine . These mutations are now seen in Ukraine .
 This includes representation of a significant part of the spectrum at Bolotnaya, not only nationalists . This also includes, incidentally, representation of some of the country's most prominent nationalists .
 A significant section of the opposition spectrum, the real street one and not of course those represented in the Duma, switched over to the street one . A significant part of the Opposition spectrum has switched over from the street to street one.
 There is only one way to find out what is really happening -talk to it personally .
 Not just interviewing Russians in the east of Ukraine as if they were exotic animals . Not just interviews Russians in east of the country as if it was exotic animals.
Until a language is developed, other people will supply a language, and then there is no need to complain . And until a language has been developed, others will supply it .
 They will evidently also ask questions, only not within the framework of a dialogue . They will apparently also ask Questions, but within theframework of action, they will also answer .
 There is no doubt that our mainstream is shifting. You do not re-import many of the actions from Ukraine, but there's no doubt. You don't re- import many of these actions from the Ukraine, says author .
 If we do not consider calmly who these people are, a significant number of whom believe in what they are doing, if there is no such dialogue, then that means trouble . I repeat, if we don't consider calmly what these people were, then there is trouble .
 The state of the political atmosphere, which is foul now anyway, will become impossible . The political atmosphere will become difficult to deal with .
 It is somehow quite difficult to imagine a dialogue between these people and the so-called national traitors . It is also difficult to Imagine a dialogue.
 There are more deserving contenders than those who dragged our country into this dangerous escapade . But in his opinion, there are other deserving contenders for them .
 I would like to return to the start of our conversation, to the motives for the Kremlin's behaviour in the Ukrainian crisis . I would also like to talk to the Kremlin about the Ukraine crisis .
 It appears to be not only diplomatic discourse but also discourse allowing for dialogue . That is, it appears, to be the first time it has been allowed for dialogue.
 The Ostankino archipelago has its ultra-propaganda lives and works . But at the same time the Ostankinos are still living and working .
 It is seen all the time as a loudspeaker broadcasting from Putin's office, as if Putin himself is saying all of this .
 A psychologically inevitable infection with his own propaganda is occurring, says the author .
 This is no longer simple propaganda now, it has gone beyond all the limits of good and evil . Moreover, this is no more simple propaganda. It has gone into all the ranges of good, evil and evil.
 Ernst himself comes up with more images for him than Putin has found in Pikul in his entire life .
 The series is Hollywood with special effects, only not with pine trees and flowers . Such things exist but you know the stories that we see cannot be written in line with the rule books .
 Its main source is to force its way through our brains to the largest possible audience . And its main source was to force our way through the brains to our biggest possible audience.
 I do not know of any media which after creating a large audience using whatever you like - a TV series, a revolution, military atrocities - would give it up . I don't know if any media would give up .
 A politician cannot give up a high rating -it is a drug for him. Just as a politician cannot giving up a top rating - it is a drugs for him .
 In the same way television will not give up a big audience - it is also a drug. In the similar way television is not giving up a large audience, it is a drug .
 A commercial drug -an audience is a commodity, sold for advertising . It is a commercial drug .
I think media ratings are real, while political ratings are fakes, produced from audience ratings . I think media rating is real, but political ratings is fakes .
 There is nothing good about the fact that people are being bludgeoned mentally, especially not young children but adults . There is no good about people being bled mentally.
 The fact that they are being bludgeoned irreparably, is obvious to me . They are being deliberately and irresponsibly, and that they're being blUDgeoned deliberately .
I try to imagine these people who are at the head of the television channels. I try to think these people at the top of the TV channels . I tried to imagine them.
 They possibly think that it does not matter, they will come round later . They may think that they may think it doesn't matter .
 The schedule will change, there will be more family programmes with seals on the screen . Everyone will become peaceful and friendly, and everyone will be peaceful .
 Peace does not provide an audience and hence ratings for politicians . But peace does not give an audience .
 The oligarchic media did not create such a closed drugs loop . It is interesting that it has closed in on itself now because the oligarchian media, which everyone repeatedly cursed, didn't create a closed drug loop .
 President Obama is conducting a desperate war on behalf of NATO, alone against Russia, against a super-power, he says .
 Ukrainian president turns into the Ukrainian president . Many of the oligarchic groups have been eaten up by their own oligarchs .
 There is one protected position in Ukraine today - the position of a war president . There is a protected position.
 All the militias, without exception, need to be included in the Russian regular forces . Only the Russians can be "infinitely superior"
 Russia really is helping the separatists with both weapons and people, says the Russian government . But Russia also is helping them with both arms and people .
 I think that this is the main problem today. I do not only not rule it out, I think it is a problem today . I think this is a major problem today, and it is also the main issue today, I say .
 Television controlling a war permits things that people simply would not have dared do a year ago . Television control a war allows people to do things that they simply wouldn't have dared done a year earlier .
Blood bath in the evenings is the political norm in Putin's election campaign .
 Courage is needed, on the contrary, to switch it off, even to reduce its volume, says the author . "Our leaders no longer have," says author .
 In this regard they are as weak as all the new generation of European leaders, says David Cameron .
 They admire their own strength on the television, it has replaced a mirror for them . They say they admire their strength on TV, it's been replaced by their own .
 The habit has arisen of what I would call an absolute rating, a rating of total support . The habit of a rating has arisen.
 habits in politics always grow into groups of interests, finance, and tools .
 Previously, say five years ago, those who encroached on the prerogatives of power were considered a threat . Now, they say they are no longer a threat.
Today it is those who have encroached on half a per cent of the rating who become the threat . But today it's those who are encroaching on half the rating. The threat is now at a low level.
 Each risk of the regime losing one per cent is simple -like NATO in Crimea . Each risk is simple, like NATO in the Crimea .
 There is quite little real confrontation for the time being. After all, there is very little real confrontation for a time being .
In people's heads missiles with Ukrainian warheads are already approaching Moscow . In people's head missiles with Ukraine warheads are also approaching Moscow.
 I am sorry but this plan, like Putin's plan 10 years ago, is just a kind of ideology, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he is sorry but he's sorry for the plan, but he says it's just an ideology .
 There were 12 Minsk points and then everything suddenly went magically quiet . However, there were the 12 points and there were 12 points .
 The truce consists of Putin and Poroshenko expressing satisfaction about its existence . The truce is a two-year truce between the two leaders .
 The entire world is becoming similar to the Ukrainian-Russian crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They will not be allowed to return with sub-machine-guns and "Buks" after all . They will also be banned from returning to the U.S. They will be able to return to the United States with a gun .
 The issue is another one -it is that the country's agenda is changing absolutely . The country is changing its agenda.
 At the same time, the everyday apathy and total contempt for reality remain . The daily apathy for reality remains .
 People have started to throw themselves at one another, they are simply losing it . People are throwing themselves at each other, people are losing it.
 Ukraine does not in fact interest them in their daily lives. On the one hand, Ukraine is not interested in their lives .
 The population of Crimea ceased to interest citizens immediately after Crimea was annexed . Crimea's population was reduced to less than half a million people .
 We have ceased to evaluate our political scene at all -even in an ideological way, even incorrectly . We have stopped evaluating our political scenes at all .
 It seems to be difficult now for us to be described as participants in a punitive operation. It is quite difficult now to be called participants in the punitive operation, says the author .
Because the audience does not know anything real now, apart from enemies, the audience doesn't know what real now .
 Television programmes have long been boring downwards and will continue to simplify everything . Television programmes will continue.
 This is a surprising experiment on a country where there were once village reading rooms . This is the first time a village reading room has been opened in a village .
 At this level it is not only modern civilian and military technologies that cannot be developed, it will soon be impossible even to deliver bread to bakeries . At thislevel it will be impossible to deliver the bread to bakeryies .
 Our leaders do not want an open direct invasion, according to information from various sources .
 Everyone is blowing on the water of the truce today, and I am blowing on it too, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 A day afterwards he was killed, and in another three days the First World War started . A day after he was dead, and a day after, the war started .
 A false sense of control arises, although in actual fact it has decreased, according to the author .
 In Europe people already know where this will all end and they are promising measures that are really devastating for us and for the market in general. In Europe, people already knows where this would all end.
 No-one knows, firstly, whose nerves will hold, and, secondly, in precisely what form . No- one knows what form will hold the person's nerves .
 I think a real risk is growing of a spasmodic, sudden enlargement of the conflict without any intermediate links . I think that a realrisk is growing. I think the real risk of a Spasmodi, a sudden enlarging of a conflict without a intermediate link
 Control is now needed to ensure the militias are not smashed and Poroshenko is scared off the idea of surrendering Donetsk .
 The Kremlin and Putin personally have to all intents and purposes tied themselves to the protection of this very Novorossiya . The Kremlin has to all of its own interests to protect this NovorOSSiya .
 Previously if they had lost -it would have been the militia, but today the outcome is that only he can lose .
 It is very difficult to do this when so many false targets such as the ""junta" and especially ""terrorists" have been introduced . It is hard to do so when so much false targets are introduced .
Putin has had a chat with Poroshenko, and they have started to kill fewer people. But I repeat, everyone is playing the game of Putin and Poroshenko .
 I am sure that neither the words ""junta" or "terrorists" were pronounced during their talks, nor ""terrorists"" either . I amsure that neither of the words "Junta" nor "participants in a punitive operation" were spoken .
 This conversation means little for those who are shooting. But the point is that this conversation meanslittle for the shooting victims .
 Poroshenko cannot allow an election now, so that he is not a war president . Poroshenko can't be allowed to run for president, so he's not war president.
Almost two months until 26 October, and all sorts of things can happen in this time . There are almost two months to 26 October .
 We did not define our strategy, what aims we had in general, we are starting to adapt our aims to the reality . We are now trying to adapt to the new reality, we say .
 If we had had such an aim then it would have proposed a whole programme of action after Crimea's separation . It would have tried to force everyone to swallow this in one way or another .
 In addition to the fact that it cannot retreat and this priority is hanging over everyone, it is also a priority for everyone . The priority is hang over everyone.
 Everyone must win -Poroshenko must win, Novorossiya must win . Putin must win. Everyone must wins .
We are already seeing how they are paying -with their lives and a collapse. We are already see how they're paying, with their lives, and their collapse .
 The budget is just the beginning of a new era of budgeting . We are already paying in a variety of ways .
We are conducting a huge campaign for what I would call controlled Russophobia in the world today . We are conducting an enormous campaign for the world to stop Russophobia .
 Moscow is now the generator of Russophobia and, even worse, a kind of racial hatred of everything that is linked to Russia . "Russophobia" is almost racial hatred, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The role of populism and populist parties and movements is growing in Europe and the Western world, says David Frum .
 A little more and we really will turn into the image of the enemy, which we were moving so far away from. A little less and we will really turn into a little more . We will be turning into the images of the enemies, which they were moving away from
 The risk of an escalation of the dispersed, combined para-war, is high and that it is still growing. So I think that the risk of a real war is high, says the author .
Despite the talk of peace and truces, it is still growing, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says it is a bad sign that it is growing.
 Let us try to return to political bookkeeping, to Russia's losses and gains from the Ukrainian crisis . Let us return to the political book keeping, to Russian losses and gain from the Ukraine crisis .
 A valuable historical monument is not worth going into . You can drop down into the sea together with a valuable historic monument .
 We gained, in a terrible way, knowledge about ourselves, about our society, about Ukraine, about Russia, about states of minds, about what opposition in Russia can and cannot be. We gained in a horrible way, about us, about ourselves. We gain, in
 We also understand something now in the Russian world - the real one and not the fantasy one . The real one is the real and not a fantasy one, says the author .
 The Chudov Monastery is in a cell of the Kremlin, when it is built . It is also in the cell of a cell in the Kremlin .