 Modi Made a Strategic Blunder by Mohammad Jamil . Modi made a strategic Blunder .
 NSC:of Kashmir’s EditOnial:.ccscossscdescssacesvasiecd ccbasates cs osecd codasnceseasdacdcaeanadessasiace cadaacecestiecdesdaaceseaostes 12 3
 China Stands by Pakistan on Kashmir. China Standed by Pakistan.
C.S. Qamar afzal RiZVi:ccccccssssssscecececesessesssaeseeecesessesneaeeeeeeeseeseesesesneaeeeeseeseeeseseecesessessesneaeeesees
 The Future of Kashmir by Syed Zeeshan Haider . The Future Of Kashmir is based in Kashmir .
 The Pakistanis are Pakistan's most populous country . The country is one of the world's largest countries .
 Rethinking Water and Urban Design by Moeen Khal .
 The Only Way Out of Afghanistan is Through Pakistan is through Pakistan .
 Dealing With Floods. Dealing with Floods is a weekly feature on CNN.com.com's iReporters .
Prime Minister as Polio Ambassador. Prime Minister as a member of the European Union .
 Pakistan FATF-APG Facts and India’s Blackface by Muhammad Adil Rauf.............cccccccccccsesssssseeeeeeees 39 14.
 PM Represents Nation’s Aspirations .
 Pakistan’s Efforts to Evade FATF by Reema Shaukat . Pakistan's Efforts To Evade.
 The U.S. State Department has been in the United States for more than a decade .
 CPEC on Accelerated Path: "We are here to talk about our ideas"
 Economic Front of Pakistan by Syed Ali IMran . The Pakistani economy is a key part of Pakistan's economy .
Economy on the Path to Recovery by Mohammad Jamil .
Sarah Saleh is the author of the book, "The Book of the Book, The Book of The Book, and The Book Of The Book. She also has a book of her own .
 The Forgotten History of the Financial Crisis was written by AdaM T00ZC .
Economic Front of Pakistan. Economic Front of the Pakistan .
Higher Education Funds. Higher Education Funds are funded by the Education Funds .
 China's backing Pakistan's request to UNSC to discuss the same . Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi’s letter was in response to Pakistan Foreign minister's letter . China's support is due to Pakistan's requests to discuss same .
 The UNSC will discuss the Jammu and Kashmir situation behind closed doors most likely on August 16, the president says .
 Kashmir is facing the worst humanitarian crisis in modern human history as strict curfew along with all communication blackout entered its 11th day today .
 Indian troops clamped tight restrictions, fearing anti-India protests, after New Delhi abolished the special status of Jammu & Kashmir on 05 August .
 The people of occupied territory have no contact with the rest of the world as internet and phone lines are cut since that day . Internet and phone calls have been cut since then .
 The petition was filed by an activist Tehseen Poonawalla . It submitted that people were not able to even avail basic services such as hospital .
 A three-judge bench headed by Justice Arun Mishra adjourned the petition for two weeks without passing any order . The petition was adjourned by Justice Mishra.
 Most Muslim countries are either mute or have issued carefully worded statements . Unfortunately, most Muslim countries have not issued carefullyworded statements.
 Turkey and Malaysia expressed serious concerns . China fully supported Pakistan’s stance . China supported Pakistan's stance .
 For the last seven decades, the terrible massacre of Kashmiris in Indian Occupied Kashmir continues unabatedly .
 The catastrophe is big enough to move any conscious human being . But unfortunately the apathy and insensitivity of international community has encouraged India to perpetrate atrocities on the people of Kashmir .
International community is unaware of repression and heinous crimes in Indian Occupied Kashmir . It is rather the vested interest of western governments to remain mute just to appease India .
 Indian authorities place all Hurriyet leaders under house arrest and in police stations . On this Eid-ul-Azha they did the same .
 Kashmir is boiling because of the killing of the Kashmiris who are protesting against atrocities committed by the Indian security forces . Kashmiris also demand the right of self-determination as per UNSC Resolution of 1948 .
 The crushing of Kashmiris’ freedom sentiment by the Indian state had started off when it militarily occupied the princely state of Jammu & Kashmir in 1948 .
 Kashmiris left no savaging weapon untried to break and subdue the freedom-demanding Kashmiris . Kashmiris have failed to cow them down, but they have completely failed to do so .
 The military has been indulging so freely and abundantly that there is not a single home there without a family tragedy . The wholesale orgy of death and destruction that its rampaging military has was indulged so freely.
 For years, India has deployed from five hundred thousand troops in Kashmir . The killings, rape and fake encounters by Indian Security Forces continue unabated .
 The aim is to deter Kashmiri populace from demanding their right of self-determination . The aim was to deter the Kashmiri population from demanding the right ofSelf-determination.
 The repression, oppression and atrocities by Indian forces have turned Kashmir into a hell that would stretch Dante’s imagination .
 The heroic struggle waged by the people of Kashmir is unparalleled in the history . Kashmir is committed to continue their struggle till their objective is achieved .
 Kashmir stands as a potential nuclear flashpoint which could consume life of millions of people in an instant . Kashmir is a potential flashpoint.
 Kashmiri youth took up the arms in 1989 . Frustrated by the apathy of the international community and non-implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolutions .
After 9/11, the political landscape of the world changed dramatically, adversely impacting the freedom struggles of the people the world over who were dubbed terrorists .
Writers, intellectuals and peace loving people condemned India’s repression on people of Kashmir .
Renowned Indian novelist and political activist Arundhati Roy has made a strong case for Kashmiri people’s right to self-determination .
 Since Burhan-uddin Wani's cold-blooded murder, an unprecedented movement and open rebellion against illegitimate occupation of India was witnessed in India-occupied Kashmir .
 The pellet guns used by security forces have damaged the faces of 1600 people . More than 1100 people have partially or wholly lost their eyesight .
 Pakistan’s response to the new crisis manufactured by the Indian establishment . A clearer, firmer policy emerged yesterday.
 Pakistan will downgrade diplomatic relations with India, suspend bilateral trade and take the matter to the UN . Pakistan's military top brass attended the meeting of the National Security Committee .
 Pakistan does not take India’s shenanigans in the occupied territory lightly. These are necessary moves that send a strong message across the border that Pakistan doesn't take India's shenanigans lightly .
 Pakistan should mount a strong diplomatic offensive and take its message to world capitals . Pakistan should mounted a strong diplomacy offensive, says Pakistan's ambassador .
 Kashmir is internationally recognised as a disputed territory . India’s chicanery is attempting to ‘localise’ the issue through amending its constitution . Kashmir is a disputed territories .
 Pakistan should not fall into the trap of exchanging bellicose rhetoric with India . Pakistan's diplomatic efforts are essential, where strong diplomacy is essential .
 Prime Minister Imran Khan brought up the possibility of war during Tuesday’s parliament session . There is justifiable anger in Pakistan over the Indian subterfuge in Kashmir .
 The atmosphere in South Asia at the moment is highly tense and volatile . South Asia is a volatile region .
 Warmongers in India would love to trap Pakistan in heated rhetoric that can spiral into actual hostilities .
 Pakistan's leadership must resist this ruse and handle the situation with utmost care . Pakistan’s leaders must resist the ruse. Pakistan's leaders must handle this ruses and handle it with utmost Care .
 The battle for the rights of Kashmir must be fought primarily on the diplomatic front . Kashmir is a disputed territory in Kashmir .
 The Foreign Office has the challenge of steering the issue before it . The prime minister has constituted a team to look at legal, political and diplomatic ways of handling the situation .
 The OIC must be convinced to move beyond insipid statements of support for Kashmir . Some of our Arab brothers, who have supported India's move, must be asked to consider Pakistan’s stand on crisis .
 The bottom line is that the international community cannot sit and watch silently as India attempts to devour occupied Kashmir and crush its inhabitants .
 Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi held over twoand-half-hour long meeting with his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi . He said Beijing would support Pakistan in the UN Security Council over its Kashmir row with India .
 Qureshi dashed to China as part of diplomatic initiative by Pakistan to seek support of Beijing in view of the brewing row over Kashmir .
 The controversy has been triggered by India’s unilateral action earlier this week to do away the special status of disputed Jammu and Kashmir region .
 Pakistan has downgraded diplomatic ties and suspended bilateral trade with India . The move drew a strong condemnation from Pakistan .
 Foreign Minister Wang noted that Beijing was seriously concerned about the latest escalation of tensions in Kashmir .
 It should be properly and peacefully resolved based on UN Charter, relevant UN Security Council resolutions and bilateral agreement, Wang was quoted as saying .
 This is the first time China has taken a clearer stance on India’s Kashmir move . China took a clear stance on the Kashmir move in Kashmir .
 Beijing statement only referred to its dispute with India in the Ladakh region . Earlier, Beijing statement was only referring to the dispute in the region .
 Foreign Minister Qureshi said he thanked his Chinese counterpart for a meeting on a short notice .
 Qureshi said that China is Pakistan’s friend that has long been trusted, and that friendship between Pakistan and China is rock solid . Pakistan's friendship between China and Pakistan is rock-solid .
 He believed China would stand up for justice on the Kashmir issue . He believed that China would standing up for Justice on Kashmir issue.
 China will continue to support Pakistan in safeguarding its legitimate rights and interests and uphold justice for Pakistan on the international arena, the Chinese statement said .
 Pakistan and India were both China’s friendly neighbours and major developing countries that were in a crucial stage of development . Wang also noted that Pakistan andIndia were both friendly neighbours .
 Qureshi said China once again proved that it was Pakistan’s ‘trusted friend’ as it fully supported Islamabad's stance on the recent developments in Kashmir . Qurehi said it once again had proved it wasPakistan's “trusted friends’
 China endorsed Pakistan’s position that India could not take unilateral step to change the status of disputed Kashmir region . He said China endorsed the Pakistan's position.
 Chinese Foreign Ministry's Spokesperson Hua Chunying called on India and Pakistan to resolve their disputes through dialogue and negotiations .
 Pakistan is undergoing to confront some underpinning challenges but not despairing . Pakistan has the energy and uncompromising resolve of rebuilding this nation and have the capacity to rise phoenix-like from the ashes .
 The remaking of Pakistan into a welfare state is certainly a mammoth challenge but not impossible . The remakes of Pakistan's welfare state will be a huge challenge but it is not impossible.
 Pakistan’s promising future lies in its drive of selfless nationalism-an objective that needs a series of evolutionary reform in rendering this Government's mission possible .
 A welfare state is a state that is rightly meant for the welfare of the people, says the author . The state is also a state of its own.
 A state whose social justice system is unquestionable. Cash payments, subsidies and concessions, concessions, grants and public distribution . State's social justice systems are unquestionable .
 All these welfare measures amount to the redistribution of governmental revenue to the needy . All these measures are part of the government's welfare package .
 Canada and the Scandinavian states-Sweden, Norway and Denmark-are the worth examples of the welfare state system .
 PM Khan’s reform manifesto is encouraging yet it requires a resourceful strategy to confront the economic, political and institutional challenges .
Economic stability and progress through which the future of a state seems predictable. Needless to say that it is the economic stability of the state .
 The economic scenario of today’s Pakistan is undoubtedly very critical . People are anxiously looking towards its leadership to resolve the present economic turmoil .
 Pakistan is fully and richly ridden with manifold opportunities which can astutely help us to solve the economic crisis faced by us . Pakistan's economic crisis is the biggest economic crisis we have ever faced .
 Make no mistake without tackling long-term challenges and problems decisively, says David Cameron . The country could hardly be able to take advantages of windowing opportunities, he says .
 The state economy is facing challenges faced by the state economy . The state's debt, increase in import and decrease in export, low savings, lower investment, low tax collection are among the ills .
People pay a large proportion of their income in taxes in the U.S. This means that these states have a large and extensive tax infrastructure . This is because they have a huge tax infrastructure and people pay large proportion.
 Pakistan receives only 12pc of our GDP in taxes, compared to Pakistan's 12pc in taxes .
 Top marginal tax rate in Pakistan is 15 9c — significantly lower than Scandinavian countries .
 The present government's Ahsas Programme sustained by Benazir Income Support Programme is a positive move . The present Government's Ah'sas Programme has been sustained byBenazir income support Programme .
In terms of stabilizing the economy, we need to take some expedient measures to decrease inflation . In addition, we also need to increase inflation to stabilize the economy . The economy is not better.
 Our international reserves have to rise, and the fiscal deficit has to come down, says the author .
 Pakistan's credit ratings need to be improved allowing it to access international capital markets on better terms . Pakistan’s credit ratings must be improved.
 China, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, South Korea, and Malaysia are interested to invest in Pakistan . Malaysia, China and Saudi Arabia are also interested in investing in Pakistan.
 Establishment of the CPEC Authority is core to the future of this mega project . The project is a major project for the government .
 The present political leadership’s mindset is somehow changed from the past, yet to truly transform the DNA of premature democracy in Pakistan . Pakistan much needs to reform in terms of land reform and electoral reform, says the author .
 Pakistan's political culture needs drastic changes via an evolutionary process . To provide the very fruition of transcending democracy, Pakistan political culture need drastic changes .
 The inflorescence of a new leadership beyond dynastic politics from constituency to the national level is a phantasy . Nonetheless, envisaging the inflorescence. of new leadership from constituency.
Without fulfilling this objective, it seems impossible that we may change our political culture . Without fulfilling the objective, we may not change our culture .
 Pakistan’s institutional inefficiencies have paved the way for the military establishment to fill the flaws as an emergency healer . Pakistan's military establishment has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The impact of strategic planning in our national affairs cannot be survived without feedback from our security establishment . But the impact of Strategic planning in national affairs can be survived by feedback from the security establishment.
 Pakistan is truly blessed with multiple riches, its painstaking people, its unprecedented geography and natural resources, its impeachable defence . Pakistan's professionally most capable armed forces are unbeatable because of its professionally most powerful armed forces .
 The writer is an independent ‘IR’ researcher-cum-analyst based in Pakistan . He is member of European Consortium for Political Research Standing Group on IR, Critical Peace & Conflict Studies .
 The most important element included in Article 370, in his opinion, was that anyone living outside Kashmir could not acquire land or property in Kashmir .
 We will need to have a look at international precedents to understand this phenomenon . We need to look at the history of the world's first time.
 The most important aspect that must be recognised is that when a political group or a government, anywhere in the world, seeks to dominate the population, they deploy different tactics .
 The economy is sometimes used as a tactic, at other times, as well as power and ideology .
 To begin, it would be helpful to look back at some specific instances where ideology was applied as a tactic .
 Fidel Castro controlled the Cuban people using the communist ideology for several years . Fidel Castro used the Communist ideology for many years .
 Despite the US's attempts to counteract this ideology, it remained unable to bring a regime of its liking into power in Cuba .
 The Cuban people never experienced the prosperity that could be seen in many of the non-communist states . But it is worth noting that during this entire era, the Cuban people didn't experience the prosperity.
 Former Soviet Union is the second example of a government built on a foundation of communism . The former Soviet Union was built on the foundation of Communism .
 A time came when the communist ideology failed and the Soviet Union was split into pieces . A time comes when the Communist ideology failed .
North Korea is an excellent example of the use of both ideology and power . North Korea is a good example of both ideologies and power. North Korea has a good reputation as a leader of the North Korean regime .
 There is also the example of the regime of Saddam Hussain, which was considered a symbol of power in Iraq .
The Iraqi people feared Saddam immensely, who completely destroyed the Kurds using his power . The Iraqi people fear Saddam immensely .
 In the end, Muammar Gaddafi's regime and his government shared the same fate as that of Saddam Gaddafi's .
 The formula of attaining dominance through the use of power seems to also end in failure . Thus, the formula ofattaining dominance is also failing .
 To understand this tactic, it is important to first understand the ideology of Karl Marx . To understand Karl Marx's tactics, it's important to understand his ideology .
 He posits the economy is the foundation for all affairs in the world . He says the lust for wealth is embedded within the fundamental nature of humans .
 To apply this ideology to concrete examples in the world, we must look for a capitalist society . To apply to this ideology, we need to look for the capitalist society.
 The United States defeated Russia only because the U.S. was a capitalist society where human nature could express its innate love for money .
 In the context of the recent incidents in Kashmir, the clearest example can be found in Israel . There are many examples like this, but in thecontext of the incident in Kashmir.
 Wealthy Jewish people acquired land in the region and then established their government by buying large swaths of land . Wealthy Jews bought land in region and established government.
 Israel has exercised a lot of oppression as well, but the fundamental modus operandi was to purchase land and then establish dominance . There can be no doubt that Israel has done a lot.
Under Article 370, a non-Kashmiri could not buy property in Kashmir . Returning to Kashmir, under Article370, could not purchase property in the region .
 India was unable to deploy the instrument of the economy to gain dominance, the way Israel did . This is the reason that India was not able to use it as an economic instrument .
 The current government has decided to deploy the economic tactic anyway by revoking Article 370 . But it seems that the current government is using the tactic anyway .
 This will potentially allow the rich private sector to acquire land in Kashmir and then evict Kashmiris from their land, as happened in Palestine .
 This tactic is definitely more powerful than the instruments of ideology and power, says CNN's John Sutter . The tactic is more powerful, he says, than ideology or power .
 Prime Minister Modi has very shrewdly planned to make use of his economic power . PM Modi has plans to use his economic powers to boost his popularity in India .
India has many business tycoons who can offer such high prices that it will be difficult for Kashmiris to decline . India has many businesses that can offer high prices.
 The ideological Kashmiris will face real challenges in the time to come, says Kashmiris .
 On one side, billionaire Indian businessmen will be offering them attractive sums of money for their land . On the other side, they lie their ideological foundations .
Based on what has happened historically, we can anticipate future events pretty clearly . But, based on what's happened, it can be pretty clearly, according to historical data .
 Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi had requested a special meeting to be convened to discuss the Indian actions as well as human rights violations in occupied Kashmir .
 In a tacit reminder of the possible fallout of the Indian actions, Qureshi had conveyed that ‘Pakistan will not provoke a conflict.’
 China supported Pakistan’s request, suggesting that the issue is discussed behind closed doors . Apparently, the decision was taken after China support Pakistan's request .
 Qureshi had air-dashed to Beijing and had hours-long deliberations with the Chinese leadership seeking their support for Pakistan’s stance .
 Beijing has expressed its annoyance over the Indian move to alter the status of Ladakh . Beijing had already expressed its displeasure over the move .
 It is not known what position other permanent members of the Security Council will take when the 'Pakistan-India question' is taken up for discussion .
 The Russian representative at the UN said that his country had no objection to the Security Council meeting . He said his country has no objection.
 As inconvenient as these problems may be, there is much more at risk than what meets the eye . There is more to risk than the eye, say experts .
 With rising population, disordered urbanization, lack of environmentally sensitive policy-making, dwindling water resources, and climate change, major cities like Lahore are certain to find themselves in a precarious situation in the future if remedies are not introduced .
 Lahore’s single aquifer provides most of the water used for domestic purposes . The water table is declining by 2.5-3 feet per year due to over abstraction .
 Much can be done to efficiently manage water resources in urban environments. Much can't be done in urban areas.
 Systematizing domestic water use, developing a well-planned water management system, introducing environmentally sensitive building technologies, and changing cultural norms dictating water use are important facets of such an approach .
Climate change resilient cities are to be developed in Pakistan. This is especially urgent if climate change resilient city is developed in the country .
Major cities in the country are currently being developed. Consider the manner in which major cities are being developed . Consider the way major cities have been developed .
 Lahore and Karachi have lost greenery to urban sprawl . The two largest cities in the country — Lahore, and Karachi, have lost greenenery .
 Both cities have become concrete hardscapes that have brought about a new set of problems . Urban runoff and soaring temperatures during summers due to changing microclimate .
 asphalt and concrete infrastructure in Lahore is being built with little to no attention paid to the environmental impact . Take Lahore and consider how asphalt, concrete and asphalt infrastructure are being built without attention to the environment .
 There is very little open soil to absorb the moisture. This is despite the fact that virtually nothing of the water seeps down into the aquifer .
 groundwater is also the primary source of water for the city of 12 million people . The resource is being depleted at an alarming rate .
 There are a number of solutions that have successfully been adopted by cities around the world . There are many solutions to problems that have been successfully adopted.
 Roads, pavements, parking lots and other similar structures are now being built with pervious concrete and porous concrete .
 construction materials allow valuable rainwater to seep through to the aquifer . Such construction materials are used to keep water from flooding or being discharged into the sewers .
 A simple change in material use and design prevents urban flooding and stores water for future use . In other words, a simple change of material use.
 The porous variety is significantly more affordable in the long run . The initial costs are higher as compared to conventional concrete/ asphalt .
Stormwater gutters have a life expectancy of around 20 years . It has lower installation and life-cycle costs and does not necessarily require investment in stormwater management infrastructure .
 There are other advantages associated with such a design approach as well as the design approach .
 Reduced water on roads during rainfall decreases the likelihood of traffic accidents . Reduced water during rainfall during rainfall reduces likelihood of accidents .
 The asphalt road is an example of how porous asphalt roads are at preventing runoff .
 Concrete or asphalt infrastructure absorb more heat during the daytime and emits it during the night . Concrete and asphalt infrastructure also absorb more Heat during the day .
Hardscapes are among the primary reasons why microclimate in a city is 3-4 degrees higher than surrounding areas . The Urban Heat Island effect is a phenomenon known as the Urban Heat island effect .
Simple design changes such as painting the surface in a brighter colour helps to reflect most of the heat absorbed from sunlight .
 The advantages, such an approach offers, are not just limited to water use either . The advantages of such a approach are also available to others .
Pavements and parking areas in residential areas are also built using conventional concrete . Pavements are also used in parking areas .
 environment-friendly designs for such structures are now widely being adopted as well . However, environment- friendly designs are now being adopted.
 grow-through pavement designs are aesthetically pleasing, but also help absorb rainwater and keep temperatures cooler .
 urban areas will become dangerously hot, leading to a sharp spike in water and energy consumption . With average temperatures rising owing to climate change, urban areas are expected to become hot .
 It is of urgent importance to introduce wide-scale strategies to circumvent the impending threat if cities are to cope with such stress . It's of urgent need to introduce such strategies to avoid such stress.
 One effective way to do this is to alter the manner in which the roofs are designed . The roof design should be altered to make it look more realistic .
 Simply painting the roofs in white colour can reduce air temperatures above the building by a margin of several degrees .
Green roofs can reduce stress, reduce heat, reduce noise and cut back on carbon emissions . Green roofs can also help to decrease the temperature inside the building, combat urban heat island effect .
 Most of the rainwater is retained by the soil instead of being discharged into the sewers or streets . This is an excellent rainwater management strategy .
 Even vegetated mats and plugs have been designed for rapid deployment of green roofs at a massive scale .
 There are also financial advantages associated with the design philosophy . The design philosophy is based on a design philosophy.
 Green roofs are estimated to increase the life of a roof by 200% . The added effect of reducing energy consumption due to lower demand for air conditioning .
 The idea is to grow vegetation on the walls of a building. Dubbed the ‘Living wall’ — the idea is the 'Living wall'
 The method provides many of the same benefits as green roofs and is highly efficient in reducing building temperature and absorbing water . The method also reduces temperature and absorbs water .
In cities across the world, community-driven projects have been initiated to allow residents to grow food on roofs as well . In some cities, residents have been able to grow their own food on roof roofs .
 Such a technique has the added advantage of providing valuable household income for the poor . The technique has been used to provide valuable income for many people .
Given the threat of climate change, civic bodies around the globe have progressively introduced policies, technological solutions and changes to the way urban centers are developed and organised .
 Pakistan is one of the world's most threatened by climate change . Pakistan has given scant attention to the matter .
 The solutions mentioned here are by no means exhaustive nor comprehensive, doing so is beyond the scope of this writing . Of course, the solutions discussed here are not exhaustive or comprehensive .
 Pakistan's climate change risk management strategy is part of Pakistan’s climate change strategy . Design and systems have as much to do with preventing urban flooding as with ensuring that valuable water resources are preserved .
 Afghanistan was thrown to the dogs after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s . Pakistan can sense the impending doom, a return to the 1990s when the country was abandoned .
 The U.S. had stopped routing aid to Afghanistan through Pakistan . The two countries had progressed to an irreversible thaw . The United States had imposed the Pressler sanctions on Pakistan .
 Afghan's slide to civil strife and breakdown of law and order in the country didn't come as unexpected . Afghan’s slide tocivil strife and complete breakdown of laws and order didn’t come as surprising .
 The situation would be similarly bleak if the 14,000 or so American troops stationed in Afghanistan withdraw prematurely .
 Afghanistan’s security infrastructure lacks the wherewithal to prevent the Afghan Taliban from storming Kabul or holding sway in the provincial capitals .
 After the American withdrawal, a weak Afghan government desperately clinging on to power in Kabul and a few provincial capitals, and an intense civil war taking place in the surrounding countryside seems like a logical outcome .
 It doesn't bode well for the stability of the region and especially for Pakistan’s already vulnerable economy . It doesn’t bodewell for the region, especially for the already vulnerable economies .
 Pakistan is pushing and prodding the Afghan Taliban to come to terms with U.S. demands . Pakistan is going all out to ensure a settlement in Afghanistan .
 The Taliban have been negotiating with the U.S. directly since 2011 . Richard Holbrooke opened diplomatic channels with them through Germany and Afghanistan .
 Pakistan did not have any kind of liaison role because the U.S. distrusted Pakistan, accused the military establishment of double crossing them and thought they might get in the way of negotiations .
 The U.S. administration has understood that it's in her interests to use Pakistan to coerce the Taliban to accept some of its less appealing demands .
 The black turbans consider the Ghani administration a puppet government propped up by the U.S. They deem it pointless to have any kinds of talks with a fangless President .
 Both sides had increased attacks — suicide bombings in the case of the Taliban — and air attacks in the U.S. It was pointless because the negotiations did not result in any kind of deal .
 Only Pakistan has the capacity and ability to force concessions from the Afghan Taliban . Only Pakistan is able to force concession from the Taliban .
 The Taliban leadership is based within the territorial confines of Pakistan . The Pakistani military has a certain amount of leverage over the Taliban .
 Mullah Baradar is the successor to Mullah Omar and now Political Chief of the Afghan Taliban . He was released in October of 2018 on the request of Zalmay Khalilzad . United States officials wanted to conduct talks with him .
 ISI would not be able to influence the Taliban to not only accept but politically deal with the current Afghan dispensation .
Realpolitik dictates that U.S. diplomats engage the Taliban until they find an acceptable solution to the Afghan problem . People in the United States might morally abhor the social attitudes of the Taliban .
 Trump is seeking reelection and hearkens for a glorified exit from Afghanistan to sell to Middle America . The United States is increasingly demanding that the United States revert from all its foreign military commitments and move towards isolationism .
 Trump's political base will not be satisfied until there's a permanent ceasefire after the U.S. withdrawal . Trump’s political base is not satisfied until the United States withdrawal .
 Americans don't want to see a repeat of the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam in 1975 . In 1975, soldiers clambered on top of each other to get to the last United States helicopter fleeing from Saigon .
 The Taliban know that they can easily outwait the U.S. United States is playing on a weak footing because the Taliban know they can outwait.
The Afghan Taliban are loath to any kind of ceasefire because it would curtail their power . The Afghan Taliban want to stay in control of their own territory .
Afghanistan has a monopoly over violence. The only reason they enjoy ungrudging respect is because they have a monopoly on violence .
 After the U.S. withdrawal, they would be looking to consolidate their gains. After the United States withdrawal.
 Political deal or not, they would seek to take over the rest of the country . They would want to take control of the entire country .
 This would include defeating their decades old enemy, the Northern Alliance, crushing the Afghan Army in battle, and pacifying the fast-emerging Islamic State of Khorasan .
 The U.S. must ensure that a power sharing formula between the Taliban and the Ghani government is agreed to . The Taliban and Ghani Government must share power sharing.
 All this must be done before the upcoming Afghan Presidential elections. All this is done before this year's elections .
 The withdrawal deal should lay out steps for the formation of a pre-election caretaker government . It includes a broad coalition from all segments of the Afghan population, including the Northern Alliance .
 The ideal outcome after that would be for the Taliban to accept electoral democracy and contest the elections as a mainstream Islamist party, much like the Jamat-e-lslami in Pakistan and the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt does .
 U.S. should outline a plan for Afghan forces to take on the Islamic State of Khorasan, an international terrorist organization .
 There were more than 200,000 foreign troops in Afghanistan. They have borne pressure when there were 200,00 foreign troops .
 Pakistan would hate to see any kind of instability in the region, it can coerce the Taliban to sit on the negotiating table with the Afghan government and agree to a power sharing deal . The U.S. should enlist Pakistan’s help, because Pakistan is part of this region
 If there’s a civil war in Afghanistan, it will not bode well for Pakistan, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: It will not be good for Pakistan in terms of economy and peace in the country .
 New Islamist fighters in Afghanistan can easily cross over the border to Pakistan, creating terror and destruction in her cities .
 Pakistan’s military leadership certainly does not want a repeat of the last decade when there was a new terrorist attack almost every day . Pakistan's military leadership doesn't want to repeat of last decade's terrorist attack .
 U.S. and Pakistani interests clearly align when it comes to the Afghan exit game plan . US and Pakistan's interests clearly aligned.
 The crux of the United States strategy must be to appease Pakistan, listen to what its needs are and what its core interests in the region are .
 The United States looks at Pakistan as a client state, giving it alms whenever it wants to get something done . It will further intensify the impression that the U.S. looks at the country as a Client State .
 Pakistan is chequered by its security paradigm vis-a-vis India . There has been an exacerbation in tensions on that front recently, says Kashmir .
 The United States doesn't even have to do much, merely support Pakistan’s stance on Kashmir on a public forum .
 In return, the United States would get the exact face-saving formula that it's looking for . The U.S. would be looking for the same formula .
 Pakistan's clients in Afghanistan can create hurdles in any endgame which is agreed to, thereby compromising Trump’s image in front of the U.S. electorate . If it ignores Pakistan on the other hand, it could create hurdles.
 The unusual rains this monsoon and India's release of water into River Sutlej have resulted in the rising water levels in the river .
Water level of Sutlej is rising as Punjab’s Provincial Disaster Management Authority warns . The situation can turn hostile, the agency says .
 prevention of floods is not practical, but it is possible to protect from floods and manage them .
 There is almost no control in Pakistan over Sutlej, but authorities need to take more than the standard protection measures to protect lives and properties .
 Chief Minister of Punjab, Usman Buzdar, has already responded to the warnings by the PDMA by summoning an emergency meeting .
 The focus of the meeting will be on protection measures against the flood . The meeting will also focus on protecting against the floods .
 At the end of the session, instructions will be issued to deputy commissioners and commissioners of districts to be on their toes .
 CM Punjab should have a fair idea of what improvements can be made in the government's response to such floods by now . CM Punjab is not CM Punjab’s first meeting in this regard .
 It is evident that the typical preparations of the authorities fail to protect people’s lives and properties . It's evident that people's experiences with floods have revealed time and again .
 The PDMA in Khyber Pukhtunkhwa has also warned the provincial deputy commissioners about India's opening of the water of Alchi dam .
 Authorities in both provinces need to be vigilant to deal with any emergency. Nevertheless, authorities in both countries must be vigilant .
 Provincial governments should leave no stone unturned in providing relief to those bearing the brunt of these floods . Also, the provincial governments should provide relief for those suffering from the floods .
 It is about time for the state to take an integrated approach to flood management on a national and regional level .
 Such an approach will help the government in reducing the loss of human lives and properties, says the government . Such an idea will help reduce loss of life and properties.
 Pakistan still lacks the will and capability to manage floods, say officials . Were that to happen will mean that Pakistan still lack the ability to manage the floods .
 The urban floods in Karachi have already exposed Sindh’s inability to deal with unusual downpour . Sindh has been struggling to cope with the recent floods .
 The floods that will hit Punjab and KP provinces will be the test of provinces’ governance capabilities .
 The framework having nine working groups will give the necessary input to expand the bilateral relations in diverse fields . The framework will also help Pakistan connect with the Central Asia, Russia and the West .
 Turkey is among the few countries which have always stood by Pakistan in the hour of trial . Turkey is one of the few nations to stand by Pakistan. Turkey is in any calamity like situation or external challenges including the FATF and Kashmir dispute .
 The roadmap for strengthening economic relations with a reliable and trustworthy friend is a truly very positive step . Both the countries will be further close to each other .
 The SEF will be operationalized instantaneously with focus on signing the long awaited Free Trade Agreement . The decision of entering into strategic economic framework was reached during PM Imran Khan's visit to Turkey .
 Pakistan can only benefit from the FTA if it diversifies its export basket by bringing in the value addition . Pakistan can also seek reduction of duties from Turkey on its products on the pattern of Egypt and Jordan .
 Pakistan has shown open heartedness to Pakistan. We are confident that Ankara will be forthcoming to fully opening its market to our products .
 Pakistan can benefit from Turkish experience of promoting its tourism industry and infrastructure . Pakistan can also benefit from Turkey's experience of tourism industry .
 Turkish investment can also be attracted in special economic zones, food processing, mining and minerals . Turkish investment is also attracted in food processing and mining industries .
 SEZ envisages establishment of high level cooperation committee to be headed by top leadership from both sides . SEZ confident that they will give their vision and ideas to take the relationship to new heights .
 Kashmir dispute will be taken to the International Court of Justice at the earliest . Both Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi and Special Assistant on Information and Broadcasting Firdous Ashiq Awan announced on Tuesday .
 Government of Pakistan this time around is going beyond mere verbal rhetoric and taking concreted steps to give a very clear message to the oppressed people of Kashmir that the people and government of Pakistan stands by them .
 Pakistan has committed clear violation of all international laws and UN Security Council resolutions . Pakistan has a very strong case as India has abrogated the special status of occupied Kashmir . India's detention and communication blackout also amount to war crimes .
 Kashmiri people have been turned into a prison by the Indian authorities . The territory is becoming worse for the Kashmiris with the territory turned into an Indian prison .
 The ICJ will go for an early hearing of the case, we also expect . Given the prevailing situation, we expect the ICJ to go for a early hearing .
 ICJ is now up to the ICJ as to how it dispenses justice to the oppressed Kashmiris . It is up to ICJ to make war crimes in the occupied valley accountable .
 The prime minister has rightly told federal and provincial governments to launch resultoriented awareness and immunisation campaigns .
 Babar Bin Atta is prime minister’s focal person on eradication of polio . PM and some foreign delegates have shared concerns about gaps in Pakistan's vaccination strategy .
 Pakistan is trying to make Pakistan polio-free . The main culprit is propaganda against the vaccination among parents .
 The prime minister himself will work as the ambassador of the polio campaign . It is an encouraging sign that he will work for the campaign .
 Babar Bin Atta has been using social media platforms to counter the propaganda . He has also been using Twitter to fight the propaganda on social media .
 A series of touching and effective messages have been going on air on mainstream electronic media about the importance of anti-polio vaccines .
 Nigeria has just celebrated three years without any polio cases . It is officially a polio-free state, leaving behind Afghanistan and Pakistan .
 Pakistan has seen 53 cases so far and Afghanistan 12 so far . Of these two countries, it is very likely that Afghanistan will beat Pakistan in the polio war .
 The Bannu region is becoming the hotspot of polio vaccination resistance . The region is also becoming a hotspot for vaccination resistance.
 A leader of a traders’ body at a convention announced that they would boycott the vaccination drive if the government did not withdraw certain taxes .
 The militants of the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan killed scores of polio workers only for their political and strategic gains .
 A polio-infested Pakistan serves their agenda of an internationally isolated country . Pakistan is one of the world's most isolated countries .
Local influencers also tried to fan disinformation about polio campaigns . A section of local influencers tried to add fuel to fuel to fire .
 The whole nation should stand by the prime minister in the war on polio, says the PM .
 Indian media is citing unnamed official sources, even though no statement has been issued by APG in this regard .
 Indian media first coined the term ‘Enhance Blacklist’ themselves and then falsely associated it to the regional anti-money laundering watchdog .
 APG has no such list called ‘blacklist’ nor do they have any jurisdiction to modify the status of any member country . The APG does not have a list of countries called “blacklisted’s”
 Only FATF has the authority to make any changes in the status of its member country . FATF official confirms that FATF can make changes in member countries .
 Pakistan Finance Ministry has rejected the false media claims . Pakistan finance Ministry has also rejected the claims .
 Only enhanced follow-up is required in some areas, identified in the Mutual Evaluation Report for further action, which was anticipated . They further clarified that only enhanced follow up is required.
 The report was for the period from February 2018 to October 2018, in which the action tasks were not quite significant . They further added that the report is for the time of February 2018 and October 2018 .
 Pakistan has made substantial progress on most of the action list, for which they have prepared a separate compliance report . Since October 2018, the country has made significant progress on the list .
 The APG is an inter-governmental organisation; consisting of 41 member jurisdictions . It is an international organisation, with 41 member countries .
 APG’s primary functions include mutual evaluation of compliance by its member jurisdictions, technical assistance, typologies research and global engagement . The APG is based in Paris, France .
 biennial update, meaning reduced follow-up, regular follow- up and enhanced follow-ups based on the frequency of the submission of progress reports . These processes are aBiennial update.
 The enhance follow-up requires expedited reporting by the member to the Mutual Evaluation Working Group . The enhanced follow- up requires expediting reporting by a member .
 APG’s 22nd annual meeting was held in Canberra, Australia, from August 18, 2019, to August 23, 2019 . The APG's 22th annual meeting took place in Canberra.
 APG adopted six mutual evaluation reports submitted by China, Chinese Taipei, Hong Kong, Pakistan, Philippines and Solomon Islands . APG also adopted six evaluation reports from China, China, Taiwan and Hong Kong .
 These reports are subject to postplenary quality and consistency review before publication in early October 2019 . These reports will be reviewed before publication.
 Pakistan delegation, headed by State Bank of Pakistan Governor Dr Reza Baqir, attended the APG's 22nd annual meeting in Canberra, Australia .
 The meeting adopted Pakistan’s third Mutual Evaluation Report . The report covers a period from February 2018 to October 2018 .
 Pakistan briefed APG’s evaluation working group on steps taken to improve its AML/CFT Framework and effective implementation of the FATF Action Plan .
 Pakistan is very much confident on the progress made specifically since October 2018 . Pakistan is also confident on progress made in the past two years .
 It is hopeful for a favourable outcome from the FATF plenary in October 2019 . Action Plan and APG findings will be reviewed .
 Pakistan was placed on the FATF grey list due to deficiencies in its financial regime . Pakistan has been placed on a list of countries with deficiencies in the financial regime.
 Pakistan has committed to working with FATF and APG to strengthen its AML/CFT framework . Since then, Pakistan has agreed to work with the two organizations to strengthen the framework .
 Pakistan has taken substantial steps towards improving its financial regime . Pakistan has been taking steps to improve its financial system .
 Pakistan will go to the last extent to support the oppressed Kashmiri people, warns India . Both countries possessed nuclear arms, says Pakistan .
 PM Khan sent a loud and lucid message to India and the world community that come what may, Pakistan will continue to support and raise the voice of Kashmiri people for their right to self-determination .
 The address was important in the context that the Prime Minister yet again exposed the extremist and evil mindset of RSS . The Prime Minister also declared first of all that the entire nation will express solidarity with their Kashmiri brethren every week .
 He said people from all walks of life should come out of their homes, offices and schools for half an hour to express their love and bonds with Kashmiri people .
 The entire nation is united on Kashmir and it will fully back the Prime Minister's call . Kashmiris will turn out in big numbers regardless of their political affiliation to show that their support to Kashmiris goes beyond verbal rhetoric .
 This will also send a very encouraging message to Kashmiri people that they are not alone at this critical juncture and that their brothers and sisters stand shoulder to shoulder with them . This is also an encouraging message that they're not alone, says Kashmiri .
 Kashmir dispute has_ internationalized following Modi’s controversial step of annexation . It is now up to us to keep it on the international radar through full-fledged diplomatic efforts .
 Prime Minister will address the UN General Assembly session next month . The content of his speech should comprise only one point -Kashmir Dispute .
We are confident that the PM will live up to his words and prove himself a true Ambassador of oppressed Kashmiri people . We are confident he will be a true ambassador to the people of Kashmir.
 One expected him to tell the nation about his government's latest initiatives on the diplomatic and political fronts to mobilise international support for the Kashmiri struggle for the right of self-determination .
 We cannot move the international community into action by raising the spectre of a possible nuclear conflagration. We can't move the world into action, we say .
 There has been unprecedented coverage in the western media of Indian brutalities and human rights violations that exposes Modi’s claim of normality returning to occupied territory .
 Kashmiri people are not required to stand with their people in Kashmir . But that is not sufficient to compel other countries to stand.
 The international community's silence over the lockdown of more than eight million people may be driven by geopolitical and economic considerations . But it also reflects our diplomatic failure, says David Cameron .
 Pakistan’s closest allies in the Muslim world are not willing to express any sympathy for Kashmiri people . Even Pakistan's closest allies leave aside condemning Modi's annexation of a disputed territory .
 UAE honoured Indian prime minister with its highest national award . It is not surprising that the UAE has honoured the Indian PM .
Lran is one of the few Muslim countries to have spoken out for Kashmiri people . Lran is a Muslim country in Kashmiri.
 India's growing economic power has helped it expand its influence in the Gulf region . But our own diplomatic shortcomings have also been a factor in us losing our clout in Pakistan .
 OIC contact group expresses concern over the situation in Kashmir . The only solace for us is a statement issued by the OIC .
 We must be very careful not to exaggerate the U.S. role in resolving the Kashmir problem. We must not exaggerate our role in solving the Kashmir issue .
 The statement by the UN Secretary General on Kashmir is also significant . The statement was also significant, according to the UN secretary general .
 There is still no sign of international pressure on Indian government to stop human rights violations in the disputed territory .
 It is a right decision by the government to raise the issue at the UN’s Human Rights Committee in Geneva .
 The committee has previously released two reports on the human rights situation in Kashmir . It has also released two other reports on Kashmir .
 The censure of the Indian action by the UN committee would certainly be a moral victory for the Kashmiri people . But for that a lot of lobbying and diplomatic work is needed for that, says the author .
 The Kashmir issue should be reconsidered, says the prime minister . The issue should go to the International Court of Justice as indicated .
 There is the question about the court’s jurisdiction over the dispute . The court's jurisdiction is the issue of the case .
 Any such move would need the consent of both parties in the conflict . Both parties would have to agree to the move .
 Pakistani leadership to go to the ICJ without even examining the ramifications of such a move . The move is typical of the government's impulsiveness on crucial policy decisions .
 There has not been any condemnation of the Indian action. Barring a few official comments expressing concern over recent developments.
 China is one of the few countries that have come out with a categorical statement criticising the Indian action . China is also one of a few countries to criticise the Indian actions .
 There is also a need to forge a national consensus on our Kashmir policy. There is a need for national consensus.
 Political instability at home would not help to meet serious diplomatic challenges . Political instability would not be helpful to meet diplomatic challenges at home .
 India's use of massive force by India has failed to put down the Kashmiri resistance . It is evident that even the use of huge force by Indian forces has not been put down .
 It has been three weeks since a lockdown was imposed on the disputed territory .
 There have been few examples in recent times of such a protracted freedom struggle . There are few examples of such protracted freedom struggles .
 Modi's virulent nationalism has widened the political and social fault lines in India . Modi’s virulent nationalism has widened political andsocial fault lines.
 For Pakistan it is important not to see Kashmir as a territorial dispute, but a struggle for the right of selfdetermination . For Pakistan, it is crucial not to seeing Kashmir as an territorial dispute .
 A coherent policy is needed to tackle this issue and raise it at the international level. The fact is that a coherent policy was needed to address this issue .
 The unfortunate truth is that we have not succeeded on the international front to convince the world to take action against Indian barbarity in Kashmir . India has not succeeded in convincing the world that it will take action.
 India has even managed to deflect international criticism of its human rights abuses in IHK . India's human rights violations have been highlighted in the international media . India has managed to avoid international criticism despite the fact that its abuses in the IHK are highlighted .
 Pakistan's inability to project Kashmir cause positively in the international arena is partly due to its economic prowess . India's economic prowess is also due to India’s economic prowess, according to the report .
 In a world governed by realpolitik, the cries of the weak are often smothered by the strong . Sadly, in a worldgoverned by realPolitik, might be right .
 Previous governments have been equally ineffective in projecting Kashmir cause . Previous governments were equally ineffective.
 India's belligerent attitude in IHK is unacceptable, says the prime minister . But if the PM wants to change the status quo, there must be a robust and cohesive policy, he says .
 The world's best diplomatic hands need to be mobilised to brief global capitals of the situation in IHK . The world can convince India to back off in the held region .
 The voice of Kashmiris needs to echo around the world, and their fundamental rights must be defended . Kashmiris need to be defended, says Kashmiris .
 It turned out that promoting a nation’s culture and political ideals on the global stage brings significant economic and strategic advantages .
 Researchers have found that a state’s soft power has a significant impact on foreign direct investment . overseas student recruitment, tourism and international influence in forums like the UN General Assembly .
 The European Council states the EU’s willingness to engage with the new government of Pakistan . The EU is willing to support its efforts in advancing social and economic reforms .
 The European Council urges Pakistan to live up to its international commitments with regards to the promotion and protection of human rights and rule of law .
 The Council draws particular attention to the freedom of religion or belief, abuses of the blasphemy law . The Council also focuses on the shrinking space for civil society and the rights of minorities .
 The Council reiterates the EU’s wish to strengthen cooperation with Pakistan in the fields of security and defence, sustainable development, trade and migration .
 The Council calls on Pakistan to step up its engagement in constructive initiatives to support peace in Afghanistan . The Council also urges Pakistan to intensify its pursuit of cooperation with neighbouring countries .
 The Council expresses its expectation that the new framework for engagement with Pakistan, the EU-Pakistan Strategic Engagement Plan, will be signed at the earliest possible occasion .
 The aid will directly benefit 15,000 people in two of the hardest hit pockets in the region . The aid is to help people in the Tharparkar district and Naushki district in Balochistan Province .
 The EU funding supports the Pakistan Red Crescent Society in delivering immediate assistance to affected families .
 Dr Shireen Mazari underlined the need for immediate action to stop the Indian atrocities in Kashmir .
 The Minister also called for steps to stem growing Islamophobia in Europe .
 17 out of 27 member states present in Pakistan will participate in the event . European Ambassador Jean-Francois Cautain said the event aimed to promote European culture and values .
 The main purpose behind holding the event was said to create people-to-people linkages with any EU country representative .
 He maintained that the general public would be provided with multiple displays of Europe as a Culturally rich and friendly place . He also maintained that he would provide the public with several displays of the continent .
 Stands by the EU as well as the members’ states will showcase the respective cultures and traditions, languages, food and music . Pakistan’s general public will also be given general information to the general public .
 The EU Ambassador noted that the economic bloc fully recognized Pakistan’s key role in promoting peace and stability in the South Asian region and beyond .
 The bloc was said to also support the government-declared goals of improving relations with its neighbours .
 The Strategic Dialogue was preceded by the 5th Session of Pakistan-EU Political Dialogue in Brussels on 20 March 2019 .
 The Strategic Dialogue encouraged for an open discussion on a wide range of areas of the bilateral cooperation as well as on regional and global challenges .
 The two sides reaffirmed their ardent commitment to the strengthening of multilateralism and adherence to the principles and purposes of the UN Charter as well as international law .
 Pakistan and EU positively agreed the Strategic Engagement Plan . Pakistan and the EU agreed the plan . The plan intrinsically signifies the growing momentum of Pakistan-EU relations .
 Pakistan invited the EU side to take benefit of the improved security situation as an opportunity to improve their relations in the areas of trade and investment as well as people to people contact including tourism .
 Brussels is a strong supporter of Islamabad’s democratic development, illustrated by four successive election observer missions from 2002 to 2018 . Brussels also provides technical assistance to Pakistan’'s Parliament and the Election Commission of Pakistan .
 The EU is also committed to enhancing its cooperation with Pakistan in its fight against the shared burden of terrorism and extremism . The EU has also pledged to enhance its cooperation.
 EU supports Pakistan’s efforts to improve its human rights record, in particular in areas such as access to justice, freedom of religion or belief .
 Belgium and Pakistan have concluded a readmission agreement . Migration is another area of cooperation, where the two sides have concluded an agreement .
 The EU fully appreciates Pakistan’s vital role in promoting peace and stability in the South Asian region . The EU also supports the Government's declared goals of improving relations.
Experts say this will facilitate government as a further step to meet requirements of FATF . FATF will finally review its decision about Pakistan’s position in September .
 FATF has placed Pakistan on grey list since February last year . The global body is working to curb money laundering and terrorism financing .
 In September, the FATF will take a decision about whether to further keep Pakistan on its watch list .
Financial Action Task Force was formed in 1989 during the G-7 Summit to deal with the growing issue of money laundering . Financial Action Task force was formed during the summit in 1989 .
 The task force at that time was charged with studying money laundering trends, monitoring legislative, financial and law enforcement activities . It also issued recommendations and standards to combat money laundering .
 The watchdog extended its work parameters to terror financing and related funding of terrorist organizations . After 9/11 this watchdog extended work parameters.
 The FATF also works in close cooperation with a number of international and regional bodies involved in combating money laundering and terrorism financing . It also works with the FATF.
 Pakistan already on the watch-list for a period of three years from 2012-2015 . Pakistan already remained on the list for a year from 2012 to 2015 .
 Pakistan is trying its best to defeat a U.S. move to put Pakistan on a global terror-financing watch list with an antimoney-laundering monitoring group . India being member of FATF always tries to blame Pakistan and drags that it should be placed in black category
 Pakistan, other countries on FATF watchlist are Ethiopia, Iraq, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Syria, Syria and Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Vanuatu and Yemen .
 The State Bank of Pakistan’s permission will be obligatory for inland movement of foreign exchange valuing more than $10,000 by an individual .
 The central bank has been given powers to regulate inland movement of foreign currency to curb money laundering . It is for the first time that the central bank is given powers.
 Law enforcement agencies will be authorized to confiscate the currency and arrest the currency holders .
 The Government surrendered the federal cabinet powers to approve bilateral agreements between the financial intelligence units . Experts say restrictions on inland movement of currency have been proposed to end the business of Hawala and Hundi .
Financial institutions will be bound to promptly share information on money laundering with FMU as against the current limit of seven days . The current limit is seven days.
 The Standing Committee also approved to empower the investigation officers to attach property involved in money laundering for six months as against the current period of three months . The standing Committee also agreed to empower police to attach properties involved in the money laundering.
 The courts could grant further extension in the attachment period of up to one year . It is proposed that the courts may grant further extensions in the next year .
Money laundering will now be a non-bailable offence under the newly approved bill .
 It will be mandatory to keep the record of suspicious transactions for 10 years, which is double the current period . It will also be mandatory.
 This bill will surely curb the money laundering activities in Pakistan . The bill would surely curb money laundering.
 Pakistan asked Pakistan to show tangible and satisfactory actions against banned organisations . The delegation asked Pakistan's leadership to pacify more countries towards supporting its case to move out of the grey list of FATF in future .
International partners helped Islamabad engage foreign consultants to support and prepare key stakeholders such as Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan .
 The Finance Adviser emphasised the importance of bilateral engagement with the United States . He told the delegation that over the past three months, the Government had taken significant steps to bring financial discipline .
 Pakistan has taken due steps to evade FATF sanctions . As part of its institutional development initiative, the SBP and FBR are being resourced and empowered .
 The writer works for Pakistan Institute for Conflict and Security Studies, a think-tank based in Islamabad .
 A U.S. delegation led by Acting Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Alice G Wells held a meeting with Adviser on Finance Hafeez Sheikh on Tuesday .
 Alice G Wells said the U.S. would continue to remain engaged with Pakistan in its economic reforms efforts . The United States will help build an environment that facilitates business development between the two countries .
 The focus of present government of Pakistan is also on trade and economic relations . The United States President during his interaction with PM Imran Khan had also talked about the great potential that exists between the two countries in economic sphere .
 Both sides will now be interacting and engaging more frequently and deeply to achieve the objective put forth by their leadership . Both sides are expected to be interacting more often and deeply .
 Pakistan remains an attractive market for U.S. Companies due to favourable demographics, English language skills and low labour costs . There are real trade and investment barriers that limit the ability of United States Companies to enter the market and grow their businesses in Pakistan .
 There is desire on both sides to bolster their economic relationship which will augur well for developing a relationship truly based on mutual interest and respect . We understand there is desire to bolster the economic relationship .
 The Council approved formation of CPEC Authority for ensuring accelerated implementation of the Corridor-related projects . Most importantly, the Council approved the formation ofCPEC Authority .
 This is really a welcome step and shows the commitment and seriousness of incumbent government towards this mega project which has the potential to change the entire economic landscape of the country. This is the first step in the process of building a new economic landscape .
 The CPEC Authority will provide a much needed platform for multi-sectoral coordination and will prove to be instrumental in coordinating efforts for development and implementation of future CPEC projects .
 The Authority would have been hired to run the Authority on modern lines . We are confident that skilful human resource fully cognizant with the contours of the Corridor would be able to run it .
 CPEC Authority to activate process of establishment of special economic zones . Special economic zones will also see shifting of industry from China to Pakistan .
 These special economic zones are very important to put the country on the path of industrialization . The zones are important for the country to become more industrialized .
 This path will help the country address most of its economic woes, says the government . It will substantially enhance exports and create hundreds of thousands of job opportunities for the youth .
 Both the CPEC Authority and the Board of Investment should synergize efforts to attract maximum investment from other foreign companies and countries in these SEZs in order to make them a successful model .
 Doing so will also help realize the long cherished dream of turning Gwadar into one of the busiest ports in the world . Do so will help realize a long- cherished dream.
 If one may execute a quantitative analysis, economic indicators may be assumed as a tool of performance together with recovery figures .
 Current Account Deficit and Trade Deficit showing decreasing trend but slowing down of economy and fall in Gross Domestic Product growth rate is a very bad news .
 Slow down of economy was an obvious outcome for import based economy which got affected due to huge devaluation of Pak Rupee . Exchange rate is set to free when Exchange rates are free .
 State Bank of Pakistan to raise Discount Rate which further resulted businesses to become costly . It compelled State Bank to raise discount rate .
In short, controlling twin deficit increased twin input costs of doing businesse . In short, the cost of doing the businee increased .
 corruption is so deep rooted that corruption out of corrupt environment is giving accountability institutions a big trouble . Economic indicators as a result of tight monetary policy are not showing much movement towards any outcome .
 FBR Chairman is determined towards documentation of economy for better tax collection . Tax evaders are retaliating and trying to skip this fiscal measure taken by the government by way of different threats .
 Answer to this question is too early to conclude when government is trying to change consumer behaviour of the country .
 PTI preferred to get an International Monetary Fund program to bring liquidity into Pakistan . Pakistan’s name from Grey List of Financial Action Task Force by introducing Qualitative measures .
 He emphasizes present economic policies to be consistent so that the final outcome would be based on the effects of these reforms .
 He stated that these painful measures will get long-term economic growth which will benefit the low income and middle class . He said the painful measures would benefit the middle class and low income .
 Prime Minister Imran Khan also quoted several times that soon the country will get out of economic troubles . He considers 6 months remaining for results to impact national exchequer, positively .
 Question arises that if Lower Income and Middle Class are happy with the pain inflicted by tough economic measures . If Lower Income is happy with tough measures, it could be a good thing for Middle Class .
 Knhan’s government is ready for GDP growth rate to slow down from 5.75% to 2.5% and inflation to rise as stated in IMF report .
Local manufacturers are discouraged and easy money is earned at which even tax were not submitted to national exchequer, twin input coste . As Economy from last couple of decades has become import based.
 Devaluation and Interest rate hike resulted an economic slow-down . Government efforts to increase tax net making lock down calls from traders and middleman .
 Unemployment is an ultimate outcome affecting Lower class house hold income, value of money and purchasing power . This scenario is triggering economic chaos everywhere where no one can determine exact future of one's economic activity .
 It is an apparent result of IMF conditions imposed over Pakistan for next 36 months . It is a result of the IMF conditions.
If government strict measures for financial discipline may successfully be installed it will become prosperity for lower income class in longer run . However, if strict measures are successfully installed, it will be a boon for the Lower income class .
 Government is committed to achieving the toughest target imposed by IMF but itself for prosperous Pakistan .
 The government has set some goals which are set to be short term and long term . For said reason the government has been set to set some short term goals .
 Twin Deficits are controlled which increased twin cost of production specially for importers as explained above but it will help local industries to grow . In short run Twin Deficsit are controlled.
Export based GDP will increase and import substitution for local consumption will become future of the country that will save foreign exchange . Afterwards Export based GDP to increase and imports will increase .
 Government is trying to improve efficiency of quality control units . For said reason government is attempting to improve quality control.
 The CNIC condition and paying GST deducted to national excheauer will result in increasing tax collection . It will ultimately be used in paying debt servicing and financing of subsidies .
 tax net will increase it will bring stability in economy, tax rates will fall . indirect taxation will be replaced with direct taxation . Soon when tax net increases will increase, it will brought stability in the economy .
 US-China Trade war has reduced global economic activities due to which business opportunities are on declining trend . Above all US- China Trade war is reducing global economic activity .
 It is said to be true that when a nation is lead by a non corrupt leader there would be a positive outcome at the end of the day .
 The Pakistani government released the first year of the government's report on the results of the administration .
 The report shows that the Pakistani economy has emerged from the crisis in the past year and has gradually stabilized, it added .
 The positive trend of the economic policy that reflects the stability of the Pakistani government is significant . The Pakistani government's economic policy is significant, says the government .
 The improvement of business environment, the increase of taxation scale, the adjustment of development focus and the optimization of foreignrelated cooperation are the outstanding features. Among them, the improvement of the business environment and the reduction of taxes are among them .
 The positive changes in the above-mentioned strong base have laid a relatively reliable foundation for the development of Pakistan in the next stage . The positive change in the past has laid a foundation for Pakistan's future development .
 The optimization of the business environment is conducive to expanding the attraction of foreign investment, says the company . The optimization is a good way to attract foreign investment.
 The Pakistani government's main investment department has approved the establishment of 11 special economic zones . The zones are distributed in the four provinces of the country .
 Pakistan has also implemented a series of reform measures . In order to improve the ease of doing business, Pakistan has implemented a number of reforms . Pakistan also has implemented measures to improve ease of business .
 In the course of business, taxes, social security, and pension payments can be paid online . The internet can be used to pay for taxes and social security payments .
 At the same time, the government has set up a 24-hour hotline to answer questions and provide convenience .
 The increase in the size of the tax will help alleviate the fiscal deficit . The increase will help ease the deficit.
 The government's series of tax reforms implemented in the past year have achieved remarkable results . The report shows that the government's tax reforms have been successful .
 The expansion of tax revenue is inseparable from the increase in taxpayers . The increase in tax revenues is linked to the rise in tax revenue .
 In the fiscal year of 2018/2019, the number of new taxpayers in Pakistan increased by 350,000 . The tax evasion problem that has long plagued Pakistan has been accelerated .
 Pakistan's fiscal deficit will gradually ease, says Pakistan's finance minister . As long as this positive momentum is maintained, the situation of the Pakistani fiscal deficit is gradually easing .
 The report pointed out that in the case of financial difficulties, the total size of development expenditure is limited . The report also said that the total amount of development spending is limited.
 Pakistani government focuses on cultivating new economic growth poles in highpotential areas . Pakistan also focuses on short-boarding in regional distribution .
 It has established a technical and knowledge-intensive economic development working group and allocated Rs 14 billion as an incubation fund for 27 projects . It has also allocated £ 14 billion to fund 27 projects.
 The situation of horizontal and unbalanced economic development in Pakistan is improving . By focusing limited development funds on key areas and areas, the situation is improving.
 The report pointed out that an important achievement of the Pakistani government in the past year has been the expansion of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor . The report also said that market access and industrial development in addition to traditional priorities such as energy project construction.
 New areas such as poverty alleviation through the people’s livelihood, agricultural modernization, and the marine economy have enabled the corridor to keep pace with the times and better meet the needs of Pakistan's economic development, says the Pakistani government .
 Pakistan will gradually increase the priority of development and construction in economic policies . In the future, economic measures of the economy will continue to be effective and the economic fundamentals will stabilize .
Construction of large-scale infrastructure projects under the corridor will accelerate . By then, the construction of big-scale projects will accelerate, according to experts .
 This was significant in 2017-18 in the last year of PML-N government when highest ever trade deficit, current account deficit and fiscal deficit were recorded . This was a significant year for the government.
 The PTI government measures include documentation of economy to increase tax revenue, reduce imports and increase exports to control trade deficit . The decision to give extension to COAS General Qamar Javed Bajwa has resulted in confidence to business community .
 The interbank market rupee has stabilized at Rs. per United States dollar . The KSE100 index for first four days recorded gains of 3,650 points and closing at 31,884 .
 Investors’ sentiments received a boost by the visit of the incumbent Chairman of Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan . His team held discussions on problems that plagued the market .
 The companies that bought shares worth $1.44 million, “brokers proprietary trading account’s’ net purchases of $ 1.74m, showed . Investors believe that talks with the apex regulator may have progressed towards a market turnaround .
 The news of current account deficit narrowing by 78pc in July raised confidence of investors . Investors believe the economy may finally be on the path of recovery .
During the session, heavily oversold stocks were trading at 11-year low price-to-earnings ratio of just five times . During the session.
 State Bank of Pakistan report indicates steep fall of 73 per cent in the current account deficit in July 2019 on month to month basis .
 In July 2019, the exports have shown an increase of 10 percent to $2.233 billion compared with $1.012 billion in July last year . In July 2018, exports have increased 10 percent, compared with the same amount in July 2019 .
 If the trend of falling imports and increase in exports continues during the current fiscal year, it will help the government to reduce short term borrowings from multilateral donor agencies, banks and friendly countries .
 The trade bodies have been critical of the restrictive import policy as it would impede economic activity and impact growth in exports .
 export products producing industries consume imported raw material and intermediate goods . The point of view of business community has some weight as export products produce imported raw materials .
 Over the past five decades successive governments had no interest to work out comprehensive industrial policies to promote industries that produce raw material for export industries .
 Z.A. Bhutto government had shattered confidence of entrepreneurs in 1970s . Nationalization of industries of 1970s by Z.a. government shattered confidence.
Almost all governments in the past failed in introduction of new technologies, their indigenization by institutions of Research and Development, and the neglect of skill development, and abnormal increase tariff of energy inputs .
 This resulted in a burgeoning current account deficit and an addition to the debt mountain . This has led to a growing current account deficits and a growing debt mountain.
 The PTI government has completed one year of its tenure but formulation of industrial policy is still awaited . It was preoccupied with damage control exercise .
 Only four industries including textiles, leather goods, surgical items and sports goods export bulk of the value-added products .
 Commercial councilors in the embassies abroad did not help exploring new markets for exportable goods and commodities from Pakistan .
The PTI does not view defence and economic development in isolation from each other . The PTI doesn't view defence, economic development and defence in isolation .
 An adequate defence is as necessary as a resurgent economy, says Pakistan . Pakistan must maintain and develop an effective capacity for the defence of Pakistan, says the writer .
 Prime Minister Imran Khan as its head and Chief of Army Staff General Qamar Javed Bajwa as one of its members . The PTI government formed the National Development Council to accelerate economic growth .
 Other members of National Development Council are Foreign Minister, Finance Minister, and top bureaucrats from relevant departments . Chief Ministers of the provinces are also members of the National Development council .
 Cabinet Division will set policies and chalk out strategy for development and provide guidelines for improving regional cooperation .
 PML-N government in its last tenure could not achieve its targets with regard to fiscal deficit, balance of payments vis-a-vis exports and imports . Pakistan's external debt mounted to around $90 billion; economic reserves had declined to $12 bn .
 Pakistan could achieve the robust economic growth in the presence of such economic indicators . Pakistan's economic indicators are a key indicator of the country's growth .
 Pakistan’s foreign reserves may drop to an alarming low, according to the IMF .
 Pakistan will have to fall back on the IMF and other international finance institutions, it was understood . The writer is a senior journalist from Lahore .
 The beginning of the fiscal year 2019 witnessed a massive drop in the current account deficit .
Much of the decline has come as a result of certain situations rather than the government policies that have worked out in our favour . But much of the drop has come from certain situations, not government policies .
 The fall in the global oil prices has benefited us immensely by lifting the pressure from oil import bills. For instance, the fall in globalOil prices has helped us immensely, says the author .
 The State Bank has also attributed the decline in the current account deficit to decrease in the import of LNG, decline in machinery import and fall in global oil prices .
 Government is optimistic that if the July trend of increasing exports coupled with remittances is sustained, it will be brought down to onedigit figure . The trade deficit has also declined .
 In July 2019, exports experienced an increase of 14 percent, while imports declined by 18 percent . In July 2018, exports were up 14 percent and imports declined.
The boost in the exports came mainly from the rice and the textile sector . The decline in imports is attributed to various government policies .
 currency depreciation plays a huge role in the trade sector . Currency depreciation is a huge part of the economy .
 When currency of a country loses its value, its exports become cheaper . This gives a price edge to that country’s exports in the international markets .
Rupee devaluation has a significant role in trade statistics . imports of that country become expensive because of its devalued currency .
 The decline in imports can also be attributed to a fall in machinery imports . The construction phase of CPEC project has come to an end .
 It is misleading because we are still in deep waters, firstly, because of the factors that have attributed to the macroeconomic improvement are highly volatile and not sustainable .
 Any hike in the global oil prices or the value of our currency is again going to deteriorate the situation. Any hike is likely to be seen in the coming days .
 The economy is once again overcome by a wave of plummeting optimism, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are once again overcoming by the other economic variables"
 The manufacturing sector has shrunk by 3. percent, adding to the unemployment and decline in domestic production .
 In such times, foreign direct investment might have brought some relief . But the statistics present a gloomy picture in that sohere too .
 The whole scenario leads to the conclusion that the fall in current account deficit is indeed welcome, but to celebrate it at this early stage is not only pointless but also foolish .
 It would have been entitled to celebration if it had occurred due to certain policy outcomes, which is not the case . It would be entitled to celebrate if it was due to some policy outcomes .
 Government optimistic that if the July trend of increasing exports coupled with remittances is sustained, the current account deficit will be brought down to onedigit figure .
 The key word here is ‘sustained’ and sustaining growth via such volatile factors is not so easy .
 Many government policies have paved way for the improvement in the current account deficit . But their share is not sufficient enough, says the author .
In order to truly sustain these improvements we need to rely more on efficient policies than on other factors . In order to really sustain these reforms we need more on efficiency policies than other factors.
 Ben Bernanke, then the chair of the U.S. Federal Reserve, made the claim in November 2009 . The claim was made just one year after the meltdown of the economy .
 The trouble began in 2007 with a downturn in the U.S. and European real estate markets .
 The contagion quickly spread to major financial institutions around the world . Thanks to the deep integration of global banking, securities, and funding markets, the contagion spread to the world.
 By late 2008, banks in Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland, Latvia, the Netherlands, Portugal, Russia, Spain, South Korea, and the United States were facing existential crises .
 The Great Depression of the 1930s is remembered as the worst economic disaster in modern history . But it was far less synchronized than the crash in 2008, says CNN's John Sutter .
 More banks failed between 1929 and 1933 and involved far smaller balance sheets . Although more banks failed during the Depression, these failures were scattered from 1929 to 1933 .
 In 2008, both the scale and the speed of the implosion were breathtaking . The implosion in 2008 was the most dramatic in the world .
 gross capital flows around the world plunged by 90 percent between 2007 and 2008, according to Bank for International Settlements data .
 As capital flows dried up, the crisis soon morphed into a crushing recession in the real economy .
 The “great trade collapse’ of 2008 was the most severe synchronized contraction in international trade ever recorded . The ‘Great trade collapse of 2008’ was the greatest synchronized contraction ever recorded.
 Within nine months of their pre-crisis peak, in April 2008, global exports were down by 22 percent . In April 2008. In March 2008, the global economy was down 22 percent.
 In the U.S. between late 2008 and early 2009, 800,000 people were losing their jobs every month . In the United States between 2008 and 2009, 8,000 jobs were lost each month .
 By 2015, over nine million American families would lose their homes to foreclosure . The largest forced population movement in the U.S. since the Dust Bowl .
In Europe, failing banks and fragile public finances created a crisis that nearly split the eurozone . In Europe, banks and public finances create a crisis, while failing banks, fragile public funds created the crisis .
 Ten years later, there is little consensus about the meaning of 2008 and its aftermath . There is no consensus about what happened in 2008 .
 In Europe, leaders have been content to blame everything on the Americans . In the United States, memories have centered on the government recklessness and private criminality that led up to the crash .
 bankers on both sides of the Atlantic created the system that imploded in 2008 . In fact, the system imploded.
 The collapse could easily have devastated both the U.S. and the European economies had it not been for improvisation on the part of United States officials .
 The U.S. and Europe's financial crisis has been obscured in recent years . It speaks to the contentious politics of managing global finances and to the growing distance between the two countries .
 No one predicted the crisis in 2008, says TALL TALES . Tall TALes is a common trope to emerge since 2008 .
 In truth, there were many predictions of a crisis, but not the crisis that ultimately arrived . There were also many predictions, but many were not of the crisis.
 Macroeconomists around the world had long warned of global imbalances stemming from U.S. trade and budget deficits and China’s accumulation of United States debt . They feared a global dollar selloff.
 Paul Krugman warned in 2006 that investors would suddenly flee dollar-denominated assets, crippling the world economy and sending interest rates sky-high .
 When the crisis came, the Chinese did not sell off U.S. assets . The Chinese didn't sell off United States assets .
 U.S.-government-sponsored enterprises such as the mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac increased their purchases of United States Treasury bonds, refusing to join Russians in a bear raid on the dollar .
 Rather than falling as predicted, the dollar actually rose in the fall of 2008 . The dollar actually fell in 2008, according to analysts .
 U.S. authorities were facing an implosion of the transatlantic banking system, a crisis of financial capitalism . The crisis was not a Sino-American meltdown, but a crisis.
 The crisis was general, not just American, although the Europeans had a hard time believing it. And the crisis was not just U.S.
 He did not want to “import’ the United States’ ‘cancer’ Despite the fact that the United Kingdom’s own banks were already tumbling around him, he said .
 The United States had allowed itself to be sucked into misguided wars of choice while refusing to pay for them . The U.S. had allowed it to be sucked into misguided war of choice .
 It was living far beyond its means, and the crisis was its comeuppance . It was a crisis that was its cominguppance, and it was living beyond its mean .
 confident predictions that this was a U.S. problem were quickly overtaken by events . But confident predictions of a United States problem were soon overtaken .
 Europe’s banks deeply involved in the U.S. subprime crisis, but their business models left them desperately dependent on dollar funding .
 The result was to send the continent into an economic and political crisis from which it is only now recovering . The continent is now recovering.
 Americans and Europeans have very different memories of the financial crisis . Even today, Americans and Europe have very similar memories .
 In September 2008, the MRepublican-led House of Representatives voted against the Bush administration’s bailout plan to save the national economy from imminent implosion . A few months later, after a lost election, House Republicans voted nearly unanimously against President Barack Obama�’
 The crisis ushered in a new era of absolute partisan antagonism that would rock U.S. democracy to its foundations . American democracy was rocked by the crisis of the Obama administration .
 Europeans remain content to let the U.S. shoulder the blame . Europeans, meanwhile, remain content with the United States .
 The Big Short dramatized the events of 2008 as an allAmerican conflict between the forces of herd instinct and rugged individualism . France and Germany have no equivalent of the Big Short, the bestselling book .
 Deutsche Bank was a major player in those events, but can easily explain this away by claiming that the bank abandoned its German soul .
 Europe's dependence on the U.S. is an inconvenient truth for European elites at a time when Brussels and Washington are drifting apart . The Europeans have chosen to forget their own mistakes, so have they forgotten what the crisis revealed .
 A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS of Europe’s persistent illusions were on full display in August 9, 2017, press release from the European Commission .
 The commission announced that the “crisis did not start in Europe’s Europe” and that the underlying problem had been “exposure to sub-prime mortgage markets in the U.S.” The deep European recession that followed followed.
 Brussels took credit for mitigating that recession through “strong political decisions’ of EU institutions and member states .
 The French bank BNP Paribas announced that it was freezing three of its investment funds due to volatility in asset-backed securities markets in the U.S. It came on the tenth anniversary of what most experts consider to be the true start of the global financial crisis .
 The European Central Bank was sufficiently alarmed to inject $131 billion in liquidity into Europe’s banking system . That same day, the European Central bank was sufficiently concerned to inject the money .
 Greece and Italy had accumulated dangerous debt stocks of their own . The bank's problems at a French bank were the occasion of the anniversary of the French bank's anniversary .
Design of mortgage-backed securities, many of which earned the highest bond ratings, was flawed . Many of the best bond ratings by bundling together bad mortgages were flawed .
 None of these problems explains why the downturn precipitated a global banking crisis . But none of the problems explain why the crisis precipitated the downturn .
 Investors lost more money when the dot-com bubble burst in 2000 and 2001, but that did not bring the global financial system to the brink of disaster . After all, investors lost moremoney when thedot-combub burst in2000 and 2001 .
 What turned 2008 into the worst banking crisis in history was a new business model for banks . The 2008 financial crisis was the worst in history .
 Traditionally, most banks had funded their operations through “retail banking’s” deposits . Consumers lend money to banks in the form of deposits, which banks use to make loans .
 Banks across the world increasingly moved toward “wholesale banking’s” banking . Banks are funding their operations through large, short-term loans .
 Wholesale funding gave banks the ability to borrow much larger sums of money than they could in the retail market . This allowed them to become more leveraged, and thus more exposed to risk than ever before .
 The real threat to the global economy was not just that banks in the U.S. and Europe were becoming overleveraged, it was Russia and Asia . Much of these banks’ short-term funding involved currency mismatches.
Foreign banks were racking up sizable liabilities that had to be paid in dollars . In short, foreign banks had to pay in dollars.
 If the money markets where they obtained these dollars ceased to function, many of the world’s banks would immediately be at risk of failure .
 The first big bank to fail spectacularly was Northern Rock, in August and September 2007 . Northern Rock was the British lender Northern Rock .
 It had no exposure to American subprime mortgages, but its funding model relied overwhelmingly on wholesale borrowing from around the world .
 BNP Paribas' August 9 announcement cut Northern Rock's access to funding . The decision was made by BNP paribas.
 This sent a signal to wholesale lenders that more banks were holding bad assets than anyone had previously understood . This sent out a signal that more lenders were holdingbad assets than they had previously thought .
 wholesale lending ground to a halt. With the extent of the contagion unknown, wholesale lending is to be halted .
Northern Rock informed British regulators that it would need assistance . Five days later, Northern Rock informed regulators that the company would need help .
 The shutdown in bank funding quickly rippled across the global financial system . Russia and South Korea, countries remote from the subprime debacle, now under stress .
 By late 2007, the world was witnessing a trillion-dollar, transnational bank run . The world's largest bank run was in 2007 .
 People tend to think of globalization as involving the rise of emerging markets such as China and India . These countries have indeed been the engines of growth, says David Frum .
 In the early twenty-first century, financial globalization still revolved around the transatlantic axis . It was between the U.S. and Europe that the real disaster threatened .
 The Bank for International Settlements estimated that all told, by the end of 2007, European banks would have needed to raise somewhere between $1 trillion and $1. trillion .
 In the good times, these banks had easily obtained funding through currency swaps and wholesale markets .
Interbank markets are drying up, with interbank markets drying up . Now, they are desperate for dollars .
By the fall of 2007, officials in the U.S. had begun to fear that European banks would liquidate their dollar portfolios .
 The nightmare scenario was that European banks would dump their dollar holdings, driving prices of mortgage-backed securities to rock bottom . The U.S. banks held even larger quantities of those securities, thus triggering a bank run .
 2008 was the most dangerous crisis ever witnessed. It was this risk of simultaneous implosion on both sides of the Atlantic that made 2008 the most deadly crisis ever seen .
 With disaster threatening, the question became how to respond . The question is: How to respond?
 In the fall of 2008, governments across the West rushed to bail out their ailing financial institutions .
 The United Kingdom effectively nationalized HBOS, Lloyds, and the Royal Bank of Scotland . The United States effectively nationalised HBOS and the RBS . The UK's largest bank, RBS, was the Bank of England .
 Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland, and Switzerland all took emergency measures to rescue their own banking sectors . Belgium, Switzerland, France and Germany all took measures to save their own banks .
 The inaugural G-20 leadership summit convened in November 2008, bringing together heads of state from developing countries such as Brazil, China, and India . The inaugural summit was held in 2008 in New York .
 The birth of the G-20 reflected a multipolar world economy in which emerging markets had new weight . The birth was a sign of a new era in the world.
 Many developing countries viewed with hostility, all the more sensitive . But it also made recourse to institutions such as the International Monetary Fund .
 No one in Washington wanted a repeat of the controversies of the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s . The IMF's draconian loans came to be seen as violations of national sovereignty .
 U.S. officials are putting an alternative rescue mechanism in place . The alternative rescue system is being put in place.
 The only institution that could fill that need was the Federal Reserve . The Federal Reserve is the only institution to fill that needs .
 Officials at the Fed had already started to worry about European banks' funding gaps toward the end of 2007 .
 The Europeans took more than half of the $3. trillion offered through the Fed’s Term Auction Facility . 72 percent of the deals provided through the Single-Tranche Open Market Operation, a little-publicized Fed liquidity program .
 Fed to be acting as lender of last resort to foreign banks was no doubt unusual . It needed to avoid a European fire sale of U.S. assets at all costs .
 The Fed's leaders found that simply providing the European banks with access to the Wall Street liquidity programs would not be enough .
 Liquidity swap lines had been used extensively in the 1960s to deal with tensions in the Bretton Woods system . But had since been confined to emergencies, as when they were used to help the Bank of Mexico during the peso crisis of 1994-95 .
 The revival of liquidity swap lines in 2007-8 ensured that there would be no dangerous spikes in the funding costs of key Asian, European, and Latin American banks .
 If interbank funding got too tight, the global financial system would receive dollars directly from the Fed . The Fed would also receive dollars from the U.S.
 The major beneficiaries of the swap lines were the central banks of Japan, Europe, and the major emerging-market countries .
 On October 13, 2008, they were uncapped, giving the major foreign central banks unlimited dollar drawing rights . The major central banks gave the major central bank unlimited dollar Drawing rights .
 By December 2008, the swap lines were the single largest outstanding item on the Fed’s balance sheet . The Fed's balance sheet was the biggest outstanding item.
The swap lines operated over various terms, ranging from overnight to three months . The swap lines were operated over several terms, including the duration of a month .
 The Fed provided its Asian, European, and Latin American counterparts with just shy of $4. trillion in liquidity . The ECB alone took $2. trillion, of which the ECB alone takes $2 trillion .
 The European banks’ giant funding gap did not escalate into a full-blown transatlantic financial crisis . That the European banks' giant Funding gap didn't escalate into the full- blown transatlantic crisis .
 The swap lines could be dismissed as technical in-house arrangements between central banks . But they represented a fundamental transformation of the global financial system .
 The world’s central banks effectively became offshore divisions of the Fed, conduits for whatever dollar liquidity the financial system required . The world's central banks become offshore divisions.
Before 2008 many had expected an imminent dollar selloff, the crisis ended up confirming the centrality of the Fed to the global financial system .
 The Fed reinforced the dollar's attractiveness as the world’s commercial currency . The Fed managed the crisis by successfully managing the crisis .
 In establishing the swap-line system, the Fed also confirmed a hierarchy of central banks .
 The system included the obvious European central banks, such as the ECB, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank . Canada and Japan also had the system .
 Brazil, Mexico, Singapore, and South Korea. But it also included the central banks of major emerging market financial centers .
 Veterans of the swap-line program at the Fed admitted that they knew that by rolling it out they were straying into geopolitical terrain .
 The U.S. Treasury Department and the State Department compiled a list of the 14 central banks that were to participate in the program . All of the central banks had to be approved by the Treasury Department, State Department .
 The Fed’s minutes from the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 29, 2008, record that at least two applicants were rejected . Their names were redacted .
Not everyone was sufficiently important or sufficiently politically and economically aligned with the United States to qualify . Not everyone was enough to qualify to qualify for the U.
 U.S. officials had no desire to publicize the fact that they were coming to the world's rescue . This was no Marshall Plan moment, and United States officials didn't want to publicly publicize it .
 The inability of Europe's megabanks to come up with the trillions of dollars they owed posed such a risk to the U.S. economy that doing nothing was simply not an option .
 The world's central banks effectively became offshore divisions of the Fed . The world’s central banks are effectively becoming offshore divisions.
 The liquidity swap lines wound down rapidly in 2009, as private credit markets began to recover .
 The full details of the Fed's liquidity programs were not disclosed until 2011 . The Supreme Court ordered the Fed to release the data to reporters from Bloomberg .
 The Fed's actions to save the global financial system have largely been forgotten . The result, however, is that the Fed’s actions have been largely forgotten .
Unprecedented intervention effectively disappeared down a memory hole . An unprecedented intervention effectively vanished down the memory hole.
 The swap lines are an obscure part of the U.S. narrative in the United States . In Europe, they have been forgotten altogether .
 The European Commission is free to peddle its story that it was prompt action by the European authorities that saved Europe from a crisis made in the U.S.
 European banks such as Barclays and Deutsche Bank can proudly proclaim that, unlike their American counterparts, they came through the crisis without state assistance .
 The state of transatlantic relations in the early twenty-first century is misleading, according to some reports .
 The U.S. and Europe remain massively interdependent, but they lack a common story to glue the relationship together . The United States and Europe are still very interdependent .
 leaders on both sides of the divide now seem eager to leave behind, writes John Sutter . Sutter: The management of that crisis relied on networks of interdependence shaped by the twentiethcentury history of the transatlantic relationship .
 Many predicted that in the aftermath of the crisis, the dollar would lose its status as the world’s leading currency . But the opposite has happened .
Today the dollar is the anchor Ccurrency, the standard against which other currencies are pegged . It's up from closer to 60 percent at the turn of the millennium to 70 percent .
 The events of 2008 left the European banks in a weakened position, and since then, they have repeatedly looked to Washington for support .
 In 2010, the Fed reopened its swap lines, and in November 2013, they were made permanent . The eurozone crisis was at its most acute, in 2010, when it was the most acute .
 At the same time as the Fed tided the European banks over during the crisis, U.S. regulators began to take an increasingly dim view of their stability .
 During negotiations in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision throughout 2010, U.S. and European officials clashed over tightening banking rules and capital requirements .
 Obama signed the Dodd-Frank financial regulations into law in July of that year . U.S. regulators began using the law's provisions to force European banks in the United States to comply with tougher standards .
 The ultimate outcome of the crisis was an unwinding of the extraordinarily tight connection between the U.S. and European finance that had characterized the 1990s and early years of this century . The ultimate result of the financial crisis was thus an unwind of the extraordinary tight connection
 Between 2009 and 2017, the foreign claims of banks as a share of global GDP fell by roughly 22 percentage points, or around $9. trillion . That's a rough proxy for financial globalization .
 The entirety of that reduction was attributable to European banks, with much of it coming in 2009 through a collapse of European claims on the U.S. The collapse on the United States.
 Deutsche Bank’s April 2018 decision to reduce its presence on Wall Street was a belated example of this broader European retreat .
 emerging markets have taken center stage at the same time as European finance has deglobalized . Europe's financial crisis has led to a slowdown in emerging markets .
 Cheap dollar finance enabled by the Fed’s policy of low interest rates has sucked emerging markets into a deep entanglement with the U.S.-dominated financial system .
 China is seen as a harbinger of China's integration into international finance . But with this new development come new dangers, it comes new dangers .
 The actions taken by the Fed to manage the 2008 crisis were underpinned by the remnants of a transatlantic relationship dating back to the end of World War Il . It is an open question whether it will be able to repeat its efforts on a truly global scale when the next crisis arrives .
 The Fed will have as much political leeway as it did in 2008. It is not clear that the Fed will be as political as it was in 2008 . The Fed has been criticized for its political leanings .
 Fed veteran who spoke to me on the condition of anonymity said it had been as though the world's central bankers had a guardian angel watching over them .
 Some legislators clearly understood what was going on, but no unhelpful and potentially inflammatory questions were asked . Some legislators seemed to understand what's going on .
 The next crisis will be in the emerging markets, and quite possibly in China, it may take more than a guardian angel to save the global economy next time .
 Khan’s government is ready for GDP growth rate to slow down from 5.75% to 2.5% and inflation to rise as stated in IMF report for current fiscal year .
Tax net and inflicting harsh measurers for the same government has opened another battle field with traders and retailers . In longer run this segment of economy who do not pay proper tax become documented through CNIC condition and paying GST deducted to national exchequer .
 A vice chancellors’ committee comprising the heads of some of Pakistan’s top universities has called for an additional official grant of Rs10bn for these centres .
 The call was made at a press conference after a meeting at the Higher Education Commission Secretariat in Islamabad . The call comes amid reports of stalled programmes and the cancellation of many important initiatives .
 The recurring budget for public universities was cut from Rs65bn in the last fiscal year to only Rs59bn this year .
 Some universities are struggling to pay staff salaries, and at least a majority of them have failed to take off . Some universities were supposed to raise their own funds to raise money for staff .
 The cut would limit students’ access to research and knowledge and adversely affect the salaries of teachers . Experts had pointed out that the cut would also adversely affect teachers' salaries .
 VCs are demanding quick measures to avoid the system from falling apart . The latest information from the campuses is alarming .
Ministers want urgent discussions regarding funds needed to course correct quickly . They want to invite the relevant ministers for urgent discussions about the funds needed .
 The outcome of this two-pronged advance is crucial to the future health of higher education institutions in the public sector . The outcome is important for the government at one level and simultaneously seeks to identify sources of funds .
 The final responsibility of sustaining the universities rests with the state . However, the state is responsible for sustaining universities .
 The more forceful argument seems to lean towards the diminishing utility of schooling because of the particular manner in which it happens in our context or, more likely, the lack of economic gain from it .
 It takes a certain level of privilege to be commenting on life and education quality . All of which is engendered by the fact that those of us commenting went to school .
 School is about a lot more than intoxication and fat, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We know school is more than alcohol and fat .
 The number one reason we must commit to giving children a school experience is because it offers them the chance to participate in a peer community . This informs a necessary part of their mental, emotional, cognitive, cognitive and social growth .
 A group of children comes together for hours at a stretch at a Pakistani school . This couldn't be truer in the Pakistani context, where even in the most rundown schools, provided there is a boundary wall .
 Young minds and bodies must be able to co-exist beyond the general familiarity of their own homes . But they must exist to enable young minds and body to learn to learn beyond their own home .
 Schools offer an important democratic function by compelling students to deal with both external to them and how they feel in a public environment .
 The schools in Pakistan have insular notions of pedagogy, bigoted perspectives in our social studies textbooks and not enough space to socialise effectively .
 None of these are incorrect accusations, but they also do not represent a much more sophisticated picture of the country's efforts to salvage our children's future .
 A modest whitewashed education building stands firmly in the midst of what used to be a Muttahida Qaumi Movement territory in Karachi .
 At the country’s only privately-run exam board, a group of dedicated, middle-class Pakistanis are slowly changing the way we think about 21st century learning in some of our most disadvantaged schools .
 Balochistan, Washington DC and now the Punjab towards their model. This is what has attracted policymakers from Balochistani, Washington D.C. and Punjab .
 Another experiment is being conducted and monitored by Pakistan’s largest not-for-profit education system . Pakistani schools as mediums to perpetuate obedience .
 The Citizens’ Foundation is trying to reverse the abysmal level of opportunity available to some of Pakistan's poorest children .
 There is something fundamentally empowering about these kinds of learning processes. More than employment, it is important to learn how they translate across multiple forms of assessment or household surveys, says Simon Tisdall .
 At best, good learning teaches young minds to explore the world around themselves . At worst, it compels students to toe a line, which is bound to be broken by one or another incident in real life .
 This may be the trigger to changing the assumptions we hold about the sanctity of long-established values . Sometimes, this may come at considerable risk to the stability of their immediate present, but on other occasions, this is a trigger .
 Many parents would comment that they wanted their children to go to some kind of school, even if it wasn’t the best, was because they could then read to their parents . In 2015, Thatta was working with female farmers in communities across Thatta .
Personal letters, medical prescriptions, bills and bills could all be accessible in a way they just weren't at the time .
 Even a small amount of schooling can yield significant marginal benefits in the lives of our poorest citizens . This realisation contests assumptions made in colloquial narratives about the singularly economic motivations behind seeking an education .
There are just about as many girls in primary school now as there are boys, says Punjab's Annual School Census 2018 for Punjab .
First-level analyses for Punjab show that this is linked more with accessibility issues than gendered positions amongst students or their parents on continuing an education . Boys do begin to outnumber girls at the secondary level, first-level analysis shows .
 Zewar-e-Taleem is one of the largest education stipend programmes in the country . Preliminary reports indicate inconclusive causality between financial incentive and educational demand .
 Once in school, girls seem to generate enough will and positive externality to associate education with more than some form of monetary compensation or reward . But the most intriguing insight from ZeT is that once in school girls generate enoughwill and positiveExternality .
 Pakistani schools continue to fail students like Aafiya Across Swat . Parents and young activists are leading their communities to ensure all children get to school .
Tehsil Kabal has been operating off a few mats and a chalkboard to make sure the little boys and girls in his makeshift school stay relatively on track .
 Swat continues its push for primary education to be delivered in a child's mother tongue . It is easiest to comprehend what is being taught.
 The way forwards for education in Pakistan is the way forward for education, says author . The way forward is the consequence of industrial hysteria in Pakistan, he says .
 The voices from the field remind us that everyday experiences of education are not explicable through linear equations between learning and employment .
 The traditional notion of the ‘market’ also does not help understand why Pakistanis struggle so earnestly to learn something .
Education features in every conversation we have, as does education . So of course it features in all conversations we have .
 We need to do better by ourselves and look at the nuance of both terms to wonder whether it is just money that drives education . It's not just money, it's investment, outcomes and externalities .
We have the resources to try and start thinking differently about how and why we learn . We need to learn more about how we learn and how to learn.
 French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu first wrote of the interplay between the education structures that bind us through our social positions . He created a theory around habitus and the urge to be free .
 The world had transformed itself too much through technology, the media, behavioural economics and resistant politics to argue anymore that a student could ever be kept shackled in his/her mind by the confines of a textbook or classroom .
 Structures could be overpowered by a relentless struggle for human dignity and agency .
 Pakistani students, teachers and parents already know this inside. This is what we must remind the Pakistani learner every single day .
 Soufia Siddiqi is an education research consultant and technical advisor to the Government of Punjab . He is also a technical advisor for the Punjab Government .
 Today those nations have progressed whose citizens were knowledgeable and skilled workers . Today those countries have progressed with citizens who were knowledgeable, skilled workers.
 The education system of Pakistan poses many challenges which include shortage of teachers, excessive absenteeism, lack of basic facilities and lack of a conducive and friendly environment .
 Many teachers who do not attend their classes rather they sit at home or start secondary businesses while receiving monthly salaries . Ghost teachers are another issue because there are many teachers who don't attend classes .
 One of the most common issues being faced is old methods of teaching that have not been changed since independence .
 Pakistani educational institutions should take measures for the betterment of the education system in the country . Pakistani education institutions should improve the shape of modern techniques, especially in primary education .
 The authorities should select skilful teachers with modern training because education is a significant area . Education is a major area for teachers in the UK .
 If it is ignored then it would be very difficult for the nation to move towards development and progress. If it's ignored then the nation would be difficult for it to move to progress .
 We see now our education system only promotes the will to power with this ism and that ism. We see it as an ism .
 We review some literature (National Education Policy Framework 2018, ASER 2019, World Bank 2013, IGC Pakistan 2010, I-SAPS, Naviwala 2016) In this article, we review some of the literature (NEPF 2018)
 Service delivery in the education sector is primarily the responsibility of provincial governments post the 18th amendment .
 After doing away with the concurrent legislative list in the constitution, planning, policy, and curriculum, and standards are now in the purview of provincial governments .
 All regulatory authorities under a federal law are still with the centre, amongst others . Interprovincial coordination, standards in higher education, and all regulatory authorities are still at the centre .
 The federal government is entrusted with a role to promote national cohesion in education . The government is also entrusted with the role to promoting national cohesion.
 Teachers are considered to be the most critical factor in imparting quality education to students . There is weak teacher accountability, teachers are considered the most important factor in education .
 13% teachers in the surveyed public schools were found to be absent in the latest ASER survey . 11% of teachers in private schools in the survey were found absent .
 One of the reasons behind teachers’ absenteeism could be the politics of patronage, according to a report .
 There is need to institute effective planning, management and monitoring to deal with weak governance structures . There is also need to be effective planning and management.
 In terms of public education reforms, some provincial governments have undertaken credible interventions . Some provincial governments are taking steps to improve public education .
 In Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, monitors visit schools every month and publish their results . Teacher absenteeism has gone down as the result of these efforts .
 For any policy to work, it has to make an explicit policy goal of improving learning outcomes . Despite efforts, there are still challenges, there is still challenges .
 The net enrolment rates in primary education have remained static . There has been even a decrease in enrolment in some provinces .
 As per ASER statement based on secondary sources, there are still 22. million out of school children . 12. million girls and 10. million boys are still out of schools .
 ASER’s survey of learning outcomes has slightly improved in 2018, compared to 2016 .
 Children in class 5 were tested to read a class 2 level story in Urdu or regional languages .
 Slightly less children could not read the story than before, leading to the assumption that slightly more could read .
 Private schools’ students performed better than public schools, boys outperformed girls in literacy and numeracy . Children belonging to richest quartile have highest percentage of enrolment and the poorest quartile has lowest .
 A sizeable number of government primary schools lack essential facilities such as toilets, drinking water, boundary walls and playgrounds .
 Some recent literature suggests it might be better to teach children in the languages they understand .
 A study of historical data reveals that two extra years of schooling in mother-tongue raised the literacy and returns to it .
 Some provincial governments in the past announced to opt for English-medium route . Some provinces have opted for English medium route .
 PTI government in Punjab wants to reverse it and introduce a new Urdu-medium curriculum .
In Punjab, there are both public and private schools as multiple options . For example, in Punjab, both private and public schools have multiple options.
Tahir Andrabi, Asim Khwaja and co-authors’ research on education has pro-market orientation to it .
 Boom in the private education can be further improved by alleviating constraints and providing better access to resources, information, and improving the regulatory framework .
 The Framework emphasizes to focus on disadvantaged districts by maximizing the use of existing school infrastructure . The Framework also emphasizes to improve access to secondary education especially for girls .
 For any policy to work, it has to make an explicit policy goal of improving learning outcomes . The goal is to improve learning outcomes, but it must also be a policy goal .
 Some provincial governments in Pakistan are achieving better outcomes in education than others . It might also be useful to research how some provincial governments achieve better outcomes .
 It could help the provincial governments to learn from each other’s education governance and management . It could also help each other to understand each other's education governance.
 The writer is an lslamabad-based social scientist . The writer was born in the city of Llamabad .
 The U.S. neither wants to openly threaten India over the issue nor does it want to derail the progress concerning the Afghan peace process where Pakistan's role has become central .
 Pakistan is going to make sure that Washington sees the Kashmir situation as an irritant to the ongoing Afghan peace process . Pakistan's focus has been taken away from the Eastern border .
 There is not any love lost for PM Modi's government in Washington as the former policy of sidelining minorities and promoting Hindutva in the country has created a wedge .
 India has scrapped Article 370/35A at a time when the U.S. is trying to negotiate its troops withdraw from Afghanistan .
 The timing of the decision is surely going to create a lot of distress in Washington DC . The United States doesn’t want India or Pakistan to be sidetracked from Washington’s principal partnership goals .
 Washington cannot afford to see another derail of the Afghan peace process. In Pakistan, Pakistan’s case, Washington can’t afford to hear another derailment .
 Pakistan’s entire focus is going to be on the Eastern border. However, given the developing situation across the Line of Control and illegal annexation of the Jammu and Kashmir .
 This is exactly the situation which the United States didn’t want to happen. This is the same thing that the U.S. didn't want to do. This was exactly the same situation that the United State didn”t want.
 President Trump FP team is not going to appreciate Modi’s decision as it comes days after the former offer to mediate between India and Pakistan .
 On the one hand, it undermines the US’s legitimacy and political clout in the region .
 President Trump's offer to mediate in Kashmir has not resulted in India deciding the issue of Kashmir .
 India's statement may have forced India to move its timeline for the decision . However, the statement may not have forced the decision to change its timeline .
 India didn't like President Trump's statement that the former had asked for the latter’s mediation in Kashmir conflict .
 The statement created a huge commotion in India, which gave BUP enough pull to implement the controversial plan . BUP has remained a part of BUP’s election manifesto for some time .
 India's move has taken away any credible chance of negotiations with New Delhi over the issue . India’s move has been seen as a move to take away any chance of talks with Delhi .
 Pakistan has maintained that resolution of Kashmir conflict can only come through negotiations . For months, Pakistan has insisted that resolution can only be reached through negotiations.
 India’s unilateral decision to annex Jammu and Kashmir illegally means that New Delhi is not interested in dialogue or diplomacy . New Delhi's unilateral decision is illegal, but it means New Delhi isn't interested in diplomacy .
 The BJP led government is focused on instability in the region . Rather, the BJP led the government is focusing on instability.
 In 2007-08, Pakistan and India came close to signing an agreement which could have resolved the issue of Kashmir .
 Pakistan is going to make sure that the international community endorses the former's stance over Kashmir and demonizes India’s recent actions .
 New Delhi has moved a factious plan to snatch away Kashmiri right of self-determination . Islamabad is likely to ensure that India doesn't have a space in the post-US Afghanistan .
 Pakistan is not only going to push ahead with an agenda that ensures New Delhi exclusion from Afghanistan but will also ask for Washington’s intervention in Kashmir . Pakistan and the US's policy may see frictions over the issue .
 Pakistan should be expected to follow aggressive regional security and foreign policy to neutralize India's influence in areas which can undermine Pakistan’s interests . Pakistan should follow aggressive foreign policy, says the author .
Both Trump and Johnson are peculiar when it comes to verbal confrontations . Both men tend to follow policies associated with political party dogma .
 Both Trump and Johnson have a long association with the media of their respective countries . Some claim it could be their reason to reach the echelons of power .
 Boris Johnson had become the talk of the town in 2015-16 for his strong support forBrexit . Boris Johnson was in the news before entering 10 Downing Street as Premier .
 Johnson remains satisfied with his decision for a nodeal Brexit . Britain is set to be hit by a drastic socio-economic blow to Britain .
 Johnson’s one of the major tasks now is his ‘do or die’ pledge to deliver Brexit . Johnson”s other major task now is to deliver his “do and die” pledge.
 The EU leaders are wondering if Boris Johnson is misleading them over his intentions for a no-deal deal .
 A nodeal Brexit would mean the UK would face endless border queues, a scarcity of medicine and disruption in flights .
Businesses in the UK who have their clients in the EU will face disruption in data management and will have an adversarial impact .
 UK's profitable financial services sector would lose its exclusive rights to function in the EU’s single market .
 Johnson has been adamant to take Britain out of the EU without any deal which will harm the socio-economic fabric of Britain . Johnson is adamant that any deal will harm Britain's economy .
 All sectors including and no limited to aviation, manufacturing, transportation and others will be affected . In short, all sectors including aviation, Manufacturing, transportation, and other industries will be impacted .
 Every legal point must be agreed upon by the British authorities with their EU counterparts if there is no withdrawal agreement in place .
 The UK would need to trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization . This includes tariffs on agricultural goods .
 Johnson's predecessor, Theresa May, pledged her full support to the new British Premier .
 Johnson resigned as Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs in July 2018 after he could not agree with Theresa May’s plans . It is evident he would not want May's suggestion in how he will deal with Brexit .
 Boris Johnson is compelled to experience and resolve Britain's political calamity following its exit from the European Union . Boris Johnson begins his new journey as the British Premier on October 31 .
 Johnson will have no other choice but to lead Britain into an era of economic vagueness . If not, Johnson will lead the country into a era ofEconomic vaguness .
 While economic and trade growth of Britain will decline, as critics opine, it will decline . Britain's economy will continue to grow.
 Britain is the fifth largest economy of the world. Taking Britain away from the EU will shake Britain’s financial markets .
 The general trend is that temperatures will rise and weather patterns will become more unpredictable in the coming years. Even a cursory analysis of the data reveals the general trend.
 The situation in the next four decades will be much worse than we originally imagined. Most policymakers and the public in general have been content with the fact that this problem is one that will not affect us in 40 years .
 Europe’s heatwave led to increases of 3 Celsius in some countries . Greenland saw its vast ice sheet melt to record levels and in recent years starting from 2003 .
 After 2003 it took seven years for the next heatwave to hit in 2010, following which the gap reduced to five years . The next one will be in 2015, then two, with a heatwave in 2017 and then two in 2018, with two record-breaking hot
 Asia’s fate might be much worse in the next decade. If a continent with relatively lower temperatures can be so adversely affected, Asia's fate may be worse .
 As an agrarian country, Pakistan’s whole way of life is threatened if weather patterns continue to get more erratic .
Fields of crops are likely to see more inconsistency in yield numbers and extreme weather conditions such as droughts and floods will hit the country with more frequency and cause greater devastation . Entire villages and settlements on the banks of rivers are threatened .
 The monsoon season will hit harder when the total duration is shorter . Glacial melt will also cause permanent temperature increases in the north and the heatwaves in the summer .
 Urban drainage to mitigate the effects of floods, improving on drinkable water storage to increase capacity and investing in aquifer systems are only some examples of what needs to be done to preserve the current way of life in Pakistan .
 The government talks about improving the lives of citizens . But if this emergency is not dealt with adequately, we might not even be able to ensure survivability for many in different parts of the country .
 They still refuse to acknowledge these two incidents as cases of white supremacist terrorism . They are still refusing to acknowledge the two incidents .
 The U.S. President Donald Trump refuses to view white nationalism as a worldwide threat .
 Trump himself came to power by fanning the flames of white supremacist ideology during his political rallies .
 legislators acknowledge it as a movement of hateful ideology . Neither do the legislators acknowledge the movement of hate .
 There is more to the rise in crimes driven by white supremacist ideology than the rise of white supremacists .
 Muslims, Asians, Africans, Hispanics, Hispanics and migrants all are victims of the new racism fuelled by the U.S. president's rhetoric .
 Dace Gomez explains this for us . The former Federal Bureau of Investigation supervisor is now a former FBI supervisor .
 It seems there is no stopping to the white violence in the foreseeable future, he said .
White supremacists tear the American society apart by depriving it of all its diversity . Why surprise if they tear the U.S. society apart?
 India appeared to be flustered by a perceived sidelining of her interests in the region . The Trump-Khan meet generated a heated debate in the international media .
 Two factors, Afghanistan and the K-Bomb, were widely discussed in the Indian media about the Kashmir issue .
 India may not like her investment to go down the drain, and this was quite obvious from the statements emerging out of New Delhi .
 Trump’s decision to fast-track the process came as a shock . Indian policymakers had foreseen that the peace process will pick up pace in the coming months .
 Currently, the Indian stance on Afghanistan is a tangent to almost all major stakeholders in Afghanistan . Currently, India's stance on the country is not clear .
 The troika of America, Russia and China met in Beijing last month . Pakistan invited Pakistan to join the parlays, excluding India .
 Indian leadership has worked for the past five years to make sure all kinds of pressures are brought onto Pakistan . Pakistan is coerced into following Indian dictates .
 India has built an alliance with the Iranian and Afghan government to physically bypass the Af-Pak economic lifeline of Karachi and Karachi-KhyberKabul . India has also been successful in denting Pak-Afghan trade by offering the alternative route .
 India used proxies in Afghanistan to counterbalance Pakistan’s alleged support to freedom fighters in occupied Kashmir . India also kept the Durand line on fire.
 The so-called surgical strike was thwarted by the Pakistani Air Force in Kashmir . Two Indian fighter jets were downed in Kashmir in a counter-strike .
 Kashmir has been a nuclear powder keg in Kashmir for years . Both sides had to gradually de-escalate to ease tensions and anxiety in South Asia .
 Indian policy on Afghanistan is born out of an old but time-tested Chanakya strategy . The strategy calls for befriending the enemy's neighbour and creating a twofront situation .
 India may not have fully appreciated that Trump's 2020 campaign has a major denominator, and that's Afghanistan .
 Trump cannot afford to start a presidential campaign without making a major headway on Afghanistan . Trump's presidential campaign is in Afghanistan .
 The Trump-Khan meet focused on finding ways and means for the Afghan peace process . No wonder the Trump- Khan meeting focused on the peace process.
 A post-war sustainable Afghanistan is only possible with the U.S. and her allies in the Gulf coming up with a mini Marshall Plan . The Taliban has assurances that the Afghan soil is not used against American interests in the region .
 Pakistan has emerged as pivotal to the Afghan peace and it appears that all roads to Kabul will have to pass through Islamabad .
 Another factor in the perceived endgame in Afghanistan is the interest of other regional players like China and Russia .
 China would like to have peace along the Durand Line so that her investment of $56 billion in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor remains safe . The route passing west of the Indus River and Balochistan does not become a new battleground .
For Russia, the spectre of the IS spreading its influence in her soft belly of Central Asia is perceived as an Achilles heel . For Russia, it is seen as a threat to Russia's soft belly .
 Pakistan has remained a frontline state in the War on Terror and has suffered tremendous losses in men and material . Pakistan has suffered huge losses in the war on Terror .
 It would like to have a peaceful Afghanistan which ensures that it does not continue to become a base for proxy war against her . It would also ensure that it doesn't continue to be a base.
 She can also try to convince the Afghan elite and their surrogates that a Talibandominated government in Kabul will be a disaster for them . She can build a perception of return of a Taliban era of the 90s .
 She may also want her proxies to target non-Pashtun communities like the Uzbeks, Hazaras and Tajiks . She may want to create cleavages within the Afghan polity .
 The Indian lobby will attempt to convey that Pakistan was a slippery ally to the U.S. head honchos on the Hill .
 She could use her diaspora in the U.S. for vote bank tactics and even threaten Trump on withdrawing from the Indo-Pacific alliance .
 Afghanistan has no direct linkage with Kashmir, but it is perceived that a second front along the Line of Control with Pakistan may open up .
 Despite the oppression faced by the Kashmiris, the freedom movement will not be subsiding . The Kashmiris are still fighting for their own rights .
 India sent 25,000 additional troops to the disputed region . India has been trying to spoil efforts for peace in Afghanistan .
 T he Trump administration has to remain vigilant about Indian attempts to increase violence as it suits Indian interests in coming days .
 Afghanistan has been hit by a surge of violence in recent months . One will have to wait and see who amongst all the stakeholders will be interested in maintaining a status quo in Afghanistan .
 U.S. and Russia will recall the occupation of South Korea and North Korea by the United States and Russia respectively . Japan’s destruction of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki will also be remembered .
 The U.S. and USSR's policy in dividing the country between them at the 38th parallel seemed to be a consensus on letting Russia have its long time wish of touching the warmer waters to its east . The United States of having a permanent presence in this end of
 The North to be enveloped in socialist attire and the South in a capitalist one, severed to alienate the two people . Both would remain mutually threatened by each other to this day .
History shows that the moment one state entity is divided into two, it becomes impossible for any of the two to overcome their selfinterests . Many of which need to be sacrificed in a reunification, many of which are needed . This should not be a surprise.
 The North and the South have come closer to end the era of hostility between them . But contrary to this effect, the decades have passed, we see the North and South endeavouring to come closer.
 Several regional and global factors may have played their role in shaping the mindsets in the two Koreas .
 The country had a staggering 39% industrial growth rate in the pre-1990 period when the United States started sanctioning the country . The 1996 floods and famine that killed 3 million North Koreans further brought economic activity to a standstill .
 Rhee’s ousting and later its complete alignment with U.S. foreign policy in dispatching its troop to the Vietnam War theatre, for which it received reimbursements of an estimate of $235,560,000 .
 SK and Japan, both being close allies of the United States in the eastern Pacific, were comfortably placed for economic cooperation .
 SK became the backyard for intermediate industries that would meet the high-end industrial need of Japan . Japan’s promise of financial aid in the name of compensation for Japanese colonial rule over Korea.
 SK opened itself to the free market after the 1997 currency crisis, allowing several global enterprises to move into the country . The country is now less dependent on Japan .
 Japan's economic-bubble-burst in the 1990s and China's rise as a global economic power in the 2000s . This further changed with Japan’s economic- bubble- burst in the 90s . China”s rise as an economic power.
 China’s obvious immediate interest would have been the diffusion of hostilities between its first door neighbours . superpower dynamics go against a power that is war-prone in its immediate neighborhood .
 The Inter-Korean summits between the leaders of North and South Koreas have been held since 2000 . This explains the inter-K Korean summits since 2000.
 In September 2018 Summit, two sides agreed to completely cease all hostile acts against each other . The two sides vowed on cooperation and military confidence building .
 On one side, the United States has insisted on complete denuclearisation . U.S. has said it is committed to complete dennuclearisation .
 Mike Pompeo has asserted that 60% of NK’s nuclear warheads and fissile material need to be shifted out of the country before having a peace deal .
 Kim's side wants an ‘end-of-war declaration’ before the denuclearisation process begins . The juggling seems to be going on with no hope of results .
 The U.S. feels its longtrusted allies are drifting away from them and into the China whirl . The United States is in a very difficult situation as it feels it is in the difficult situation .
 Kashmir dispute has put Kashmir dispute on the international radar like never before . India in complete violation of all international laws including UN Security Council resolutions and clampdown that is continuing in the territory ever since 5th August .
 Kashmiri people are standing firm against the Indian tyranny and persecution and then to the incumbent Pakistani leadership who have mounted a strong diplomatic offensive to highlight the plight of Kashmiri.
 Tension between nuclear armed neighbours on Kashmir is something that the world community cannot remain oblivious to it . The world community especially the U.S. cannot remain unaware of it .
 President Donald Trump has made efforts to defuse tension between Pakistan and India . This is the reason that over the last few days one has seen President Trump taking the Kashmir issue very seriously .
 He made telephonic contacts with Prime Minister Imran Khan and Indian PM Narendra Modi . He reiterated that he would do his best to mediate on the explosive and complicated Kashmir dispute .
 Trump said that he would discuss this possibility over the weekend with Narendra Modi . Modi is slated to meet Trump at the G-7 Summit in Biarritz, France .
 The U.S. President has repeated the mediation offer regardless of the fact that India earlier rejected the same offer .
 This shows for the first time the real seriousness of Washington on Kashmir dispute. This shows the real serious seriousness of the dispute, says CNN's John Sutter .
 India has always been strongly averse to any third party mediation . The United States can use its clout and influence on New Delhi to move towards the resolution of the festering dispute .
 The voice of Kashmiri people has now started resonating in the U.S. Congress . Key lawmakers are urging New Delhi to end the occupation and allow its residents to speak .
 Congressman Adam Smith, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, called Indias United States Ambassador on Tuesday . Smith expressed concern over ongoing communications blackout, increased militarization of the region and enforcement of curfews .
 The world’s most important capital Washington is in support of Kashmiri people . The same kind of support is expected from other major capitals especially the Arab world .
 PM Imran Khan has declared himself as the Ambassador of Kashmir . We are confident that he and his team will continue to present the true picture of human rights violations in occupied Kashmir .
 Kashmiris have to keep the dispute alive and on the international radar till the Kashmiris get their right to self determination . The Kashmiris will not be allowed to self-determination until they have the right toself determination .
 PM Khan has directed the PTI leadership in Washington to mobilize community members and the human rights organizations for the protest against the Indian Prime Minister . The UN General Assembly session is scheduled next month .
 Modi already stands exposed because of his extremist RSS mindset . Modi is known for his extreme views on the Indian government .
 Pakistani and Kashmiri expatriates need to come forward in big numbers to tell the world about what kind of brutalities and human rights violations the people of occupied Kashmir are currently faced with .
 She compelled the Europeans to accept Russia as a great power as a condition for doing business . She compelled them to accept it as a good power for business .
In contrast, Imperial China at that time was self-sufficient and inward looking . In contrast, imperial China at the time wasSelf-sufficient.
 The emperor questioned the ability of the British who were knocking on the door to “acquire the rudiments’ of Chinese civilization. It did not want to open up trade relations with Europe .
 The heart of Russia, economically, politically, scientifically, scientifically and culturally, culturally and educationally is west of the Ural mountains . Russia is economically, economically and politically, politically and culturally.
 Bush appeared to want to keep hope alive, but he didn't win a second term . He was defeated by Bill Clinton who rebuffed Russia, expanding NATO eastward and breaking a solemn American promise made to Gorbachev not to .
 Russian leadership doesn't speak of joining up with Europe . Most people in the west of Russia would like to be attached to Europe, he says .
 President Barack Obama was outwitted on Russian policy by a hostile Republican Congress .
 Russia wants to be politically self-sufficient and like Russia it doesn't want to be encircled by America’s allies, Japan, South Korea, Australia, the Philippines, Vietnam and by American warships that patrol off its coast .
 The West has kept up a drumbeat of criticism because of China’s decision to remain communist-ruled while becoming capitalist economically and keeping political power exclusively in its own hands . The West, in particular the US, but supported more quietly by the EU, has for years kept
 The United States for a least a decade has added China to its list of nuclear targets . The U.S. has gratuitously added China on its list.
 President Donald Trump is sledgehammering China in a trade war . Some of his advisors are talking about introducing short-range missiles that could be nuclear armed .
 The EU might not like all of this but it doesn't loudly speak up against it . The EU may not like it but it does not loudly speak against it.
 Russia and China are now embracing each other after two decades of drifting apart . It’s not surprising that they are embracing.
 A rebuffed and wary Russia and the confident behemoth China, constantly challenged by the West, find that once again, they should seek each other's support, politically and economically .
 This does not mean they are totally at loggerheads with the West — not yet . This doesn't mean they're at loggerhead with theWest .
 China has backed up America’s attempts to persuade North Korea to give up its nuclear arms .
 China has substantially increased its military spending it’s from a small base . Despite the hype, China has significantly increased the military spending .
 Russia helped the U.S. and EU negotiate with Iran to stop its nuclear research . The United States and the EU negotiated a means of capping Iran's nuclear research so that nuclear bomb-making was impossible .
 The Taliban still allows American troops and materials to travel overland to fight the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The United States buys rocket engines from it and uses Russian rockets to carry its astronauts to the International Space Station . The U.S. uses Russian rocket engines to carry astronauts to space station .
 Russia has worked with the U.S. to remove chemical weapons from Syria . Russia has been working with the United States to remove the weapons .
Despite some positive elements, Russia and China are being pushed into a tight embrace . We can see why, despite somepositive elements, they are being push into a Tight embrace .
 In the small picture are the everyday slights that the U.S. and the EU inflict on China and Russia .
 Neither of these two proud countries will allow themselves to be bullied. Neither will allow them to be bullies .
 Jonathan Power was for 17 years a foreign affairs columnist and commentator for the International Herald Tribune . Power was a columnist for the Tribune for 17years .
 The annual get-together of heads of state was a nice photo-op for the recently concluded G7 summit .
 There came no display of provocation or discourtesy from any side, even though a previously unannounced guest from Tehran sat in the audience .
 French President Emmanuel Macron vowed to bring U.S. and Iran closer and trigger talks on sanctions and nuclear deal . The summit proved to be a non-starter .
 Trump called for the inclusion of Russia to the group, but the proposal did not interest any other member . Instead, he called for Russia to be included in the group .
 Russia used to be a member of the G8 until 2014, when it annexed Crimea, which resulted in its expulsion . Russia was part of a G8 member until 2014.
There is a divide between the U.S. and the rest on a range of issues like trade, tariffs and foreign policy . More accurately, there is a divided between the United States.
 The summit's only gains came for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson who found an admirer in the person of Trump .
 Johnson expects a trade deal from the U.S. to keep afloat in the post-Brexit era .
 At times, Johnson kept a distance from Trump and stood by his European colleagues on issues like Trump’s escalating trade war with China .
 The other sigh of relief from the summit could be Trump’s comment on the China trade issue .
 The summit failed to present a united front on issues like Iran, climate change and trade and tariffs . The summit, however, failed to address issues such as Iran and climate change .
 It was held under tight security to keep anticapitalism demonstrations in Bayonne in check . The demonstration was held in a bid to keep the demonstrations under check .
 The gathering of not-so-like-minded allies has ended without any sour point . In all, the gathering of the allies has been without a sour point.
 Commentators described his political positions as populist, protectionist, and nationalist .
 He was elected in a surprise victory over Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton . But he lost the popular vote .
 He became the oldest first-term U.S. president without prior military or government service . He is the first president without a prior military service .
 President Donald Trump can sometimes be nicer to his country's perceived enemies than its friends . It's no secret.
 Trump’s unorthodox negotiating style appears to be wearing thin in Kashmir . But Trump's unconventional negotiating style seems to have been wearing thin .
 Trump’s advice that Pakistan and India must “work towards reducing tensions’ in the wake of the cancellation of the special status and autonomy of Indiaheld Kashmir shows just how grave the situation is .
 Mr Trump described the current state of affairs in this region through his tweets . He spoke by phone to the leaders of the two countries in the space of a few days .
 Mr Trump’s latest attempt to disentangle Pakistan and India as a rudimentary effort at freighting .
 It is intended to de-escalate present hostilities to avert a potential war in the region that would have long-term repercussions for the entire world .
America has intervened to ward off possible military conflict in the region . This is not for the first time that America has intervened in a military conflict .
 Washington should play a more proactive role and make good on Mr Trump’s ‘offer’ to mediate on the Kashmir dispute for long-term peace .
 A constructive American engagement with both sides focused on finding a solution to the Kashmir dispute is important to ensure lasting peace in South Asia for the sake of its people as well as international security and order .
 India has always been averse to any suggestion of mediation by a foreign power or even by the UN . There is no doubt that India will put up strong resistance to such efforts .
 The U.S. is trying to convince New Delhi to listen to the voice of reason once the international community realizes that peace and an improved relationship between India and Pakistan is in the best interest of all those with stakes in this region .
 The conflict started after the partition of India in 1947 as a dispute over the former princely state of Jammu and Kashmir . It escalated into three wars between India and Pakistan and several other armed skirmishes .
Both India and Pakistan claim the entirety of the former princely state of Jammu and Kashmir . Both India andPakistan claim the entire state of the state .
 India administers Jammu, the Kashmir Valley, Ladakh, and the Siachen Glacier .
 China administers the mostly uninhabited Shaksgam Valley, and the Aksai Chin region . The region is also known as the ShaksGam Valley .
 The regional bloc may not be able to play any meaningful role in the current crisis between India and Pakistan .
 The South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation should be dissolved if it cannot play vital role in this scenario . If this group cannot play a vital role, it would be dissolved .
 India has stopped trade with Pakistan so there is no concept of South Asia Association of Regional Cooperation here . India has also stopped trading with Pakistan .
 The Islamic countries which are more than 57 are still silent on this issue . More than 57 of the world's largest Islamic countries are silent on it .
 If not 57 but only 15 major countries like Saudi Arabia, Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, Turkey and others like that break connection with India, stop trade or ban their visas .
 No other country has raised his voice against this brutal situation. But it is strange to notice that no other country is raising his voice .
 Donald Trump is still trying to play the positive role of this South Asian issue . On the other side Donald Trump has been criticized for his handling of the issue .
Donald Trump's policies are for the welfare and the radiant future of the U.S. of America .
 Donald Trump should play his positive role immediately to stop both countries from going to war . Trump should stop the war between the U.S. and the world's most powerful nations .
 Washington should play more proactive role and make good on Mr Trump’s ‘offer’ to mediate on Kashmir dispute for long-term peace .
 The Middle East has remained a victim of intra and extra-regional security frictions . The Mideast has been a victims of intra-region security friction .
 The current crisis between Iran and the U.S. has attracted focus from European powers . The crisis has also attracted attention from the United States .
 Germany, the United Kingdom and France are party to the P5+1 nuclear agreement with Iran . The Middle East has been the strategic backyard of Europe for long .
 If it remains fragile for longer time, the spillover effects of this crisis can also impact Europe . If it continues to be fragile, it can also affect Europe, says David Cameron .
 The ongoing migrant crisis has caught the attention of European governments and multilateral institutions such as the European Union .
 The Middle Eastern region has led the US to undertake active engagement in the region . But yet again it is the centripetal force of the Middle Eastern dynamics .
 Trump often called those wars ‘stupid’ where the U.S. was engaged in the world, wars started by his predecessors . That is one of the reasons why he wants America to leave Afghanistan.
 Trump administration beating the war drums against Iran, and in an apparent hurry to bring Tehran to heel . But it is surprising to see the same Trump administration beat the war drum against Iran .
 President Trump often does not hesitate while referring to broader foreign or defence policy issues concerning America . Khamenei prefers private discussions concerning Iran, according to Karim Sadjadpour .
 The crisis started when the Iranian forces shot down the U.S. surveillance drone on June 20, 2019 .
There were many ways where chances of confrontation remained high and those of collaboration low . If one looks at the pages of US-lranian relations since the Iranian Revolution, there are many ways of confrontation .
 The costs of war would be horrific keeping in view of both the U.S. and Iran's capabilities .
 The U.S. strategy seems to be to limit the Iranian role in the Middle East, while the Iranian strategy revolves around pleading its case against the US’ withdrawal from the nuclear deal .
 Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Zarif recently said, “No one would be safe’ in a conflict, he said .
 Iran has felt the need to abide by the treaty. Iran may now begin to test limits of its literal commitment to the treaty .
 On July 19, the British-flagged oil tanker Stena Impero was seized by Iran's Revolutionary Guard on a key shipping route .
 HMS Duncan has joined frigate HMS Montrose to escort vessels sailing under the British flag through the Strait of Hormuz .
 The detention of an Iranian oil tanker in the Gibraltar signalled that the two sides are about to up the ante . The detention and the quid pro quo detention of a British oil tanker also signalled the two side is on the way .
 Greece's decision not to allow the oil tanker to dock its ship indicates that Europe still appears divided on adopting a predictable, clear, unanimous and consistent stance in the ongoing crisis .
 Iran standoff can also expand existing fissures between the U.S. and Europe . But the ongoing Iran standoff could also expand the existing fISSures between Europe and United States .
 This can also be detrimental for United States and European cooperation in the Middle East . This can be detrimental to U.S. and EU cooperation in Middle East, says CNN .
 The US-lran standoff, if escalated, can push the Middle East and the neighbouring region in another spell of crisis .
 It will also unleash forces of proxy and sectarian conflict across the region in the Middle East . Yemen, Syria, Iraq and Lebanon will also be affected by the conflict .
 If options range from limited to full-blown military action are pushed, it will only strengthen the relevance of the Revolutionary Guards and lran's ruling party .
 The US-lran standoff can also adversely impact the ongoing efforts of the U.S. in Afghanistan .
 Iran enjoying significant influence in the Dari speaking areas may create roadblocks in the ongoing intra-Afghan peace process . Iran enjoys significant influence.
 The writer has been working as a Research Fellow at Islamabad Policy Research Institute .
 The Pentagon tested a land-based missile once banned under the agreement . Two weeks later, on a small island off the Californian coast, the Pentagon tested the missile on the island .
 The demise of the INF Treaty is now official, on paper as on the ground . The treaty's demise is now officially on paper, as on ground .
 Moscow's sole cosignatory, Moscow, had been flouting its rules for years . An agreement cannot work if only one party honors it, and the INF Treaty’s sole Cosignatory is Moscow .
 During his presidency, Barack Obama considered withdrawing from the INF for precisely the same reason that helped drive President Trump’s decision .
 The decision to ditch the treaty is misguided and dangerous, says many observers . Still, to many observers, the decision is dangerous and dangerous .
 The Trump administration is dismantling guardrails that were erected to keep tensions from escalating into a destabilizing arms race . The administration says it's dismantling guardRAils that have been erected to protect the nation .
 At a time when several elements of the global arms control architecture are fraying, this latest casualty could only make matters worse . The latest casualty is the latest casualty of the arms control system .
 If unilateral U.S. adherence to the treaty was futile in the face of repeated Russian transgressions, it had become outright dangerous . China is a much more potent adversary than the United States .
 China uses that missile arsenal to threaten the U.S. and its allies and partners throughout East Asia . Today, China uses it to threaten its allies, partners and partners in the region .
 The INF Treaty is no panacea, but it opens much-needed possibilities for Washington to reset the military balance with Beijing in its favor .
 Washington should use this opportunity to develop and deploy its own missiles to counter the Chinese threat . Washington should not be steamrolled in a future confrontation.
 In theory, the U.S. could have pushed for China to join the treaty, but China wouldn’t, and it still won't . The United States could have asked China for the treaty.
 Beijing derives great benefit from its large land-based missile force . It has made clear that it won't accede to any substantive arms control agreements for the foreseeable future .
 The INF Treaty, with its narrow focus on the United States and Russia, always acted as a straightjacket for U.S. strategy in Asia . The treaty's narrow focus was to focus on Russia and United States .
 China has made meteoric military progress by pursuing technologies that place opponents on the wrong side of physics . Over the last three decades, China's military progress has been made by pursuing technology that places opponents on wrong side.
 Ballistic missiles travel at multiple times the speed of sound and are difficult to intercept . Ballistic missiles have been the cornerstone of the effort to intercept them .
 China can develop and deploy these weapons far more cheaply and effectively than the U.S. can defend against them, making any future conflict with China an extremely expensive and risky undertaking . The United States can't defend against these weapons .
 Beijing “controls the largest and most diverse missile force in the world,’s Admiral Harry Harris testified in 2017 .
 Some 95 percent of missiles would have been prohibited by the INF Treaty, according to Harris . China was a signatory .
 Arms control debates tend to focus on nuclear weapons, of which China has far fewer than Russia or the U.S. Arms control debate focuses on China .
 China’s inventory of conventional missiles exceeds its nuclear inventory by a ratio of at least 7:1 . But China's nuclear inventory is more than 7,000 more than any other country's .
 Beijing fired six anti-ship ballistic missiles into contested waters in the South China Sea . The move is a signal of assertiveness to its neighbors, Washington, and the world at large .
 It now fields several dozen such “carrier killer’s missiles, named for their potential ability to destroy warships or aircraft carriers far from Chinese shores .
 The vast majority of China’s missiles are land-based, rather than deployed on aircraft, ships, or submarines .
 The U.S. military struggled to locate even in exposed desert . It is even truer of China’s arsenal of cruise and ballistic missiles .
 China’s missile-centric military buildup may be the single biggest factor eroding U.S. power and influence in Asia . China's cybertechnologies may be one of the biggest factors eroding the United States power .
 Beijing is trying to establish a fait accompli in Taiwan, writes John Sutter . Sutter: This destructive arsenal could embolden Beijing to pursue its oft-invoked “core interests’, including its disputed claim to sovereignty .
 U.S. air bases and aircraft carriers are technologically sophisticated compared to China’s . They are vulnerable to Chinese missile forces .
 Washington should take a page out of Beijing’s own post-Cold War playbook and build a deterrent based on land-based missiles . The U.S. should build a deterrence based on missiles, Washington says .
 The death of the INF Treaty offers the perfect Opportunity to do so . The treaty was signed in 1994 .
 To begin with, it can once again develop and test ground-launched medium and intermediate-range missiles .
 Testing has begun on a groundlaunched variant of the Tomahawk, allowing deployment within 18 months . Testing has been underway on the ground launched variant of Tomahawks .
 A mobile, ground-launched intermediate-range ballistic missile with a range of 3,000 to 4,000 kilometers will eventually follow . Unlike the Tomahawk the IRBM lacks a Cold War analog on which to base new missiles .
 China’s missiles may be the single biggest factor eroding U.S. power and influence in Asia .
 The U.S. should deploy the missiles in the Asia-Pacific, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 For now, the most realistic and promising location is the United States overseas territory of Guam . Guam is the U.S. territory of the Guam territory .
Small islands such as Guam have only limited concealing terrain . Foreign governments may face popular opposition to hosting U.S. missiles .
Public opinion could shift quickly if China's military capabilities and regional ambitions continue to expand . But the winds of public opinion may shift quickly, especially if China’s military capabilities are expanding .
 The U.S. can still pursue agreements that would allow it to rapidly deploy missiles for a limited period in times of crisis . If peacetime politics preclude a permanent deployment in these countries, the United States can continue to pursue agreements .
 United States withdrawal from the INF Treaty doesn't close the door on future arms control initiatives . U.S. withdrawal doesn’t close the doors on future Arms Control initiatives .
 Russia remains free to work with the U.S. on nonproliferation, including in the emerging realms of hypersonic and undersea nuclear weapons . None of which is currently governed by any agreement .
 Chinese leaders remain vocally opposed to any IRBM development by the U.S. But unwilling to make any concessions when it comes to their own stockpile .
 If the Chinese eventually come to the arms control negotiating table, it will be because Washington pursued new capabilities, not because it unilaterally tied its hands .
 The two sides have confirmed that they are preparing to ink an accord that might form the basis for reconciliation talks among Afghan factions . The agreement would iron out future course of action in which Afghanistan will go .
 Taliban would not allow their country to be used by Al-Qaeda or other groups against any other country . There is not yet official confirmation as to what has been agreed upon by the two sides .
 Americans would not be reducing their troops even by 50% against original demand of Taliban for total withdrawal and an end to occupation of Afghanistan . Analysts believe that sustainability of the understanding between Washington and Taliban is doubtful .
 President Trump has started hurling threats on Taliban that his country would come back to Afghanistan with force like never before if there was another attack on the U.S.
 He is hinting about permanent U.S. presence in Afghanistan, which would be a source of concern for those who never compromised on their independence and sovereignty .
 Americans have never made secret of their intentions to expropriate huge mineral wealth of Afghanistan . Apart from establishment of permanent military bases, Americans have no intention of expropriating mineral wealth .
Afghan factions would be in trouble if Afghan factions successfully overcome their differences during reconciliation talks . The process would prove to be a tricky process, which itself would be difficult .
 Beijing dubbed the act a serious violation of the agreement between the U.S. and Chinese presidents at the G-20 summit in Osaka . It threatened necessary countermeasures .
 Trump's provocative action would invite Beijing to take retaliatory measures . Trump historically hasn’t retreated from his tariff misadventures .
 The tense situation could dramatically escalate the trade war between the world’s two largest economies .
 Trump lashed out with a series of grating tweets. It is shocking that at a time when the US-China trade talks were sailing smoothly towards a decisive deal .
 The hasty but expected proclamation elaborates that the kernel of Trump’s tariff strategy has a political backdrop .
 The United States military engagements in Afghanistan and trade deals with China, the EU, Japan, and Mexico were key promises to his people during his previous campaign .
 To date, he has only been able to accomplish a trade agreement with Mexico . But to date, the deal has not been completed .
 Trump craves to pull the plug on trade strains with Beijing quickly . New tariffs on Chinese goods would take effect from September 1 .
As the fresher tariffs aim to penalise Chinese consumer electronics, clothing, shoes, and toys, American buyers of these goods are the definitive victims of Trump's actions .
 Trump’s previous tariffs in May of 25% on $250 billion worth of Chinese goods were expected to have cost every American household $500 annually .
 If the new tariffs are implemented, Oxford Economics estimates it will cost American families roughly $700-900 . The Peterson Institute reckons a higher figure of $1,270 per annum, according to Newsweek .
 Retailers will be the prime target of these tariffs, Goldman Sachs says . The new levies will “disproportionately impact apparels, footwear, consumer electronics, and toys’s.
 Wall Street experts also agree that departmental stores are exposed to substantial risks . Departmental stores also have substantial risks, they say .
 Global stock markets were also apprehensive of Trump’s tarrif decision .
 Trump’s self-initiated trade war with China would put a squeeze on the U.S. economy and GDP, which would be subject to flagging purchasing power of the people across the country .
 As a result of Trumps’s irrational and unscrupulous trade war, American multinational companies would be forced to shift their manufacturing plants to nearby countries . This is the crux of Trump's campaign towards China .
 The population exploded in the United Kingdom and the United States . Then, the population exploded, next in much of the rest of Europe, and in Asia .
 It reached three billion around 1960 and then four billion around 1975 . It reached 3 billion in 1960, then 4 billion in 1975 .
Just as much of the world has come to see rapid population growth as normal and expected, this time into reverse . The trends are shifting again, according to experts .
 Most parts of the world are witnessing sharp and sudden contractions in either birthrates or absolute population . Most parts are witnessingsharp and suddencontractions in the world .
 The only thing preventing the population in many countries from shrinking more quickly is that death rates are also falling . People everywhere are living longer, because people everywhere are live longer, according to experts .
 Morland does not believe that “demography is destiny,’ as the old adage mistakenly attributed to the French philosopher Auguste Comte would have it .
 Empty Planet is a new book on the rapidly shifting demographics of the twenty-first century . The authors of Empty Planet are Darrell Bricker and John Ibbitson .
 The potential consequences of plateauing and shrinking populations in the decades ahead are almost wholly ignored . If their role first in the rise of the West has been underappreciated, the potential consequences are almost completely ignored .
 The mismatch between expectations of a rapidly growing global population and the attendant effects on climate, capitalism, and geopolitics is so great that it will pose a considerable threat in the decades ahead .
 Governments have evolved to meet the challenge of managing more people, not fewer and not older . Governments worldwide have evolved.
 We are not only unprepared to answer that question; we are not even starting to ask it . We are just not only prepared to answer the question, but we are also unprepared to do it .
 The Human Tide and Empty Planet is the work of the eighteenth-century British scholar Thomas Malthus . The work is an odd yet compelling work.
 Malthus’ 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population argued that growing numbers of people were a looming threat to social and political stability .
 He was convinced that humans were destined to produce more people than the world could feed, dooming most of society to suffer from food scarcity . The very rich made sure their needs were met, he said .
 In Malthus’ dire view, that would lead to starvation, privation, and war, which would eventually lead to population contraction . Then the depressing cycle would begin again, and then the depressed cycle would start again .
 Increased crop yields, improvements in sanitation, and accelerated urbanization led not to an endless cycle of impoverishment and contraction, but to an explosion of global population in the nineteenth century .
 Morland provides a rigorous and detailed account of how, in the nineteenth century, global population reached its breakout from millennia of prior human history .
 The population begins to grow rapidly when infant mortality declines, he says . The population is growing rapidly when infants are born .
Fertility falls in response to lower infant mortality, but there is a considerable lag . It explains why societies in the modern world can experience such sharp and extreme surges in population .
 Women tend to give birth to many children, expecting at least some of them to die before reaching maturity .
 When infant mortality begins to drop, it takes several generations before fertility does, too . It takes several years before fertility begins to occur .
 A woman who gives birth to six children suddenly has six children who survive to adulthood instead of a child . The woman's six children were born to adulthood .
 Her daughters might also have six children each before the next generation of women adjusts, she says .
 The population bust is going global almost as quickly as the population boom did in the twentieth century . The population boom is going worldwide almost as fast as it did in 20th century .
 It started in the United Kingdom at the end of the nineteenth century . It then spread to the United States and then France and Germany .
 The trend next hit Japan, India, and China and made its way to Latin America . The trend is now moving to Latin American countries .
 Sub-Saharan Africa has seen its population surge thanks to improvements in medicine and sanitation . But it has not yet enjoyed the full fruits of industrialization and a rapidly growing middle class .
 Ehrlich argued that plummeting death rates had created an untenable situation of too many people who could not be fed or housed . Ehrich argued that the death rate had created a 'unenable' situation .
 Ehrlich’s prophecy, of course, proved wrong, for reasons that Bricker and Ibbitson elegantly chart.
 The green revolution, a series of innovations in agriculture that began in the early twentieth century, accelerated such that crop yields expanded to meet humankind’s needs .
 governments around the world managed to remediate the worst effects of pollution and environmental degradation, such as Beijing, Cairo, Mexico City, and New Delhi . In terms of daily living standards in multiple megacities, the world has been able to improve living standards .
 These cities face acute challenges related to depleted water tables and industrial pollution . There has been no crisis akin to what was anticipated, but there is no crisis like what was expected .
 Today, the UN predicts that global population will reach nearly ten billion by 2050 .
 Judging from the evidence presented in Morland's and Bricker and Ibbitson's books, it seems likely that this estimate is too high, perhaps substantially .
 Governmental and international statistical agencies do not turn on a dime. They use formulas and assumptions that took years to formalize and will take years to alter .
 The sudden ebb of both birthrates and absolute population growth has happened too quickly for the models to adjust in real time .
 Population expectations aren't merely of academic interest; they are a key element in how most societies and analysts think about the future of war and conflict .
 More acutely, they drive fears about climate change and environmental stability . An emerging middle class numbering in the billions demands electricity, food, and all the other accoutrements of modern life .
 Combined with warming-induced droughts, storms, and shifting weather patterns, these trends would appear to line up for some truly bad times ahead .
 Bricker and Ibbitson argue the numbers and all the doomsday scenarios associated with them are likely wrong .
 Bricker and lbbitson marshal. The signs of the coming bust are clear, according to the data . The data is based on the data that Bricker, lbbits on marshal .
 Almost every country in Europe now has a fertility rate below the 2.2 births per woman that is needed to maintain a static population .
 The UN notes that in some European countries, the birthrate has increased in the past decade . The birthrate in some countries has increased.
 European birthrate up from 1.6 to 1.7, but that means population will still grow older in the coming decades . New births fail to compensate for deaths, as new births do not compensate for death .
 Japan's population has already crested, and in Russia, where high mortality rates for men have led to a decline in the population . That trend is well under way in Japan, where the population has crested .
 The population bust is going global almost as quickly as the population boom did in the twentieth century. What is striking is that the population bust has gone global as fast as it did in twentieth century .
Fertility rates in China and India are now at or below replacement levels . Fertility rates account for nearly 40 percent of the world's people .
Fertility rates in other populous countries, such as Brazil, Malaysia, Mexico, and Thailand, are high .
Morland is skeptical that humanity is on the cusp of a tectonic reversal in population trends . Morland is a demographer by training .
 He agrees that the trends have changed, but he is less prone to the blanket certainty of Bricker and Ibbitson . He says he is more prone to a blanket certainty than Bricker.
 population expectations have frequently been confounded in the past and that certainty about future trends is unreasonable . This is not because he uses different data; he simply recognizes that population expectations are often confounded .
 Even if fertility rates fall dramatically in Africa, there will be decades left of today’s youth bulge there, says Morland .
 Morland tends to be more circumspect in drawing dramatic conclusions. Because he is more measured in his assessment of the ambiguities and uncertainties in the data, Morland is more  circumspect .
 China’s population will peak short of 1. billion in 2030 and then stagnate, he says . He suggests an aging population and gradual absolute decline thereafter . He says that China's population will be 1.1 billion short in 2030 .
 The implications of the coming population bust occupy a large portion of Bricker and lIbbitson’s book . The implications should occupy a much larger portion of the collective debate about the future .
 The underlying drivers of capitalism, the sense that resource competition and scarcity determine the nature of international relations and domestic tensions, says John Sutter . Sutter: The fear that climate change and environmental degradation are almost at a doomsday point.
 If the human population is about to decline as quickly as it increases, then all those systems and assumptions are in jeopardy . If the population is declining as quickly, then those systems are in danger .
 Both books note that the demographic collapse could be a bright spot for climate change . The demographic collapse is a good sign for the future of climate change.
 The experiences of Japan and the United States are showing that people consume less as they age . The U.S. and Japan are also showing that Americans consume less .
 A smaller, older population spells some relief from the immense environmental strain of so many people living on one finite globe .
Greening of the world will happen quickly enough to offset the worst-case climate scenarios is an open question . Current trends suggest that if humanity can get through the next 20 to 30 years without irreversibly damaging the ecosystem, the second half of the twenty-first century might be considerably
 The downside is that a sudden population contraction will place substantial strain on the global economic system . The world's economic system will be affected by the contraction .
 Capitalism is, essentially, a system that maximizes more output, more goods, and more services . Capitalism is essentially, basically, a systems that maximize more output and goods .
 That makes sense, given that it evolved coincidentally with a population surge, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The success of capitalism in providing more to more people is undeniable, as are its defects in providing every individual with enough . The success in providing people with enough is undeniable .
 capitalism is implicitly predicated on ever-burgeoning numbers of people . If global population stops expanding and then contracts, capitalism will likely not be able to thrive .
 An aging population will consume more of certain goods, such as health care, but on the whole aging and then decreasing populations will consume less .
 So much consumption occurs early in life, as people have children and buy homes, cars, and white goods . So much of consumption occurs in life.
 That is true not just in the more affluent parts of the world but also in any country that is seeing a middle-class surge .
 The future world may be one in which capitalism at best frays and at worst breaks down completely . The future will be one of the world's worst economic times .
 No capitalist economic system operates on the presumption that there will be zero or negative growth . No capitalism operates on a presumption that the economy will not grow in the future .
 No one deploys investment capital or loans expecting less tomorrow than today . No one is expecting less today than today.
 Japan's aging, graying, and shrinking absolute population now demonstrates . But in a world of graying and shrinking populations, that is the most likely scenario, as Japan’s aging and shrinking population now shows .
 A world of zero to negative population growth is likely to be a world ofzero to negative economic growth . Fewer and older people consume less, because fewer and olderPeople consume less .
 The future world may be one of enough food and abundant material goods relative to the population . It may also be one in which capitalism at best frays and at worst breaks down completely .
 The global financial system is already exceedingly fragile, as evidenced by the 2008 financial crisis . The world's financial system has already been severely damaged by the financial crisis.
 A world with negative economic growth, industrial capacity in excess of what is needed, and trillions of dollars expecting returns when none is forthcoming could spell a series of financial crises .
 As growth grinds to a halt, people may well start demanding a new and different economic system .
 automation and artificial intelligence are already making millions of jobs redundant . The result is likely to be a future in which capitalism is increasingly passe .
 If population contraction were acknowledged as the most likely future, one could imagine policies that might preserve and even invigorate the basic contours of capitalism by focusing society on reducing costs .
Furious opposition from business interests, policymakers, and governments would claim that such attitudes are defeatist . But those policies would likely be met in the short term by furious opposition .
 In the absence of such policies, the danger of the coming shift will be compounded by a complete failure to plan for it, says author .
 The demographic deflation is happening in rich societies that are able to bear the costs of slower or negative growth using accumulated wealth .
 Some societies, such as the United States and Canada, are able to temporarily offset declining population with immigration . But soon, there won't be enough immigrants left.
 As for the billions of people in the developing world, the hope is that they become rich before they become old .
 Either way, the reversal of population trends is a paradigm shift of the first order and one that is almost unrecognized .
 We are utterly unprepared for a world of fewer people. We are vaguely prepared for the world of more people . We are not prepared for more people, we are unprepared for fewer people .
 The realist wing of the U.S. foreign policy establishment has at times held back in rebuking this reality .
 U.S. foreign policy establishment realists have a critical overview of some trends among foreign policy realists . We all have our biases, with the ideal to nevertheless be reasonably fair and balanced .
 The realist leaning National Interest, exhibits a different choice of words, relative to actions taken by the Russian and U.S. governments .
 Beebe is tame in his prose dealing with post-Soviet U.S. actions, which within reason can be considered as unnecessarily aggressive and deserving of condemnation . In comparison, Beebe's prose is tame.
 The aforementioned ‘Russian cyber aggression’ is something continuously brought up with a lack of conclusive evidence, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Beebe's use of “punishing’s” versus “rewards’ towards Russia is along the lines of treating a child .
Neocons and neolibs will find little, if any disagreement with his opening comment . Neocons will find nothing to disagree with his comments .
 The use of enemy and adversary is in line with tabloid sensationalist inaccuracies, as opposed to a realist seeking a more balanced overview, says author .
 In line with a pragmatic approach, this suggestion is in sync with the foreign policy realist, who second guesses the extent of which these two countries should be at odds with each other .
 The rest of Simes’ piece is for the most part agreeable. From a non-establishment realist perspective seeking improved US-Russian ties, the rest of the Simes' piece is more agreeable .
 U.S. based mass media journalist Natasha Bertrand suggested in so many words that Simes might be, or is, a Kremlin flack .
 Simes' article at issue. It's that kind of mass media portrayal which might compel Simes to express himself in the beginning of his article .
 There's a basis for the U.S. foreign policy establishment to broaden itself with other sources, says John Sutter .
 Simes co-hosts a show on Channel 1 on Russian national television . Simes has been at the forefront in having the likes of the Atlantic Council's John Herbst and former Obama administration official Charles Kupchan .
 The major U.S. TV news networks don't do a better job in getting diverse views on issues concerning US-Russian relations .
 A U.S. mass media elite says that Russian media is restricted comes to mind . A United States mass media executive says that Russia is restricted .
 NBC's Richard Engel spun a demonic image of the Kremlin this past May . Engel's image was spun by NBC’s Richard Engel .
 Engel’s ‘proof’ includes an underhanded way of covering his butt if the claim gets completely demolished . Engel's “proof” includes a subtle acknowledgement of lacking conclusive evidence .
 Many Russians can pursue agendas on their own, without approval of the Russian government . As is true with many other nations, if not most nations, many can pursue their own agendas .
 In Russia, there’s been features on intolerance in the US, with some of that coverage being inaccurate . In the U.S. and other countries, there's been some coverage of intolerance .
 The U.S. State Department’s George Kent spoke at a Capitol Hill discussion on Crimea . The Atlantic Council, United States Institute of Peace and Ukrainian Embassy hosted this past March .
 "Crimea is Ukrainian" in the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages, Kent pointedly said . “Crimea was Ukrainian’s most preferred language in Crimea, and Russian is the most preferred.
 The majority of Crimea's ethnic Ukrainian population support Crimea's reunification with Russia, Kent says .
 Kent's suggestive advocacy to pit non-Russians in Crimea opposed to Russia/Russians was propagandistically presented by Nick Schifrin in an Al Jazeera segment around the time of Crimea's reunification with Russia .
 Within Crimea, there’s no noticeable call to leave Russia and rejoin Ukraine .
 Doug Bandow has expressed views which generally put him in the realist wing of the U.S. foreign policy establishment . Bandow: "I'm a realist"
 His comments on Crimea further highlight some of the limits within the U.S. foreign policy establishment realist circles .
 A well over 2/3 majority in Crimea support their area being reunited with Russia . It's crystal clear that a well over two-3 majority of Crimea support the reunite .
 It’s a high point of hypocrisy to dwell on Crimea having another referendum, while not advocating a referendum for Kosovo . It's a highpoint of hypocrisy. It's not a referendum on Kosovo or Crimea, it's a vote on Crimea .
 Such an inconsistency jives with the anti-Russian biases regularly presented in the U.S. mass media without much of a rebuttal .
 Russia doesn't want Ukraine to become part of the West, says Putin . Russia is trying to wreck Ukraine, he says, because Russia doesn’t want it to be part of West .
 If we follow the prescriptions that Bill and Mike favors as well, what we are going to end up doing is further antagonizing Putin .
 Mearsheimer has said that he finds more fault with the Western stances taken on Ukraine . He also said that Russia's stance on Ukraine is more like Russia's .
 A good deal of Ukraine’s problems pertain to some internal dynamics in Ukraine, which don’t specifically involve Russia or West .
 Following Yanukovych’s overthrow, there were a series of increased anti-Russian acts in Ukraine .
 Russia was if anything more open than the leading Western nations to a jointly negotiated Russian-Ukrainian and Western agreement on how Ukraine’s economy should develop . The two nations were in talks on how to develop Ukraine's economy .
Pro-Russian elements in Ukraine have opposed some key aspects of the Euromaidan . Like it or not, there’s pro-Russian element in Ukraine who’ve opposed key aspects.
 The Russian government can't be seen as being too oblivious to the concerns of Russian speaking pro-Russians just outside Russia’s border .
 Russia has a relatively large country like Ukraine, with considerable socioeconomic problems . It's not in Russia’s interest to have on its border, says CNN's John Sutter .
Anti-Russian elements seek to make propaganda points out of increased tensions with Russia .
 Human-caused climate change has put an immense strain on the delicate ecosystem of our planet . The consequences of this are becoming increasingly apparent .
 Varied forms of human behaviour have combined to wreak havoc on the natural environment . The natural environment has been affected by human behaviour .
 Polluting industrialisation processes, use of fossil fuels to meet growing energy demands and the creation of unsustainable food production systems are all major contributors to an ever-growing environmental crisis . Pollutingindustrialisation processes and use of Fossil fuels are all key contributors to the environmental crisis.
Land use is still ignored, yet very important aspect of contending with climate change . Heat-trapping gases are recognised as a major cause of global warming .
 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has just released a sobering report . It highlights how current patterns of used land are making global warming worse . It also makes food more expensive, scarcer, and less nutritious .
Land comprises only 30% of the Earth, and it is warming much faster than the rest of the planet . Land comprises only 20% of Earth, but is warming faster than other planets .
 It has caused deserts to grow and has made forests more vulnerable to drought, fire, pests and disease . It has also caused deserts and has caused forests to grow, making them vulnerable to fire, fire and disease.
 Scientists had long thought that higher levels of heattrapping carbon dioxide in our atmosphere made plants grow more . Scientists had thought that one of the few benefits of higher levels was that it made plantsgrow more .
 Carbon dioxide reduces protein and nutrients in many crops . But scientific studies show how high levels of carbon dioxide reduce protein and nutrient levels .
 The stability of food supply is projected to decrease as the magnitude and frequency of extreme weather events such as floods and droughts disrupt food chains .
 Human land use is not only part of the environmental problem; it can also offer a potential solution . Human land uses can also be used as a way to improve the environment .
 Rethinking our agriculture and forestry policies can become a powerful force in combatting climate change, says author . Rethink our agriculture, forestry policies.
 land is also a great carbon “sink’sink, which sucks heat-trapping gases out of the air .
 Agriculture and forestry still pull more carbon dioxide out of the air than they put into it . Agriculture and Forestry still pull a lot more Carbon dioxide than they do .
 If we continue to deforest and destroy our soils, carbon being absorbed by our land will go into the atmosphere instead and make the rate of global warming even worse .
 Palm oil production has played havoc in tropical forested areas of Africa and Asia . Palm oil has been blamed for the problems in the region .
 Germany imports large amounts of soy from Latin America, where forests are being destroyed to plant the crop . It is easy for richer countries in Europe to criticize this deforestation, but even an environmentally conscious country like Germany continues to import large amounts.
 If people change their diets, reducing red meat and increasing plant-based foods such as fruits, vegetables and seeds, the world can save as much as 15% of current emissions by mid-century .
 Global food waste accounted for 8% to 10% of heat-trapping emissions between 2010 and 2016 . Food waste alone accounted for 9% to 8% of global food waste .
 If people change the way they eat, grow food, and manage forests, it could help save the planet from a dangerously warmer future .
 The change needs to occur within and across all countries around the world, says the author .
 Planting trees is one important part of rethinking the land use strategy, which currently seems in vogue within Pakistan .
 agricultural and urban development strategies remain quite unsustainable . However, other issues which also merit equal attention are our agricultural and Urban development strategies .
 The United States and the Taliban have held talks in Qatar several times this year to formulate a deal . The U.S. and Taliban have been in talks with the Taliban for several years .
 The framework would allow for a phased withdrawal of U.S. troops . In return, the Taliban would prevent extremist groups from operating in areas they control .
 It would give Donald Trump a chance to claim success in ending America’s longest war . It would also be a chance for the Taliban to claim they have achieved their goal of driving out United States and NATO troops .
 President Trump said on Tuesday that the Taliban would like to stop fighting us .
 The U.S. president is right to say that no one is to be trusted. Yes, the president is correct to say no one should be trusted .
 President Trump proves himself to be an unpredictable person in his decisions and actions . President Trump is an unpredictable man.
 On Tuesday, he reiterated his will to reduce the number of U.S. forces in Afghanistan . He also reiterated his plans to reduce U. S. troops in Afghanistan.
 Pakistan's key role in pushing the Afghan Taliban to reduce battlefield violence is equally important . Pakistan’s key role is also important though tough at this point. Pakistan is also key to pushing the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Trump's policy of Pakistanmediating for Afghan peace has been met with scepticism in Washington .
 Pakistan could come back to harm the U.S. in future. Pakistan has failed to stand with the United States in the past .
 Trump's relationship with Prime Ministerlmran Khan is a player-turned-politician . The two leaders would seek their interests, one a businessman and other a player, says Khan .
 Trump seeks his interests after discussing a wide range of issues . Trump is a businessman used to calculated decisions .
 Trump’s recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel has infuriated the Arab world and upset his Western allies, sparking more violence in the region .
 Trump and Khan's talk was on bilateral relations . In theOval Office meeting, Trump and Kahn's talks were on bilateral Relations .
 Both countries wish to move forward keeping in view their own interests . Both countries want to keep their interests in view of each other .
 The Taliban said they would visit Pakistan whenever they received a formal invitation . After three days of that meeting, the Taliban said that they would travel to other countries to explain their position regarding the peace process .
 The Taliban spokesman said that the visit could take place in the coming weeks . The Taliban said that it could be in the next few weeks .
 Taliban's immediate response was to be taken as a positive gesture towards Pakistan’s struggle for the peace process in the region . The Taliban's response, no doubt, was a positive response to Pakistan's struggle for peace .
 Trump made a surprise offer to mediate between Pakistan and India on Kashmir . Kashmir is a perennial dispute between the two countries .
 The United States was already aware of India’s intention to scrap Article 370 . But now it is being said that the U.S. is already aware that India is planning to scrap it .
 Trump said on Tuesday that he would do his best to mediate in the “explosive and complicated’s’ Kashmir dispute . The Kashmir dispute is between the nuclear-armed Pakistan and India .
 The Afghan peace process or mediation in the Kashmir issue, time will reveal the priorities of the U.S.