 The RUSSIAN-EurOPEan-EUROPEan UNION UNION COMPETITION in UKRAINE 6.2 .
 Ukraine crisis underway since November 2013 is a significant occurrence in a greater debate over what norms will prevail in the European and global security environment .
 The roots of the crisis lie in two-and-a-half decades of competition for influence in Ukraine by the European Union and the Russian Federation .
 The competition between Russia and the EU over Ukraine has evolved significantly since Ukraine became independent in 1991 . Russia and EU have been battling over Ukraine since the independence of Ukraine .
 The European Union’s level of awareness of and competition with Russia for influence in Ukraine has significantly grown. This thesis shows that the European Union's level of Awareness of and Competition with Russia has grown . This thesis is based on a thesis from the EU.
 Ukraine’s position in EU diplomacy has grown from secondary status to being regarded as a critical interest across EU institutions and member state governments . Ukraine's position in the EU has grown to be regarded as an important part of the EU .
 Russian efforts to establish dominant influence in Ukraine have also intensified . Moscow’s interest in Ukraine has been consistently high .
 The findings indicate that the European Union has not given up on Ukraine nor accepted the legitimacy of a Russian “sphere of influence’ in post-Soviet states . The findings of this thesis indicate the EU has not give up on the Ukraine .
 Competition between Russia and the European Union over Ukraine is likely to intensify and remain at a high level for the foreseeable future .
 The European Union Russia competition strategies Ukraine Crimea integration Eurasian Union 17. The EU Russia competition strategy is Ukraine Crimea Crimea integration .
 Ukraine crisis underway since November 2013 is a significant occurrence in a greater debate over what norms will prevail in the European and global security environment . Mohammed Hafez Chair, Department of National Securiy Affairs, says the Ukraine crisis is significant occurrence .
 I also thank my parents, Terry and Barbara Sullivan, for instilling in me a lifelong interest in the history and culture of nations around the world .
Ukrainian territory has been influenced by both East and West throughout the centuries . Ukrainian territory has a history of influence on both the West and Ukraine .
 Western Ukraine has been historically li nk ed to the Habsburg Empire and Poland, while the eastern provinces and Crimea were traditionally part of the Russian Empire .
 The region was the prize of Gennany’s brief triumph during the Great War . The region is the prize for Gennan's brief triumph.
 The 1918 treaty of Brest-Litovsk created for the first time an independent Ukraine . It was designed to be a vassal state of the German Empire .
 The independence of Ukraine did not survive long after Germany's defeat . The fledgling Soviet Union seized the opportunity to reassert Moscow’s control over the strategic area .
 Ukraine was among the most vicious battlefields of the Second World War . Ukraine was one of the most brutal battlefields in the war .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 has loosened Russia’s grip on the region . The growth of the European Union has created greater prospects for Ukraine to become more integrated with Western Europe than ever before .
 Ukraine has become a tantalizing prize in a contest between political, political, and economic models . As the European Union expands and Russia reasserts itself, Ukraine is a tantalising prize .
 The European Union paradigm includes Ukraine within the broader European community . The EU is not necessarily defined by formal institutional integration into the European Union itself .
 The thesis assesses the level of competition between the European Union and Russia over Ukraine from an external standpoint . Ukraine has been regarded as an object of value by Brussels and Moscow .
 The EU's instruments include democracy promotion and measures designed to deepen economic and political cooperation . Russia’s tools encompass its control over energy resources, its military assets, and its ability to gain support from ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has been in a standoff since November 2013 as the result of cartoonish Russian imperialism or nostalgia for the old Soviet days is too simple .
 Both Russian and European Union policies in the Ukraine crisis have been shaped by two and a half decades of interaction conducted in the geopolitical landscape of former communist regimes .
 The European Union countries have asserted that Russia’s behavior in the Balkans and the post-Soviet space is a lack of commitment to the shared security paradigm . Moscow’'s refusal to cooperate in partnership initiatives.
 Many Russians regard EU and NATO expansion as being aimed directly at the interests of their state . Many Russians, meanwhile, regard the expansion as aimed at their state's interests .
 The RussianGeorgian war in 2008 threatened the established precedent of inviolate territorial integrity in Europe . Russia’s behavior in Crimea in 2014 has established a trend in this regard that has affected EU-Russian interactions .
 The competitive trend of EU-Russian relations has major significance for Ukraine in particular . Ukraine is one of the most competitive countries in the EU .
 Russia views Ukraine as a pivotal arena in a contest between Russia and the West . There is evidence to suggest that Russia thinks Ukraine is a key arena in the West's conflict .
 Russians have made an effort to establish a unique Eurasian ideology in clear competition with the liberal democratic model favored in European Union and NATO nations .
 Russians regard international politics as a zero sum game . They see increased Western influence on their periphery as a limitation on their own influence .
 The conviction of ideological superiority and realist power politics combine to give Russia strong motivations to establish itself as the most influential actor in Ukraine . Russia is considered the most powerful actor in the Ukraine .
 Russia has had a continuous strategic engagement in Ukraine due to its proximity, its armaments manufacturers, and the presence of the Black Sea Fleet at the Sevastopol naval base .
 Russia has had a low level of institutional linkages with Ukraine . Russia has nevertheless had a high level of links with Ukraine. Russia has also had low levels of institutional links to Ukraine .
 Neither the Commonwealth of Independent States nor the proposed Eurasian Economic Union has produced significant Russian influence in Ukraine .
 Die-Hard Myths and Real Dilemmas (Rome: NATO Defense College, 15 May 2014)
 The actions of Russian military forces in Ukraine since February 2014 have escalated the competition to a new level . It may represent a shift in Moscow’s desired endgame in Ukraine .
 Moscow's interest in protecting Russian-speakers and ethnic Russians outside Russia’s borders has been asserted by President Putin . Most notably in his speech to the Duma on the annexation of Crimea .
 Russia intends to establish a dominant military position in the post-Soviet space as leverage to prevent any further encroachment by the European Union on its legitimate sphere of influence .
 The issues examined in this section make an understanding of Ukraine’s role in Russian-EU relations highly valuable to policy makers .
 The significance of this thesis has been underscored by the outbreak of an international crisis in Ukraine beginning in November 2013, and escalating with the February 2014 decision by President Yanukovych to leave the country .
Top level officials have already asserted that Russian behavior in Ukraine since the crisis began marks a major shift in relations between the West and Russia . Top level officials say Russian behavior has changed dramatically since the Ukraine crisis began .
 There is a plethora of literature dealing with the relationship between the European Union and Russia . Some works dedicated to how Ukraine figures into the diplomatic equation .
 The literature, as it addresses the full range of functions and interactions conducted by states and a supranational institution, analyzes a wide range of themes, causal factors and trends .
 schools of thought regarding EU-Russian competition, and Ukraine’s role in the interactions between the EU and Russia, can be parsed out .
 One school is adamant that competition between the European Union and Russia is inevitable . Both parties are aggressively seeking to bolster their influence, says one school .
 European Union is willing to concede where EU interests conflict with Russian objectives in Ukraine . Another set of experts argues that the EU is not interested in competition with Russia .
 The literature on Ukraine itself is divided between two major positions . The Ukraine's literature is divided by two main positions .
 Ukraine is committed to pursuing a pro-Westem policy and seeks to deliberately distance itself from Russia . One argument is that Ukraine is trying to avoid Russia from Russia.
 The second school argues that Ukraine favors neither the European Union nor Russia over the other . The school says Ukraine has consistently pursued a balanced policy aimed at maintaining independence and constructive engagement .
 A common position in the literature is that there is an explicit competition between the European Union and Russia over Ukraine specifically and the post-Soviet space .
 Russia, it is argued, perceives the EU’s liberal nonns and institutional creep as a concerted effort to block Russian influence in former communist territories .
 In response, proponents of the competition position argue that Russian diplomacy in so 15 Adomeit,’ Russia and its Near Neighbourhood,” Russia’s near-neighbourhood. ‘Russia and its near-bourhood’
 Mediterranean Quarterly 25. Rival Integration Projects in the Balkans,’s Mediterranean Quarterly,” Mediterranean quarterly 25.
 Russia’s behavior is aimed at the “strategic denial’ of Ukraine to the West, says Peter Bergen . Russia is positioning Russia to dominate the security situation by controlling the pace of conflict .
 Authors supporting the competition interpretation have identified many instances where Russia has leveraged its state power to influence Ukraine . Authors support the interpretation of the competition.
 Russian tools include CIS treaties, withholding energy supplies to apply political pressure, links between the Russian state and pro-Russian political parties, and military intervention .
 Moscow has sought to construct a legal narrative that justifies Russian intervention and that obstructs the European Union . Moscow has also sought to build a legal narratives that justifies Russia's intervention .
 examples include the Russian position that Yanukovych’s replacement by a new acting President and the subsequent election of Petro Poroshenko were illegal steps . Examples include the replacement of Yanukovych by anew acting President .
 Moscow asserts Crimea has legitimately become part of the Russian Federation through a democratic referendum process . Moscow asserts that Crimea has legitimate rights to be part of Russia .
 The aim of Russia’s legal narrative is to muddle the issue among potential adversaries with strong commitments to adhering to international law and liberal nonns .
 How and Why Russia Broke the Rules: 1269-1271 . The Rules are the rules of Russia .
 Journal of European Public Policy 16 no. 858, 866; Reiber, ‘Geopolitical Games,’ 339; Proedru, “Ukraine’s Foreign Policy,” 451 .
 The European Union’s drive to compete for Ukraine is seen as motivated primarily by economic reasons with a strong normative dimension .
 EU agreements with Ukraine have tightened the mutual economic connections, enabling an increased flow of labor from Ukraine to the EU through visa agreements . Some experts argue that these developments constitute evidence of deliberate competition by the EU with Russia .
 European Union has been drawn into competition by Ukraine itself . As some commentators observe, the European Union is in competition with Ukraine .
 Demands from Ukraine and other Eastern European countries motivated the EU’s creation of the ENP . Ukrainian elites with ENP process identified as a driver behind the development of the EAP framework .
 There is some discussion of conciliatory Russian diplomacy, but in the 23 Allison, "Russian ‘Deniable’ Intervention,” 1285; Freedman, “Ukraine and the Art of Limited War,’s 4.3 .
 A Basis for Rapprochement or Deepening the Rift in Europe,’s Journal of European Affairs 10 no. .
Several propositions are advanced to demonstrate an avoidance of competition over Ukraine . In the case of the European Union, several propositions are advance to demonstrate a avoidance of Ukraine .
 The EU carefully designs its engagement with Ukraine to avoid competition with Russian interests .
 The EU motivations to do so are attributed to the importance of economic and energy links between the EU and Russia . Ukrainian ties to Russia, respect for Ukrainian ties, and an unwillingness to create instability that could negatively impact the security environment .
 The EU has never extended the possibility of accession to the European Union. The EU is not competing with Russia over Ukraine because the EU has not extended access to the EU .
 The EU is unwilling to entertain the notion of Ukrainian membership because of concerns that Ukraine does not meet EU standards in areas such as human rights and political development .
 Ukraine's part, eventual accession to the European Union is deemed the primary motivating factor behind its engagement with the EU 33 . The EU's refusal to discuss accession reflects an unwillingness to compete because it ignores Ukraine’s core interests .
 The EU Policy Towards Ukraine During and Since the Orange Revolution,’s International Politics, is published in the International Politics .
 The Impact of EU Conditionality on Ukraine under the European Neighbourhood Policy,” Europe-Asia Studies 61 no. : 208 .
 In some circles it is argued that Ukraine is seeking closer ties with the European Union at the expense of Russian influence .
 The European Union is also a major Ukrainian trade partner . The EU offers the greatest prospects for growth in trade, investment, and employment opportunities for Ukrainian citizens .
 Closer ties with European Union would enable Ukraine to pursue greater economic independence from Russia . The CIS has sometimes been used to pressure Ukraine into supporting Russian policies .
 Some observers maintain that Ukraine has sought to balance relations with the EU and Russia, favoring neither . But some scholars do not deny Ukraine has an interest in the European Union .
 A large ethnic Russian minority consists of people that view themselves as Ukrainian citizens . They are looking to Russia for cultural leadership .
 Russia has vital economic importance to Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government . Russia has a strong role in Ukraine's economy, but it is also important to Ukraine's stability .
Ukrainian elites have expressed pro-Russian sympathies despite their nationality . Many Ukrainian elites have said they are pro-Russia .
 Russia remains Ukraine’s largest trade partner after the European Union . Russia is an important source of investment in Ukraine .
 Politically, there is ample evidence of Ukraine taking care to placate Russian interests . There is evidence that Ukraine is taking care.
 Ukraine worked to maintain economic ties with Russia, expressing interest in Russiasponsored Single Economic Space . As early as 2003, Ukraine worked with Russia to maintain ties .
 Ukraine failed to make major political and economic reforms to align with the EU model under the ENP 43 . After the 2004 Orange Revolution receded, Ukraine undertook several measures to reassure Russia .
 The literature highlights political developments during the administration of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 In 2006, discussions over Ukraine’s membership in the Single Economic Space were reopened .
 Yanukovych abandoned an Association Agreement and free trade deal with the EU in November . In response to the stick of Russian pressure, Yanukovych abandoned a Russian gas deal and major loan .
 The European Union and Russia are the two largest economies in the world . The EU and Russia have the highest share of the world's most powerful economies .
Historical trends may contribute to a more informed understanding of current issues . The crisis is not resolved, placing the events in the competition since November 2013 in context with historical trends may help .
 Several defensible hypotheses could be advanced to assess and explain EU-Russia competition over Ukraine .
 Potential explanations can be broken down into two overarching groups, such as the U.S.
 The levels of competition between Brussels and Moscow have remained constant since Ukrainian independence . The EU and Russia are engaged in a competition over Ukraine, one could posit .
Russian consistency in attempting to maintain influence in the post-Soviet space. This hypothesis could draw on the consistency demonstrated in Ukrainian expressions of interest in EU membership, and Russian consistency .
 The EU and Russia have been at a low point following Ukrainian independence in 1991 . The EU-Russia competition has increased in recent years, according to a new model .
 This explanation could be supported through a detailed examination of Brussels’ evolving engagement programs with Ukraine . This explanation will be supported by an examination of the Brussels engagement programs .
 Kiev’s troubled history within the CIS, recurrent economic and energy conflicts with Moscow, and the annexation of Crimea also contribute to strengthening the case . Kiev's troubled history in the CIS also contributes to the hypothesis, says the author .
 Russian efforts to develop an integration model to serve as an alternative to the EU, including the CIS, the Single Economic Space, and the Eurasian Economic Union, also fit into this argument . Increasing Russian efforts are also part of the argument .
 The European Union is not seeking to bring Kiev into its orbit, or to challenge Russian interests in Ukraine . The literature review identified a school of interpretation .
 The European Union's historical unwillingness to consider Ukraine a candidate for accession to the EU is cited as a reason . The EU tempered its engagement with Ukraine to avoid interfering with Russian interests, says the author .
 A related hypothesis could posit that Ukraine has moved firmly into the Russian sphere of influence, and that therefore the EU is unable to compete. A similar hypothesis could also suggest that Ukraine is moving firmly into Russia .
 Kiev's susceptibility to Moscow's pressure in the energy and economic sectors, as well as its vulnerability to Russia's military power and strategy of ethnic politics, fit well within this framework . Kiev’s susceptibility to Russian military power, and vulnerability to ethnic politics fit well
 Russia and the European Union have taken different paths in their relations with Ukraine . The EU and Russia have taken a different path in their relationship .
 The variations in the interests and diplomatic strategies of the EU and Russia reflect incongruent levels of competition by the two entities over Ukraine .
 The European Union has evolved from a low level of competition over Ukraine to placing an increasingly high priority on securing influence over the country . The EU has placed a high priority in securing influence on Ukraine .
 Russia has consistently had a high interest in competition in Ukraine . But it has not always been as capable of acting on that interest as it has been in recent years .
 Ukraine has historically fueled this competition by avoiding irreversible commitment to either the EU or the Russian Federation . Ukraine has always avoided irreversible commitments to either EU or Russian Federation.
 Kiev has an interest in the economic opportunities, democratic values, and security offered by membership in the European Union .
 Ukraine has lasting, vital ties to Russia stemming from its long time status as a province of the Russian Empire and republic of the Soviet Union . Ukraine also has a significant ethnic Russian population cementing cultural ties to the East .
 Ukraine's attempt to sustain a balancing act between East and West has intensified the competition over time . Ukraine’s attempt to maintain a balanced act between the two sides has intensified over time.
 The Ukraine crisis began in November 2013, but has changed the dynamic by influencing Ukraine to firmly embrace the European Union and diminish its links with Russia . The crisis began 12 years ago, but now it has changed that.
 This thesis examines the interests, strategies, and events that have infonned how the European Union, Russia, and Ukraine have approached the competition . It also examines how the EU, Russia and Ukraine are approaching the competition.
 Chapter II seeks to identify EU interests in Ukraine, and trends in the levels of interest that the EU has demonstrated in Ukraine . The EU has shown interest in Ukraine in the past .
 Special attention is devoted to how the European Union has reacted to Russian activities in Ukraine .
 Chapter IV focuses on Ukraine’s place in the broader interactions between the EU and Russia . Chapter IV focus on Ukraine's place in broader interactions with the EU .
 This chapter includes an analysis of how Ukrainian politics and choices have affected the competition between the European Union and Russia . This chapter also includes a look at how Ukraine's political choices affected the EU and Russia's competition .
 The European Union has an intense interest in expanding markets for its member states . The EU is also promoting the economic prosperity of trade partners throughout the world .
 The EU has a major interest in Ukraine as the largest of the Soviet successor states . Ukraine is on its border and a major energy corridor. The EU is also interested in the country's energy corridor .
 Ukraine is the European Union’s 24th largest trade partner . The EU is a close second to Russia in trade with Ukraine .
 The European Union also has an interest in normative engagement with all states on its borders . The EU also has a interest in normality engagement with countries on its border .
 The EU promotes democratic values, the rule of law, accountable governments, and economic prosperity to ensure security and stability of its own member states .
 The major engagement incentive for Ukraine, and many of the states on the periphery of the European Union, is the prospect of EU membership . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in the EU .
 The carrot of membership has permitted the European Union to pursue an engagement strategy of conditionality . The EU is demanding that bordering states adopt EU norms in exchange for limited tangible gains short of accession .
 European Union diplomacy with Ukraine also began as a “take it or leave it’s’ approach, reflecting a lack of awareness of Russian ambitions, or an unwillingness to compete with Russia for dominant influence in Ukraine .
 The European Coal and Steel Community was founded in 1951 . The EU's eastern expansion and the Orange Revolution in Ukraine began in 2004 . This state of affairs persisted until 2004, when the EU’s eastern expansion began .
 Interest in expanding economic cooperation between member states has played a major role in the EU's evolution to its current form .
 The European Foreign Affairs Review 16 no. 268. Challenges, Progress, and Potential,’s.
 European Union policy has steadily evolved toward active attempts to court Ukraine . In the aftennath of the Orange Revolution, EU policy has evolved toward trying to compete with Russia .
There has been a significant debate within the EU regarding its Ukraine policy since 2004 . This chapter shows that there has been significant debate in the EU over the Ukraine policy .
 The overall consensus has shifted in favor of competing to promote the European Union’s influence in Ukraine . The majority has shifted to promoting the EU's influence.
 The European Union’s initial relations with Ukraine established the trend of limited engagement that would prevail over the next decade . The EU's initial relations.
 Relations with Ukraine were so disorganized that an official EU delegation did not even open in Kiev until 1993 . The low priority was assigned to Ukraine at the time .
 Ukraine has long been interested in accession to the European Union . Ukraine, however, has long wanted access to the EU .
 Ukraine's President Kuchma frequently expressed support for EU membership . He signed a decree formalizing that interest as a strategic goal in Luxembourg in 1998 .
 The PCA represented Ukraine's first exposure to the EU’s norms, values, and legal regime . It was called the acquis communautaire .
 The agreement lacked incentives from the Ukrainian point of view, in that it required a long list of domestic reforms with no promises from the EU in return .
 The PCA did have long tenn value for EU influence in Ukraine . Despite the lack of formal progress toward closer ties as a result of this agreement, the PCA does have long value for European influence .
 It established an institutionalized dialogue, exposing Ukraine to EU norms and expectations . It also exposed Ukraine to European expectations, exposing the country to the EU norms .
 Specialized departments for cooperation and adaptation to EU norms were also created within Ukrainian government ministries .
 It was also the first PCA achieved with a former republic of the Soviet Union . Ukraine had at least some unique level of significance to the European Union . It was the first time a PCA was achieved with an ex-Soviet republic .
 The years following the implementation of the PCA in 1998 and prior to the Orange Revolution in 2004 can be seen as a low point in the European Union’s competitive approach to relations with Ukraine .
 The EU did not invite Ukraine to the 1998 European Union Enlargement Conference held in London . The conference was held in 1998 .
 In 1999 the European Union and Ukraine agreed on a Common Strategy aimed at supporting Ukraine’s democratic and economic development .
 The agreement took over three years to be officially adopted in Ukraine . It resulted in no substantial domestic reform or diplomatic gains with the European Union .
 During this period domestic politics in Ukraine also drove the EU away from a strategy of pursuing closer engagement .
 The study is based on the work of CASE Network Studies and Analyses . It is called "CASE Network Studies"
 The withdrawal of high level political contact by the EU reflected a reluctance to continue even the dialogue established by the PCA . Let alone compete for an increased stake in Ukraine’s development, says the EU .
 The European Union was content to withdraw high level contact and await reform . When this outcome did not prevail, as demonstrated with the Kuchma Presidency, the EU was content with the decision .
 In 2004, the European Union enlarged from fifteen to twenty live states . Seven of the new members had formerly been members of the Soviet Bloc .
 In 2004, Ukraine experienced a mass pro-democracy movement known as the Orange Revolution . In 2004 also also also saw a mass anti-government movement called the Orange revolution .
 Ukraine and the European Union have changed the diplomatic dynamic between the two countries . Ukraine's relationship with the EU has changed dramatically since the start of the Ukraine crisis .
 The EU’s European Neighborhood Policy was designed as an overarching framework for engagement with all states in the European region not within the EU .
 The ENP was not directed exclusively at Ukraine, but due to Ukraine’s size and importance in Eastern Europe, it became a major object of ENP diplomacy .
 Ukraine's early prominence in the ENP framework was the presence of the new eastern members of the European Union . An important factor in Ukraine’s early prominence.
 Poland was a strong advocate of prioritizing Ukrainian interests over Russian concerns in ENP diplomacy . Lithuania sought to strengthen a bilateral partnership with Ukraine formed in 2002 .
 The European Neighborhood Policy was barely off the ground when the mass protests began in November 2004 . The Orange Revolution was known as the Orange Revolution .
 The Orange Revolution drew the EU toward more overt competition with Russia over Ukraine . It sparked the first major internal EU debate over policy toward the country .
 The European Union became active in support of Ukraine’s movement toward a more accountable and more democratic government .
 The Commission dispatched election observers to support the new rounds of elections that would eventually see Yuschenko elected president . Yuschenko was elected president of Ukraine .
 majority of observers supplied by Poland and Slovakia . Majority of observers provided by Poland, Slovakia .
 The European Union, via the Common Foreign and Security Policy, was vocal in support of the power sharing constitutional compromise that resolved contention over new round of elections .
 Lithuania, Poland, and the United Kingdom were the strongest supporters of the Orange Revolution movement . Lithuania was the strongest supporter of the movement in the UK .
 France, Germany, Italy, and Spain expressed reservations to various degrees . Spain, Spain, France and Germany expressed reservations.
 French and German reluctance was based on concern over the implications for EU-Russian relations . French and Germans were reluctant to take part in talks with Russia .
 The French government had no major interest in the Ukrainian question . French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier expressed more concern over regional upheaval than support for the demonstrators .
 Germany was in the midst of negotiating a gas deal with Russia, and was slow to support the Orange Revolution . Germany was also slow to back theOrange Revolution .
 The European Union eventually unified in support of the Orange Revolution . But the debate demonstrated the evident concern 64 Youngs, “Door Neither Closed Nor Open,’s, was not open .
 The European Union officially supported the proWestern Orange Revolution despite awareness that it conflicted with Russian interests .
 The performance of the ENP framework demonstrated a continuation of the trend of tentative engagement . Despite the increased interest in Ukrainian affairs demonstrated by EU support for the Orange Revolution, the performance of ENP demonstrated a continued trend of cautious engagement .
 The Ukraine-European Union Action Plan developed in February 2005 laid out 73 tasks to be performed with the goal of bringing Ukraine into line with EU standards . Ukraine-EU Action Plan was developed in 2005.
 Ukraine has promised closer cooperation with Ukraine . There were no concrete incentives laid out in return, only nebulous promises .
 No substantial effort was undertaken to codify the requirements of the action plan in Ukrainian law . As a result, no substantial efforts were undertaken tocodify the plan .
 Membership in the European Union was a concrete goal of the Ukrainian government under both the Kuchma and Yuschenko regimes . Accession was not an option on the table within the ENP framework .
 The unwillingness of European Union negotiators to extend this option created a disincentive for Ukrainian elites to push legislation to meet the AP tasks . The unwillingness to extend the option created an opportunity for Ukrainian elite to push for legislation .
 The European Union failed to establish motivations for Ukraine to show unity and will to accomplish the Action Plan . The EU’s lack of detennination to compete for influence in Ukraine is evidence that the EU has failed to compete with Ukraine .
 Persistent concern over Russian perceptions and reactions was in large part responsible for the EU’s hesitancy .
 One Commission director admitted concern over Russian energy supplies was the key reason why several member states were ‘slowing down’ on relations with Ukraine .
 The European Union’s desire to avoid the appearance of competition with Russia constrained Brussels’ diplomacy . Concerns about Russia were not the sole reason for the slow progress toward deepening relations with Ukraine .
 The ENP framework produced some advances in EU-Ukrainian relations . It also evidenced increasing European Union influence in Ukraine .
 A visa agreement was successfully negotiated, easing Ukrainian access to the Schengen Area . The agreement was finally offering a concrete, if minor, benefit for Ukraine from its EU relations .
 The growth of Brussels’ influence has been evident in the foreign policy realm . The growth in Brussels' influence is evident in foreign policy, says the European Union .
 Ukraine has contributed to the EU Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine . Ukraine has also contributed troops to NATO peacekeeping missions .
 The closer alignment between Ukraine and the European Union in foreign policy issues is evidence of a significant shift toward the West . The closer aligning between the EU and Ukraine is evidence that the West is moving toward the west .
 The ENP resulted in an increased level of socialization with the EU and the growth of institutional linkages . The EU was careful to 70 Youngs, “Door Neither Closed Nor Open,’s,” 371.
 In 2006 Commission President Manuel Barroso explicitly stated that ‘Ukraine is not ready’ for membership . In 2006, Barro so explicitly stated “Ukraine isNot ready” for membership.
 The events of the Orange Revolution and the framework established by the ENP created the foundation for deeper EU-Ukrainian relations and more explicit competition with Russia .
 The evolution of the EaP was driven from within the EU by a desire to tailor integration strategies for states in the post-Soviet space . The evolution was driven by demands from non-EU Eastern European states for a more functional process .
 Poland was the major EU sponsor of the EaP, with the specific goal of strengthening relations with Ukraine . Poland was a major European partner in the 2004 enlargement of the European Union .
Designing an integration program centered around Ukraine indicated the increasing importance placed on gaining EU influence with Kiev . Designing an integrated program centered on Ukraine indicated an increasing importance for Kiev .
 European Union diplomatic language continued to be sensitive to Russian perceptions during this period . But nonetheless, policies and negotiations within the EaP framework represented intensified EU-Russian competition in Ukraine .
 The DCFTA, negotiated between 2008 and 2011, offered significant economic opportunity for Ukraine . It also promised to intensify legal and institutional activity in Ukraine .
 The European Union’s experience with the enlargement process with its Eastern European states such as Poland indicated that countries joining the European Market can expect to experience economic modernization and significant growth in foreign direct investment .
 The agreement extended beyond the elimination of tariff barriers . It would integrate broad swaths of the Ukrainian economy into the European Union model .
 The EU acquis communautaire would have created significant linkages between EU institutions and Ukrainian ministries governing transportation, trade, energy, and justice .
 The Association Agreement under negotiation through the EaP also promised to further reduce visa barriers and access to various EU-sponsored protocols, including education, cultural and financial programs .
 The process of negotiating the agreements described in the preceding paragraphs also demonstrated a shift toward competition with Russia on behalf of the European Union .
 At the outset of negotiations over the DCFTA, the EU appeared to continue the historical trend of “take it or leave it’s integration strategy.
 Ukraine’s National Institute for Strategic Studies. Andrey Ermolaev: “European bureaucrats think that if Ukraine enters Europe, it should accept the European Rules.
 The European Union's response to these developments was evidence of an active attempt to compete against Ukraine’s shift to the East . The EU's response was a response to the developments.
 Yanukovych was invited to Brussels in September 2010 to smooth relations ahead of the scheduled EU-Ukrainian Summit in November of that year .
 The summit yielded conciliatory statements from Yanukovych, and the extension of tangible integration benefits by Commission President Manuel Barroso .
 Both parties recommitted to the negotiation of the DCFTA, which proceeded without any major incident until the November 2013 Vilnius Summit . Both parties agreed to the negotiations .
 Yanukovych ultimately declined to adopt the DCFTA in 2013 . This summit illustrated the newfound willingness of the European Union to pursue closer cooperation with Ukraine .
 EU leaders had been limited to support for the democracy movement of the Orange Revolution . The cooperation projects were left to the bureaucratic level within the ENP and EaP frameworks .
 Ukraine has continued to capture increasing attention at high levels of government within the European Union . As the remainder of this chapter shows, Ukraine has remained in the spotlight .
 The European Union's dialogue has continued to stress complementarity, not competition, with Russia . Despite the higher level of attention afforded Ukraine, the European Union’s dialogue continues to stress the importance of the EU .
 EaP became the preferred forum for diplomatic engagement due to its focus on economic and civilian political issues . The West had longstanding, Ukraine-specific, institutional links with Kiev through NATO through NATO .
 Moscow threatened Ukraine with the loss of existing bilateral economic advantages while offering a $15 billion loan . Moscow also offered $15billion loan to Ukraine .
 President Yanukovych rejected the EU Association Agreement by President Yanukovych at the Vilnius Summit in November 2013 . This resulted in the November 2013 rejection of the agreement by Yanukovych .
 The EU dispatched mediators to Kiev to negotiate arrangements for new elections that might result in the replacement of Yanukovych . The EU reacted vigorously, dispatching mediators.
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014. Faced with growing political opposition from his own supporters and mass protests in the Euromaidan and elsewhere in Ukraine .
 The International Annual Scientific Session Strategies XXI, 338. Ukraine and Moldova,’s. The International Scientific Session strategies XXI , 338, is the first of its kind .
 The study will consider President Yanukovych’s decision not to conclude the EU Association Agreement in November 2013 as the initiation of the current Ukrainian crisis .
 The course of events since November 2013 has radically altered the nature of the competition over Ukraine . Ukraine's 2014 World Cup has been held in Ukraine since October 2013 .
 The European Union has openly condemned Russian behavior toward Ukraine as illegal and unacceptable . The EU has publicly condemned Russian behaviour toward Ukraine .
 The EU began directly punishing Russia with a series of economic sanctions beginning on 17 March 2014 . Russia has been hit by the EU's sanctions since then .
 The eruption of civil war between the Ukrainian government and proRussian rebels in April 2014 has drastically altered the nature of Ukrainian relations with foreign powers, including EU member states .
 European Union into outright competition for Ukraine’s future, firmly aligning the EU against Russian intervention in the Ukrainian civil war . These factors have galvanized the European Union.
 The evolution of the European Union’s diplomacy in the Ukraine crisis since November 2013 bears remarkable similarity to its development during the 2004 Orange Revolution . The development of the EU-Ukrainian relations is also a major turning point in EU-Ukraine relations .
 Yanukovych appeared to regress on respect for democratic standards, repressing pro-Western protestors and becoming increasingly authoritarian . Yanukovych’s rejection of the Association Agreement and DCFTA at Vilnius has cooled.
 The situation was reminiscent of early 2004, when the failure of the Common Strategy and concerns over Kuchma’s government chilled relations between the EU and Ukraine .
 The Orange Revolution prompted a European Union recommitment toward Ukraine . Yanukovych’s ouster and subsequent Russian behavior drew the European Union into deepening relations .
 Poland and Baltic states came out strongly in favor of overt competition with Russia . Poland and the Baltic states also came out strong in favor.
 As early as March 2014, Estonian NATO Ambassador Lauri Lepik and Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski were calling for the pennanent deployment of up to ten thousand NATO troops in their countries .
 France and Germany were initially more reluctant than Estonia and Poland to directly antagonize Russia . Russia's annexation of Crimea has angered France, Germany and Poland .
 France at first refused to consider tennination of a planned sale of two amphibious assault warships to Russia . France has been in talks with Russia to sell the warships .
 Angela Merkel rejected calls for NATO to garrison Poland or the Baltics . She said it would “flout the NATO-Russia accord for 1997’s Founding Act .
 Gennany was initially reluctant to support broad sanctions against Russia . He was initially hesitant to support the sanctions .
 France took the major step of suspending its planned warship sale to Russia in September 2014 . France also suspended its planned sale of its warship to Russia.
 In September 2014 Merkel pushed for deep financial, capital, defense, and travel sanctions despite a tentative ceasefire agreed by Russia, Ukraine, and Ukrainian separatists .
 The European Union has reached a consensus on overtly opposing Russian intervention in Ukraine . It is evident from these trends that as a result of the crisis since November 2013, the EU has reached an agreement .
 The actions and proclamations of the European Union resulting from the new consensus reflect a deepened commitment to compete for influence in Ukraine . The actions of the EU resulting from a new consensus reflects a deeper commitment to competing for influence.
 The European Union and Ukraine signed the Association Agreement and DCFTA in Brussels on June 27th 2014 .
 The diplomatic language of key leaders in EU countries has also come to reflect the theme that the old strategy of conciliation with Russia has come to an end . A competitive environment is the new norm, according to EU leaders .
 The institutional leadership of the European Union is also adapting to the new competitive approach . The European Union's leadership is adapting to new competitive approaches .
 Donald Tusk was selected to assume the presidency of the European Council in August 2014 . Tusk developed a reputation as a hardliner on Russian relations during his service as Poland’s PM .
 Italian Federica Mogherini was chosen to succeed Lady Catherine Ashton as the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs .
 Mogherini has been criticized for being too sympathetic to Russia . She has said she will align with the EU consensus to oppose the Russian intervention in Ukraine .
 The European Union’s direct competition with Russia during the crisis has occurred mainly within the economic arena .
 Between March and September 2014, the EU enacted four rounds of sanctions against the Russian Federation and individual Russian citizens . The EU enacted the sanctions against Russia and individuals .
 The EU enjoys unique advantages in exerting economic pressure . As a coordinated collective including several of the largest economies of the world, the EU enjoys a unique advantage .
 As Russia's biggest trading partner, it is able to deny Russia access to its most important market . Russia’s largest trading partner.
 The European Union has also proven agile in adjusting to the cost of sanctions, including retaliation by Russia, to its own economy . The EU has also been able to adjust to the costs of sanctions by Russia and other countries .
 The European Commission has coordinated economic relief measures to redirect affected goods within the EU . In August 2014 made €155 million available as short term compensation to affected EU firms .
 Russia has not employed energy restrictions against the EU during the Ukraine crisis . But there is evidence that the EU may be resilient in this realm as well .
 In September 2014 Gazprom gas production was 7. percent below forecast due to the impact of the crisis . Despite the lack of energy-specific sanctions, a broad energy blockade could become unsustainable for Russia .
 The European Union has also proven agile in mitigating this strategy . The EU has also proved agile in dealing with this strategy, though .
 Slovakia has prepared a gas pipeline for “reverse flow to Ukraine, able to supply gas from the EU . Austria, Germany, Hungary, and Poland could also participate in this effort .
 The Ukraine crisis has yet to be resolved. At the time of this writing, the Ukraine crisis hasn't been resolved .
 The European Union's involvement in Ukraine has entered a new phase. But it appears clear already that the European Union’s involvement in the country has entered an new phase . The EU's commitment to compete with Russia has also been bolstered by a commitment to competing with
 The European Union has taken concrete steps to deepen its cooperation with Ukraine, and to impose negative consequences on Russia for its armed intervention and policy of coercion in Ukraine . The EU has demonstrated awareness that it is in a competition, and it has been taking concrete steps.
 If peace is reestablished and the provisions of the Association Agreement and DCFTA are implemented, there is likely to be a continuation of the trend of increasing European Union interest in Ukraine .
 When Ukraine attained independence in 1991, the European Union regarded it as just another state on its eastern periphery . The EU regarded Ukraine as just one of its periphery .
 European Union did not regard its interactions with Ukraine as steps in competition for influence with Russia . EU was careful to avoid conveying impression that the PCA or ENP would create new divisions within Europe .
 The liberal norms and democratic values of the EU drove it to express vocal support for the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution is the first of its kind.
 The EU's newly acceded Eastern European members, including Poland and the Baltic States, demanded that the EU’s relations with Ukraine become more prominent due to their interests in the region .
 The European Union for the first time made a palpable effort to deepen its influence in Ukraine . As a result, the European Union has made an effort to deepening its influence.
 The European Neighborhood Policy codified an Action Plan for EU-Ukrainian cooperation . It established concrete, if minor, economic and political gains, to reward Ukraine for its association .
 The Association Agreement and DCFTA promise to create strong legal and economic ties between the EU and Ukraine . It could be causing a permanent economic and political shift away from Russia .
 Russia has responded with aggressive efforts to retain its influence. Despite efforts by the European Commission to downplay these programs as a potential source of conflict between East and West, Russia has reacted aggressively .
 The sudden abandonment of Ukraine’s aspirations for an Association Agreement by President Yanukovych in late 2013 developed into a crisis . The crisis has brought the competition between the EU and Russia into the open .
 The EU has made public statements critical of Russian behavior in Ukraine . The EU is critical of Russia's behavior in the Ukraine .
 The EU has punished Russia with economic sanctions, and its leaders have acknowledged the emergence of a vastly different security environment, demanding a return to deterrence . Russia has been punished by the EU with sanctions, but the EU has not punished Russia .
 Despite the new European Union policy, the current crisis may demonstrate the limits of EU influence in Ukraine .
 The EU was forced to postpone 32 implementation of the DCFTA due to fears of Russian economic retaliation .
 Accession to membership in the European Union, a top Ukrainian strategic goal, seems to be further out of reach than ever before following Russian military intervention .
 Ukraine may not accede to the EU for decades, but it is clear that both Ukraine and the EU have committed to deeper cooperation . Ukraine and EU have shown a high level of alignment in foreign policy.
 The crisis is still ongoing, but the trend toward increasing EU engagement with Ukraine, and competition with Russia, is obvious . As of this writing, the crisis remains ongoing, and the trend is obvious.
 Ukrainian state existed only briefly during Russia’s Bolshevik Revolution .
For much of history, the concept of an independent Ukraine would have been alien to most Russians . For much of the history, it was alien to many Russians .
 Ukraine and its territory are in many ways an inseparable part of Russia’s historical identity .
 Russian civilization itself stems from this proto-state, which was the cultural and political ancestor to the Russian Empire . Russia was the first state of its kind .
 Kiev, Odessa, Sevastopol, and Kerch figure highly in Russian national memory . Hundreds of thousands of Russian and other Soviet soldiers died in them during the Second World War .
 Putin reminded his audience that everything in Crimea speaks of our shared history and pride . In his March 2014 address on the annexation of Crimea to Russia, President Vladimir Putin reminded the audience of the Crimea .
 These factors align closely with Russian aspirations to compete for dominance in peripheral states . These factors also align with Russia's aspirations for dominance.
 Russian policy has consistently aimed at bringing Ukraine squarely within Moscow’s sphere of influence and opposing Ukrainian integration with the European Union .
 Russia seeks to secure its interests in Ukraine via traditional and non-traditional tools of state power, rather than the strategy of nonn sharing, conditionality, and economic integration favored by the EU .
 Russia seeks to establish exclusive influence over Ukraine via Russian-dominated institutions, application of pressure in the economic and energy sectors, and military power . This chapter will show that Russia wants to establishexclusive influence over the Ukraine via Russia .
 The chapter will also examine how Russia sponsors and exploits ethnic tensions and a “Pan-Slavic” identity . The approach also applied in other “frozen conflicts,’ including Georgia and Moldova .
 The European Union has not always understood that it was involved in a competition with Russia, or that it needed to compete with Russia over Ukraine, and it has at times deliberately avoided doing so .
 Russian Federation's strategy has been consistently aimed at establishing Russian dominance . The actual intensity of Russian competition with the EU has varied depending on the strength of Moscow’s economic and military condition .
 Russia prefers to follow traditional power politics and establish a solely Russian sphere of influence . The European Union’s strategy of institution-building, multilateralism, normative engagement, and “take it or leave it” conditionality.
 The countries of Central and Eastern Europe, and especially former Soviet states, are perceived by Moscow as rightfully within the Russian sphere .
 Moscow feels threatened by the EU because the multilateral principles and liberal norms it embodies are perceived as antithetical to Russian interests . Russia's desire to establish itself as the central state of a power bloc in eastern Europe .
 Russian efforts to establish and maintain a sphere of influence have persisted despite attempts by Western powers over the last two and a half decades to alter the adversarial dynamic of the Cold War . Russian efforts have persisted.
Both NATO and the European Union have attempted to bring Russia into a new international order based upon liberal norms . Both NATO and European Union want Russia to become part of a new world order .
 NATO articulated a new role for the alliance after the collapse of the Soviet Union . NATO envisioned supporting democracy promotion, transparency, and collective security .
 NATO's continued existence and enlargement were described as stabilizing factors that would benefit all European states, including Russia . NATO’s continued existence, enlargement and continued existence were described by NATO as stabilising factors .
 Russian President Yeltsin seemed to welcome a new European order, and raised the possibility of Russia seeking NATO membership in 1991 and 1993 . Shortly after the Cold War ended, Yeltsins seemed to welcomes a new EU order .
 The Russian view is that NATO, if it continues to exist at all, should be a mere political forum, or be subordinated to the OSCE, or since 2008, to the terms of the proposed European Security Treaty sponsored by Moscow .
 Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov describes NATO-Russian Founding Act as merely “damage limitation” Russia never approached the agreement in a spirit of cooperation, Primakov says .
 The European Union’s diplomatic outreach programs have been similarly spurned . The EU's diplomatic outreach program has been also spurned.
 ENP also had a second dimension designed to assist Russia in transformation to a successful democratic state . The ENP was designed to formalize engagement with states along the European frontier .
 Russia has been sharply critical of the ENP, preferring to conduct relations with the EU on a bilateral basis . The ENP has been criticized by Russia for not conducting bilateral relations with EU .
 Russia opposed Ukraine’s inclusion in the ENP program on the basis that the former Soviet republic was not a legitimate target of EU influence . Russia also opposed Ukraine's inclusion on the grounds that the ex-Soviet republic is not legitimate target.
 Russia rejected successor EAP program as an attempt to expand Brussels's power at Moscow's expense . Russia also rejected the successor E AP program as a attempt to expansion Brussels’s power .
 The European Union and Russia have come into sharp focus over the past few years . The EU and Russia are often seen to have a close relationship .
 Ukraine has become a central focus of the conflict. Competition between the EU and Russia is now obvious, and Ukraine is now an obvious focus .
 Moscow has a long history of animosity and strategic competition between western European states and Russia . It is possible that Moscow possesses this attitude simply because of the longHistory of animosity .
 Russian Federation has been consistent in its strategy of seeking to establish preponderant influence over its non-European neighbors . However, the Russian Federation is consistent with its strategy.
 Russia has consistently sought to use the Commonwealth of Independent States to accomplish hegemonic aspirations along its central Asian border with Kazakhstan . Russia has repeatedly tried to use Commonwealth of independent States to achieve hegational aspirations along the border with the country .
 Russia has also made an effort to establish Russian influence in East Asian states and thereby constrain the power of the U.S. Since Vladimir Putin’s assumption of the Presidency Russia has made little success .
 Apart from Russia itself, Ukraine is the most populous and economically dynamic successor state of the Soviet Union . The country is most economically dynamic and populous .
 Ukraine’s economic circumstances, geographic positions, strategic importance to Russian security, and demographics help explain why Moscow has taken an enduring and consistent interest in securing influence in Ukraine .
 Ukraine was part of a single economic market along with Russia within the Soviet Union . Until 1991, Ukraine was one of the only single economic markets in the USSR .
 Commonwealth of Independent States was to help overcome economic dislocations resulting from the new national borders . A major purpose of the Commonwealth of independent States was the help to overcome economicdislocations .
 The CIS, in turn, has motivated and enabled Russian elites to interfere in Ukrainian policy . Economic developments in the CIS have major implications for Russia domestically .
 Ukraine has remained economically vital to Russia since the end of the Cold War . Ukraine has been a key part of Russia's economic growth since the 1990s .
 Ukraine was Russia’s third largest source of imports in 2013, according to the World Trade Organization . In 2013, Ukraine was the third largest Source of imports, the WTO says .
 Russian-Ukrainian trade is largely in industrial products and other advanced sectors of the economy . Russia’s imports from the European Union have a strong agrarian character .
 The content of this trade means that it is a major strategic interest despite being much smaller in volume compared to the Russian trade with the European Union . The Russian trade is much smaller than that of the EU and the EU .
 Ukraine plays a major role in Russia's ability to exert influence in Europe through control of energy supplies . 80% of the European Union’s gas supplies come from Russia .
 Russia has used control of energy supplies to influence decision making in the capitals of the European Union, the Balkans, and Ukraine itself . Russia has also used power to influence decisions in the Balkans and Ukraine .
 Deeper cooperation between Ukraine and the European Union would bring Ukrainian energy infrastructure under a common EU energy policy . Russia’s ability to exert pressures on governments in the EU and the Balkans would be restricted .
 Ukraine is an important state in Moscow’s strategy of seeking to use local populations of ethnic Russians to project political power . Ukraine is also a state in Russia's strategy of using local populations to project power .
 Russia has claimed a right and responsibility to ensure security for the 25 million ethnic Russians left outside Russian borders after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Ukraine is a major consideration in Russian security strategies as well as Russia's security strategies . Ukraine is an important part of the Russian security strategy .
 Crimean peninsula and city of Sevastopol represent a vital line of communication between Russia, Europe in the west, and Russia’s Asian frontier in the east .
 The Black Sea Fleet is based in Sevastopol, Russia . It is a major instrument of Russian military strength, based in the city .
 Russian access was assured through a lease with Ukraine, but there is evidence that Moscow was not convinced that this arrangement was a secure, long term option .
 The tenns renewing Russia’s right to continue to base the fleet in Sevastopol were arrived at in part through pressure exerted by Moscow exploiting Ukrainian energy dependence on Russia .
 Ukraine has a significant population of Russians and Russian speakers, especially in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The country has a large number of Russian speakers and speakers .
 Ethnic Russians in Ukraine are strongly supportive of building institutional ties with Russia . Ethnic Russians within Ukraine are strong supportive of Russia .
 Moscow is keen to take advantage of Ukraine and in other nations to solidify its influence and obstruct the European Union . Moscow is also keen to strengthen its influence in other countries .
 Ukraine's significance to Russian security also resides in its continued importance to the Russian military-industrial sector . Ukraine’s significance to Russia's security also lives in its continuing importance to its military- industrial sector .
 As of 2014, Ukrainian factories supplied Russia with a variety of vital military products, including tanks, helicopter engines, naval supplies, and parts for SS-18 intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 The 2014 conflict has spurred Russian officials to reduce dependency on Ukrainian products . wholesale replacement is a multi-billion dollar effort that will require years of rebuilding infrastructure .
 Ukraine’s geographic position ensures that it will always be a major security interest for Russia regardless of the future status of the Black Sea Fleet or militaryindustrial considerations .
 Maintaining Ukraine as a ‘buffer area’ within the Russian camp has long been considered vital to protecting the integrity of the core Russian state . Ukraine is considered a vital part of the Russian state.
 The Russian state was built by military conquest of culturally and historically disparate regions . The state was founded by the Russian army in the early 1950s .
 Both the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union relied on a militarized society to maintain a multicultural and multiethnic polity . Both the Empire and Soviet Union rely on a militaryized society.
 The "loss of Ukraine to the European Union" is considered unacceptable by Moscow . It would set a precedent enabling further paring away of territory considered to be Russian .
 Ukraine has a low level of multilateral institutional relations with Russia . Russia has a high level of bilateral relations with Ukraine .
 Ukraine is not expected to become a member of the pending Eurasian Economic Union . Unlike fellow post-Soviet states Belarus and Kazakhstan, Ukraine does not join the Collective Security Treaty Organization .
 The Commonwealth of Independent States is the main institutional tie between Russia and Ukraine outside of purely bilateral arrangements . The Commonwealth is the biggest institutional ties between the countries .
 Kiev is not an enthusiastic member, participating in CIS programs selectively . Kiev has even taken the initiative of founding a regional organization of its own .
 Russia has remained committed to using international institutions controlled by Moscow to compete for influence in Ukraine . Despite the scarcity of institutional ties and Ukrainian resistance to taking policy cues from the CIS, Russia remains committed to use international institutions to compete.
 Russia has sought to establish the CIS (and forthcoming EEU) as a parallel integration force in competition with the European Union . The CIS is Russia's second largest body in the world after Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 Ukraine has avoided across the board participation in CIS programs and agencies . The high level of interdependence between Ukraine and Russia has allowed Russia to exercise power through the CIS .
 Russia successfully pressured Ukraine into signing 30 out of 53 CIS agreements on collective security . Russia successfully pressure Ukraine to sign the agreement . The agreement is part of a series of security agreements between the countries .
 Ukraine has a high level of alignment with European Union CFSP declarations . But its security agreements through the CIS have precluded adoption of the EU's positions on Belarus or the Caucasus .
 Ukraine must seek to align with Russian-sponsored institutions to help compensate for the loss of the Soviet Union’s single market .
 The Kuchma administration was enticed to move toward joining the Single Economic Space in 2003 . The Orange Revolution disrupted those plans by the Orange Revolution .
 The prospect of Ukrainian membership in the Single Economic Space was again raised by Russia to entice President Viktor Yanukovych toward pro-Russian policies .
 The stronger market and energy ties between the EU and Ukraine would limit Russia’s ability to influence Ukrainian economic policy . It would also preclude any possibility of Ukrainian participation in the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Ukraine Crisis has made clear that Ukraine will not be a member of the EEU in the foreseeable future . The Ukraine Crisis since November 2013 has made it clear that the Ukraine Crisis is not the future of the EU .
 Ukraine's experience with the CIS, Single Economic Space, and BRK-CU demonstrate Russia’s commitment to use international institutions as a means to build influence in Kiev . The European Union is limiting penetration by the European Union .
 Russia's vast energy resources are both a source of economic strength and a tool for coercive diplomacy . Russia’s vast energy Resources are both an economic source ofEconomic strength.
 Russia has demonstrated a consistent strategy to employ its huge share hold in European energy supplies . Russia has shown a consistent approach to support its interests and obstruct the expansion of the European Union’s influence .
 Russian investment in energy transport infrastructure in the Balkans, and control of the energy source, have pennitted Russia to manipulate energy prices for political gain . The European Union is trying to price out any attempt by the European Union to introduce its own energy initiatives .
 Azerbaijan’s 2013 initiative to construct a pipeline to funnel Caspian gas to Europe enables Russia to play the Balkans, Ukraine, and Azerbaijan against each other in energy transport negotiations, further strengthening Moscow's coercive power .
 Russia's energy relations with Ukraine are indicative of a sustained campaign to entice Kiev to support Moscow’s interests, or deter it from adopting pro-Western policies . Russia's regional energy diplomacy is consistent with Russia”s regional diplomacy .
 Ukraine is heavily dependent upon Russia for energy . 35 percent of gas and 75% of oil used by Ukraine originates in Russia .
 Russia attempted to trade cancellation of Ukrainian gas debts in exchange for long term agreement on Russia’s Black Sea Fleet and surrender of nuclear weapons that Ukraine had inherited from the Soviet Union .
 At the time, Ukrainian elites were more interested in security guarantees from Russia, where the Duma had revealed an unwillingness to accept the independence of Ukraine as a whole .
 Russian intent to use energy as a lever was clear. Energy politics were not the deciding factor in the negotiations . Russian intent was clear .
 Following the Orange Revolution in 2004, a gas crisis erupted between Russia and Ukraine in early 2006 . The crisis erupted in early2006 .
 The public reason given for the dispute was an inability to agree on prices . An ulterior motive on the part of Moscow was probably to pressure the pro-Western regime .
 Russia has taken advantage of Ukraine's dependence on Russian energy to exert Moscow’s will . Some energy issues appear to be chiefly contractual in nature, such as the 1999 dispute .
 As of 2008, 80% of the energy supplies the EU purchased from Russia transited through Ukraine . 25% of EU's total energy supplies are sourced from Russia .
 The European Union’s need to ensure stable delivery of energy, and Russian desires to exclude EU influence from Ukraine, have created tierce competition .
 Energy-related cooperation with the EU represents a major threat to Russian ambitions in Ukraine . It would limit Russia’s ability to exclusively influence Ukrainian economic policies .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin quickly acted to prevent any EU penetration of Russia’s energy monopoly in Ukraine .
 Putin: "If Russia's interests are being ignored, then we will be forced to revise our relationship with our partners" In Putin's words, “if Russia’s interests are be ignored, we will have to change our relationship, he says .
 The main point is that trying to solve the problem of increasing gas supplies, gas which is Russian, is meaningless . But the main point, which I would like to emphasize, is that the problem is not solved .
 Energy policies have played an important role in shaping the EU-Russian competition since November 2013 . Energy policies in Russia have played a key part in shaping EU-Russia competition .
 Gennany, one of the most influential EU states, is particularly dependent on Russian energy supplies . Initially was wary of mounting strong sanctions on Russia due to concerns over its energy supply .
 Then-Prime Minister of Poland Donald Tusk provoked strong opposition from German Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy Sigmar Gabriel when he proposed an EU energy syndicate to jointly negotiate energy purchases with Russia .
 Germany prefers to avoid antagonizing Russia on energy policy and supports keeping energy purchases within the private sector . Germany prefers not to antagonize Russia.
 Russia’s gas embargo on Ukraine, beginning in June 2014, has drawn the European Union into direct confrontation with Russia over energy issues . The European Union has been in direct confrontation over Ukraine .
 European Union member states purchasing gas from Russia, then delivering it to Ukraine through pipelines . This tactic involves buying gas from Russian states, then transporting it to Europe . It is normally used to transport energy from Russia to Europe.
 Russia forced its EU clients to cease supporting Ukraine through reverse flow operations . Russia threatened to cut off gas supplies to Europe entirely in September 2014 .
 Russia’s use of energy to pressure both Ukraine and its potential European Union supporters in the crisis since November 2013 is a clear continuation of a long term Russian strategy to keep Ukraine within Moscow's sphere of influence and exclude penetration by the EU .
 Russia has a track record of using military power to achieve its objectives in neighboring states . Russia has also used military power in other countries .
 Moscow’s favored tactics are nuclear threats, intimidation with conventional forces, and actual use of military force . Moscow has taken the form of both standard and hybrid warfare .
 Russia’s nuclear arsenal is the one aspect of Russian military power that has remained threatening throughout the two and a half decades since the end of the Cold War in 1991 .
 Russia has shown willingness to employ veiled and explicit nuclear threats to achieve its ends in Eastern Europe and Ukraine . Russia has demonstrated a willingness to use veiled and explicitly nuclear threats.
 Putin made clear in 2008 that Russia considered Ukrainian membership in NATO unacceptable . He also threatened to target Ukraine with nuclear weapons if it joined the alliance .
 Leonid Reshetnikov is the head of a major strategic think tank reportedly responsible directly to Putin . He said Russia would have to target Serbia and Montenegro with nuclear weapons if those nations pursued membership in the European Union .
 In both 2009 and 2013 the Russian military openly conducted a large scale nuclear exercise simulating a nuclear attack on Warsaw . The exercise was carried out by Russian military in 2009 and2013 .
 Moscow is clearly willing to use its nuclear arsenal for strategic posturing and signaling . The potential for Russia to actually use nuclear weapons in offensive combat is difficult to assess .
 Russia has established a trend in the use of conventional military power to intimidate or directly intervene in other countries to secure advantages for Moscow . Russia has also established a tradition of using conventional military powers to intimidate other countries .
 Putin publicly announced at the NATO-Russia Council that such a move would be regarded as a "direct threat" to Russia . Putin reportedly privately told President George W Bush that “Ukraine is not a real state,” and threatened war to seize Crimea and eastern Ukraine if NATO moved
 Ukraine's government lost interest in NATO membership and enshrined nonalignment by law in 2010 . Putin’s strategy was evidently successful .
 The credibility of Russian military threats and consistency in strategy were demonstrated without question during the Georgia-Russia war .
 The Saakashvili government in Tbilisi was far more vocal in defiance of Moscow than Ukraine had been up to that point . Russia to firmly assert its dominance with a military campaign .
Relations with NATO and the EU returned to "business as usual" within a year of the Georgia-Russia conflict . Russia says military action was a viable strategy for preventing states from building closer ties with Western organizations .
 Russia envisions a major role for the military in any future competition over states on its periphery . These developments indicate that Russia wants to be involved in the future competition .
 The February 2014 ouster of President Yanukovych by pro-Westem factions presented Moscow with the failure of its efforts to prevent closer cooperation between the EU and Ukraine . The prospect that Ukraine would move irreversibly out of reach of the Eurasian Economic Union.
 Moscow's options to pursue its interests through Ukraine's political system were exhausted . Moscow’s options were exhausted, according to the Kremlin .
 Moscow opted to exercise the military option when faced with a defiant Georgian government that refused to bow to pressure .
 The exercise drew worldwide attention and concern but was evidently not designed to intimidate . It was a “Maskirovka,’ or deception, disguising the activities of unmarked forces, Russian troops in Crimea .
 In seizing and then annexing Crimea, Russia secured the Black Sea Fleet headquarters and reclaimed a territory than many Russian politicians felt naturally belonged to Russia .
 Pursuing interests created difficulties in achieving the strategic objective of a pliant Ukraine within a Russian sphere of influence . Pursuing these interests, however, created difficulties.
 The seizure of Crimea eliminated any residual willingness of the new Ukrainian government to try to balance its position between Russia and the European Union .
 The new government under President Petro Poroshenko signed the Association Agreement with the EU in June 20 1 4 .
 NATO says Russia is supporting separatist forces in eastern Ukraine by supply convoys and the provision of heavy weapons . NATO: Russia is supplying convoys, providing tanks, artillery, and air defense units .
 Putin has demanded a federalization of Ukraine with autonomous powers devolved to eastern Ukraine . It would allow Russia to position itself as the protector of the Donbas region and influence decisions in Kiev .
 The existence of an autonomous, pro-Russian region within Ukraine would likely make any closer ties with the EU or NATO impossible .
 Russia has also taken military action to shape the broader competition with the European Union in conjunction with the Ukraine crisis .
Following the shoot-down of MH17 Strelkov, MH17 left Ukraine and re-emerged in Moscow . It prompted speculation that he had been recalled .
 Russia has stepped up military activity along its border with EU member states in the Baltic Sea . Russia has dramatically increased patrols by military aircraft in theBalt Sea .
 Russian military intimidation has contributed to a rift in the EU, with eastern members such as Latvia demanding a strong military presence to defend their countries . Germany has a reluctance to undertake such major steps by countries further afield such as Germany .
 The cultural and ethnic angle of Russian relations with Ukraine follows a trend in broader Russian diplomatic strategy . Russia's diplomatic strategy follows the trend in wider diplomatic strategy.
 In 1995 President Yeltsin asserted that the territories encompassed by the CIS were a “fundamental and vital interest’ for Russia due to the 30 million Russians, Russian speakers, and people culturally linked to Russia .
 Russia has exploited ethnic conflicts in the fonner Yugoslavia to create fissures where its influence can be extended through Moscow’s alternative institutional model .
 Russia impeding the ability of Balkan states to meet EU accession criteria or respond to Western democracy promotion efforts . Fueling ethnic conflict also contributes to Russia’s competition with the EU .
 Ukraine is fertile ground for Russia to compete with the European Union on cultural and ethnic grounds . Ukraine is also fertile ground to compete on cultural, ethnic grounds, says Russian official .
 In Crimea, a preponderantly ethnic Russian region, a majority of residents identify themselves as “Soviet’s” rather than Ukrainian . A majority of people in Crimea identified themselves as "Soviet" instead of Ukrainian .
 Chapter IV undertakes a more detailed investigation of cultural identity and its role in political loyalty in Ukraine . Chapter IV also undertakes an investigation of the Ukraine's political loyalty .
 Within Ukraine support for Ukrainian independence, the European Union, or Russia cannot be broken down purely along ethnic lines .
 Figures suggest a high level of receptivity to Russian competition for influence on ethnic and cultural grounds . Taken together, these attitudes and figures are suggestive of a high levels of receptiveness .
 Russia has a steady trend of exploiting ethnic and cultural issues to extend its power in Ukraine . Russia has been exploiting ethnic issues in Ukraine to extend power .
 In 1995, the Russian Duma refused to ratify a friendship treaty with Ukraine . The Duma was sharply critical of President Yeltsin's acceptance of Crimea's status as Ukrainian territory .
 The treaty’s rejection is indicative of a longstanding spurning of Ukrainian political independence . The Russian state was not powerful enough to exert any significant coercion .
 Understanding the Orange Revolution,” Communist and Post-Communist Studies no. . 291 .
 Yanukovych's ouster in February 2014 was a major setback to Russia's ability to gain advantage through pro-Russian factions within Ukraine’s political system . Russia also offered new motivation and opportunity to exploit ethnic and cultural issues .
 The historical and cultural ties of Crimea to Russia have been used as the main argument to justify the detachment of the peninsula from Ukraine and its annexation to Russia .
 Crimea was transferred to Ukraine by Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 and then allowed to remain part of Ukraine in 1991 . In his speech concerning the annexation, Putin argued that Russia “was not simply robbed, it was plundered,’
 Russia is creating a narrative that its actions in Crimea are merely the rectification of a historical and cultural crime . Russia's actions are not a historical crime, it is a cultural crime, according to a report .
 The emphasis placed on the referendum reflects an effort to compete with the European Union on its own principles and lay claim to additional legitimacy based on the precedent that Russia believes was established in the Kosovo case . Russia believes that Kosovo case was established.
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea secured the Black Sea Fleet base and a large Russian population, but compromised Moscow's ability to exert control in the rest of Ukraine .
 The annexation removed a large sector of the pro-Russian electorate and provoked the fonnation of a political consensus opposed to Russian influence .
 Russia has sought to employ ethnic and cultural manipulation to detach areas of interest from Ukraine and bring them under Russia’s influence .
 The areas targeted by Russia were referred to as ‘Novorossiya’ by Putin on April 17th 2014, recalling the region’s name during the Tsarist period . The area was referred to by Putin as “ Novorossya’
 The Novorossiya project is to establish an autonomous sub-region within a federalized Ukraine . The project is dominated by a population that identifies politically, culturally, and ethnically with Russia .
 separatists in eastern Ukraine have received administrative support from professional bureaucrats . They have achieved success in building the institutions of the breakaway, Russia-backed Transnistria region of Moldova .
 Russia’s approach to competition over Ukraine is fundamentally different from that of the European Union . Russia's approach to Competition over Ukraine has been different from the EU's .
 Russia demonstrated a consistent dedication to reassert exclusive, state-centric influence over Ukraine . Moscow lost political control of the country following the Soviet Union’s collapse .
 The preference for a sovereignty-based strategy of dominance over the European Union’s method of engagement, cooperation, and multilateralism stems from Russia's preferred version of the European order . The preference is for a traditional, sovereignty- based strategy of dominated over the EU’S
 Russia has resisted embracing Western multilateral norms . Russia has refused to acknowledge that Ukraine and other states in the post-Soviet space are legitimate subjects of EU attempts to advance such nonns .
 In its relations with the European Union and other Western institutions, Russia has worked to derail programs that would improve transparency, deepen cooperation, and legitimize Western multilateral power arrangements .
 Ukraine figures highly in the national memory of Russians and its battlefields are an indelible part of the Russian identity . Ukraine is considered a major part of its national memory .
 Ukraine remains a state with major economic importance to Russia . Ukraine is no longer part of the Soviet single market .
 Before 2014, there was a significant trade relationship between the two countries, especially in sensitive military technology . The two countries had a significant relationship between them .
 Ukraine is a vital link in Russia’s energy export infrastructure to Europe . Russia is a key part of its energy exports to Europe.
 The country is also important to Russian security strategy, both as a base to project power to Europe through the Black Sea Fleet and as a buffer to the NATO alliance .
 Ukraine also hosts a large population of Russians and Russian speakers who look to Moscow for cultural and sometimes political leadership . Ukraine also has a large number of Russian speakers and speakers .
 Russia has used traditional and novel strategies to achieve its objective of securing exclusive influence over Ukraine . Russia has been trying to secure exclusive influence in Ukraine for years .
 Moscow's aim has been to secure Kiev’s cooperation with Russian policies . Ukraine's history of limited or nonexistent interaction with the CIS shows that this strategy has been less than successful .
 Russia has consistently used energy as a tool to enforce its will, both by punishing Ukraine with higher prices or cutoffs . Russia has also used energy to punish Ukraine by enticing cooperation through special deals .
 Moscow has not hesitated to employ military force to advance its core interests . When diplomatic and economic leverage has failed, Moscow has been able to use military force .
 The Russian military was used in 2014 to seize Crimea, home of the Black Sea Fleet, and support a rebel insurgency in eastern Ukraine . European Union's efforts to carry cooperation with Ukraine any further have been complicated by the conflict .
 Russia has stepped up rhetorical and political support for ethnic Russians within the country . Russia has also demanded autonomy for areas of Ukraine heavily populated by Russians .
 In the wake of the seizure of Crimea, Russian strategy in Ukraine seems to have evolved . Russia's strategy in the Ukraine has evolved since the Crimea seizure .
 Rather than seek to influence the country as a whole, Russia appears to have settled for asserting firm control over the territories of greatest value to Moscow .
 The Russian military has provided material support, and has at times engaged in combat, to prevent Kiev from defeating the pro-Russian forces in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s actions have strengthened pro-European Union elites in Kiev, removing the possibility of complete Russian hegemony . Russia's actions have weakened pro- European Union elites, removing for the time being.
 Russia continues its competition with the EU by demanding the establishment of an autonomous region . It could stymie European Unionled cooperation efforts through pro-Russian proxies .
 Russia's strategy of seeking exclusive influence over Ukraine has remained unchanged since late 2013 . The events of late 2013 have yielded both gains and setbacks for Moscow .
 The objective of Russian competition over Ukraine, and the value placed on winning that competition by Moscow, have remained consistent . The European Union's slow growth of interest has remained consistent, in contrast to the European Union’s slow growth.
 Moscow will likely continue to seek ways to bolster Russian state power in Ukraine . Moscow is derailing EU cooperation projects in Ukraine while derailing cooperation projects .
 The previous two chapters have undertaken a detailed consideration of European Union and Russian foreign policies with regard to competing for influence in Ukraine . The previous three chapters have also considered EU and Russian policies .
 This chapter considers how the attitudes and policies of Ukraine itself have shaped the competition between the EU and Russia . This chapter also considers how Ukraine itself has been shaped by its policies and attitudes .
 Ukraine's relations with both sides are complex and cannot be reduced to a friend or foe dichotomy . Ukraine’s relations with the two countries are complex, and can’t be reduced.
 The complexity is driven by the diversity of approaches to identity within Ukraine itself, and by the realities of Ukraine’s geopolitical position .
 Ukraine is a crossroads between Europe and Russia . In terms of culture, economics, and geography, Ukraine is an important part of the country .
 A crossroads implies that a singular course must be chosen, yet such a decision is not easy for the Ukrainian state .
 Ukraine’s historically close association with Russia, both culturally and via centuries of political union, has created a potent incentive to maintain a strong relationship despite independence . Ukraine's history of close ties with Russia has created an incentive for Ukraine to maintain its strong relationship .
 Kiev has sought to maintain its longstanding ties with Russia while expanding relations with the European Union . Kiev has also sought a delicate balance with Russia and the EU .
 The forces that support these initiatives are not strictly partisan in nature . The forces behind these initiatives were not strictlypartisan in nature, they say .
 President Kuchma has been careful to address Russian concerns . Political leaders with a decidedly pro-European agenda have been careful.
 The staunchly Russia-friendly President Yanukovych demonstrated a sustained concern for Ukraine’s European opportunities . Ukraine's European opportunities have been limited to Russia .
 The European Union and Russia over Ukraine has been sustained by Kiev’s efforts to placate both sides . The competition between the EU and Russia.
 The European Union has significantly transformed its efforts to become the major external influence in Ukrainian affairs . As neither Brussels nor Moscow was able to gain decisive advantage, each has continued .
 Ukraine forced into a decision over an association agreement with the EU in November 2013 . The competition intensified until Ukraine was forced to make a decision on the agreement .
 Ukraine appears to have rejected participating in Russia’s Eurasian Economic Union project and to have committed to seeking closer ties with the European Union .
 This chapter will examine how domestic Ukrainian attitudes have shaped competition by the EU and Russia . It will also examine how the competition has shaped Ukraine's policies .
 A brief survey of identity in Ukraine will be undertaken to illuminate the diverse groups within the country and their viewpoints on the European Union and Russia .
 The chapter will show that Ukrainian foreign policy since independence has enmeshed the EU and Russia into competition with each other . It will also show that Ukraine's foreign policy has been in the spotlight since independence .
 The chapter concludes with a discussion of Ukraine’s choice of the European Union in 2014 . The chapter also discusses Ukraine's choice of a European Union.
Ukrainian identity separable and distinct, but culturally linked with Russia . Russia is ancient, and its history of statehood is culturally linked .
 The Ukrainian people are either the true inheritors of Rus’ legacy, or at least share an equal historical and cultural claim with the Great Russians .
 Ethnic Ukrainians have also developed historical ties to Europe independent of the Russian experience . Ethnic Ukrainians are also developing historical ties with Europe .
 Evidence suggest that ethnic Ukrainians in Galicia and as far east as Kiev consider themselves as part of Europe due to these long standing connections .
 Western Ukrainian nationalists exhibit a high level of political organization, according to a report . The report is based on policies of autonomy practiced by localities in the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 Nationalist Ukrainians strongly support ties with Europe as a means of assuring their independence from Russia . They also support the development of a Ukrainian identity .
 The Rukh was a major driving force behind Ukraine’s secession from the Soviet Union . It was the early political organization representing Ukrainian nationalism .
 Ethnic Russians in Ukraine prior to 2014 rarely manifested a tendency to favor separatism . There is no evidence of ethnic conflict in Ukraine during its first decade of independence .
 A 1995 survey of Russian elites in Donetsk revealed a lack of conflict between Ukraine and Russian culture . The survey also revealed a perceived lack of loyalty to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Russophones have a complex attitude toward foreign relations, exhibiting support for Ukraine’s political independence . They also seek to maintain cultural links with Russia .
 Ethnic Russians and Ukrainian Russophones have demonstrated attachment to a “Soviet’s rather than Ukrainian or Russian allegiance .
 The segment of Ukraine’s population identifying itself as ‘Soviet’ has never accepted Ukrainian or Russian nationalist rhetoric . The segment prefers the perceived stability, prestige, and economic security that Ukraine enjoyed while it was a Soviet Union .
Inherent in this identity is a belief that Ukraine and Russia should be a fundamentally connected unit . Inherent in the identity is the belief that the two countries should be together .
 Ukrainian identity is not outright hostile to Ukraine's ties with Europe . While favoring strong ties with Russia, this identity isn't outright hostile.
 A Ukrainian ideological "center" also exists between European-leaning nationalists and Slavic-oriented ethnic Russians and Ukrainian Russophones .
 This space is not filled by an organized political faction, but by corporate interests and oligarchical business elites . This space has not been filled by organized political factions, but rather by corporate interest .
 Russian-oriented factions have been successful in obtaining political power . They have succeeded in obtaining power due to the inability to generate majority support .
 Ethnic Ukrainian business elites in the east are supportive of ties with Russia due to their industrial concerns . They are also supportive of Russia's economic concerns .
 A new class of Ukrainian capitalists has consistently supported a succession of political fronts in favor of trade relations with the West . The new class is wary of nationalist rhetoric .
Ukrainian political scene is an ever present and influential part of the Ukrainian political scene . Nonetheless, they are still influential in the Ukrainian politics .
 Ukraine began its modern history as an independent state with a turn away from Russia . Ukraine has taken a series of actions to seek closer ties with Europe .
 The high level of support for separation from Russia elicited surprise in many quarters . Russian leader Boris Yeltsin remarked “What, even the Donbass voted yes?”
 In the 1994 Ukrainian presidential elections, incumbent Leonid Kravchuk was defeated by LeonidKuchma . Kuchma won the election in 1994 .
 Ukrainian impetus behind the agreement was to seek improved economic cooperation with the EU and an eventual free trade agreement . The Ukrainian impetus was to improve economic cooperation.
 The Kuchma administration placed a high value on the ability to pursue economic growth independent of Russia that the EU represented .
 The process of expanding Ukrainian-EU relations in this period was slow due to the lack of interest demonstrated by Brussels .
 Ukraine bears responsibility for the plodding pace of diplomacy due to its continued interest in maintaining positive relations with the Russian Federation . Ukraine also bears significant responsibility for its continued efforts to maintain positive relations .
 There is no evidence of a strong Ukrainian political constituency advocating expanding cooperation with the EU at Russia's expense as a primary interest .
 Diplomacy with the EU was conducted via presidential fiat, economically motivated, and pursued with Russia’s sensibilities in mind .
 Ukrainian independence had gathered majority support in both the east and the west . The country did not seek to abandon association with the new Russian Federation .
 Ukraine’s membership and participation in the Commonwealth of Independent States were primarily motivated by the need to mitigate the economic impact of the loss of the Soviet market . Ukraine's membership and membership in the CIS was motivated by a need to mitigating the loss.
 In the energy sector Ukrainian corporate oligarchs are heavily vested in stable relations with Russia to maintain the extant energy infrastructure that their livelihood depends on . The energy sector is heavily vested with Russia.
 Russia's strong political constituency demanded continued engagement with Russia . Russia's economic requirements of close cooperation with Russia require close cooperation .
 Ukrainian elites are at least partially responsible for the government’s slow pace in developing relations with the European Union .
 Russia had difficulty pursuing its aims due to the disruption and 25 Wilson, The Ukrainians, 195 . Russia, while maintaining an ambition to exercise exclusive influence over Ukraine, had difficulty achieving its aims .
 Ukraine's attempt to walk a tightrope between Brussels and Moscow escalated the competition . A resurgent Russia faced an increasingly engaged European Union .
 The events of the Orange Revolution and the subsequent escalation in the competition between the EU and Russia are li nk ed to Ukraine’s continued polices of courting both powers .
 The Orange Revolution was formed in response to a machinated victory by Yanukovych in the 2004 presidential election . The domestic forces behind the Orange Revolution itself were formed in a response to the 2004 election .
 The scheme was supported by outgoing President Kuchma due to a perceived need to maintain a balanced relationship with Moscow .
 The outrage at the corrupt electoral process strengthened the pro-EU forces within Ukraine . The European Union itself into deeper engagement with Ukraine .
 At the height of the Orange Revolution, 55% of Ukrainians expressed support for closer ties with the European Union . The Orange Revolution was the peak of the revolution in Ukraine .
 In the previous decade, only a quarter of the population could be counted among the pro-West faction .
 The European Union became directly involved in Ukrainian politics for the first time . It dispatches negotiators to help mediate the agreement that eventually resulted in the election of pro-Western candidate Viktor Yuschenko .
 Ukraine's involvement in the EURussia competition intensified under Yuschenko . Under Yuschenko, Ukraine’s involvement in EURussia has intensified .
 The new government’s policies domestically downgraded the status of the Russian language and culture .
Ukraine and the EU agreed on an ENP Action Plan despite the lack of any major incentive to do so for Kiev . Ukraine and the European Union agreed on the plan despite a lack of major incentive .
 Viktor Yanukovych, the leader of the Ukrainian pro-Russia faction, announced support for pursuing relations with the European Union as well .
 Demands for closer association with the European Union by multiple factions within Ukraine revealed that the ENP was an inadequate mechanism .
 The EU continued to deepen cooperation with the EU after the election of Yanukovych to the Presidency in 2010 .
 Ukraine’s continued expression of interest in the EU, even during the rule of an ostensibly pro-Russian administration, committed Brussels even further to competition for influence in the country .
 EU support for the Orange Revolution contributed to the EU's growing stake in Ukraine . In combination with the moral and political investment made by the EU, these developments contributed to Ukraine .
 The dramatic events of the Orange Revolution would seem to indicate a decisive turn toward the European Union and away from Russia .
 As the tide of emotional pro-Western sentiment receded, political forces favoring Russia reemerged . The tide of emotions that buoyed the Orange Revolution receded .
 Yanukovych administration reaffirmed Ukraine’s interest in the Common Economic Space and in Ukraine's membership in the Belarus-Russia-Kazakhstan Customs Union in 2010 .
 The Association Agreement due to be signed between the EU and Ukraine in November 2013 deeply threatened Russia’s longstanding diplomatic strategy toward Ukraine .
 Ukrainian engagement with both the EU and Russia since independence ensured that each power had a sizeable stake in emerging as Kiev’s main partner .
 The intensification of competition between Moscow and Brussels sustained and deepened each power’s efforts to bring Ukraine into its economic system and international alignment .
 The legal incompatibility of the two systems and Russia’s perception of the competition as a zero sum game demanded that a choice be made . Russia's view of the game as azero sum game demands that it be made.
 Yanukovych’s decision triggered immediate and robust political opposition from Ukrainian nationalists and pro-Europe factions of the political and managerial class .
 Yanukovych chose to flee the country in February 2014 rather than see through to conclusion the negotiations with the opposition factions . The rise of pro-Europe sentiment was so powerful that Yanukovych saw no prospect of preserving his position .
 The new Ukrainian government would have reversed course and pursued the association agreement with the European Union . There was little doubt that the new Ukrainian Government would have reverse course .
 Russia ensured that Kiev would chart a strictly pro-EU course by occupying Crimea days after Yanukovych left the country .
 In June 2014, Ukraine’s new President, Petro Poroshenko, formally signed the EU Association Agreement . The agreement commits Ukraine to deepened cooperation with the European Union .
 Ukraine's first full scale round of elections following Yanukovych's withdrawal from power resulted in a resounding victory for pro-European factions . Ukraine’s first full-scale round of election followed Yanukovych's exit from power .
 Poroshenko's faction, the Petro Poroshe nk o Bloc, secured the greatest share of the vote . It was followed by the People's Front party of pro-independence politician Arseny Yatseniuk .
 The landslide victory for pro-European forces was undoubtedly aided by the fact that the regions of Ukraine most likely to return Russia-oriented candidates did not participate in the election . The Donbass due to Russian-sponsored separatists controlling the region rather than the Kiev government .
 Ukraine’s dramatic realignment toward the European Union can be attributed to Russia twice over . Ukraine's dramatic realigning toward the EU can also be blamed on Russia .
 Any economic incentives Ukrainian nationalists had to maintain relations with Russia were erased by Moscow's seizure of Crimea and support for the armed revolt against the government .
 Russia removed the faction naturally inclined to support maintaining strong ties with Russia from the polity . Those same Russian actions, meanwhile, removed a faction of the Russian government from Russia .
 There is evidence that Russia’s aggressive behavior has disillusioned non-nationalist Russophone Ukrainians as well .
 Further time and study is necessary to determine the strength of this consensus and its prospects for long term endurance .
 The confirmation of a domestic consensus supporting Ukraine’s ambition to join the European Union ensured the continuation of pro-Western policies .
 Poroshenko reiterated Ukraine’s interest in joining NATO in November 2014 . Poroshenko announced plans to hold a referendum on seeking membership in the alliance .
 Poroshenko announced a reform program aimed at preparing Ukraine to join the European Union by 2020 . At the December 2014 ratification ceremony of the EU-Ukrainian Association Agreement.
 Moscow has transformed Russian strategy in the competition in Ukraine . As a result of the changes in domestic Ukrainian politics, Moscow has changed its strategy in Russia .
 Russia apparently recognized that its previous objective of exercising dominant influence over the Ukrainian government had moved out of reach . Russia appears to have recognized that the previous objective was to exercise dominant influence in Ukraine .
 Putin officially burned all remaining political bridges between Moscow and Kiev . All bilateral agreements between the two countries were voided by the supposed coup against Yanukovych .
 Russia now seeks to constrain Ukraine's strategic options by creating a frozen conflict . The new government in Kiev is staunchly committed to the EU .
 Russia demanded a federalized Ukraine, with significant autonomy for the separatist-controlled eastern region . At the September 2014 Minsk peace summit Russia demanded that Ukraine be federalized .
 The diverse identities and interests of Ukraine’s population have guided the country to conduct pragmatic diplomacy with the European Union and Russia . The country is seeking close and productive ties with both yet committing to neither .
 Ukraine’s foreign policy in turn shaped the competitive strategies of Brussels and Moscow .
 The EU and Russia both sought to bring Ukraine into their respective political and economic systems . The EU wanted to bring the country into its political and political systems .
 The competition escalated to the point that circumstances demanded a decisive choice . Inevitably, the competition escalated.
 The crisis beginning in November 2013 has resulted in a fundamental shift in Ukraine’s role in the competition between the EU and Russia .
 Ukraine has announced its unreserved interest in joining the European Union . Ukraine has forged a pro-Western political consensus and announced its unreserved interest .
 Russia has given up on its previous strategy of bringing Ukraine as a whole into its sphere of influence . Russia has instead seized control of its vital interests in the country, either directly or via support for separatist proxies .
 Specific policies resulting from Ukrainian pro-EU consensus have yet to manifest themselves at the time of this writing .
 Ukraine's role in the competition has changed, but a return to the balanced and pragmatic policies of the past is no longer an option . It is certain, however, that Ukraine’s role in Ukraine has changed .
 The territory that comprises modern Ukraine has been the object of many competitions throughout history . The territory has been a key part of Ukraine's sporting history .
 Long considered the birthplace of Russian civilization . Parts of the land also saw rule by the Mongols, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Ottoman Empire, and Austria-Hungary .
 A distinct Ukrainian identity claims status and historical standing equal to that of Russia . Only recently has Ukraine achieved political autonomy .
 Ukraine’s first two and a half decades of independence from Russia have led the strongest partisans of Ukrainian nationalism to seek closer ties with the European Union . Ukraine's first two-and-a-half decades ofindependence from Russia has led to a stronger partisans of
 The European Union’s decades of enlargement and outreach have brought its eastern edge to the borders of Ukraine . Ukraine is an object of interest and opportunity to Brussels .
 Ukraine's population cannot be considered unified in its cultural or political identity . Despite Ukraine's independence, the country’s population can't be unified in their cultural orpolitical identity .
 Significant swaths of Ukrainian citizenry, especially in the eastern regions, maintain strong ties to Russia .
 Russia has never lost interest in Ukraine, regarding it as a key part of Russia’s own identity . Ukraine is a strategic asset in military and geographic terms, and an essential element in Moscow's plans to exert regional power .
 Russia has spurned participation in EU engagement programs . Russia has sought to build a regional sphere of influence in which power emanates from Moscow .
 Russia has asserted various interests in Ukraine, but its geopolitical ambitions are the prime drivers behind the competition for influence in the country . Russia has claimed various interests.
 Ukraine’s position as a state bordering the eastern-most members of the European Union demands consideration by Brussels in the fonnulation of EU foreign policy .
 Ukraine is situated directly between the EU and Russia . It figures in the EU’s strategy of creating stable, liberal states on its periphery .
 The successful installation of enduring liberal norms in Ukraine would validate the credibility of the EU’s soft power and its multilateral diplomacy .
 The EU has growing economic interests in Ukraine, especially in the realm of energy . The EU also has growing interest in Ukraine .
 Over time, these interests have drawn the EU into seeking ever deeper cooperation with Ukraine .
 EU-Ukrainian relations have had an inauspicious start, but have grown steadily over the decades .
 After Ukraine gained independence, the EU had no official delegation to the country for over two years . The EU had not visited Ukraine since the country gained independence .
 The EU has committed to the implementation of ever deeper formalized programs of cooperation . Since the establishment of relations in 1993, the EU has agreed to a deeper formalization of cooperation.
 The 2014 Association Agreement concluded by Ukraine and the EU is especially significant considering that it took place in the context of an ongoing, active military intervention in Ukraine by Russia by Russia .
 The European Union has not always been aware of its role as a participant in a competition with Russia . The EU is not always aware of their role in the competition .
Early EU diplomacy with Ukraine was characterized by a “take it or leave it’s’ approach, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: “Hardly the mark of an aggressive courtship.’
 When the prospect of competition with Russia was raised, it often served to dampen Brussels’s enthusiasm for deepening ties with Ukraine .
 Ukraine has become more willing to overtly compete with Russia for influence . European Union’s relations with, and investment in, Ukraine have expanded .
 The European Union's diplomatic communiques have repeatedly condemned Russia’s behavior . The 28 member states have leveled several rounds of punitive sanctions .
 There has been a marked shift in the attitudes of EU elites toward Russia as a result of the crisis .
 Once Moscow was a strategic partner, but it is now a strategic problem . Moscow was once a strategic partners, but now it is a strategic issue .
 Russia has demonstrated a steady strategic commitment to securing Ukraine within Moscow’s sphere of influence . Russia, on the other hand, has shown a steady commitment to secure Ukraine within the Russian sphere.
 Moscow has consistently sought to use Russian-dominated international institutions to encourage Kiev to adopt policies favorable to Russia . Moscow has a demonstrable track record of manipulating energy policies to strong arm Ukraine into aligning with Russia .
 Ukraine has not been a passive pawn in the competition between Brussels and Moscow . Since its attainment of independence, Ukraine hasn't been a Passive pawn in Brussels .
 Ukrainian political and cultural identities and economic realities have historically driven Kiev to seek cooperation with both the EU and Russia . Kiev is trying to avoid antagonizing either of the two countries .
 Seeking membership was the official policy of the Kuchma, Yuschenko, and Yanukovych presidencies . Seeking membership in the European Union was the main policy of Kuchman and Yuschenko . The European Union is a major part of the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine’s foreign policy during this period also demonstrated an awareness of the importance of Russian trade, and especially Russian energy resources . The 2013 crisis avoided irrevocably damaging relations with Moscow .
 Yanukovych's abrupt withdrawal at the EU's Vilnius summit was driven in part by the fact Moscow made clear to him that signing an Association Agreement with the EU would constitute an unacceptable challenge to Russian interests .
 Yanukovych's February 2014 decision to flee the country began a new phase for Ukraine’s role in the competition between the EU and Russia . Ukraine is in the hands of pro-Western domestic forces .
 Kiev has firmly aligned with the European Union and is now engaged in a conflict with separatists acting as proxies for Russia in the east of the country .
 The European Union has shown a willingness to directly oppose Russian actions since 2013 . The EU has condemned Moscow and enacted an escalating series of sanctions, which remain in place .
 The European Union’s level of competition with Russia has increased, the competition itself has been transformed . The competition itself is now more competitive than ever before .
 Ukraine has committed itself to the EU’s camp and has ended its efforts to maintain a balance between Brussels and Moscow .
 The strategy to bring Ukraine within Russian-dominated systems such as the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic Union has been placed on hold .
 Moscow now acts to defend limited core interests such as its Black Sea Fleet in Crimea . Moscow also demands that Kiev enact political reforms that would empower separatists in east Ukraine .
 The current high level of competition between the European Union and Russia is likely to continue for the foreseeable future . The European Union is expected to continue to compete with Russia in the future .
 A series of peace protocol meetings in Minsk has failed to resolve the Ukraine conflict . The Ukraine conflict has been ongoing for months .
 Russia continued to demand a reformed, decentralized government that would politically empower pro-Russian separatists . In the deliberations for a new peace agreement, on 11 February 2015, Russia demanded a reformed government .
 Russia is unlikely to give up pursuit of its interests in Ukraine or make strategic concessions to the European Union . The U.S. rhetoric of a “pivot to the Asia-Pacific,’s economic instability within the Eurozone.
 None of the peace agreements has succeeded in ending the fighting in Ukraine’s civil war .
 Brussels has taken significant steps to cooperate with Kiev to resist Moscow, as shown in Chapter II of this thesis . Brussels still unwilling to extend an invitation of EU membership to Ukraine .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel called Crimea annexation “criminal and illegal, under international law,” while speaking at a ceremony commemorating the anniversary of the end of the Second World War .
 The European Commission released a paper acknowledging the “shortcomings’ of the European Neighborhood Policy in March 2015 . The paper called for the policy to be restructured.
 Ukraine has become a battleground in a greater debate over which norms will prevail in the European and global security environment . Ukraine is a battleground for the future of the world's security environment.
 At stake are the liberal nonns of democracy, multilateralism, partnership, and the rule of law that the EU is founded upon .
 European Union's commitment to compete with Russia over Ukraine indicates that the EU is willing to defend these values . The growth of the European Union’s commitment to competes with Russia indicates that it is willing.
 Ukraine at the center of the European Union and Russia's competition . It is more evident now than ever before that there is a deepening competition between the EU and Russia .
 How and Why Russia Broke the Rules I' International Affairs 90 no. 1255-1297 .