 It is possible to understand what is happening in Ukraine, it is much more difficult to evaluate and forecast the development of events . It's possible to see what is going to happen in Ukraine. It's more difficult than to predict what's happening in the country .
 If you follow your emotions, neither proper assessment nor correct forecast will result. Blood, death and destruction are the most serious emotional blows .
 The United States and the West are facing of the strongest crises in its history . The U.S. and West face of the biggest crises in their history .
 The strength and depth of the problem are compounded by the fact that ... the West has won. The strength of the issue is compounded by that the West is winning, says the author .
 It incorporated practically all of Europe, crushed, to varying degrees, with a few exceptions . It incorporated almost all of the world, including Europe, and the whole world .
 Those who can be robbed are fewer and fewer, and those with whom it is necessary to share the "stolen goods" That is the standard of living that rests on unrestricted dollar emissions, are more and more .
 In the U.S. it is 18 trillion dollars, but such debts exist in all so-called developed countries . Such debts, and even worse ratios of the national debt to GDP, exist in the United States .
 As a result the United States must eliminate two threats to its power China and Russia . The U.S. must eliminate the two threats.
 To do this the U.S. need to change regime in one of these countries, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Americans think that the regime change in Russia is an easier task . The U.S. thinks that the change is an easy task .
 Orange technologies did not work in 2011, Putin became president again . Orange technologies didn't work for Putin in 2011 .
 What the West does when it loses in any territory is most important for understanding the events in Ukraine .
 Western loss means failure of plans and loss of control over certain areas . Western loss is full or partial .
 Before leaving the British set up the Anti-India a new state of Pakistan . The new state will be Pakistan's first state.
 Evacuate there the army of Chiang Kai-shek under the protection of the United States Navy .
 Tensions, the permanent possibility of war between China and the Anti-China ensue. Tensions are high in China and China .
 In the geopolitical game to grant a diplomatic recognition is to follow the current 'national' interests, and nothing more . The geopolitical game is to grant diplomatic recognition.
 Washington recognizes Beijing and ceases to recognize Taipei . But later Washington changes its position, recognizing Beijing and recognizing Taipei.
 At the same time it strongly supports Taiwan and prevents the reunification of the two ""Chinas" Let's not stray far into history, says Taiwan .
 In 2011 the West loses control of Russia not completely yet, but its plans to deny Putin another presidential term fail . In 2011, the West lost control of the country not entirely yet .
 The dismantling of the fifth column begins, Russia strongly defends its interests in the world . The dismantling is the first step in the dismantling of a fifth column .
 Anglo-Saxons start creating it, and the soil is prepared in Ukraine .
 Propaganda starts in 1991 and even earlier, militants are trained, money is allocated, the elite is bought and well fed . The elite is well fed.
 According to the United States plans, Yanukovych should be removed during the elections in 2015 . U.S. plans to remove Yanukovych during the election in 2015.
 Remove him in such a way as to launch anti-Russian hysteria and begin to create the Anti-Russia from Ukraine .
 What is happening today in Ukraine is nothing more than the creation of the Anti-Russia. What's happening today is nothing less than the anti-Russia campaign .
 Propaganda, hate, readiness to destroy and kill on the part of the nationalists and some deceived common citizens. Propaganda and hate, ready to destroy, kill and kill, some deceived people .
 When they pump up the Ukrainian army, equip it, create it, and prepare it . When they prepare it, prepare it. When it's ready, it can be used to train and train it .
 U.S. will try to pit the two parts of the same nation against each other . Ukraine will face Russia in the 2014 World Cup .
 Were the Crimea not reunited with Russia, it would still remain an excuse. Were the Crimean peninsula not reunited, it wouldn't have been an excuse .
 Basing the Russian army in Crimea would give a lot of opportunities for the organization of conflicts and provocations . The pro-Russian population living there would give an opportunity for conflict and provocation .
Regardless of the actions of Putin and the people of Crimea, the Western plan would remain the same. Therefore, regardless of Putin's actions, the plan would be the same .
 Support of those in Ukraine itself who do not agree with this turn of events. Support of the Ukrainian government is not clear .
 The West creates the Anti-Russia, Russia must help and support the anti-Russia campaign . The West has created the Anti -Russia campaign, and Russia must support it .
 In the Southeast of Ukraine the people who do not agree with the Kiev's coup rose up . Few had a clear idea that they were “blocking the road’s road of such a terrible scenario.
 The presence of the Anti-anti-Russia as a part of a federalized Ukraine has blocked the Western plans to unleash the Ukrainian-Russian war . The Anti-Anti-Russia is part of Ukraine, refusing either to arm for the West or pull the chestnuts out of the fire
 Moscow's insistent calls for territorial integrity of Ukraine, for federalization, for negotiations .
 Moscow needs a unified Ukraine, where the pro-Russian part of the society will "tie the hands of the militants and bought politicians, and will not allow to draw the whole Ukrainian people into the war. Moscow needs an unified Ukraine .
 It needs a militarized state with an aggressive ideology in the form of hatred directed against Russia . To draw Russia into war, forcing her to send troops into Ukraine, she must send troops.
 The more Ukrainian citizens will die in the fratricidal war, the better for the West, the more the West will die .
All of it in order to take the course toward preparation of the war between Russia and China . All of it to take a course toward preparing for the war .
 Neither military success nor the military invasion by Russia and its participation in the civil conflict were achieved . Neither military or military invasion was achieved .
 The existence of the DNR and LNR as Anti-anti-Russia is the key to inability of the West to start a war between Ukraine and Russia . The West's inability to start war between Russia and Ukraine is key to the West's failure to do so .
 The cannonball on its leg does not let the U.S. push Kiev toward this Great War with tens of thousands of victims .
 Sergei Lavrov says that we are for the territorial integrity of Ukraine . That is why Moscow is helping Donbass in every way possible that is why Sergei Lavrov said that we were for Ukraine .
 Russia does not recognize the DNR and LNR as independent states . That is why Russia doesn't recognize LNR and DNR asindependent states .
 To recognize them, to let them secede means to launch countdown for war with Ukraine, to recognize them . To recognize the Ukrainian government, to allow them to go to war with them, is a sign of war .
 In case of incorporation of Donbass into Russia, those in Washington will stand up and give a standing ovation .
 In today's situation the Russian tactics in Ukraine are the only correct ones, according to Russian media .
 U.S. must pay to support 40 million people, Russia must help 3 million people in the Donbass and 1. million refugees . United States must pay for support of 40 million.
 Moscow constantly insists on negotiations, not allowing the aggressor being shaped by the west to "remove the weight" from its leg . DNR and LNR are not allowed to be defeated militarily. Moscow constantly insist on negotiations .
 Even to the militants in Chechnya in the 90's they gave no dollars, instead they gave them clichés for printing fake dollars .
 Self-financing is the principle of the Anglo-Saxon politics, in extreme cases a refund within a short period of time . Self- Financing is a principle of Anglo- Saxon politics .
 The path to war in Ukraine was blocked by the courage and determination of the DNR and LNR militia fighters . The bet of the West – to organize a new Maidan in Russia – was blocked .
 The bet of Russia – wait till the West loses its interest in Ukraine because of high costs without any tangible benefits . The bet is that the West will lose its interest because of the high costs .
 Washington wants to use the instability of Ukraine at least for a possibility of gas blackmail of Moscow . Washington wants the instability to be used to blackmail Moscow .
 Few in Ukraine understand what a tremendous role the courage of the Donbass residents plays in today's world politics. Few in the Ukraine know what a huge role they play in the world politics .
 Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian citizens have been killed in Ukraine . Ukrainian authorities have been trying to save hundreds of thousands .
 The same children that today are "jumping" in Ukrainian schools, whose parents collect money for ATO, support Kiev authorities, according to the U.S. plan .
 That's what all of us need to remember, regardless of our current citizenship. That is what all we need to be remembered, even if we're in the U.S.
There is no doubt that MH17 was shot down by a Ukrainian SU-25, possibly one of several Su-25s patrolling the skies that day .