 NATO accepted countries with problems concerning territorial integrity in the past . NATO has accepted nations with problems with territorial integrity .
 This is often used as a rebuttal against Ukraine’s drive to join NATO and the EU . Russia occupies the Crimea and parts of the Donbas .
 The record of NATO-Ukrainian relations under five Ukrainian presidents is mixed . The record is mixed.
 The first was Russian unwillingness to respect Ukrainian sovereignty under Kuchma and military aggression against Ukraine under Poroshenko . The first is Russian unwillingness. to respect Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Russia missed the boat, only sending President Borys Yeltsin four years after Kuchma was elected to sign the inter-state treaty recognising their border .
 Ukraine's strategic partnership with President Donald Trump's administration is stronger than with Obama's predecessor, Barack Obama . Under Poroshenko, Ukraine’s strategic partnership has been stronger than Obama's .
 NATO-Ukrainian relations today are at a higher level than during the second half of the 1990s . NATO-Ukraine relations are now at a lower level than in the 1990's .
 Under President Leonid Kravchuk, NATO had not yet developed a policy towards the former communist countries .
 President Viktor Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko prioritised their private petty quarrels and greed for power above that of Ukraine’s national interests .
 In 2006, the Bush administration's plan to visit Ukraine in June was destroyed by three months of Yushchenko-Tymoshenko in-fighting .
 Ukraine changed its foreign policy towards seeking an ephemeral non-bloc status . Under Yanukovych, Ukraine's security forces came under Russian control .
 Requirements to join NATO are not standardised and they have been tougher on Ukraine than the three Baltic states, Macedonia and Montenegro .
 Estonia and Latvia would have won referendums on NATO membership if their Russian speakers all had citizenship and could have voted . It is doubtful Estonia and Latvia could have won referendum on membership if all speakers had citizenship .
 NATO has a long-term and existing relationship with NATO . Russian influence and soft power has fallen to low levels, according to a report .
 In 2003, Ukraine provided the largest non-NATO military contingent to the US-led coalition forces in Iraq .
 NATO forces train Ukrainian soldiers while NATO and Ukraine have held regular annual military exercises for nearly two decades . NATO forces training Ukrainian soldiers in Ukraine while NATO forces trains Ukrainian soldiers .
 Ukraine today has the best army it has ever had, according to the Warsaw-based Centre for Eastern Studies . It is the first time the country has had an army.
 This is one of President Poroshenko’s major achievements that cannot be denied . Theoshenko's major achievements are one of his major achievements.
 Ukraine has half a million security forces which dwarves the 2,000 that Montenegro brought into NATO in 2017 . Ukraine has more than 2,500 security forces than Montenegro .
 Ukraine’s military is ranked the 29th strongest in the world according to a U.S.-based independent defense think tank . Only 10 out of 29 NATO members possessing stronger armies .
 Ukraine has the eighth strongest army and 22 of NATO’s members are ranked below Ukraine . Within Europe, Ukraine is ranked eighth strongest in Europe .
 Montenegro, Macedonia, and Slovenia bring little added military value to NATO . The three Baltic states and Slovenia are therefore consumers of security .
 Ukraine has a revived Military-Industrial Complex that supplies Ukrainian troops . It is the world’s ninth largest arms exporter .
 Only 6 NATO members spend the required 2 per cent of GDP on defence . Three are east European countries, three are east Europe .
 NATO did not ask every NATO member in eastern Europe to hold a referendum before joining . Thirdly, NATO didn't ask all NATO members to hold an election before joining.
 President Poroshenko has suggested holding a referendum on NATO membership on the same day as the 2019 presidential elections . The president has suggested a vote on the issue will be held on same day.
 Many Ukrainians feel that Ukraine cannot guarantee its own security and that it needs to be part of a security organisation . Russian military aggression has made many Ukrainians feel they cannot guarantee their own security .
 This is higher than those who supported NATO membership in the Hungarian and Slovenian referendums . This is the highest percentage of those who support NATO membership .
 Ukrainians who support NATO membership are actively lobbying for this goal . Those who are opposed have decreased in number since 2014 and are far more passive than supporters .
 Many former opponents of NATO membership are today supporting a “non-bloc’ status for Ukraine .
 The biggest change has been in eastern Ukraine where support has grown from 12 to 32 per cent . In the south where it has increased from 7 to 33 per cent, support has risen from 7 per cent to 33% .
 Even in the Donbas, support stands at 12 per cent where it was practically zero prior to 2014. Even in Donbas.
 The majority of nationalists and populists throughout Europe are anti-NATO, anti-American and pro-Putin . The majority are pro-Russian and anti-U.S.
 Russian interference was high in the Baltic states and Montenegro as was its objections against their membership . But this did not dissuade NATO from inviting them to join .
 Russia attempted to organise a coup in Montenegro and assassinate the Prime Minister . Russia attempted a coup.
 In 2014, Russia was defeated in its attempt at detaching so-called “New Russia’s from Ukraine . In 2014. Russia was defeat in its attempts to detaching “ New Russia” from Ukraine.
 Russia's goals of capturing the “crown jewels’ of Kharkiv and Odessa were thwarted . Russia’s attempts to capture the ‘crown jewel’ were thwarted.
 Russian proxies nearly lost the Donbas and Russia had to invade in August 2014 to rescue them from defeat . The Donbas had to be rescued from defeat by Russian proxies .
 Ukraine defeated Putin's plans because the majority of Ukraine’s Russian speakers showed themselves to be Ukrainian patriots . The majority of the Russian speakers in Ukraine were Ukrainians .
 Russia would have greater difficulty in launching such an operation because patriotism has grown throughout Ukraine . The Soviet myth of “Brotherly peoples’ is dead in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia no longer has the means to exert soft power inside Ukraine as Russian ties in the spheres of the traditional media, social media, energy and economy have been dramatically curtailed . Russian ties with Ukraine have been drastically curtailed.
 Pro-Russian political parties, think tanks and NGO’s no longer exist or have become marginalised. Pro- Russian political parties and think tanks are no longer exists or are marginalised .
 Russia’s biggest export to Ukraine and Europe was corruption and corruption in the energy sector . Ukraine has become energy independent and is now energy independent .
 President Poroshenko will hold a referendum on NATO membership on the same day as the first round of the 2019 presidential election . Poroshenko is confident it will receive a massive endorsement from Ukrainian citizens .
 Ukraine has a large military that is experienced in fighting Russian hybrid warfare . NATO leaders will be left with little choice except to announce the date as to when to invite Ukraine into a Membership Action Plan .
 A shorter version of this article was presented at the Kyiv Security Forum in April 2018 . The shorter version was presented by the Ukrainian security forum in April2018 .