 Belarus and Kazakhstan originally sent troops to quell popular protests against their dictators . In both Belarus and Kazakh countries he originally sent soldiers to quells popular protests .
 He demoted those dictators to little more than provincial governors . Then he demoted them to little-more-than- Provincial governors .
 Nobody really knows what is going on in Putin's mind, here are some thoughts on Ukraine .
After the Mongol invasion of the 13th century, Kiev's kingdom disintegrated . After the invasion, the Kiev kingdom disintegred .
 Ukraine's territory was occupied first by Lithuania and then by Poland, which eventually united . While Moscow was picking up the pieces of various small principalities and the south was still controlled by Mongols .
 Most of Ukraine was now "united" within the Russian empire, except Galicia . So most of Ukraine is now ""united"" within the Russia empire .
 Ukraine was actually one of the causes of World War I The Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire . Each supported rebellion in the part of Ukraine controlled by the other .
 Ukrainians who resented being occupied and colonized by Russia would have preferred to be under Austrian rule . There were Ukrainians who wanted Russia to invade Galicia .
 World War started after the assassination of archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria by a Serbian nationalist .
 Russia sided with Serbia while Germany and the Ottoman Empire sided with Austria . Germany and Austria sided with Germany while Serbia and Serbia sided with Russia .
 Some Ukrainians saw an opportunity to split Ukraine from Russia and formed a volunteer unit in the Austrian army .
Russia quickly occupied Galicia and extended the ban on the Ukrainian language to that region . Russia quickly occupied the region and extended it to Galicia .
 In 1917 the Russia revolution deposed the czar and installed a provisional government . The Russia revolution was the first in Russia to take over the throne .
 Russian revolution of October 1917 was actually a coup by Lenin that overthrew that government and started a civil war for the control of Russia .
 When Lenin seized power in Russia, this parliament declared the independence of Ukraine from Russia .
 Lenin's Bolsheviks didn't recognize the independence of Ukraine and invaded Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian parliament signed a peace treaty with Austria and Germany to protect Ukraine from Lenin's invasion . The treaty was signed by the Ukrainian parliament to protect the country from the invasion of Ukraine .
 Germany turned out to be a double crosser and installed its own puppet government in Ukraine .
 In 1918 the puppet government resigned and the Ukrainian parliament was in control again . Luckily for Ukraine, Germany and Austria lost the war, so that in 1918 the government resigned .
 War erupted in western Ukraine between Ukraine and Poland while at the same time Lenin's Bolsheviks were trying to invade eastern Ukraine .
 Both reds and whites committed atrocities against Ukrainians, and the whites restored the anti-Ukranian laws wherever they took control . Both red and white committed atrocities.
 In 1919 Poland also invaded most of Lithuania and Belarus, and in 1920 briefly invaded Ukraine . In 1920, Ukraine was briefly invaded .
 Bolsheviks had largely defeated the whites and finally sued for peace with Poland . The Bolsheviks were largely defeated by the whites .
 The peace treaty of Riga split both Ukraine and Belarus between Poland and Russia . Poland and Belarus split both countries in the peace treaty .
 The Ukrainian government went into exile in 1922 as Russia turned Ukraine into a communist republic . In 1922 the Ukrainian government dutifully joined the newly born Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union recognized the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian cultural traditions . The good news is that the Soviet Union recognizes Ukrainian language .
 The Soviet Union relocated a lot of Russians to Ukraine, and that's why eastern Ukraine is mostly ethnic Russian .
After World War II Ukraine expanded a bit to the west and in 1954 Soviet leader Khrushev gifted Crimea to Ukraine . 75% of its population was ethnic Russians, despite the fact that 75% were ethnic Russians .
 At the time that gift was meaningless because Ukraine was part of the same Soviet Union as Russia .
Several new countries were created by the disintegration of the Austrian and Ottoman empires . Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Iraq were created after the end of World War .
 When the Spanish empire collapsed in the 19th century, a lot of countries were created in Latin America that had never existed before, from Mexico to Argentina .
 When the British empire collapsed after World War Il, several countries were created that never existed before . Pakistan and most African countries were never created before .
 When the Dutch Empire collapsed, Indonesia was created . Indonesia was a country that never existed before .
 Crimea was mainly populated by Tatars, a Turkic-speaking ethnic group descended from the Mongols . Up until then Crimea was mostly populated by the Tatars .
 The Tatars became a minority during World War II when about 200,000 were deported by Stalin to Siberia . About 100,000 Tatars were deported to Siberia during the war .
 In 1954 the Soviet Union moved Crimea from Russia to Ukraine . The Soviet Union, which ruled both Russia and Ukraine, ruled both countries .
 Crimea was stolen from the Tatars in 1783 . Putin is right to ignore the fact that Crimea was taken from Tatars .
 Putin made a big mistake in 2012 when he gave a speech in Kiev in which he told the Ukrainians that Russians and Ukrainians are one people .
 Two years later Ukrainians revolted against their pro-Russian president . That offended many Ukrainians and two years later they revolted .
 Another mistake was to support Yanukovych when he ran for president in 2010 . Another was to back Yanukovych in 2010 when he run for president .
 Ukraine is better off without Crimea, and perhaps even without Donbass . Ukraine is still without Crimea .
 Russia has removed millions of ethnic Russians from Ukraine. By stealing Crimea and now Donbass, Russia has taken millions of people from Ukraine .
 Russia may have helped solve one of Ukraine's two big internal problems, by making Ukraine more western-leaning than ever . Ukraine's internal problems are one of the country's biggest problems .
 Ernst & Young ranks Ukraine amongst the most-corrupt nations of the world . Ukraine is one of the most corrupt nations in the world.
 The only country in Europe that is more corrupted than Ukraine is Russia . Russia is the only country that is the most corrupted in Europe .
 Zelenskyy has been slow to make progress on fighting corruption because of the Russian threat, he says . The Russian threat constituted a graver danger for the nation and for himself personally, he adds .
 The oligarchs have been lining up behind Zelensky because they realize that a puppet regime installed by Putin would mean that the Russian oligarchs would replace them .
 Better to be poorer oligarchs in an independent Ukraine than be nobody in a Ukraine controlled by Putin's mafia .
 People like Rinat Akhmetov and Vadim Novinsky are nationalist out of personal interest . They are likely to be more malleable if Ukraine remains independent, having realizes what they have to lose .
 It is ok for Russia to regain Crimea on the basis that it has been Russian for two centuries . It is OK for Finland to demand the return of Karelia, stolen by the Soviet Union in 1940, and for Japan to demand return of the Kuril islands, that were Japanese
 In 2014, the events that overthrew Ukraine's president Yanukovych were not a coup at all . In 2014 the events in Ukraine's Ukraine's Yanukovych's government were not the coup atAll .
 A coup is carried out by either the military or the police, by a person with guns .
 Yanukovych was convinced to resign and leave the country by international diplomacy, including Russia .
 The politicians who took over were all elected members of Ukraine's parliament . They were mostly Russianspeaking Ukrainians, notably the one chosen as temporary president .
 One month later Russia invaded and annexed Ukraine's Crimea . Russia is taking advantage of the chaos in the divided country .
 In May, another ethnic Russian, Petro Poroshenko, won presidential elections . Three months later, in May, the same ethnic Russian won presidential election .
 The European Union does not control the will of the Ukrainian people. It is true that initially the European Union had agreed with Russia on a plan to keep Yanukovych in power .
 The revolution happened during the Winter Olympic Games that were being held in Sochi, Russia .
 Ukrainians may be more willing to federate with Russia, the same way that Italians federated with France in the European Union . If Russia were ruled by a more appealing leader, the Ukrainians could be more likely to join Russia .
 The Russians of Crimea, who are now part of Russia, have lost all their freedom . The Russians are now in Crimea .
 If Putin truly wants Russia and Ukraine to unite, all he has to do is to resign . Putin has to resign if he wants Russia to unite .
 If he disappears, there's a good chance that the two nations will reunite . The two nations have been separated for more than a decade .
 The longer he remains in power the more likely that the rift becomes irreversible . The longer the longer he is in power, the longer the rift is irreversible .
 Putin points out NATO's promise never to enlarge after the fall of the Soviet Union . Putin says NATO promised never to expand after Soviet Union fell .
 Documents show how Western leaders misled the Russians to believe that a promise had been made . The documents were never put in writing .
 In exchange for the Soviet Union's acceptance of German reunification, the West verbally promised that there would be no NATO enlargement to the east .
 James Baker said so to Russia's foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze during the ""Open Skies"" conference in Ottawa . Baker also spoke to ShevardNadze himself during a visit to Russia .
 The discussion about possible NATO expansions was never raised in the following years because Russia assumed that the matter had been settled in 1990 . Russia assumed the matter was settled in the 1990.
 NATO admitted Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary in clear violation of the spirit of all previous conversations . Two years later NATO admittedPoland, Czech Republic, Hungary and Czech Republic in violation of all prior conversations .
 In 2001 Putin's Russia helped the USA invade Afghanistan in retaliation for Al Qaeda's terrorist attacks . Nonetheless, in 2001 Putin’s Russia helped U.S. invade Afghanistan .
 NATO underwent the largest expansion in its history, admitting seven more Eastern European countries . Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania had been part of the Soviet Union .
 Russia had offered the olive branch and NATO had taken advantage of it to carry out actions that surrounded Russia . For more than a decade, Russia had been offered an olive branch .
 Putin personally resents NATO broke its promise to him. So it is likely he resents that NATO broke his promise.
 USA asked Russia to support U.N. resolution 1441 to give Iraq an ultimatum in 2002 . Putin's Russia learned again not to trust the word of the USA in 2002 when the U.S. asked Russia for support .
 That resolution never authorized the use of force, but four months later the USA used it as the legal justification for a full-scale invasion of Iraq . That resolution was never authorized.
 In 2008 the USA accused Russia of invading Georgia but every observer agreed that it was Georgia that started that war . Putin too knows so, hence he knows that the USA lied about it .
 In 2011 the USA got Russia's approval to enforce a "no fly zone" over Libya during the revolt against dictator Qaddafi . The U.S. also got the approval of Russia to enforce the no fly zone .
 It is false that the USA engineered the disintegration of the Soviet Union, another common Putin complaint . Incidentally, it is false.
 George H Bush tried to convince leaders of Ukraine and other republics to remain federated with Russia . He was president at the time .
 NATO and Russia negotiated directly and whatever they decided was never approved by the Ukrainian people or by a democratically elected parliament .
 Ditto for all the other eastern European countries that decided to join NATO after they truly became democratic and their governments truly represented the will of the people .
 Any agreement between NATO and Russia about other countries that did not involve legitimate representatives of those countries is null and void . Any agreement that doesn't involve those countries that didn't involve legitimaterepresentations is void .
 The Ukrainians are right to ignore whatever was decided about their country without consulting them . The U.S. didn't keep its promise, but the Ukrainians areright to ignore what was decided .
 When Russia carries out similar actions in Georgia and Ukraine, the West is outraged . The West has been outraged by the actions .
 NATO's secretary general Jens Stoltenberg gave Zelenskyy no hopes that Ukraine could join NATO any time soon . He met with U.S. president Joe Biden in Washington but again got no hope of Ukraine becoming a NATO member .
 Putin knew that attacking Ukraine would increase NATO presence, not decrease it, and not decrease, support of Ukraine within the European Union .
 Ironically, it is Putin's invasion of Ukraine that may lead to the first expansion of NATO in more than a decade . The invasion may be the first in the past decade .
 Sweden woke up to a Russian submarine incursion in 2014 . Neither country is a NATO member, but they regularly join Denmark, Iceland and Norway in military exercises .
 Sweden fears that Russia could grab the island of Gotland, strategically located between Kaliningrad and Sweden, and deploy missile systems that could block access to the Baltic nations .
 There's a difference between defensive missiles and offensive missiles . There's no difference between the two sides of the line .
 Defensive missiles need to be placed in the territory that they are meant to defend, say experts .
 Offensive missiles can be based anywhere because they can travel long distances at supersonic speed with their nuclear loads .
 Russian missiles can hit the USA in ten minutes even if launched from far away . Russia can launch its own missiles in 10 minutes, even if it is launched far away.
 These cruise missiles are similar to the Tomahawk cruise missiles of the USA . They don't need to be deployed near the borders of Eastern Europe in order to reach most of Europe .
 Russia has missile bases in Vilyuchinsk, very close to Alaska . In any event, Russia has missiles in the region .
 At the time NATO had not deployed any air defense in these Baltic states .
 In 2017 Russia held its massive quadrennial Zapad military exercise and in 2019 the Russian navy staged its large-scale Ocean Shield exercise . The exercise was further alarming former satellite nations .
 In 2017 Russia deployed the 9M729 missile in Kaliningrad in violation of the Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaty . The treaty restricts the range of missiles, signed by the Soviet Union and USA in 1987 .
 In February 2018 Russia announced that it had deployed the nuclear-capable Iskander missiles to Kaliningrad . In October 2018 satellite imagery from Israel's ImageSat International showed the extent of Russia's military buildup in Kalinedrad .
 All the Russian missiles aimed at Ukraine may as well hit Turkey, which is a NATO member .
 USA had repeatedly accused Russia of violating the Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaty . The U.S. has accused the Russia of breaking the treaty .
 Putin accuses the USA of violating the treaty, but the truth is that Russia violated it first and in any case Russia withdrew from it just like the USA did .
 Russia was very angry when in 2017 the USA deployed a battery of Patriot long-range anti-aircraft missiles in Lithuania . It was there only for NATO wargames .
 Poland asked the USA for a permanent U.S. military base in Poland in September 2019 . That was in response to the Russian military buildup in Kaliningrad, Poland .
 NATO conducted its largest exercise in 25 years in January 2020 . The exercise followed Russia's Zapad and Ocean Shield exercises in January .
 This has been happening while Japan has not added a single missile to its defenses . This has not been happening in Japan. This is not the first time the country has added a missile to the defense .
 Russia is guilty of doing exactly what Putin accuses NATO of doing, says Putin . So in reality Russia is Guilty of doing what NATO accuses Putin of doing .
 Putin's real concern was not NATO expansion, but a prosperous and free Ukraine . Ukraine could even become a destination for Russian emigrants, says Putin .
 European funded economic program to help Ukrainian economy . Ukraine's economy will be helped by a European funded program .
 GDP per capita in Lithuania is about $20,000 and in Estonia $23,000 compared with Russia's $10,000 . GDP in Estonia is $23k compared with $10k in Russia, according to CNN .
 The last thing Putin wants to see is that the ethnic Russians in Ukraine get richer than the Russians across the border in Russia .
 Putin will be equally wary of a prosperous and democratic Romania or Poland once Ukraine becomes part of Russian empire .
 The mother of all problems in Europe is that Russia views Europe as a hostage . Russia has said that Europe is a hostage, and that Europe should be held hostage .
 In the event of war with the USA, Russia sees itself losing unless it holds Europe hostage . Russia is in danger of being held hostage by the USA .
 Russia thinks Europe is insecure. Russia thinks that Europe's security is the main security condition .
 North Korea holds South Korea and Japan hostage the same way Russia holds Europe hostage . North Korea is holding South Korea, Japan hostage .
 In 2009 U.S. president Obama gave in to Russian pressures and canceled plan .
 The other cause of Russia's insecurity is that nobody wants to be ruled by Putin's Russia just like nobody wanted to be rule by the Soviet Union . The other reason is that no one wants to rule by Putin.
 There might be more neofascist Fox News viewers in the USA who like Putin than people in the entire Eastern Europe .
 Ukraine does have a far-right neo-nazi group, but those who voted against the current president, Zelensky, and his government are precisely the ones that voted against him .
 Donald Trump won 46% of the vote both in 2016 and in 2020 . By comparison, the far-right Donald Trump had 46% in 2016 .
 The far-right party Svoboda holds one seat in the Ukrainian parliament . Trump supporters hold 100s of seats in the U.S. congress .
 The Azov battalion, founded by white supremacists like Andriy Biletsky, became heroes when they fought against Putin's army in 2014 .
 The Russian occupation of Donbass has simply provided this neo-nazi militia for an opportunity to gain popular support . The Russian Occupation of Don Bass has provided the neo- nazi militia with a chance to gain support .
 Azov has one thousand soldiers compared with 50,000 Ukrainian national guards and 250,000 regular Ukrainian soldiers .
 Putin's new invasion of Ukraine under the pretense of "denazify" Ukraine will turn into a self-fulfilling prophesy because it will make the militias more powerful and respected .
 Putin is calling for the "denazification" of Ukraine simply because Russians think of "nazists" as threats to the existence of Russia . That said, Putin is called for the ""denazified"" of Ukraine .
 Most Russians can't clearly distinguish between Hitler's nazism and their own regime at the time, Stalinism .
 The clear distinction is that nazist germany attacked communism Russia . That's the distinction between nazism and communism that is clear to all Russians .
 Most of Russia's news coverage has been claiming for years that Russia is at war against fascists and nazists . Most of the news coverage claims that Russia has been at war with fascists and Nazists.
 Russian fascists base their fascist theories and activities on the premise that Russia is under attack by foreign fascists . Russian fascists believe Russia is being attacked by foreign fascism .
 Putin forgets to mention that Vladimir was open to all religions, but opted against Islam because Islam forbade alcohol . Vladimir married a Christian woman (the sister of the Byzantine emperor) against her will .
 Ukraine is vastly more democratic than Russia, says West . Putin's Russia should first de-nazify itself, says CNN's John Sutter .
 World War II was a "world" war because Japan joined Germany and Italy, and attacked the USA which then joined the war too .
 Imagining a third "world" war means assuming that China will attack the USA if the USA attacks Russia in Europe, or that Japan will attack Russia .
 There is no defense pact between China and Russia, and it is hard to imagine what China would gain from joining such a war .
 The chances of annexing Taiwan would be even lower in a military conflict with the USA than they would be in a one-on-one with Taiwan .
 Japan has no offensive army and his population is strongly opposed to any kind of war, let alone an invasion of Russia . Russia has no army and its population is very opposed to war .
 In reality, a U.S. direct attack on Russia would only be a war between NATO and Russia .
 U.S. surveillance of Russia is so good that it can "hear" what Putin says, Putin says .
 Putin has been known for being an astute calculator . Too much of this invasion sounds irrational for a man like Putin who is known to be a calculator .
 One wonders if Putin's ability to judge what was going on in the world was beginning of a serious deterioration in his judgement .
 Putin has been increasingly isolated in his palaces and in his dacia, surrounded by people who are too afraid of contradicting him and therefore feed him stories he wants to hear .
 Both Macron and the Finnish president talk of a different, paranoid Putin .
 The images of Putin meeting with Macron and even with his own generals at that long table speak allegorically to his isolation and paranoia .
 Sergey Naryshkin, head of a spy agency, dared suggest negotiations with the West . Valentina Matviyenko, chairman of the federation council, was visibly uncomfortable .
 Putin has shrunk the circle of advisors since the protests of 2012 . Putin has progressively shrunk the group of advisors .
Both defense and foreign ministry were caught off guard by the invasion of Ukraine . It seems like both defense andForeign ministry were catching off guard .
 Biden knew more about Putin's plans than Putin's own people, it sounds like he knew more than his own people .
 For years there have been rumors that Putin is obsessively re-watching the video of Libya's dictator Qaddafi in 2011 .
 Putin says he is motivated by NATO's expansion but there has been no NATO expansion in many years . No NATO expansion was planned and no expansion was expected . Putin: "I am motivated by the expansion"
 There have been "color" revolutions in almost all the former Soviet republics . On the other hand, there have been ""color"" revolutions in most of the former republics.
 Many of the people around him would be happy to replace him with someone younger and less megalomaniac . He may sense that many of his people would be happier to be replaced with a younger person .
 Putin's problem today is that he can't find anyone whom he could trust the way Yeltsin trusted him . Putin promised never to go after him in 1999 when Putin promised to never go to him .
 Putin senses that all the people around him could betray him, jail him, or even kill him . Putin senses he could be betrayed or kill him.
 Preparations for the invasion of Ukraine began in 2021 when Putin lost two key allies . Putin lost the two allies in the Ukraine invasion .
 It became clear that Trump's claims of electoral fraud were not going to help him regain the White House . First, it became clear. First, the claims of election fraud weren't going to be helpful .
 Putin started planning the invasion when he realized that his buddy Trump was gone forever . The invasion was planned when Putin realized that he was going forever .
 Putin's original plan was probably to wait for Trump to withdraw from NATO and then to attack Ukraine and possibly the Baltic states . Putin's first plan was likely to wait until Trump withdraws from NATO .
 Putin decided to act when it became obvious that there will be no second Trump term . Putin's decision to act came after it was obvious there will not be a second term .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is the leader of Ukraine's main pro-Russia party . He owns three pro-Russian TV stations . He was arrested in May 2021 .
 The other international event that may have increased Putin's fervor for an immediate invasion was the retirement of German chancellor Angela Merkel .
 Putin is facing one of the worst covid death tolls in the world and needed a distraction . Maybe Putin viewed Europe as exhausted by the covid pandemic with zero appetite for another economic crisis .
 The West just invented a new weapon of mass destruction: global sanctions on a scale never seen before . The West has created a new weapons of mass Destruction .
 The global sanctions of March 2022 will be remembered as a new type of weapon of mass destruction, except that this is not a weapon that kills people but a weapons that kills economies . This is not the weapon that killed people, but a gun that killed economies .
 Machine guns are now as common as pistols, every major country has an air force . Several countries have a stock of nuclear bombs, and military drones are already everywhere .
 The econocide cannot be easily duplicated by nations that don't control the flow of capital. In this case the econ genocide can't be easily duplicateicated by countries that do not control capital .
 The West will try to decouple their economy from the West . Instead of trying to develop a similar "econo-cide" the rivals of the West will attempt to dec separate their economies .
 The West has unleashed an unprecedented culture war against all Russians . The West's culture war has been dubbed a culture war by the West .
 An Italian university has suspended a course on Dostoevskij and Italy's famous opera theater La Scala . The university has fired conductor Valery Gergiev .
 Eurovision, FIFA and Paralympic Games have banned Russian singers, soccer teams and even disabled athletes from participating in their competitions . Eurovision and the Paralympics have also banned singers, singers and soccer teams from participating .
 EA Sports removed the Russian national team and Russian clubs from its popular soccer videogames . EA Sports also removed Russian clubs and Russian national teams from its games .
 Some Western supermarkets have removed Russian vodka from their shelves . And, comically, some Western supermarkets are removing Russian vodka .
 Russian citizens could appreciate the level of alarm and outrage outside Russia. It is precisely by inviting Russians to the West that Russian citizens can appreciate the levels of alarm, outrage outsideRussia .
Iran and Venezuela suddenly look less like enemies and more like opportunities . Iran and Venezuela are more like enemies than enemies .
 Russia became so important in oil production that it has been crippled by U.S. sanctions . The oil production of these two oil giants is crippled by United States sanctions .
 If the U.S. reaches some kind of deal with Iran and Venezuela, the importance of Russian oil will greatly diminish .
 During covid the European Union suddenly realized that it depended on China for medical supplies, even for masks .
 The European Union finally wakes up to the fact that it depends on Russia for oil and gas, especially thanks to its suicidal anti-nuclear policies .
 Russia is a small economy that makes money by selling oil and gas to Europe . It then invests all the money in weapons which it then uses to threaten Europe . Russia makes money from selling oil, gas and oil and then invests in weapons .
 The European Union is also waking up to the fact that it is vulnerable to Russian propaganda, in particular to cyberwarfare .
Brexit happened mainly because of Russian trolls and bots that influenced British public opinion .
 The European Union will also wake up to the fact that it cannot count on the USA to defend it, that the USA is a different country, a country more focused on China than Russia .
 Germany has decided to increase to 2% the share of GDP that it will spend on defense . Germany will spend 2% of the GDP on defense.
 China knew exactly what Putin was going to do. On one hand it sounds like China knew what Putin would do .
 Putin attended the Winter Olympics in Beijing and spoke with China's president Xi . Putin also spoke with the president of China .
 Putin told Xi what he was going to do, and simply promised to wait until the end of the games . It is likely that Putin told him what he wanted to do .
 China accused the USA of creating panic over nothing, which sounds like China didn't know Putin's intentions . On the other hand, before the invasion, China kept accusing the U.S. of creatingpanic over nothing .
 Belarus, Eritrea, North Korea and Syria were the only countries that sided with Russia . The only countries with Russia were Belarus and Eritrea .
 Chinese media are the only media that are faithfully re-broadcasting Russian propaganda . On the other hand, Chinese media is the only news media that is faithfully broadcasting Russian propaganda.
 Russia alleged that the USA was sponsoring Ukraine's chemical and biological weapons labs . China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian stated that there are 26 bio-labs in Ukraine managed by the USA .
 China is benefiting from the crisis because now Russia has to sell its goods to China . Russia has been mostly outlawed from the West, having been mostly banned from the west . China is now selling its goods at a discounted price .
 Russia's future is to become a client state of China, providing China with all the natural resources it needs . China's future will be to provide the country with all its natural resources .
 Russia will never be a rival again to China in Central Asia or anywhere in Asia . Russia itself will gradually fall under the Chinese sphere of influence .
 China probably views Russia as a tactical ally whereas the USA is the strategic long-term rival . China probably sees Russia as an ally while the USA sees it as a strategic rival .
 Russia may change dramatically under a new leader. In less than 10 years Russia may be changing dramatically .
 The anti-European and anti-US stances are relics of the Soviet Union . Putin is likely to be someone raised outside that state of mind and more inclined to become a partner, not a rival, of the West .
 The Chinese, who tend to think long term, are probably considering. That's another thing that the Chinese are likely considering .
 There is continuity between tzarist Russia, communist Soviet Union and neofascist Russia . There is also continuity between the Communist Union and the Russian Communist Union .
 Russia has remained essentially a vast, centrally-controlled, bureaucratic empire . Perhaps precisely because of its size, Russia has stayed essentially a large, centralized, bureaucratic Empire .
 Stalin was a great bureaucrat who rose from the ranks, and Putin was agreat bureaucrat . Putin was an excellent bureaucrat, and Stalin was an outstanding leader .
 The Soviet Union and Putin's Russia seem to be very different from tzarist Russia . But they are actually very similar in one aspect: it is still a colonial empire .
 Russian politician trying to defend the right of Russia to exist as it is, it's like an Austrian politician .
 Putin claims that Ukraine makes no sense but maybe it's Russia that make no sense .
 Yet again, a nuclear power has invaded a country that gave up weapons of mass destruction . The U.S. gave up its nuclear weapons.
 In 2003 the USA invaded Iraq and deposed Saddam Hussein claiming that he had weapons of mass destruction . In reality the invasion worked precisely because he didn't have them .
 In 2011 Libya's dictator Qaddafi was overthrown and killed after he voluntarily surrendered his weapons of mass destruction . In 2011, Qaddafi's regime was ousted and killed.
 The U.S. never tried to invade or overthrow North Korea's dictator because North Korea has nuclear weapons .
 China threatens to invade Taiwan because Taiwan gave up its nuclear program in the 1960s . China threatened to invade the island nation because it gave up nuclear program .
 Nobody threatens to invade Israel because Israel does have nuclear weapons. On the other hand, nobody threatens to invasion Israel because it has nuclear weapons .
 Europe let an impoverished authoritarian Russia rearm to the point that Russia decided to use those weapons . Europe let the country rearm.