 The Russia-Ukraine relationship has moved from cozy mutual exploitation to lethal hostility . The relationship has become more lethal than cozy .
 Russia's intervention in Ukraine has been seen as a modern example of interstate power politics . Five years after the Ukraine crisis began, the presidential campaign gets under way in that country .
 Those who try to analyze the Russia-Ukraine conflict through the prism of the national interests of the two countries are doomed to failure .
 Russia and Ukraine have been intertwined in what we might call a geopathological embrace . Since independence, Russia andUkraine have been inseparable in the past .
 I regard them not as sovereign entities but as an involuntary dyad in which each side sees the other both as a model and as an adversary . I regard the two sides as both as models and an adversary.
 This state of affairs is not a deviation from the global norm but a constituent part of the new globalized world . It is not the world's first state-of- affairs, but a part of a new world .
 The Belavezha Accords of December 1991, signed by the leaders of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine, dissolved the USSR . It left behind a vacuum of ideals .
Post-Communist countries of central and eastern Europe found a new model in the West . Ivan Krastev and Stephen Holmes have called the “age of imitation,’ which began in 1989 .
 This imitation created a consensus of norms that masked a gap between the imitators and those they are imitating . This imitation creates a consensus that masked the gap between imitator and those imitating.
 In the 1990s, Russia and Ukraine went down a different route, one of codependence, focused less on the West than on each other . The two countries are now one of the world's most powerful nations .
 The Russian side could not articulate properly its desire to swallow up Ukraine, as it could not fully explain that desire to itself . The Russian government could not explain why it wanted to swallow Ukraine .
 Ukraine enjoyed what looked like a safe game in which it could count on gas contracts worth billions with Russia . Ukraine enjoyed the safe game, which looked like it was safe .
Both Putin and Kuchma aspired to anoint their own Putin-like figures to be Russia's next leader .
 The trouble was that the succeeding two presidents, Viktor Yushchenko and Viktor Yanukovych, were the worst leaders independent Ukraine has had . The trouble is that they were the best presidents independent Ukraine had had .
 In Moscow, there was an obsession with controlling Ukraine, which only grew stronger as Russian elite had no idea what to do with their own country .
 Even the reformers of the Yeltsin era, who were still powerful in the early 2000s, began to see Ukraine as a counter-project .
 In 2014, Maidan protests began, caused by the greed and hesitations of the former Ukrainian president, Yanukovych .
 The urban revolution that followed, like all classic revolutions, could not be controlled . It was the first time the urban revolution could be controlled by a government .
 The old state lost its ability to manage the nation, while the revolutionary forces failed to acquire that right . The revolutionary forces didn't acquire the right to control the nation .
 A hiatus, a crack in the system, appeared and the Kremlin rushed in and captured Crimea . The Kremlin captured Crimea.
 In the spring of 2015, a grotesque imitation of the Kiev revolution appeared in Donbas, a cosmopolitan Vendée . It was neither Russian nor Ukrainian or even national, but a third entity.
 Life in the two incomplete republics of DNR and LNR continues after a fashion . There is no proper front and people on both sides live with two or three passports .
 The scarecrow of a ‘hybrid war’ is very useful when a presidential campaign is kicking off in Ukraine .
 The patriotic mobilization in Ukraine bled the “Revolution of Dignity’s dry and triggered the years of reaction of 2014–2017 in Russia .
 The Russian television public has been punished by five years of relentless coverage of life in another country .
 Volodymyr Zelenskiy is a Russian-Ukrainian comic actor who used to provide content for Moscow television . He is the current favorite in the Ukrainian presidential race .
 The relationship has become so pathological that each side sees the future through the other, desiring it or wishing it harm . The relationship is so pathological, each side has seen the future as the other .
 Each finds there only a stinging impression of the hated other, says author .
 Any topic that is cloaked in the Ukrainian context has become unresolvable . For the foreseeable future, any topic that's cloaked in a Ukrainian context is not clear .
 The expansion of NATO, EU enlargement, the U.S. missile defense, the base of the Black Sea fleet, and the difficult destiny of the Eurasian Union are now reasons why Russia feels insulted and forgets.
 The only desire it has is a toxic one, to break the will of the other side, says the author .
 In this duel, the Russian side is richer and more powerful, but it's less clear if it is the one that is leading events .
 In the past, the kind of clash in the Kerch Strait was the siren call for a slide toward full-scale war .
President Petro Poroshenko’s Roshen chocolates from a kiosk in central Moscow right opposite the Ministry of Defense .
 Kiev and Moscow are not fighting a full-scale war, but both political establishments use alleged “victories’ to get stronger and richer . Both political establishments are using alleged ‘victories' to get richer and richer.
 The Russian intervention is a gift that Kiev has long desired, a gift to Putin himself .
 Kiev can count on Western support so long as it “contains Russia,’s territory of the Russian Federation is a base of support for the separatist regions of Donbas . Ukraine can call itself the symbolic frontier of the West .
 The price it pays is the loss of territory and the white-hot hatred between Kiev and Donetsk . The price they pay is the lost of territory.
 Only if these twin mutually dependent satellites acknowledge the deep and destructive connection between them .
 Russia would consider ceasing fighting its war on the Ukrainian flank . But only if it drew Kiev closer, it would consider fighting on the Ukraine flank .
 Ukraine dreams of liberating itself from Russia, but wants to score a symbolic victory at the same time . Ukraine wants to win symbolic victory in a symbolic way .
 Neither of the two European nations that were dreamed of in 1991 has yet established itself in the world .