 Kharkiv-based translator Zaven Babloyan is executive director of the Oko publishing house . He is also a translator for Oko.
 He was born in Moscow and spent his childhood and teenage years in Luhansk and in Shchastia . He has recently featured prominently in news bulletins from the war zone . He is in a town in the region that has recently feature prominently in the news bullet
 Babloyan has been a translator, literary editor and publisher for over twenty years . He has been an editor and translator for over 20 years .
 He has translated books by Serhii Zhadan, Natalka Sniadanko, Taras Prokhasko, Lubko Deresh and other contemporary Ukrainian writers into Russian .
 He has translated works of western psychoanalysts from English into Russian . He has also translated the works of John Steiner and Ronald Britton .
 Babloyan was an active participant in the Kharkiv Maidan protests from the day they began . He was a member of the protest group that was formed in 2011 .
 His regular commentaries have made him popular in the Ukrainian Facebook community . His regular comments have also made him a popular online commenter .
 In September 2014, he was a guest of the Institute for Human Sciences in Vienna . He was also a guest at the University of Vienna .
 IWM Fellow Tatiana Zhurzhenko was born and lived in Kharkiv before moving to Vienna in 2002 . He was interviewed by IWM fellow Tatiana.
 You live in Kharkiv, where you not only witnessed the dramatic events of 2013-14, but also actively took part in them . The events took place in the city of Kharkov, where many people took part .
 I think that, for me, just as for the other protesters, it was a classic case of moral imperative . "I think that," he says, for him, as for other protesters . "It was a case ofmoral imperative," he adds .
 "I sensed that my personal efforts were insufficient, and this feeling has remained with me ever since," he said . But on each occasion, he sensed that his personal effort was insufficient .
 Our Maidan was not permanent like in the one in Kyiv; nor was it as confrontational and bloody . Our Maiden was not a violent, confrontational or bloody.
 Violence against us broke out only after the victory of the Revolution in Kyiv. The violence against us only broke out after the win of the revolution in the Ukraine .
 The ‘Oplot’ against a small group of Euromaidan supporters, mostly organised local football fans, went on . This provoked a night-time attack by the 'Oplot' against the small group.
 The essence of our actions appears through our actions. By the latter, I mean a collective sense of self in which symbols and names may be inherited .
 The escalation of violence in Kharkiv was a reaction to this emerging new Ukrainian identity . The escalation was a response to the emerging new Ukraine identity .
 In our city, violence did not take the most lethal of forms, like in Kyiv, but it was nevertheless frightening and ugly . In Kyiv.
Hundreds of Euromaidan demonstrators have been beaten by separatists by separatists . Some of them local, others imported from Donbas or Russia .
 A nurse from Chuhuiv kicked a man lying on the steps of the metro with his head split open . Or think of that nurse from that nurse.
 I am not sure that any sociological analysis has been done on them, so I will highlight some of the groups that were most visible .
 There was the middle-aged intelligentsia, mostly women – people who later selflessly cared for refugees . There was also a middle-age intelligentia.
 There were the young, creative people who now look after the wounded, help the army and contribute to the 'Ukranianisation' of the city .
 They are one of the discoveries of the Revolution, and have had an impact nationwide . They have had a impact nationwide, and had an effect nationwide .
 predictions about the growing role of ‘football patriotism’ made two or three years ago, before the Euro-2012, have been vindicated, even more than we expected, according to predictions .
 There was the relatively quiet ‘Samooborona’ group or groups . Some of those involved have now joined the army .
 There were mostly men involved in this, ‘serious men’ and mature, quite prosperous and many of them business owners . There is our own 'Automaidan'
 The students are the rare exception of the ‘Democratic Alliance’ - I was disappointed .
 There were no students, as an identifiable group, on the Kharkiv Maidan, and I know people who took part in them . I can fairly say that there were noStudents, as a group, and no students .
Kharkiv students proved to be as much of an inert, grey and cowed mass as Kharkiv’s ‘biudzhetniki’ students . They are a chip off the old block .
 He disappeared from public life in Kharkiv in May 2014, which was only to the benefit of the city . Whether or not there was an attempt on his life, he did disappear.
 Gepa reappeared in a wheelchair and went back to his old ways . But then he went back into his wheelchair and returned to his former ways .
 We saw the same loutish speeches, the same demonstrative, triumphalist hypocrisy and the same flirtations with demoralised ‘biudzhetniki’ The same proprietorial attitude. The same adulation from what is left of the city’s ‘
 Gepa is not a sword of Damocles hanging over Kharkiv; he is a cancerous growth within the very body of the city . He is not the sword ofDamocles.
 The Yanukovych cult of personality failed, it seems that his PR team had not even been entrusted with such a task . It seems that the Yanukovych cult was not even entrusted with the task .
 Yanukovych's main rival, Yulia Tymoshenko, was far more important. Destroying the image of Yanukovych’s main rival was far less important .
 The creation of the Gepa personality cult has been utterly successful . But the creation of a personality cult is not a success .
 The price was that Kharkiv has been trampled into the mud and has become a rotten city . The price is the price of the city, says the author .
 He successfully acquired a 'saviour’s' halo and the image of ‘a nice guy’ in Saltovka, Kharkiv's industrial suburb .
 Protesters on the Kharkiv Maidan were divided over the dismantling of the Lenin monument on Independence Square .
 Lenin monuments were removed only at the end of September . It survived the first wave of toppling Lenin monuments in the spring of 2014 .
 I think that the 'Lenin question' has been blown out of all proportion by counter-revolutionary forces . I think the ‘Lenin question’ has been blew out ofAll proportion bycounter-revolutionaries .
 Two weeks have passed since the removal of the monument and it has become clear that the plinth only needs to be wrapped in a green plastic fencing for everyone to be satisfied .
 If it were not for the usual attempts by Mayor Kernes to destabilise the situation, then the disturbances would have died down earlier .
 The Lenin statue in Zaporizhzhia was recently dressed up in a vyhsyvanka – the traditional Ukrainian embroidered shirt .
 In Kharkiv, there are still about ten Lenins left, but their ranks have recently thinned noticeably . In Kharksiv, the Lenins' ranks have also recently thined noticeably .
 The monument on Independent Square did not fall in spring 2014 . Maidan activists in Kharkiv are exceptionally tolerant and civilised people .
 Kharkiv officials were ‘authoritatively’ saying that the demolition of the monument would cause a major catastrophe by its sheer weight . The square would be destroyed, the metro station beneath would collapse, communications would be broken .
 The statue was hollow inside and even the paving stones remained undamaged when it fell .
 The authorities obviously had no intention of fulfilling terms of an agreement about a ‘planned dismantling’ of the monument .
 Empty head of the toppled Lenin monument in Kharkiv, September 28, 2014 .
 The formula of ‘further political polarisation’ seems strange to me, and indeed suspect, to put it mildly .
 The dismantling of the monument has a significance that corresponds to its previous presence . The dismantling is a significant reminder of the site's significance .
 If there were people who hoped that ‘everything would be as it was before, then it is right and good that their expectations should not be fulfilled .
Had this process begun earlier, it would have developed at a more calm and even pace. And I continue to hold that, had this process began earlier, I say .
 Old woman weeping in front of what is left of the Lenin monument, September 29, 2014 .
 It was important to me that the monument should be dismantled – not in order to put something else in its place, but simply in order not to have it there . The monument should not be dismantled, says the author .
 I don't think that the issue of what to do about ‘the absence of the monument’ is particularly urgent . I don’t think that that is particularly important .
 There is no public debate about what monuments should be dismantled and what memorials should be erected . In Kharkiv, there is no discussion about what should be removed .
 In this, as in everything else, we simply follow the lead of the country . In this case, we just follow the leads of the nation .
 It would be a mistake, in his view, to seriously consider the protagonists of the 'Russian Spring' to be philosophers and historians .
Professional Santa Claus, Pavel Gubarev, puts him in the shade . There is perhaps one professional writer there in the background .
Military and security professionals play a greater role in the 'Russian Spring' But I'm no expert, he says. I believe that military and security professional role is greater than ever .
In this war, Berezin is known as more of a former military figure than a writer . He says he is more of an ex-military figure than an author .
 Pro-Russian demonstration in front of the Lenin monument, March 23, 2014 .
 The literary mantle around the ‘Russian Spring’ is pure simulation, mimicry and bluff, it’s just bogus, says author .
 In this context, the appearance of any literature, history or philosophy serves only to cover up the illiteracy, dehumanisation and philistinism of the pro-Russian part of the society .
 It matters little what sick ideas exist in the head of any particular re-enactor, says the author .
Russian culture was degradation of Russian culture into the 'Russian world' 21st century revival of the principle of lebensraum created an ugly and cynical war .
 The roots of the war lie in mass-produced propaganda with a strong visual focus and in a neo-Soviet ideology, says the author .
 All those endless texts about our darling Russia’s victories in the future and in space are a symptom of this pathology .
 In the early 1990s, the post-Soviet intellectuals experienced a fashion for postmodernism, psychoanalysis and feminism .
 Nationalism was viewed as something primordial, archaic and almost embarrassing, to be deconstructed at the very best .
 The post-Soviet intellectuals sought to legitimize their new role and often dissociated themselves from the autochthone Ukrainian intelligentsia, which saw its own mission in nation building .
 Many intellectuals have had the existential, physical experience of involvement in mass protest, resistance and solidarity . But now that many have had a physical experience, they say, nationalism is no longer an abstract concept .
 Ukraine is witnessing a process that is the opposite of balkanisation, says the author . Ukraine is seeing more along the lines of national consolidation, he says .
 The communities that have ‘fallen away’ from Ukraine evidently belong nowhere. The communities in Ukraine evidently belongs nowhere .
Former inhabitant of Luhansk region. I would add in parenthesis that I have never sensed any distinct regionalism in Donbas .
 The sense of identity there was generally built on the notion of ‘shared territory’ No more than that .
 This space of non-identification was occupied by a neo-Soviet myth in response to the Orange Revolution and the emerging national identity .
 I would contrast the hypothetical ‘new Ukrainian nationalism’ against a neo-Soviet nationalism, with a Russian Nazism looming on the horizon . So I would compare the hypothetical 'new Ukrainian nationalists' against the neo- Soviet nationalism .
Left-wing groups discredited themselves during the Ukrainian Revolution . Western leftist anti-nationalism also acts as camouflage and covers up a Russian imperialism that is the same as ever .
Ukrainian intellectuals have laid the ground for reflecting this constellation. It seems to me that Ukrainian intellectuals have already laid the grounds for reflecting it .
 The personal, physical experience of collective action is a logical extension of the protest movements of the 1990s and of the 2000s .
 It has not been monolithic, by any means, monolithic and has included separate sub-ideologies in a way characteristic of all Maidan Square protests . But always within a patriotic consensus .
 The Maidan protests have developed into voluntary movements, in which each group chooses its own direction .
 This trajectory is now widely accepted as a basis for the development of a new Ukrainian citizenship, even nationhood . This trajectory has been accepted as the basis for a new Ukraine citizenship .
 The Russian-speaking population has proved to be the weak point of the Ukrainian project . Putin has struck in Ukraine .
 The Russian-speaking East is now paying a terrible price for its short-sightedness, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: By and large, the Russians are now paying the price for their short-vision.
 'Russian speakers' represent a double-edged sword that could be used against Russia, says the author .
 The double-edged sword that the Russian-speaking population represents can be applied to the destruction of the ‘Russian world’ But in the first instance, this should happen within Ukraine .
 At the time of the 2014 Revolution, Russian-speaking Ukrainian culture was already fairly autonomous from the Russian one . Ukrainian-Russian authors were often published in Russia .
 A culturally autonomous, Russian-speaking Ukrainian is someone who has been through the early phases of the post-colonial drama, at the very least .
 Russia and Ukraine have a mutual understanding between them . The two countries have not been able to reach out to each other for years .
 We cannot expect any understanding from the Russian side until it shakes of its neo-Soviet cocoon . The Russian side is not expected to be able to understand the situation .
 Even the so-called ‘fifth column’ in Russia is still preoccupied by internal Russian problems . Ukraine is only of secondary significance, according to Russian media .
 Even the most desperate Russian fighters against Putin’s regime often shock us with their colonial high-handedness . The most desperate Russians against Putin's regime often surprise us with its colonial high handedness .
 Ukrainian poets, scholars, businessmen, managers, managers and programmers fighting at the front .
 Mutual understanding is something that we need in the first instance within Ukraine, says Ukraine's president .
 The army is fighting an old, criminal, pro-Russian neo-feudal system against which we are being forced to hold on a second front . It is happening thanks to people who are dealing with supplies for the army, looking after the wounded, supporting refugees .
 Ukrainian and Russian speakers understand each other – there is no language barrier . And these people, Ukrainian and Russians, understand each each other .
 If we are to talk about collective guilt, then it has to be the guilt of the Donbas before the rest of the country . As regards guilt and responsibility, it has also to be guilt and Responsibility .
 All Ukrainians, regardless of regional differences, are being forced to pay a terrible price for the acquiescence shown by the Donbas in the face of neo-Sovietism .
 The Donbas region itself is a natural consequence of this. What is happening to the region is, alas, a natural result of this .
 One could also mention the failed policy of Ukrainisation in the years before the revolution, and before the surrender to Russia .
 In Ukraine, this imagined community has never been a political subject to merit blame . It seems that, in Ukraine, the imagined community hasn't been political subject of blame .
 Psychoanalysis has a strong tradition of theorizing the phenomena of war and totalitarianism . Freud’s Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego and his correspondence with Einstein and Einstein .
 All these resources can help us to grasp how people come to take ‘the path of Evil’
Vast numbers of people supported the criminal and authoritarian Yanukovych regime, he says . In his view, the fact that vast number of people support the regime is reprehensible .
 The relegation of the self into the hands of an internal ‘mafia’ leads to serious consequences in life . The self-rewarding of a self in an internal 'mafia' has serious consequences.
 The 'mafia' is a form of neofeudalism, says the author . It is a condition where the population is deprived of a real historical identity, and demoralised in the most literal sense of the word .
 There was no officially declared boycott of Russian books at the Forum . Since the Russian-Ukrainian war is underway, there should be no Russian publishers' stands at the forum .
 The ‘official All-Russian’ stand included. But even in good times, they could have been counted on the fingers of one hand .
Organisers wanted to avoid provoking Ukrainian society at a time when it was suffering so acutely as a result of the war . Second, the organisers wanted to avoided provoking Ukraine society at the time of war .
 Russian authors did come to L’viv and participated actively in events at the Forum . However, Russian authors were not involved .
 Many booksellers ignored the recommendation without any consequences . By the way, this recommendation was ignored.
 The Ukrainian book market is 85% dominated by Russian production, if one excludes educational publications and specialized literature .
 The lion’s share of Russian book production represents an alien culture, which currently tends to be hostile against Ukraine .
 Ukrainian publishers are cautious about the radical ban of Russian books . It could lead to the collapse of the Ukrainian book market, they say .
 The Russian book trade in Ukraine is effectively finished, says author . But in the long run, he says, he believes that the Russian book market in Ukraine has effectively finished .
 Ukrainian publishers will be able to organise substitute trade for home-produced publications . The question is only how quickly Ukrainian publishers can organise a substitute trade .
 There are no fundamental obstacles that cannot be overcome as we go down this route, says John Sutter .
 The phrase ‘is it acceptable’ in your question seems to be slightly naïve . The phrase 'is itacceptable’ seems to me to be somewhat naïve .
 It has been widely noted that this lexicon not only mocks and humiliates, but ‘dehumanises’ the opponent .
We should recognise that this dehumanisation only reflects the desperate situation when you have no choice but to pull the trigger . We should recognise, however, that we should recognise the dehumanisation of people .
 Ukrainian society has never been particularly politically correct . To be fair, Ukrainian society hasn't been particularly political correct .
 To think of cultivating political correctness under conditions of war would be naïve, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Taking the Odessa episode out of context is a Russian ideological tactic, says the writer .
 There was a fire in the Kyiv House of Trade Unions in Odessa . It was a no less horrible fire.
 The meme that ‘Russian people are victims’ has marked this war ever since the first stone was thrown on Maidan Square .
 Most of these writings reflect a civilian's perspective. Most of them are often refugees or people caught in the midst of a military conflict .
Volunteers write reports written by volunteers who work in the conflict zone . Another genre is reports by volunteers working in conflict zones .
 These are usually witness accounts, fragmentary reports that often contain colourful details . These are often witness accounts that often include colourful details.
 If there are reports from the front, they often come as a cry – a scream of horror, a plea for help, weeping for the dead .
 The reality of war breaks all conventional patterns of understanding. It is too merciless and volatile for us to produce any kind of structured narrative .
 It seems that writers working away from the front find it impossible to identify with those who are there .
 No doubt the problem lies in the extreme experience, far beyond the boundaries of what most people know . It is something that cannot be ‘appropriated’ in absentia, says author .
 I would assume that even at the front, the effort to articulate this experience can easily result in truisms and clichés . I would assumption that even in the front of this experience, it can easily lead to clichés.
 For the time being, despite all the selfless support offered to the army and all the patriotic fervour, belles lettres from the front are absent .
War prose will appear on the scene in time, but it seems to be that we need it now . It may be that, in time. It may also be that it will appear in time in time .
On the other hand, I have the impression that our attempts to make sense of the war are hampered by a premature work of mourning .
 Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder normally appear in the wake of a trauma . While we are still in the throes of it, we are not in the midst of it .
 When there is a temporary pause in the fighting, even the media cannot find an adequate formula to express what is happening . Even the media can't find a adequate formula.
 We are under the pressure of war, and of events that are moving too rapidly, says CNN's John Sutter . We are also under the pressures of war.
 Or perhaps our confusion results from the inadequacy of our psychological resources to deal with war. Or perhaps we are confused by our lack of psychological resources .
 This is the first experience of full-scale military conflict for almost all of us. After all, this is thefirst experience of a full- scale military conflict .
 For the time being, the few precise texts that we have show the very shock of the war reflecting the fragmentation, fracture, the collapse of the physical and mental world .
 We have heroes, however, even if it is easier for us to identify victims, whoever they may be . We have heros, but we also have other heroes .
 We were not ready to take the burden of responsibility, to recognise the justice of our resistance . We were 'not ready' to take responsibility for our resistance, says the author .
 Fear of active resistance to violence has been haunting us since the Maidan. Fear of an adequate response to violence is haunting us.
 Europe is no longer capable of any kind of robust resistance to evil. But if we look at Europe, it seems it is no more capable of a robust resistance.
 We have had our independence on credit for too long and now we are paying the interest in blood . We are paying interest in Blood. We have been on credit on credit too long, we are now paying interest.