 Russian President Vladimir Putin recognised them only on Monday, paving the way for the official presence of Russian troops in rebel-controlled areas that occupy about a third of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Putin recognises Donetsk and Luhansk, along with breakaway Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . So far, only Cuba, Venezuela, Nicaragua and Syria have joined Putin in recognising Donetsk .
 The central question is whether Russia would recognise them in their current borders . The question is if Russia would recognise them in current borders.
 Should it decide to help the rebels “restore their statelets to the original borders, it may spell a large-scale war between Moscow and Kyiv .
 At the moment, Russia will recognise “the borders, where the leadership of the DNR and the LNR are executing their authority,’s Deputy Foreign Minister Andrey Rudenko says .
 The foreign ministry also said that the issue of the borders is yet to be resolved . But the foreign ministry said on Tuesday that the problem is still not resolved .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree recognising two Russian-backed breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine as independent entities . A 13. metre-tall statue of Vladimir Lenin still dominates the main square in Donetsk, the capital of the eponymous breakaway region .
 The constitution adopted by Lenin’s successor, Josef Stalin, has been restored by the Moscow-backed separatist leaders of Donetsk and neighbouring Luhansk . The separatists broke away from the central government in 2014 .
 This constitution prescribes the death penalty for a number of crimes, making the separatist ‘People’s Republics’ Europe's only homes to capital punishment .
 North Korea's "republics" are understood to have evolved into totalitarian, North Korea-like statelets . After almost eight years of existence, the “ republics’s” have evolved to have become totalitarian, statelets.
 Ukrainians can only visit if they have relatives in Donetsk and Luhansk, and would have to cross into Russia first . The journey takes about 30 hours and costs $100 .
 In the statelets, secret police and “loyal residents monitor every word, phone call and text message . The statelets are known for their secret police.
 Dissidents or businessmen who refuse to ‘donate’ their assets to the “needs of the People’s Republic” have been thrown in “cellars, or dozens of makeshift concentration camps, without trial .
 For almost two years, he was incarcerated and tortured in these "cellars" until separatists swapped him and dozens of other prisoners in 2017 . He was released from prison in 2017.
 Thousands of others were tortured and abused in the "cellars," according to rights groups and witnesses .
 The grave human rights abuses make Donetsk and Luhansk far worse than today’s Russia, an international human rights advocate said .
 There are much wider problems such as civil and political rights, he said . But there are much broader problems suchas civil andpolitical rights, says the author .
 Rust-belt ruins have gone hand in hand with economic degradation . These tendencies have gone by hand withEconomic degradation .
 Aseyev, 32, now lives in Kyiv and has published a novel about the events in Donetsk . The living standards are “many times, if not dozens of times worse than in pre-war 2013”
 This regress looks even more staggering considering Donetsk's and Luhansk’s not-so-ancient history . This regress is even more shocking considering Donetsk’'s andLuhansk's history .
 Englishman Charles Gascoigne built a metal factory in Luhansk in 1795, shortly after czarist Russia annexed Crimea and eastern Ukraine from the Crimean Khanate .
 Donetsk was named after him – Hughesovka or Yuzovka – until the Soviet era . In 1869, John Hughes started a steel plant and a coal mine in what is now Donetsk .
 The birth and rapid growth of both cities followed the czarist government's drive to develop the immense coal and iron ore deposits of what is now eastern Ukraine .
 Communist Moscow further spurred the region’s development, and tens of thousands of ethnic Russians settled there . Urban areas almost exclusively Russian-speaking .
 Coal and mines grew deeper next to hillocks made of spent ore, and foundries, chemical and power plants dotted the region .
 The political heyday of Donetsk began in 2010, when its native Viktor Yanukovych became Ukraine’s president .
 Ukraine's parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office in February 2014 . Months-long protests began in November 2013 and ended when Yanukovych was removed .
Pro-Russian rallies and uprisings in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, failed . Odesa, Ukraine's largest seaport on the Black Sea, failed.
Four months later, after separatists tried to confiscate his minibus, he locked his apartment, loaded the bus with his most valuable belongings, and left for Kyiv . But four months later he locked the apartment and loaded his bus with the bus and left the country .
 Russia still had to bankroll the separatist provinces spending billions of dollars a year . But Russia still has to spend billions a year on separatist provinces .
 Russia may want to remove the middlemen who pocketed the lion’s share of profits from the export of coal and steel and the delivery of humanitarian aid that was immediately resold on the black market .