 intelligence estimates suggest a Russian offensive against Ukraine was unlikely . The rhetoric escalated between Ukraine and Russia .
 Field camps had not been built on Russia’s border with eastern Ukraine . Field camps would be needed to deploy Russian troops into eastern Ukraine during invasion .
 Russian forces staged on the Ukraine-Russia border have fuel and ammunition for about one day of fighting, a security firm says . A civilian intelligence and security firm tells The Daily Signal that Russian forces have fuel, ammunition for one day.
 The ceasefire between Kiev and the Russian-backed separatists is fraying badly . The ceasefire is between the two sides.
 Russia has positioned military units with thousands of troops to the north in Bryansk, to the east near Rostov, Crimea and to the west in the Moldovan region of Transnistria .
 People in Crimea began posting online about a large deployment of artillery and tanks in the north of the peninsula and within range of Ukraine .
Ukrainian intelligence agencies say a Russian air defence regiment has been embedded with separatists in Donbass .
 A photograph from Ilovaisk railway station shared online on Tuesday morning showed a train in the sidings, laden with heavy Russian tanks . It was verified by defence analysts interviewed for this article .
 Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov vows ‘exhaustive measures’ will be taken against Kiev in reprisal . Russia called an attempted terror attack by Ukraine's defence ministry by Russia .
 Analysis is shared by many in Ukraine and among the western defence and intelligence community . That analysis is shared with many in the Ukraine.
 Russia wants elections in the Donbass before any ceasefire . It would probably cement the semi-autonomy of the region and fatally weaken Kiev’s ability to stand up to Moscow .
 Russia’s military build-up is a likely precursor to the Group of 20 summit on September 4 . Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, will inevitably meet Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, and François Hollande, the French president, to discuss Ukraine .
 Russia is dialling the tension in the region up and down, says one senior European intelligence official . It is ahead of another round of diplomatic negotiations, he says .
 The sabre-rattling is about reinterpreting the Minsk agreements in Russia’s favour, a Russian official says .
 Many intelligence analysts believe it probably depends on violence . While such a purpose might rule out an overt land-grab, it does not preclude serious military conflict .
 Russia may seek to bring its anti-aircraft capabilities to bear too, or it could declare a no-fly zone to goad Kiev into fighting .
 The 25th anniversary of Ukraine’s independence on August 24 could be a powerful and symbolic moment .
 Putin may be betting that with more violence, and a provoked Ukrainian response, he can make them break ranks and recalibrate the Minsk protocol to his advantage .
 Russia and Ukraine once again edged toward the brink of open war last week . The conflict in eastern Ukraine is no closer to a long-term solution .
 Russia’s successor spy agency to the KGB, the Federal Security Service, or FSB, claimed to have thwarted terrorist attacks in Crimea . Russian authorities pinned on the Ukrainian government .
 A Russian soldier also died in a separate, cross-border firefight, spy agency says .
 A war of words followed between Kyiv and Moscow, edging the two countries to the brink of a military conflict more serious than the ongoing one in eastern Ukraine . The two countries have been engaged in a war of Words since the start of the conflict .
 Russian troop movements inside Crimea, north toward the Ukraine border, are reported . The buildup of Russian forces on the border with Ukraine’s southeastern Donbas region is also reported .
 Ukraine's military went on high alert, and Ukraine’s ambassador to the U.N. requested an emergency closed-door session .
 Russia has supported two pro-Russian separatist republics in the conflict with the Ukrainian government . Russia has also supported pro- Russian separatists in the Ukraine .
 Russian troops have participated actively in combat against Ukraine’s armed forces, officials say . Ukrainian and United States officials say.
 Moscow denies having deployed troops to fight inside Ukraine . Moscow, however, says it has not deployed troops .
 Last week’s Crimean incident was textbook Kremlin tradecraft, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukrainian media highlighted past instances of such operations by Russia . In 1999, there were frequent references to a series of apartment bombings across Russia .
 Those bombings boosted public support in Russia for the second Chechen War, as well as bolstering the profile of Putin, then prime minister .
 U.S. officials and media reports have suggested Russia’s Federal Security Service was likely behind the 1999 bombings . The 1999 bombings killed 300, as part of an effort to gin up support.
 Some in Ukraine speculated that last week's Crimean provocation might have been a Kremlin gambit to delegitimize Ukraine’s post-revolution government in order to pressure Western countries to lift sanctions against Russia .
 The U.S. and European Union placed sanctions on Russia after its illegal annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in March 2014 .
 Ukrainian officials are not taking the Russian threat lightly . Ukrainian officials, however, are taking the threat lightly.
 This is roughly on par with the 45,000 pro-Russian separatists and regular Russian troops deployed inside eastern Ukraine and the approximately 45,00 Russian troops staged across the border in western Russia .
 Ukraine has about 10,000 troops deployed in southern territories near the Crimean border . Ukrainian officials estimate Russia has about 45,000 military personnel inside occupied Crimea .
 The war in Ukraine has remained quarantined to the embattled Donbas region . So far, the war has not spilled over into open conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 The prospect of open war between Russia and Ukraine has faded incrementally. After two cease-fires, the prospect of an open war has faded .
 At times, it seemed the two countries were on the brink of a major conflict . The two countries have been at odds for years .
 Kyiv residents were instructed to use the city’s subway system as a bomb shelter .
 Spray-painted signs pointing to the nearest bomb shelter became common sights on the sides of buildings across the country .
 Last week’s spat over alleged terrorist plots in Crimea temporarily revived dormant worries of a major Russian offensive .
Violence in eastern Ukraine has risen sharply in recent months . The violence has been on the rise in the past few months .
 The cease-fire signed in February 2015, called Minsk II, markedly reduced the overall intensity of the conflict . The ceasefire was signed in March 2015 .
 Casualties, including military and civilian deaths, are still a weekly occurrence .
Heavy weapons and rocket systems are supposed to have been pulled back a prescribed distance from the front lines . As part of the Minsk II cease-fire’s terms, heavy weapons were supposed to be pulled back .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, or OSCE, says the banned weapons are still frequently used . Yet, the group says the ban is still being used .
 The southern industrial city of Mariupol is only miles from the front lines . Despite being only miles away, life in the city continues on .
 According to U.N. data, 57 percent of the conflict’s 73 civilian deaths in July were due to heavy weapons banned from the conflict under the cease-fire's terms .
 A wave of fresh violence in the Donbas followed last week’s flare up in Crimea . Fears of a larger offensive in the making .
 The Ukrainian military reported nine heavy armor attacks against its positions in the area around Mariupol . That same day, the Ukrainian military also reported separate artillery attacks and firefights .
 The crisis at the Crimean border brought the Ukraine war briefly back into Western media headlines and editorial pages . The crisis in Ukraine brought the crisis back into the West's headlines .
 Putin hosted Turkish President Recep Erdogan for a meeting in Moscow on Aug., the day before the Crimea incident . Putin hosted Erdogan in Moscow.
 Russia launched airstrikes in Syria from an airbase inside Iran on Tuesday . Russia also launched airstrikes from Iran's airbase .
 Putin's diplomatic and military moves left foreign affairs experts and military analysts reading the tea leaves to speculate about the Russian president's larger strategy .
 One week on, the threat of a Russian offensive on Ukraine appears to have cooled off . The threat of an attack on Ukraine has cooled off.
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Russia would not cut diplomatic ties with Ukraine over the Crimean incident . On Aug. 23, Russia's foreign minister said Russia wouldn't cut diplomatic relations with Ukraine .
 Lavrov and Steinmeier also discussed restarting the Normandy Four peace process . Putin's threat to withdraw from the talks could walk back Putin’s threat to pull out of the talks .
 A reckoning is coming sooner rather than later in Western relations with the Russian Federation . Russia's relationship with the West has been strained in recent years .
 Many Russian athletes justifiably barred from the competition in Moscow . It is easy to feel the slow burn in Moscow watching the Olympics unfold .
 Russia also feels intense frustration over the ongoing sanctions imposed following the invasion of Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea . Russia is also frustrated over the increasing costs of Syrian operations in support of Bashar al-Assad .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is preparing to shake up the game as he has done in the past during the distractions of summer vacations in the West .
 These August surprises have included the invasions of Ukraine in 2014 and Georgia in 2008 .
 He continues to seek a “grand bargain’ with the West that would include negotiating a mutually acceptable endgame in Syria . He also wants to create an international accommodation on Ukraine that ends the fighting .
 As always, when trying to understand Russia, go back to Russian literature . As always. When trying to understanding Russia, try to understand it.
 We are in danger of approaching that point with Russia, and now is the time to think more coherently and realistically about a unified and strategic approach to Putin’s Russia .
First, we must reassure our NATO allies and solidify the Alliance position concerning Russia . First, we need to reassure our allies.
 This means engaging constantly with our NATO allies and ensuring that we reassure the understandably nervous Eastern Europeans . Poland and the Baltic nations, but also our allies along the Black Sea littoral .
 We can do this most effectively through a program of exercises and military operations, including rotational stationing of ground forces, warship deployments to the Baltic and Black Seas and defensive air patrols .
 The work of German Chancellor Angela Merkel thus far holding the European Union together has been impressive . It is by far the most important point of leverage with Russia .
 We need to actively support the Chancellor as she battles on the European front with maintaining E.U. solidarity, especially given the uncertainties engendered by the recent vote for Brexit .
 The U.S. should continue to leverage the broader international community in condemning Russian behavior. Third, the United States should also continue to use the international community to condemn Russian behavior .
International fora highlights everything from the penalties applied to Russian doping in the Olympics to the ongoing fermenting of violence in Ukraine . This includes using a wide variety of international fora to highlight everything from doping to publicizing illegal cyber hacks .
 We should confront where we must to uphold such widely regarded standards of international behavior. We must confront where they must be, say the U.S. We need to confront where it is needed to be, says the United States .
In the midst of this summer of discontent emanating from both sides, we must keep open our communications pathways, which are increasingly in danger of shutting down . We need to keep open the communications pathways.
 It is in no one’s interest to stumble backwards into another full-blown Cold War, but that possibility seems more likely with each passing week .
There are a group of distinct issues upon which cooperation is possible with Russia . There are a number of different issues on which cooperation could be possible .
 Russia and the West share a common hope of stabilizing Afghanistan, says U.S. diplomat . Russia and West share hope of stability in Afghanistan, he says .
 The U.S. military has well-trodden mechanisms for reducing dangers of military confrontation through accidental or inadvertent collisions at sea or in the air .
 We have in the past shared a reasonable level of intelligence in fields like counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics . We have also shared areasonable level of Intelligence in fields such as counter-terror and counter -narcotic .
 Russian civilian and military leaders have worked together in counter-piracy, he says . He says .
 In the end our best hope for a “grand bargain’ is not in a sweeping package that comes together at a single point in time .
 Such a sudden strategic outcome is a chimera. While attractive to contemplate, such a sudden Strategic outcome is not attractive .
 Our best hope lies in adopting a transactional approach that says we will confront where we must . But cooperate where we can, says the U.S. President .
 Russia is seeking to find a meaningful modus vivendi with Russia . Russia has been in the middle of a difficult summer of discontent and discontent . Russia will be in the midst of a major crisis this summer .
 Ukraine has put its troops on high alert. Some think Russia may be preparing to invade its western neighbor .
 President Obama joined the EU in imposing sanctions on Vladimir Putin after the seizure of Crimea . The Russian leader has continued to thumb his nose at the U.S. Recently, Moscow began delivery of an S-300 air defense system to Iran .
 The former KGB operative has repeatedly provoked the president, knowing that he has, weirdly, the upper hand . Edward Snowden has reportedly orchestrated the email leaks which revealed corruption at the DNC .
 Trump's supposed links to the Russian bully has been ignored by a media frenzy over his links .
 Trump said at a rally, "Russia, if you're listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing,” referring to those communications that Hillary Clinton deleted from her personal server .
 Emails that, for the record, should not have been destroyed and that she lied about. Emails that should not be destroyed should not been destroyed, she said .
 The narrative is that by expressing admiration for Vladimir Putin’s leadership ability, Trump might somehow cede power to the former KGB operative if he became president . Trump has had meager business activities in Russia .
 Obama signaled that post-election he might abandon plans for a European missile defense system . The system was meant to defend against Iranian nukes .
 Early on he had scrapped plans to install 10 Interceptor missiles in Poland and a radar network in the Czech Republic . He had also scrapped plans for 10 interceptor missiles.
 A substitute program, meant to be more efficient and strategically superior, was expected to be installed by 2018 . It was intended to be a more efficient, strategically superior program .
 In 2013, Obama waffled when President Assad in Syria used sarin gas against his own people . The president had warned him not to cross the line .
 Obama turned the mess over to Putin to resolve. Instead of attacking Syria, Obama turned over the mess to Putin .
 Putin invaded Ukraine and seized Crimea in 2014. This was a remarkable decision, which became even more costly in 2014 . The decision was bolstered by his newfound alliance with Obama, Putin said .
 Secretary of State John Kerry met with his Russian counterpartSergey Lavrov 20 times in the next twelve months . Kerry visited Moscow twice to meet with Valdimir Putin, just to be sure he wasn't getting too lonely .
 Obama could not afford to isolate Putin, because he was losing the fight against ISIS . Obama's approval ratings were plummeting .
 Obama had permitted an offensive against the terrorist organization . But so hobbled the military that bombing sorties returned home with 75 percent of their munitions on board .
 Obama allowed Putin to take over the battle. ISIS thrived and grew, spawning attacks around the world . Obama let Putin take over, so Obama allowed him to take control of ISIS .
 In March, The Guardian reported that Russian airstrikes had killed 2,000 Syrian civilians, including children, in the prior six months . The Guardian also reported that 2,00 Syrian civilians were killed by Russian airstrikes in March .
 Moscow’s attacks targeted not just ISIS, but also hit U.S.-trained and U. S.-trained opponents of Assad .
 ISIS-held territory began to shrink, and Obama's approval ratings rose . Obama’s approval rating rose .
 One approach would have been an all-out effort to break Europe’s dependence on Russian natural gas .
 The Obama White House has been criticized for the lack of energy production in the U.S. This would bolster the fortunes of our energy producers . This would be an outcome anathema to the White House .
 Putin is flying high, overcoming a shrinking economy and widespread international opprobrium . Putin is now flying high.
 President Obama has manipulated President Obama into giving him an important seat at the table . He has manipulated him into giving the president an important place at a table .