 President Viktor Yanukovych, 1 Stephen Blank, “Perspectives on Russian Foreign Policy,” Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, September 2012 .
Land area approximately 315,028 sq. mi.; slightly Poroshenko, a pro-Western billionaire, took 54.7% of the vote . Land area approximately 300,000 sq.m. mi.
 Ukraine's president says his government would be to fight corruption . He also wants to minimize the influence of certain elements of Ukraine's society .
 He stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collects and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities .
 U.S. Ambassador Pyatt praised Abromavicius for his efforts and expressed disappointment with his resignation .
 The same day, parliament chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that beginning on February 16, 2016, the legislature would conduct a review of the cabinet’s work . It would precede a vote of no confidence on the Yatsenyuk government .
 The outcome of the vote further complicated the political environment . Poroshenko argued that change was necessary to reassure the 6 Testimony of Victoria Nuland .
 Ukrainian law prohibits Rada from considering additional no-confidence votes for six months . Yatsenyuk was given time to make changes and move the reform process forward, if possible .
11.11 for these observers, history seemed about to repeat itself . Their mutual hostility paralyzed the government, alienated voters, and delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovich in 2010 .
 Some in the Rada felt Yatsenyuk no longer held a mandate for governing . It's unclear just how much success in addressing corruption Yatenyuk could achieve and how much trouble was in store .
 He also 12 Testimony of Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland, in U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations .
 The EIU says this target is in line with the government’s commitments made as part of its April 2014 IMF loan of $17 billion . The government has pledged $17billion to the IMF .
 The IMF also wanted to make rapid progress on reforms, including further energy price increases, bank restructuring, governance reforms of state-owned enterprises, and legal changes to implement anti-corruption and judicial reforms .
 Poland's central bank announced in December 2015 that it would establish a zloty/hryvnya currency swap line with the National Bank of Ukraine .
 The EIU forecasts a growth of around 1% in 2016 . On January 25, 2016, the Ukrainian Central Bank issued its own revised forecast, estimating that growth would only reach 1.1% .
Senior U.S. officials and NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Philip Breedlove said they believed Russia had played a leading role in the activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia stepped up its support to the separatists in late August and early September . Russian troops and the separatists were apparently supplied with tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, surface-to-air missiles .
 Withdrawal of all heavy weapons by both sides to be protocol to end the conflict and begin the process within 14 days . Process of achieving a political resolution to 3.5 days is expected to be completed by 3 days .
 Pardon and amnesty of figures involved in the conflict. early February 2015 to try to secure a new agreement to stop the fighting . Pardon, amnesty of figure involved in conflict .
 12, a cease-fire agreement was signed to take 7 hostages . Release of all hostages and other illegally detained people is based on the “all for all’s principle.
 Safe delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need will take place on February 15 . The aid will be delivered to those who need it .
 The Minsk-2 agreement based on an international mechanism. entered into force on February 15, 2015 . The agreement is based on a mechanism.
 Ukrainian control over its border with Russia similar to those of the original Minsk-1 throughout the conflict zone . 10.5% of the peace agreement failed to secure the peace, 10.7% of it was reached .
 Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory . Some observers expressed skepticism about 11.5% of all armed groups .
 Constitutional reform in Ukraine is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015 . A new constitution by be implemented than the previous one would be a key element .
 The agreement called for local elections in rebel-held regions to be held according to OSCE standards . It also called for legal and constitutional reforms to be negotiated with the rebels to give a special “decentralized’ status to the region .
 U.S. imports from Ukraine include iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, oil, aircraft, and agricultural products .
 Congress calls on President to increase pressure on Russia by targeting Rosoboronexport and Gazprom . Congress also prohibits ExportImport Bank programs, government procurement contracts, exports of arms and services .