 Institutions shape people, but then again people change and, at times, subvert the institutions in which they sit .
 The US-Russia Confrontation over Ukraine from the Center for the National Interest is now on the hot reading list of Washington insiders . The promotion by Johnson’s Russia List may be taken as an indicator .
 NI places on all its publications, management reminds us that the institution began its life as the curator of the political legacy of President Richard Nixon .
 Russian émigré Dmitri Simes was Richard Nixon's go-to man on post-presidential trips to Russia . He became his designated president of the Center .
 The booklet Costs of a New Cold Warshows shows how far the legacy of Realpolitik has been clipped and marginalized by the resurgent forces of Neoconservatism in Washington and in the think tanks spread across the country .
 The collection has authors expressing various points of view, and is structured to present 2 Russian and 2 American perspectives . I would draw attention to the introduction by editor Paul J Saunders .
 Graham’s "Dangers of a New Containment Policy for Russia" sets out almost without comment the official U.S. policy directed at degrading if not destroying Russia's economy . The only way back appears to be regime change.
 Washington is determined to break every bone in the Russian body politic. Graham makes it plain that Washington is willing to do so .
 Paul Saunders' essay and that of Paul Saunders are imbued with American triumphalism and assume as a given American global hegemony .
 Such hegemony, of course, is the antithesis of Realpolitik policies such as Richard Nixon pursued, says Richard Nixon . Such hegemony is the very antithesis to Realpolitika policies, he says .
 Kissinger Associates is now run by the supporter of a political philosophy totally at variance with the much more nuanced and genuinely Realpolitik views of its founder . Kissinger Associates was founded by Kissinger Associates in 1970 .
 The National Interest is putting into circulation Neoconservative views that run totally counter to what its nominal publisher and president Dmitri Simes says .
 The assumption that the U.S. can and will do far more damage to Russia is supported by the feeble essays representing the Russian side . The assumption is that the United States can do little or nothing to retaliate.
 Fedor Lukyanov is an IR theorist who directs his attention to medium or long term Russian efforts to change global governance . The confrontation will likely be resolved in the short term .
 Igor Yurgens' main concern is how the sanctions damage the position of his fellow Liberals and give control over the Russian economy and polity to their opponents in the Kremlin camp .
 The authors of the book all believe that Washington is calling the shots and it is Russia's lot to suffer . Russia is by far the weaker party in the fight.
 They are assuming total rationality, they are not thinking about the unthinkable . But then they are assumingtotal rationality, and they're not thinking of the unthinkable.
 Richard Nixon demonstrated in his Christmas bombing of North Viet Nam that seemingly irrational behavior can be used by great powers when they are pressed .
 Thomas Graham has earned a deserved reputation as one of the most experienced and skillful American diplomats dealing with Russia . Graham has been in Russia for more than a quarter century .
 The program he outlined for "containing" Russia in The National Interest is so extraordinary and even alarming. This makes the program for Russia in the National Interest so extraordinary, even alarming, says the author .
 The first flaw to be pointed out in Graham's program is that it assumes total passivity and passive acceptance on the part of Russia's leaders and its people .
 If we are to accept any validity to Hans Morgenthau’s political science model of ""realism,’ we must acknowledge that great powers will always follow what they perceive to be their best interests .
 Any attempt at accommodation or passive acceptance by Russia of that program would be a waste of time . However, the unavoidable conclusion to be drawn from the Graham program is that any attempt at accommodations or passive accept by Russia would be wasted .
 Russia would be left with no option except to oppose the U.S. program with reciprocal or greater force in the very real interest of its own survival .
 Russia may feel constrained to follow in opposing them in the interest of their own survival, Graham says . Graham neglects however to consider how openly expressed goals would be perceived in Russia .
 Within the past 25 years, well over 20 million Russians died prematurely in the dark decade of the 1990s . Now falsely represented by U.S. pundits and even some Russian liberals, as a lost ""golden age” of freedom .
 U.S. President Bill Clinton and his Treasury Secretary Lawrence H Summers died because of the crash privatization program . They were adopted by Russian President Boris Yeltsin and adopted by him .
 Russian leaders have openly expressed plans to "degrade” or "overthrow” their government . The current generation of Russian leaders are concerned about the deaths of 20 million of their people .
 The Ukraine crisis should be seen as a 'godsend' for NATO, Graham says . NATO is focusing on the alleged new Russian threat after withdrawal from Afghanistan and Iraq .
 There are so many gaping holes in this line of alleged reasoning, one is almost at a loss to point out the most egregious ones . There are more than a dozen holes in the line of allegedly reasoning .
 NATO's operations out of theater in Afghanistan and elsewhere have been catastrophic failures . NATO’s operations in Afghanistan have been disastrous failures, NATO says .
 The last thing that the exhausted and weakened military forces of the alliance need is to be forced to confront a new artificially generated enemy that they cannot contain . The alliance cannot even rely on popular support in their home countries.
 The U.S. and the EU will finally trigger a military response from Russia . It is all too easy to project a scenario in which destructive economic warfare by the United States and the European Union will be triggered by Russia .
 The U.S. and NATO forces directly facing Russia in Eastern Europe will set off a land war . It would rapidly escalate into a full-scale nuclear exchange .
 Dr. John Sutter is one of the world’s leading experts on the dangers of nuclear weapons . Dr. Sutter says nuclear weapons are dangerous and dangerous .
 There were only six individuals in the entire audience, none of them from any significant U.S. news organization .
 U.S. policymakers and media leaders are in denial about the dangers of nuclear war, she says . But she also warned that it reflected the astonishing levels of denial among U. S. policymakers .
 Graham in his National Interest article shows a similar extraordinary insouciance . Graham's article in National Interest shows the same extraordinary insuciance.
 In America, the policy-makers say it’s not a Cold War, because they don’t want to take responsibility for it, because their policies since the 90s have led directly to this point .
After the coup in February, Ukraine became a civil war between Kiev and the South-East of Ukraine . That political dispute, after the coup, became a Ukrainian civil war .
 The civil war then became what we call a "proxy war" with the U.S. and NATO supporting Kiev and Moscow supporting the eastern Ukrainian rebels .
 Some people think the ceasefire has averted the danger, but the ceasefire is not solid . Some people believe the ceasefire was averted by the ceasefire .
 The danger is that the proxy war would lead by accident or intention to the intervention of Russian military forces in the East and NATO forces.
 Kiev shelled Donetsk and it did that on the day that school began . It appears to have done that in the past few days .
 Kiev attacks the Donbas again and Russia feels the need to help them militarily. Let’s say, Kiev attacked the Don Basis again .
 Inside NATO they are discussing the possibility of NATO forces entering Western Ukraine in such an eventuality .
 The U.S. would have the NATO forces in Western Ukraine, whether on the ground or in the air, it doesn’t matter .
 Russia has the doctrine since the 90s, because Russian conventional forces are weaker than American-NATO conventional forces . Russia has had it since the 1990s .
 Russia reserves right to use nuclear weapons if Western forces threaten the Russian state and Russia . Russia reserves the right toUse nuclear weapons.
 We're in a new Cold War, we’re beginning a new nuclear arms race, says author . The danger is now immense, he says . We’s in a New Cold War.
 Russia has tried to compromise on where this missile defense would be located . Russia has been trying to find out where the missile defense is located .
 NATO gave the missile defense project to NATO, so missile defense is now part of the NATO expansion . The project is part of NATO's expansion of the network .
 It’s not just NATO bases coming towards Russia, it's the missile defense . It's the defense of NATO bases in the region .
 The United States says the missile defense is not directed at Russia . The U.S. says it is not aimed at Russia.
 In its fourth stage it will be able to strike down Russian missiles as they rise towards their ultimate trajectory . But American scientists have said that in its fourth stages it could strike down the missiles .
 For at least 15 years there was an agreement between NATO and Moscow that even if NATO would expand there would be no permanent military bases in the countries that came in closer to Russia .
 NATO Wales summit has created a rapid deployment force of 4,000 men . They’ve seized the Ukrainian crisis at the NATO summit, a month ago, to create this rapid deploy force .
 NATO expansion politically, which is what it was previously. And that would be not only politically, it would also be politically .
 It’s not too late, if leadership does what leadership is supposed to do, if statesmen and women do what they are meant to do . It's not too early, if leaders do what leadership should do, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Washington's foreign policy-making establishment badly needs a reminder of the basic realities of great power politics, says the Center for the National Interest .
 As Gilbert Doctorow notes, the booklet is imbued with American triumphalism . The booklet is also imbued by American triumphs .
 The notion that America could, in fact, be on the losing side is simply not considered . America could be on a losing side.
Let me first list several reasons why the establishment should think again and then draw some obvious conclusions . Let me first lists several reasons for the establishment to think again .
 Any self-appointed ""exceptional" nation, ""global leader’s or primus inter pares is sooner or later going to encounter determined resistance from the "lesser" nations" If the ""leader" insists on pressing hard, the rest will form an alliance against him
 Europe never came to be governed by a stable centralised authority . This is why recent attempts at such control ended in disaster for would-be hegemon .
 Washington seems to be completely ignorant of Yale historian Paul Kennedy’s common-sense notion of ‘imperial overstretch’
 Washington should carefully examine whether Russia's ambitions of global hegemony will correspond to its economic power .
 Washington fails to see that its allies will be seduced by the dynamic China-driven non-Western economy .
Business elites will increasingly resent Washington’s demands for anti-Russian sanctions, especially if those sanctions appear structured to enhance U.S. economic interests at the expense of its allies .
 They will do their utmost to resort to well-tried and -tested creative ways to circumvent or gradually erode any such sanctions .
 The National Interest booklet gives a disturbing sense that the U.S. establishment has irrevocably entered an advanced stage of intellectual sclerosis . It is not unlike that seen in Brezhnev's Soviet Union where dissent had no place in the highest reaches .
 If the pamphlet really is on "the hot reading list of Washington insiders" as Doctorow notes, then we must truly fear for America, its allies and indeed for the entire planet .
 The Empire will stagger on blindly expanding, until it finally over-reaches and implodes, causing huge collateral damage . It looks like the Empire will continue to expand until it eventually implodes .
 Doctorow's scathing assessment of the booklet's contents. I would take issue with his blanket dismissal of the value of the Russian contributions .
 Igor Yurgens, speaking for Russian pro-Western liberals, has come up with the usual platitudes about the sanctions misfiring by strengthening the hand of Putin's anti-Western hardliners .
 Fyodor Lukyanov has written a highly sophisticated analysis of the Kremlin’s actual or potential "asymmetric response" to America's increasingly aggressive campaign against Russia .
 Excessive power leads to triumphalism and arrogance; arrogance breeds intellectual degeneration and myopia . intellectual blindness causes overestimation of one’s strength and underestimation of that of your adversary .
 Washington insiders should study Lukyanov’s piece and don’t waste their time on the remainder of this disappointing compendium . I would recommend to Washington insiders that they carefully study Lu Kyanov.
 U.S. policy makers recognize that Putin is a judo master, but they are oblivious to the rules of this sport .
 Washington would avoid applying its full weight on Moscow for the fear of falling flat on its face . If Washington paid attention to details, it would not apply its fullweight on Moscow .
 weight wins if it manages to limit the maneuverability of its smaller but more agile opponent . In the competition of weight against evasion.
 Russian trade statistics do not show any significant changes for August-September 2014 . There were no significant changes in the Russian economy .
 The total value of energy exports has decreased because of falling oil prices, but the total trade surplus has remained positive . The value of the energy exports is down because of the fall in prices .
 Gazprom shelved plans to expand LNG production and Exxon Mobil Corp. or BP PLC may not participate in oil projects in the Arctic or in shale oil in the Volga region .
 Western petroleum majors try to find ways to avoid sanctions . They insist that they are searching for gas that is not sanctioned rather than for sanctioned oil .
 Moscow is obliged to raise the question of "naturalizing" their local units . Up to now, such giants as Baker Hughes or Halliburton have monopolized the Russian petroleum service industry .
 Visa or MasterCard process Russian transactions in centers overseas and Moscow is not pleased to be so closely monitored . They have highlighted the fact that Visa and MasterCard processes Russian transactions .
 It has ordered that the processing be localized, which would immunize about 90 percent of total banking operations against foreign interference . The processing will be localized .
 Washington may count on the remaining 10 percent that require trans-border transactions using SWIFT . But this victory may prove to be Pyrrhic in the long run .
 Russia will join forces with China to develop a comparable trans-border banking system . It prompts Russia to join forces in developing a similar system .
 In general, the sanctions create the impression that they are sabotaged by all parties . The sanctions create an impression that all parties are being sabotaged .
 China and Latin America remain alert to the trade opportunities in Russia if its relations with Europe will really sour . Europe knows that, China andLatin America will be alert to trade opportunities.
 Washington has failed to limit the room for maneuver for Moscow in trade, says the U.S. In short, Washington has not done enough to limit Moscow's maneuvering .
 The bacteria are stained with aniline dye . Now, they have become colored like Gram-positive bacteria stained with the dye .
Former Vice Premier of Russia Boris Nemtsov opined that sanctions push Russia towards becoming a "Chinese colony,” the average Ivan or Masha ask immediately why Boris prefers seeing Russia as a "colony of the West” instead .
 The sanctions have consolidated Russian society to a degree not seen since 1945 . Russia's economy has been hit by the sanctions .
 People who are normally at each other's throats – from nationalists to communists – show astonishing consensus viewing sanctions as an act of aggression . The sanctions are seen as a sign of aggression by some of the world's most powerful people .
 Former opponents of Putin's regime to speak up against the U.S. pressure and for grassroots NGOs to denounce funding from foreign governmental bodies .
 Even oligarchs face the stark choice to repatriate their "hard-earned" capital or risk losing it to the sanctions .
 Paradoxically, Washington has helped Moscow to gather in its lands and people . Washington has also helped Moscow.
 If we look at the other side of tatami, western unity is hardly present, says the author . "Western unity is not present," he says .
 Paris and Berlin seem to be content at sabotaging the sanctions and for good cause. I have already mentioned that Paris and Germany are content to sabotage the sanctions . I have also mentioned thatParis and Berlin are content with sabotaging sanctions .
 If Washington fails to bring Moscow to its knees, America’s frontrunners – most of all Berlin – risk bearing the full brunt of animosities .
 Germany increasingly favors neutrality instead of unwavering U.S. support in Washington's squabbles with Moscow .
 The largest problem that Putin faces nowadays comes not from the West, but from the Ukrainian soil .
 The Putin's concern has nothing to do with Washington meddling in that country’s political affairs, he says .
 He should be sensitive to irrational behavior that the Russians of all stripes show from time to time, says the author .
 A Westerner will always misinterpret such behavior as "a riddle, wrapped in a mystery" when a Russian will immediately recognize the issue . A Russian would immediately recognize such behavior .
 The majority of Russian elite still wants the things to be back to square one, with relations and economic cooperation with the U.S. and the EU restarted .
 The first vice-premier Igor Shuvalov, finance minister Siluanov and the chairwoman of the Central Bank, Elvira Nabiullina, all try to counteract rumors about the possible limitations on free flow of capital .
 Putin should have got rid of the Gaidar-style liberals – Siluanov, Nabiullina and especially the economic development minister Alexey Ulyukayev .
 Russian elite will start to act decisively only in the worst of cases when harmful actions from the West become truly existential . So, the Russian elite can only act decisively in the best of cases .
 Arresting the foreign assets of individuals connected to Putin or conducting NATO’s exercises in the Baltic countries and even in Ukraine are not existential threats . Arresting foreign assets is not an existential threat, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia will turn against the U.S. and the EU after such an escalation . Russia will be a gradual process for Russia, according to the Russian government .
 Fyodor Lukyanov’s predictions of a "aikido style" are pretty realistic .
 Russia to stop supplying energy to Germany only in case Germany stops paying . Russia will stop supplyingenergy to Germany in case it stops paying Germany .
 There are many possible variants of "force majeure" which may hamper Russian supplies to Germany .
 The Ukrainian government has been stealing gas from the pipelines leading to Germany even in much calmer times – beginning from the 1990s .
 In 2009, when Ukraine under its then president Viktor Yushchenko siphoned off gas from the pipelines, Bulgaria suffered . Bulgaria suffered from the siphoning off gas in 2009 .
 I hope even EU bureaucrats will realize the stakes are too high now, after the civil war in Ukraine . I hope now even even the EU bureaucrats have realized the stakes were too high after the war .
 Russia will not be the side that starts military action. At what point can destructive economic warfare by the U.S. and EU trigger a military response from Russia?
 Russia will not try to take Kiev as some sort of a reprisal for Western economic pressure. And of course Russia won't try to do so as some kind of reprisal.
25 years of anti-Russian propaganda has transformed many of our brothers in Kiev beyond recognition . It is a clear and sad fact, that 25 years of propaganda has turned many of their brothers beyond recognition, says the author .
 The Russian elite understands it and it realizes that trying to correct this tragic situation by force would be a fateful mistake . Russian elite understand it and realizes that it realizes it is a mistake .
 If Russia is attacked by the NATO, it will target the attackers, not Ukraine, according to the report .
 Russia should present itself as an attractive alternative to the Western-led international order . Russia should wedging the gap even wider and weakening the entire Western structure, says Putin .
 Russia can deepen its strategic partnership with China and work on formalizing one with Iran . The former being global and the latter being in the West's most vulnerable theater .
 A Russian-Iranian strategic partnership would extend beyond Caspian and nuclear energy issues . It would see implicit cooperation between the two in the Mideast, especially in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen .
 It can even carry over into Afghanistan after the NATO drawdown by year’s end .
 BRICS could be expanded to include the MINT countries, thus furthering the organization's scope and creating opportunities for a long-term strategic ‘flip’ of those states .
 The SCO is already enlarging with the forthcoming admission of India and Pakistan . This will present many more unforeseen advantages for Russia’s foreign and economic policies .
 Russia should support integrating its multilateral partnerships even further, as the interests of these organizations and their members largely coincide with Russian foreign policy . Russia should also support integrating these organizations, as well as their members .
 The rush that non-Western countries were in to fill Russia’s counter-sanction agricultural void testifies to the interest that many states have in penetrating the Russian market .
 Moscow can use this, and every other counter-sanction, to help build an alternative non-Western-centric trade network . Russia can bolster Russia’s complex economic interdependence with other states .
 Russia has a geostrategic opportunity of being an air, land, and sea bridge between Europe and East Asia . Russia has the opportunity to be an air and land bridge.
 Russia can use its geographic position to reap the dividends of East-West trade and thereby increasing its middleman importance . In line with China’s Silk Road and New Eurasian Land Bridge projects, the concept of the Northern Sea Route, and international air routes travers
 In the case of air travel, it can also prohibit U.S. military overflight from Afghanistan . Western air carriers can also sanction Western air carrier .
 The EU is rife with both leftand right-leaning groups that preach a form of ‘Euroscepticism’ that endangers the current Atlanticist establishment .
 UKIP and the National Front's existence sends quivers down the Eurocrats’ spine . Whether or not they are explicitly Russian-friendly, their existence is not explicitly Russian .
 Moscow can use its information channels to provide implicit support for these movements and their supporters, thereby irking the West in the same manner that it does Moscow through its support of Navalny and others . Moscow can also use its Information channels to support these movements .
 The Russian government has weathered the geopolitical storm quite well. All things considered, the Russian government is doing well .
 This has been done in a confident manner, which conforms with present and likely future realities . This is a confident way, and it conforms to future realities, says the author .
 Russia-West trade relations aren't one way street as some suggest . With other options in the global economy, combined with Russia's own ability, Russia- West trade relations are not one way Street .
 Russia and the West each have other geopolitical concerns to ponder . The two have some convergence of interest between them .
 There are limits to what Russia and the West can and can't do, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Post-Soviet Russia during Putin's leadership reveals a clear understanding of this situation . Post- Soviet Russia is a post-Soviet Russian state of the country .
 Some believe the Kremlin has been pursuing a zero sum game stance . It's ironic how some believe that the Kremlin is pursuing azero sum game approach .
 The Russian and Ukrainian governments sought three way talks on how to best develop Ukraine . Prior to the overthrow of Ukraine's democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych, Russia and Ukraine sought three ways to improve Ukraine .
 The EU and the Obama administration pursued an all or nothing approach, which disregarded the counter-Euromaidan perspective in Ukraine . In contrast, the EU and Obama administration pursue an all-or-nothing approach .
 Yanukovych's overthrow contradicted the internationally brokered power sharing agreement, on how Ukraine would be governed for the remainder of this year .
 Had a reasonable course of political action been pursued in Kiev, Crimea might very well still be a part of Ukraine .
 Moscow has ample reason to feel well premised about Crimea's reunification with Russia . As is, Moscow has plenty of reasons to think about the reunification .
 Donetsk and Lugansk areas of eastern Ukraine could be in a prolonged frozen conflict status . For the time being, it looks like the situation in the Donetsk area is in a protracted frozen conflict .
There's the probability that eastern Ukraine will not achieve a formally recognized independence from Russia, or an offer to become a part of that country .
 Russia has good reason to not risk getting so entangled in a prolonged messy setting . Russia has a good reason not to get so entangled.
 The Kremlin can't be too passive to a nearby unstable condition, that can create increased problems for Russia .
 Outside Donetsk and Lugansk, the rest of Ukraine remains problematical . The rest of the Ukraine is still a problematical, according to the Ukrainian government .
 It's not in the interests of Russia or the West to see things in that former Soviet republic get too chaotic, says CNN's John Sutter . The former Russian republic is not in Russia's interests, he says .
 Ukraine can eventually see a rise in a better political outlook one that can successfully balance the different historical, cultural and geopolitical preferences in that former Soviet republic .
 Russia and the West can't be completely blamed for the imperfections in Ukraine . Russia and West cannot be completely blame for the flaws in Ukraine.
 I'd be no surprise to see this difference become even more evident in the coming months . I'm not surprised to see that the difference will become more evident.
 The relationship between Russia and the West will continue to have up and down trends . In the foreseeable future, the relationship between the West and Russia will be on the decline .
 There will be added examples to review and analyze, for further guidance on how to best proceed . As time progresses, there will be more examples to be added to the list .
 When things heat up, expect the usual suspects to advocate a more confrontational approach .
 The Russian military presence in Kiev is a hypothetical scenario . We're IMHO distant from the aforementioned scenario .
 There seems to be enough of a Russia-West understanding to limit the chance for that move . For now, there seems to have been enough of an agreement to limit it .
 Clark isn't known for being sympathetic to pro-Russian interests . As a frequent geopolitical commentator, Clark is often sympathetic to Russia .
 Since the end of WW II, Galicia has experienced a noticeable migration of people from the pro-Russian areas of Volhynia and Galicia .
 Kiev regime still has sway over Odessa and Kharkov, which are more pro-Russian than the Ukrainian capital . The Kiev regime is still in control of Odessa.
 Russia is far less vulnerable to U.S. bullying than people like Graham realize, he says . I think Russia is more vulnerable to United States bullying than others realize .
 Russia simply too big and too connected with other countries to be bullied like Iraq, Libya, or Yugoslavia . Russia is too big, too connected to other countries.
 Instead of thinking in terms of military muscle and economic clout, Russia should be putting more effort into winning over hearts and minds in the West .
This is more valuable than the biggest of defense budgets or largest of economies . This is more important than the largest of defense budget or biggest of economies.
 Efforts to force Russia to adhere to Washington’s wishes have been so far, and will continue to be, a spectacular failure .
 The Russia-hostile government in Kiev is tottering on the verge of collapse . The Russian government is in danger of collapse, according to a report .
 Economic sanctions have had little effect, and in many ways are helping Russia . Russia's economy has been hit by the sanctions .
 The world media landscape is very different today than it was even in 2008 when the Georgian war happened . The media landscape has changed beyond recognition since Iraq and Yugoslavia .
 Information now crosses national borders with ease, and it is much harder to enforce a certain line in national media .
 The West is spectacularly vulnerable, because their media have wandered so far from the objective truth, that it is child’s play to shoot down the nonsense .
 Western media has failed its readers so miserably, and understand how it happened . We’ve also thought a lot about why Western media is failing its readers, and why it has failed .