 Most are minority radical parties which have to undermine the EU’s already quite unwieldy system from the inside . Moscow's support of the Crimea annexation has drawn attention to the political fifth column in the EU .
 The political motley crew, ranging from the far right to the far left, are not afraid of finding themselves in one company with each other and Moscow . They are a political motleys crew,ranging from the left to the right, but not afraid.
 The easiest way to see who in the EU supports Putin's annexation of the Crimea is to browse through the list of “international observers’s” at the ‘referendum’ Moscow staged on the peninsula .
 The FP&#214; is a far-right radical party, which did not prevent it from becoming the third biggest party in Austria . It is the third largest party in the country .
 It dispatched its “observers’ to the Crimea and they saw no violations there . The Crimea is the region of Crimea .
 Johannes H&#252;bner said that everything went well during the vote . One of them, Johannes H &#252, said that the vote went well .
 Chief Heinz-Christian Strache lambasted the Austrian government for not sending any official observers .
 The sponsor was the Eurasian Observatory for Democracy and Elections led by Belgian far-right radical activist Luc Michel, a long-time supporter of Putin .
 The first place on the list of Europe's best-known right-wing radicals is shared by the Hungarian party Jobbik and France’s National Front led by Marine Le Pen .
 The Russians tried to actively cooperate with these political forces throughout 2013 . The Russian government tried to cooperate with the political forces .
 Jobbik's leader G&#225;bor Vona was in Russia where he had an open discussion with the Kremlin’s ideologist Aleksandr Dugin .
 Crimean vote was "exemplary" and "a triumph of a community’s self-determination," says party's representatives . The reaction to the Crimean vote came as no surprise .
 Hungarian radicals would like to transfer this ‘triumph’ to Zakarpattia, a Ukrainian region bordering on Hungary .
 Mr Putin's links to the group are considerable enough that he was put on a blacklist by Finnish authorities .
 Finnish authorities later said it had been a big mistake and they had ordered the banning order to be removed .
 Mr Putin first met the bike group in 2009 – a stunt that his detractors viewed as another of his macho photo opportunities .
 Mr Putin was once four hours late for a meeting with Viktor Yanukovych because he had been touring the Crimea with Mr Zaldostanov .
 The verdant forests that abut the Black Sea are home to perhaps the richest ecosystem in all of Europe .
 The 2014 Sochi Olympic Games saw miles upon miles leveled to make room for luge tracks and stadiums . That’s changing fast, and not only because of the 2014 Olympic Games, but because of Sochi .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin and other top government officials are also seizing huge swaths of public land and erecting luxury villas . Russian President Vladimir Putin is among the top officials who are seizing public land .
 The other activist, a geologist named Evgeny Vitishko, wasn’t so lucky .
 A court reversed the 40-year-old’s suspended sentence following a separate arrest for swearing in public . In February, he began serving three years in a penal colony .
 Full list of foreign observers to a Crimean pseudo-referendum has become public . Full list is now public .
 Names of "friends of Putin" will make you consider very carefully, who should be called a fascist . Names of “friends’ of Putin’s” should be considered very carefully .
 Ukrainian diplomats have published information on European political forces, which back Russia’s aggressive stance toward Ukraine .
 UNIAN has already partly covered the story on ‘achievements’ of most of them in their home countries, disguised with the ideas of nationalism .
 The main behavioral model of European ultra-right political forces is defending an indigenous nation and searching for enemies . The main behavioural model of the ultra-left is defending the indigenous nation .
 Such enemies are often found amongst migrants or national minorities . Such enemies can be found among migrants or minorities .
 The party "Jobbik" uses anti-immigrant, anti-Roma and anti-Semite rhetoric on regular basis . The party is Kremlin's satellite in Hungary .
 Party leader G&#225;bor Vona calls for restricting birthrate for Gypsies . Vona says gypsy children should be placed in social facilities .
 G&#225;bor Vona repudiated anti-Semitism and tried to prove that ""Jobbik"" has nothing to do with this idea . G&&# 225;bor Vona repudiates anti-Semitic anti-Jewish anti-Israel ideas .
 In 2012, one of the members of the party called to make a list of Jews who pose a threat to the security of Hungary . The list sparked a huge scandal in Hungary .
 "Jobbik" was referred to as the neo-Nazi party . As a result, at the European Jewish Congress it was called a neo-Nazis .
 modern neo-Nazis in Hungary have claims to all the neighboring countries . They claim to all other countries .
 In particular, they do not mind "chopping off" Transylvania from Romania and Transcarpathia from Ukraine .
 ‘Jobbik’ backed Putin in his implementation of a plan of Crimea’s annexation. In this respect, it is not surprising that “Jobbic” backed Putin, says the Russian leader .
 "referendum" in Crimea can be very useful for them, says the author . "Referendum in Crimea is very useful," he says .
 The Spanish government approved the actions of the Spanish government in its fight against terrorism, especially regarding suppressing the extremist ETA . ETA spoke for the independence of the Basque country .
 Crimea's representatives believe Crimean referendum to be legitimate and justified . In this regard, it is surprising that its representatives believe Crimea's referendum is legitimate .
 Members of the Belgian far-right-wing separatist party “Vlaams Belang’s” are represented in Crimea by three “observers” The party also advocate the independence of Flanders from Belgium .
 The Belgian Court of Appeal condemned Vlaams Belang for discrimination against immigrants . It even reached the point when the Belgian court condemned the Belgian government .
After that, the party was even forced to review its political program . In fact, after that, it was even reviewed by the party .
 French neo-Nazis from the party ‘National Front’ are just as ardent supporters of Kremlin regarding the annexation of Ukrainian territory .
 National Front and its leaders were several times in the center of scandals when they were accused of anti-Semitism and racism . National Front was accused of racism and anti-Semitic behavior .
 The National Front favors a ban for special menus at schools for Muslim students .
 Muslims who perform namaz on French streets with German occupiers during Second World War . They also compare Muslims who performed namaz in France with the German occupier .
After this, he was suspended from participation in municipal elections by his party . He was also banned from participating in elections by the party .
 Serbian and Bulgarian nationalists united with love for Russia and Putin by a combination of several common ideas . The main of the common ideas is religion .
 Bulgarian ""Ataka"" and Serbian ""Dveri" are deeply religious . Orthodox faith is often more important for members of these parties than ethnic issues .
 There is an attraction to the Russian Orthodox Church and, as a consequence, to the Kremlin .
 Factions in Tsar Vladimir's court crystallize around institutional interests, charismatic individuals, common ideas, or shared self-interest . Even around sports, the court's actions crystallize.
 The Market Council convened inside an office tower not far from the Kremlin to discuss the country’s wholesale electricity market .
 The bank had long held the exclusive right to service it . It is a colossal business, worth 2 percent of Russia’s gross domestic product .
 The board voted in April to shift that business to Bank Rossiya, a smaller institution that lacked the ability to immediately absorb the work . With no advance notice or public debate, the board voted that day to shift the business to the bank .
 Bank Rossiya was a tidy coup set to yield an estimated $100 million or more in annual commissions . But it was hardly the only new business coming in .
 State corporations, local governments and even the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea were suddenly shifting their accounts to the bank, too .
 Bank Rossiya had received an enormous windfall, nearly all from different branches of the Russian state, which was delivering a pointed message .
 The U.S. had made Bank Rossiya a primary target of sanctions, effectively ostracizing it from the global financial system .
 Kremlin was pushing back, steering lucrative accounts its way to reduce pain . Now the Kremlin is pushing back .
Built and run by some of the president's closest friends and colleagues from his early days in St. Louis .
 Bank Rossiya is emblematic of the way Mr Putin’s brand of crony capitalism has turned loyalists into billionaires . Putin's influence over strategic sectors has in turn helped him maintain his iron-fisted grip on power .
 sanctions are testing the resilience of his economic and political system . Now the sanctions are being tested by President Barack Obama .
 President Obama argues that the measures aimed at Mr Putin's inner circle are pinching Russia’s economy . Many of them have mocked the sanctions as a mere nuisance, the economic equivalent of a shaving cut .
 Bank Rossiya now has nearly $11 billion in assets . Founded as the tiniest of banks in the twilight of the Soviet era, the bank is now the largest in the country .
 The Kremlin controls a vast financial empire with tentacles across the economy . It controls a large stake in the country’s most powerful private media conglomerate . It is a key instrument of the Kremlin's power to shape public opinion .
 How well the bank survives in a time of sanctions may ultimately be a barometer of whether economic pressure is enough to make Mr Putin stand down . The Baltics are increasingly anxious about a newly aggressive Russia .
 Putin came to power vowing to eliminate ‘as a class’ the oligarchs who had amassed fortunes . Under his predecessor, Boris N Yeltsin, in the post-Communist chaos of the 1990s.
 The new class of tycoons have emerged, men of humble Soviet origins . They offer unquestioning political fealty to Mr Putin in return .
 Putin is the chief executive officer of Russia's state-owned companies . He doling out lucrative government contracts in deals that provoke accusations of corruption but have the veneer of legality .
 Mr Putin began his unobtrusive rise from a middling career as a K.G.B. intelligence officer to a midlevel functionary . Mr Putin's inner circle coalesced around Mr Putin as he began his unassuming career .
 Bank Rossiya’s chairman and largest shareholder, Yuri V Kovalchuk, is a physicist by training . He sometimes called the Rupert Murdoch of Russia for his role as architect of the bank's media interests .
 Other Bank Rossiya shareholders include several of the country's wealthiest men, the son of Mr Putin’s cousin and even an old St.
 Petersburg friend of his, a cellist who was formerly first chair at the fabled Mariinsky Theater, is a former first chair .
 The Kremlin has long denied giving Mr Putin’s friends preferential treatment .
 Kremlin directives allowed it to purchase prize state-owned assets at what critics have called cut-rate prices . But in acquiring many of its holdings, the privately held Bank Rossiya benefited from Kremlin directives .
 The true extent of its holdings is obscured by shadowy corporate shell structures that nest like matryoshka dolls . One inside the next, one inside of the next .
Several European leaders expressed deep ambivalence about alienating a Russia that under Mr Putin’s rule has become immeasurably wealthier than it ever was under the Soviet system .
 Russia has been a sought-after partner in the globalized economy . It has also purchased billions of dollars in real estate in places like the Cote d'Azur and the Belgravia district of London .
 This month, despite an edgy truce between pro-Russian separatists and government forces in Ukraine, the West announced a new round of sanctions aimed at Mr Putin’s powerful cronies .
 Some argue that this punitive strategy fundamentally misunderstands the way the Putin system works . Some argue it is not the way Putin's system works.
 Gennady N Timchenko, an oil trader and Bank Rossiya investor, admitted in a recent interview with Itar-Tass to a measure of annoyance . His own holding company is also under sanctions .
 He was unhappy that his Learjet had been grounded because of sanctions . He could not vacation in France with his family and dog, Romi, which happens to be the offspring of Mr Putin’s beloved black Labrador, Koni .
 The House of Music has been repurposed as a training academy for classical musicians . Lately its elegant halls — this one in Baroque style, this one English, thisOne Chinese .
 Sergei P Roldugin has his own singular back story . The academy’s artistic director has a singular backstory .
 He is certainly not a businessman, he explained at the palace the other day .
 On paper at least, he has a fortune that could be worth $350 million . And yet, on paper, he may have a fortune of more than $350million .
 He acquired shares in a small bank run by men close to his old friend Mr Putin . That is because, years ago, he said, he acquired shares.
 Mr Putin met Mr Putin in the 1970s, and is godfather to his eldest daughter, Maria .
 Putin invited them to play again next night for the same small group of friends who had gathered there . They played Mozart, Weber and Tchaikovsky .
 The concerts are a glimpse into the small, remarkably cohesive group of men who came together around Mr Putin as the old order was crumbling and new, post-Soviet Russia was taking form .
 Mikhail S Gorbachev began to allow the first experiments in private enterprise in the 1980s . The last Soviet leader, Mikhail S. GorbSoviet, was the last leader to allow private enterprise .
 Petersburg was still Leningrad, an impoverished shadow of the czarist capital it had been . The city was still an impoverishedShadow of the city .
Mr Kovalchuk founded the Ioffe Physical Technical Institute to turn its scientific work into commercially viable products . He was a physicist at the I offe Technical Institute .
 Former Soviet trade official, Mr Timchenko, formed cooperative to export products from an oil refinery on the Baltic Sea . Another was a former Soviet Trade official, who formed a cooperative to exports products from a refinery .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 brought Mr Putin into their orbit .
 Mr Putin was part of a wave of embittered military and intelligence officers who withdrew from the Soviet satellites and returned with few prospects to a changing homeland .
 Mr Putin asked Mr Putin to become an adviser, to smooth relations with the still-powerful security services . He asked him to be an adviser.
 Mr Putin joined Mr Sobchak full time, overseeing a new committee on foreign economic relations .
 The committee worked closely with Russia’s emerging entrepreneurs, regulating imports and exports .
 Some of the deals became controversial during the hungry winter of 1991-92 . One deal to barter oil, metal and other products for food became controversial .
 City Council committee unsuccessfully sought to have Mr Putin fired for incompetence . Virtually none of the food ever materialized .
 Mr Putin was considered an efficient, unprepossessing administrator, helping businessmen cut through the bureaucracy . For all that, he was considered a good administrator .
 His fluency in German was useful with many Germans seeking a foothold in the city . He was known for his work in Germany as a doctor .
 Matthias Warnig was formerly of the East German secret police, the Stasi . He opened one of the city's first foreign banks, Dresdner, in the city .
 Mr Putin was, in short, both collecting new friends and laying the foundation for what would evolve into a state-sponsored capitalism .
 Bank Rossiya received an infusion of municipal aid. One enterprise that received the aid was Bank Rossya .
 In December 1991, he and a group of friends secured a small loan from a local shoe manufacturer . He bought the foundering bank .
 The investors included three other alumni of the Ioffe Technical Institute . The physicists Victor Y Myachin and Andrei A Fursenko were among the investors .
 The reconstituted Bank Rossiya quickly became a favored city institution . The reconStituted bank Rossiya soon became a favorite city institution.
 The city opened several large accounts there, fattening the bank’s coffers and setting it on its way, reports say .
 In 1996, Putin joined seven businessmen, most of them Bank Rossiya shareholders, in forming a cooperative of summer homes, or dachas, called Ozero, or ‘lake,’ in the northeast of St. Petersburg .
 The group has come to have an outsize influence on Russia’s political and economic life . The group's influence has been growing in recent years .
 The cooperative included the homes of Mr Putin, Mr Yakunin, Mr Kovalchuk, Mr Fursenko and his brother Sergei, Mr Myachin .
 Petersburg office of German manufacturer Siemens would also acquire a major stake in Bank Rossiya .
 Petersburg businessman with exclusive contract to supply city's gasoline retailers . He served as Ozero’s director .
 His investment involved “a lot of manipulations, he said, and required him to take out a loan . He said his investment involved a lot of manipulation and required a loan. He said he had to take a loan because of his investment .
 Mr Yeltsin unexpectedly elevated him to prime minister and then acting president on New Year's Eve .
 He won his first presidential election in 2000 on the crest of war to suppress separatists in Chechnya . He had arrived in Moscow as a midlevel apparatchik in ill-fitting suits .
 Putin won second term with 72 percent of the vote in a race tainted by allegations of strong-arm tactics and vote rigging . By 2004, Mr Putin had become the paramount figure in Russia .
 The Russian economy, buoyed by high oil prices, was booming, creating huge fortunes . The middle class was lifting the middle class .
 Not many people yet understood that in the middle of Russia’s prosperity, the men in the tight circle close to Mr Putin were becoming fabulously wealthy, and increasingly powerful .
 Bank Rossiya reported less than $1 million in profits in the year before Putin became president . Figures like Mr Kovalchuk and Mr Timchenko remained in the shadows .
 Led the investment group that bought the bank after the Soviet collapse .
 Member of Ozero dacha cooperative, a community of lakeside homes owned by President Vladimir V Putin and friends .
 He and his brother Sergei were among the early investors in Bank Rossiya . He was among the first to invest in the bank .
Serves on boards of corporations that dominate Russia's energy, aluminum and banking sectors . Bank Rossiya’s is one of Russia's largest banks . BankRossiya is a Russian bank .
 The Obama administration would resurface the “cashier’s allegation, though it offered no evidence that Mr Putin has personally profited from the bank .
 Mr Kovalchuk has attributed his bank's success not to special treatment but to sound investment and business decisions .
 Either way, Bank Rossiya’s holdings would increase tenfold during Mr Putin's second term .
 The bank’s ability to snap up assets at knockdown prices had previously belonged to the state-owned energy company Gazprom .
 Reports published at the end of Mr Putin's second term by Boris Y Nemtsov, a former deputy prime minister, Vladimir V Milov, and others .
 Bank Rossiya bought controlling stake in Sogaz by acquiring shares that had been held by Gazprom .
 The bank paid around $100 million, according to Mr Nemtsov and Mr Milov, who later valued Sogaz at $2 billion . The bank later valued the bank at $1 billion .
 Sogaz became the insurer of choice for major state companies like Russian Railways, headed by Mr Yakunin, and the growing oil giant, Rosneft .
 Sogaz also bought 75 percent of a company called Leader that managed Gazprom’s $6 billion pension fund, Gazfond . The company also bought a company that managed the company's $6billion pension fund .
 The purchase price was $30 million, less than Leader’s profits that year alone, according to Mr Nemtsov .
 Yuri Shamalov, son of the Bank Rossiya shareholder and Ozero member, had been appointed chairman of Gazfond . The year before, YuriShamalov had been chairman of the bank .
 At the same time, Mr Kovalchuk, the bank’s chairman, began assembling a media empire . He now controls some of Russia's largest television and radio stations.
 Bank Rossiya had already assumed management of the assets of Gazprombank, one of Russia's largest .
 Gazprom bought Gazprom Media Group, which owns five television and several radio stations . Now, Gazprombank owns Gazprom TV, radio and TV stations .
 Dmitri A Medvedev put Gazprom Media's value at $7. billion, or 45 times the purchase price . Two years later, he was a Putin prot&#233;g &#233, and first deputy prime minister .
 Bank Rossiya began buying up media companies of its own . Not content merely to manage media assets, the bank bought up its own media companies .
 In 2005, a subsidiary of Bank Rossiya bought a stake in Channel 5, a local television network owned by the St. Petersburg-based bank .
 Channel 5’s value swelled in 2006 when regulators let it acquire frequencies in 30 regions across Russia .
 Putin designated it a national broadcaster, able to reach 91 cities and 53 million people . Soon after, Mr Putin designated the national broadcaster .
 A year later, a Bank Rossiya subsidiary bought a controlling stake in Ren TV . Ren TV is today the country's eighth-largest broadcaster .
 Ren TV was once known for investigating government corruption and airing opposition views that were never allowed on state television . Ren TV over time became noticeably less critical .
 Mr Putin’s second term was ending and the Bank Rossiya empire provided a supportive voice .
 Mr Medvedev was elected president, while Mr Putin largely retained control over the levers of government . Mr Putin remains in control of the government .
 Mr Kovalchuk scored his biggest prize — a 25 percent stake in Channel 1, a state-controlled network with the largest audience in Russia . Two years later, he scored his largest prize - a 25 per cent stake in the network .
 The stake cost only $150 million, according to the newspaper Novaya Gazeta . The stake is "an amazingly low price," the newspaper says .
 Mr Putin announced in 2012 he would seek a third term as president . In 2012, he announced he would run for the third term in Russia .
 Mr Putin's men were targets of rising criticism, no longer hidden . No one doubted he would win, though the economy had slowed .
 Bank Rossiya’s holdings extend around the globe . One place to visit is 13A Karpathou Street in Nicosia .
 This is the registered address of Med Media Network Limited, a company listed in a corporate flow chart connecting Bank Rossiya to a company called Video International . The registered address is a registered address.
 In a peculiarity of the Russian marketplace, broadcasters do not sell advertising time directly .
 Video International buy airtime wholesale, then sell to those who wish to advertise . Video International act through middlemen like Video International, which buy air time wholesale .
 Med Media’s address in Cyprus is hardly a corporate headquarters at all .
 The concrete home is a simple concrete home with a large ficus shading a small garden . It is a small concrete home.
 The owner, Agathi Zinonos, has never heard of Med Media or any of the other companies registered there . Med Media has never been owned by the owner .
 Video International’s convoluted corporate structure requires going back to 2011 . Attempting to unwind Video International needs to go back to the previous year .
 Bank Rossiya and a couple of partners purchased the company in 2013, according to an interview given by Video International’s chief executive in 2013 .
 Video International had controlled 70 percent of the advertising-placement market . Video International has controlled 70 per cent of the ad market .
In the months before the sale, the government hastily enacted a new antimonopoly law . The law prohibits national television networks from using advertising shops that controlled more than 35 percent of the market .
 Video International turned out to be a boon for Bank Rossiya . But what looked like a debacle for Video International was a boon to the bank .
 Mr Aleksashenko invoked the saying: "my friends get everything, while my enemies get the law" The former finance minister said the government's antimonopoly office has looked other way .
 CTC Media is a company with several television channels that was partially owned by a subsidiary of Bank Rossiya . Among those taking part in the new arrangement was CTC media, a company that was part of the new deal .
 CTC continues to pay Video International around $80 million a year . But as a consultant, it still pays Video International $80m a year.
 The arrangement allowed Video International to maneuver around Russian law . It may have placed CTC at risk of violating American sanctions .
 CTC's headquarters are in Delaware and it is traded on the Nasdaq . For though CTC is a Russian broadcaster, its headquarters in Delaware is in the state .
 The sanctions prohibit American-headquartered companies like CTC from doing business with entities that are majority-owned by sanctioned companies like Bank Rossiya .
 Bank Rossiya retains a majority stake in Video International . It is impossible to ascertain whether the bank will retain a majority share in the company .
Nearly all the rest of the shareholders are buried behind fronts like Med Media of Karpathou Street . Nearly all the other shareholders of Med Media are buried in front of the company .
 Cyprus is one of the world’s busiest offshore financial-service centers . It has one of Europe's lowest corporate tax rates and laws that enable foreigners to incorporate companies within days .
 Nearly 270,000 companies are registered there, and many are created to shelter income while obscuring the real owners . Many are shells created to shelters income and shelter income .
 Zinonos’s son, Zinon, is listed as a Med Media director . Zinon is an administrator at Scordis, Papapetrou & Co., a Nicosia law firm that represents Med Media .
 Makis Chrysomilas said his firm typically uses its own address or those of employees when establishing residence for shell companies . A partner at the firm said he typically uses his own address.
 He has taken names from a book listing the thoroughbred horses auctioned in the U.S.
 He has named companies after streets in London and other European cities . He also has named firms after streets.
Cypriot laws enable true owners of shell companies to remain secret . Cypriot law allows true owners to remain hidden .
 Med Media, Namiral Trading Limited, Devar Investments Limited, Reibruk Limited and Attalion Investments Limited are among the companies involved in the business .
 Panama and the British Virgin Islands are equally opaque jurisdictions . Delving into their ownership produces yet more corporate shells, headquartered in Panama .
 Video International spokesman would not reveal who was behind shell companies . He said only that they had not been sanctioned .
 A CTC official declined to say what if any due diligence the company had done to determine if it was violating the sanctions . A C TC official said no due diligence was taken to determine whether the company was violating sanctions .
 CTC was working with the Treasury Department to ensure that it complied with the law . But he said CTC is working with Treasury Department. CTC said it was working to ensure it complied.
 He later directed the presidential administration to begin depositing his official salary into a Bank Rossiya account . The president's salary is roughly $7,500 a month .
 State-owned energy companies transferred accounts to Bank Rossiya, and governors of St. St. Petersburg . State- owned energy companies transfer accounts to banks and governors .
 Petersburg and the surrounding Leningrad region told state institutions in their jurisdictions to do the same, according to reports .
 The main party loyal to Mr Putin provided the margin needed to rescind the law . It effectively limiting Video International to just 35 percent of the advertising-placement market .
 The council regulates Russia’s $35 billion wholesale electricity market . It is a nonprofit organization with 22 members representing government ministries .
Inter RAO UES is a private enterprise spun off from the former state electricity monopoly . One of the council’s members is an executive at Inter RAo UES .
 Its chief executive is Boris Kovalchuk’s son, Boris . Its board chairman is Mr Sechin, the president of the state-owned oil giant Rosneft . Mr Putin is one of Mr Putin’'s closest advisers .
 A spokeswoman declined to discuss the vote, except to say that a quorum attended . She said she did not want to contribute to an “anti-Russian” article .
 The decision to shift the business to Bank Rossiya was one of several routine actions taken during a regular meeting, she says .
 The U.S. and Europe continue to ratchet up the economic pressure . It is an open question how long the government can continue to prop up the growing number of institutions faced with sanctions .
 Russia’s economy had been struggling even before the annexation of Crimea .
 The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development recently predicted that the economy could contract next year .
Other companies are lining up behind Bank Rossiya, hoping for bailouts . Other companies are lined up behind the bank .
 The government recently announced that it would pump $6. billion into two state-controlled banks . The banks' access to foreign capital has been cut by the government .
 The latest thing to sweep Moscow's culture of street demonstrations is a coalition of war veterans, patriotic politicians, nationalist bikers, and mixed martial artists .
 The group's name signifies its opposition to the recent “EuroMaidan” revolution in Ukraine . The group’s name reflects its decidedly anti-Kyiv, pro-separatist position on the war in eastern Ukraine .
 Alexander Zaldostanov, one of the movement's leaders, is one of its leaders . He is also a former member of the Russian National Socialist Party .
 Zaldostanov, also known as ‘The Surgeon,’ heads the Night Wolves motorcycle club . The Surgeon is known for his work as a surgeon .
 The Night Wolves are well-known for supporting Vladimir Putin and celebrating the Kremlin's decision to annex Crimea and Sevastopol . They are also known for supporting the Russian president .
 A headquarters with co-chairs, along with an executive committee, will lead the movement . The movement will be led by a chairman, co-chair, executive committee .
Anti-maidanovtsy will go to all major unsanctioned protests and numerically dominate the participants . Numbers are important for the organization, says Sablin, who says it's important for its organization .
 Cossacks will go to some places, Combat Brotherhood members will go elsewhere . Cossack members will also go to others .
 Anti-Maidan promises to act peacefully, but says it will use force to restore order if necessary . At unsanctioned events, Anti- Maidan says it'll act peacefully .
 In some cases, if we see that someone is starting a fire or trying to burn tires then we will pull them out of the crowd ourselves and transfer them to the police, says Sablin .
 Fighters and experienced sportsmen, who are at least candidates for master of sport, will do this work . Fighters and experience sportsmen will do the work . They will also be able to make a difference in their lives .
 Russians hold the fate of our Motherland and the future of our children dear . We are Russians, who hold our children's future in their hands .
 We are uniting for the Anti-Maidan movement because we love Russia and want to preserve and protect our Great Country . We're uniting because we want to protect our great country.
 We are standing together in order to prevent “color revolutions,” street disorder, chaos, and anarchy, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
We will not allow those forces in our cities who hate Russia. We will not allowed those forces who hate the strong and sovereign Russia . We will also not allow them to receive approval and support from abroad .
 We believe only a sovereign Russia can guarantee a worthy life for our citizens . Russia is a sovereign nation.
 All key decisions for our country should be made in Moscow, not in Washington or Brussels, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has paid to survive the breakdowns of order that have sometimes happened in Russia . We know the history of our country, the terrible cost our nation has paid .
 We see the tragedy in Ukraine, where a fratricidal war in the Donbas began with the “Maidan’s and street demonstrations and disorder, we say .
 The majority of Ukrainian citizens would have been to prevent the bloodshed and collapse of the government . But this was not so and it's not how events were reported . We are convinced that the clear position of the majority of Ukrainians would be to prevent bloodshed .
 "We are united, having realized all of this, to defend the constitutional order and law, as well as the traditional values of our society and the future of our country. We are united," says President Obama .
 We will not allow an armed overthrow of the legally chosen government, regardless of what pretty slogans these forces use to conceal themselves . We are resolutely announcing that we will not let an armed overthrown government .
 We, the Anti-Maidan movement, are ready to defend our Motherland, her peace and stable development . We are prepared to defend the Motherland and her peace .
 Anti-Maidan was launched following the launch of the anti-maidan movement . The movement sprung into action just as Sablin imagined, to crash an unsanctioned gathering outside the Kremlin .
 A mixed crowd made for a “strange’s night, one photo-blogger says .
 The exhibition, held on Pushkin Square in central Moscow, displayed graphic pictures from American militarily conflicts and failed popular uprisings .
At the crucial moment, when you need them to go out and save the Motherland, they will not act until the receipt for their payment has been signed .
 The Moscow mayor's office has sanctioned the event for up to 10,000 participants . The march will proceed along Petrovka Street, just outside the Kremlin .
 It's unclear what impact the Anti-Maidan movement might have on Russian street politics . It's not clear what impact it might have.
 Anti-Maidan resembles a more militant version of the pro-Kremlin youth groups Nashi and Young Guard . It was created in 2005 after Ukraine's Orange Revolution to build a similar protest-busting capacity in Russia .
Thousands of protesters gather in downtown Moscow to demonstrate against what they describe as a “fascist coup’s’ one year ago in neighbouring Ukraine .
 Police said 35,000 people attended, though those numbers were impossible to verify independently . Police said that 35,00 people attended; those numbers are difficult to verify .
 Anti-Western sentiment in Russia has spiralled to new heights. Anti- Western sentiment in part spurred by state television coverage of Ukraine crisis has spiraled to new height .
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych said in a recent interview with Channel One Russia that he would come back to Ukraine as soon as he had an opportunity .
 The events were unfolding rapidly, and I feel sorry that I couldn't have done that. The events are unfolding rapidly and I'm sorry, I can't have been able to do that . I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad that I
 Yanukovych: "As soon as I get an opportunity, I will return and will do my best to make Ukrainians' life easier" "I will return," Yanukovych said .
 Former President Viktor Yanukovych fled from Kyiv on February 21 last year, effectively abandoning the presidency .
 Criminal proceedings have been initiated in Ukraine against Yanukovych, former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka and several other former officials .
Interpol declared wanted Yanukovych, former Prime Minister Mykola Azarov and other former Ukrainian officials . Interior Minister Arsen Avakov said Interpol had declared Yanukovych, ex-PM Azarov, others wanted .
 Viktor Yanukovych has spoken out from self-imposed exile in Russia . He has promised to return to Ukraine to ‘ease people’s lives’ and help stop the war .
 Yanukovych's interview with Russia’s state-owned Channel One was his first public appearance since he gave two bizarre press conferences in February and March 2014 . Yanukovych claimed he remained Ukraine's president, claiming he remained president .
 Russia-backed rebels have established breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine . At least 5,600 people have died in the conflict in the year since Putin has annexed Crimea .