 Ukraine and Russia have clashed over the strait well before 2014 . Not surprisingly, the two countries have clashed well before the 2014 crisis .
 The Kerch strait became an object of legal and political contention . With the break-up of the Soviet Union, the Kerch Strait became a object of political and legal contention .
 Ukraine unilaterally claimed a boundary line in the strait in 1999 and made moves to declare parts of the Sea of Azov as internal waters . Ukraine unilaterally claims a boundary lines in the Sea.
 Russia countered in 2003 by building a dike from its mainland towards Tuzla island, a speck of land in the very part of the Kerch strait Ukraine claimed as its own .
 Russia’s continuous attempts to control the Kerch Straits have long been connected to its designs on Crimea .
 Ukraine has always resisted these efforts, which got the two countries close to military conflict well before 2014 . Ukraine and Ukraine have always resisted the efforts .
 A Russian amphibious marine unit attempted to land troops near Feodosiya in Crimea in May 2005 . Ukrainian border troops repelled the attempt .
 Ukraine and Russia almost came to blows in 1994 when Russia seized a disputed Black Sea Fleet ship with expensive military equipment on it . This served as a reminder for 1994 when Ukraine, Russia and Ukraine almost came into blows after Russia seized the ship .
 Russia has started to build a bridge over the Kerch Strait to connect the Peninsula to the Russian mainland . After annexing Crimea in 2014, Russia began to build the bridge . It has previously failed to connect Ukraine's Sea of Azov coastline .
 Ukraine sued Russia by invoking the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea . To try and stop the trans-Kerch bridge and grant access for its vessels through the straits, Ukraine sued .
 The danger of military escalation between Russia and Ukraine, with all of its unforeseeable consequences, is real and rising . The danger is real, and rising.
 Russia is largely unaware of this, as it has moved its attention away from Ukraine and towards operations in Syria . Russia is countering U.S. efforts to modernize its nuclear arsenal, and improving Russian gas supply capabilities .
 Russian state-controlled media continues to trash the Ukrainian government while celebrating the finalization of the Kerch bridge and economic miracles in Crimea .
 Crimea remains occupied, and the West has quietly acquiesced to this fact . The West has made sure that existing sanctions are primarily tied to advances in the Minsk process over Donbass .
 Minsk process is seen as illegitimate to begin with . No such advances in the Minsk framework taken place, which suits Russian interests .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin has permitted the stationing of bombers and Iskander missiles in Crimea . Both of the missiles are dual-capable missile delivery systems .
 Since 2014, Russian support for the Putin regime is less dependent on the country’s economic well-being, and more so on the continued performance of Russia as a great power .
 The annexation of Crimea has long boosted Putin’s popularity . While the effect is declining, the annexation has long been seen as a boost to his popularity .
 Ukraine has significantly beefed up its military forces and improved its on-the-ground-control . Ukraine, simultaneously, has significantly increased its forces .
 The anti-tank Javelin launchers provided by the U.S. are only a small part of these efforts . The Javel in launchers are only one of the United States' efforts .
 A replication of the confused and feeble Ukrainian response in 2014 is unlikely . The Ukrainian response is unlikely to be replicated in 2014 .
 The Ukrainian military is now even regarded by some in Kyiv as a possible tool to establish some new facts on the ground .
 Petro Poroshenko trails his main competitor Yulia Tymoshenko, who has made Donbass, Crimea, and Russia core topics in her attacks on Poroshenko .
 Tymoshenko's strategy, the stalling Minsk process, Ukraine’s ongoing economic woes, rampant corruption, and allegations of Poroshenko being involved in shady business deals increasingly narrow down the incumbent's options for holding on to power .
 His most promising option is to present himself as a successful, or at least assertive, war president .
 Yulia Tymoshenko's questionable record is not to be optimistic about Ukraine's elite struggles . Ukraine's traditionally cut-throat nature of Ukraine’s elite struggles is to blame for the problems .
 The West, at the same time, looks inward and has shown little interest in effectively ameliorating the danger of military escalation between Ukraine and Russia .
 This is likely to continue, due to the ongoing twists and turns surrounding Trump and the continuing Brexit process in Europe .
 The United Kingdom is likely to formally leave the European Union two days before the Ukrainian presidential election . U.S. will leave the EU two days after the election .