It is not permitted to be sold in electronic format under any circumstances . It is not allowed to be used in electronic formats under any circumstance .
Taras Kuzio and Paul D’Anieri offer a refreshing look at the sources of Russian conduct toward Ukraine .
 Russian-Ukrainian conflict is a broader historical context. They challenge conventional analyses by exploring deeper roots of the conflict . They also place Russian tactics against Ukraine in a wider historical context .
 Taras Kuzio and Paul D’Anieri provide an invaluable guide of the complexities of current developments in and Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine .
 The book draws on comprehensive field research, demonstrates deep knowledge and understanding of Ukrainian-Russian relations . It also presents an alternative to much of the Western writing on the crisis .
 Two of the West's preeminent Ukraine scholars have written an indispensable book . Vladimir Putin’s war against Ukraine is not a response to Western behaviour but the product of longstanding tendencies within Russian policy .
 You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use . You may be able to use your license in anyreasonable manner .
 Please contact e-ir.info for any such enquiries, including for licensing and translation requests . Please contact info@e-ir .
 There are no restrictions placed on the use and dissemination of this book for student learning materials/scholarly use . Other than the terms noted above, there are no Restrictions placed on use of the book .
 Maksymenko Nataliia A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library .
 A series of scholarly books presented in a format that preferences brevity and accessibility while retaining academic conventions .
Each book is available in print and digital versions, and is published under a Creative Commons license . Each book is published in print, digital versions and is available under the Creative Commons licence .
 E-IR’s daily publications feature expert articles, blogs, reviews and interviews . The daily publication includes student learning resources .
 The West has slowly come to understand that Russia’s annexations and interventions, interference in elections, cyber warfare, disinformation, assassinations in Europe and support for anti-EU populists emerge from Vladimir Putin's belief that Russia is at war with the West .
 The crisis has deep roots in Russia's inability to come to terms with an independent Ukrainian state, Moscow’s view of the Orange and Euromaidan revolutions as Western conspiracies . Most Russian-speaking Ukrainians do not want to rejoin Russia, author says .
 Ukraine is central to rebuilding a sphere of influence within the former Soviet space . In Moscow’s eyes, Ukraine is key to re-establishing Russia.
 The book shows that the wide range of ‘hybrid’ tactics that Russia has deployed show continuity with the actions of the Soviet-era security services . The book was published in the summer of 2013 .
 USF funding enabled 15 research visits to cities, villages and military frontlines in Eastern and Southern Ukraine . It became the basis for the publication of this book and the earlier published Putin's War Against Ukraine .
 Paul D’Anieri spent the fall semester of 2017 as the Eugene and Daymel Shklar Research Fellow in Ukrainian Studies . He is a senior member of the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute .
 The Institute provided exceptional academic resources and a congenial atmosphere for work on this project . The Institute is also working on a more in-depth study of Ukraine's relations with Russia since 1991 .
 The book is written to fill what we see as important gaps in the literature . It will also answer the question of why the war happened .
 We contend that the roots of the crisis go back further than is widely understood . We see the cause of the conflict in long-term factors underlying Russia's policy toward Ukraine .
 We trace Russia’s goals and tactics from the beginning of the post-Soviet era in 1991 . In some cases to the Soviet era, we trace Russia's goals and Tactics from the 1990s to 1991 .
We stress the continuity between the Soviet era, the early post-Soviet era, and the crisis since early 2014 . We stress the historical breaks, rather than focusing on historical breaks . We also stress the current crisis in Russia, which has been in crisis since 2014 .
 Russia chose to use military force in 2014. The key break was that Russia, in pursuing goals that it held since 1991, chose to Use military force . Russia has not used military force since 1991 .
 Russia’s actions in 2014 were not a response to specific events, such as NATO enlargement, EU policy, democracy promotion or revolution in Ukraine . The main drivers of Russian policy were visible prior to those events, according to the authors .
 The events of 2013-2014 in Ukraine certainly spurred resentment, and may have created a sense that a window of opportunity was closing . But they created neither Russia’s desire to regain Ukrainian territory nor the tactics that would be used in doing so .
There is not much new about Russian hybrid warfare, we argue . Except for using the most recent technology, there is not new about Russia .
 Russia deployed in military interventions from 1991 onwards in Moldova and Georgia . It shows considerable continuity with both the goals and tactics that the Soviet intelligence services used during the Cold War .
 Putin’s personal history in the Committee for State Security and its successors . Our focus is on the endurance of norms, practices, and institutions from the Soviet to the post-Soviet era .
 The crisis has exposed a fundamental disagreement over what a European order should look like . The crisis is the latest in a series of political disputes over the future of Europe .
 The European Union remains wedded to principles that both stress the sovereign equality of large and small states and reject the use of force . The EU remains wedding to principles.
 Russia seeks recognition of a Russian ‘sphere of xii The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics’ beyond its borders . Russia as a great power is entitled to a veto over what happens in the region .
 Russia's claim has been a main topic of discussion, and we believe some important perspectives have been missing . Whether or not the West should accept Russia’s claim is a main issue of discussion .
 Our critique focuses not on the broad question of when realpolitik should and should not trump principle, but on how realism applies to this conflict . The critique focuses on the broader question of what realpolitika should and how realism should do .
 It is not at all clear that realism would find the causes of the conflict in Western action in Ukraine . It would not find the solution in acquiescing to a Russian sphere of influence in Ukraine.
Some of the most prominent applications of realism to the Ukraine-Russia crisis contradict basic tenets of realist theory . Some of the more prominent applications to the crisis contradict realist theories .
Realist theory fits equally well, if not better, with a policy of opposing the expansion of Russian influence . We show that realist theory fit equally well with a policies of opposing Russian influence.
 Russia's aim is to build on Russia's aims, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia's goal is to make Russia more aware of its aims, says Putin . Putin's government has been accused of using Russia's actions to justify its actions .
 Chapter one reviews existing literature on the conflict, identifying different schools of thought on why Russia annexed Crimea and launched military aggression against Ukraine in 2014 . Chapter one review existing literature.
 We argue that realism has been applied to the case in a way that does not seem realist at all . We argue the case is not a case of realist.
 We also identify the major gaps that we address in the following chapters . We also need to look more deeply into the early post-Soviet era and at the role of Ukraine in Russian identity .
 Chapter two traces the evolution of hybrid war from Soviet to post-Soviet Russia . Chapter two is titled "The Evolution of Hybrid War"
 The tactics of dezinformatsiya and maskirovka have a long history . Cyber warfare is based on fundamentally new technology .
 The Soviet Union and Russia have used similar rhetoric against the Ukrainian national movement . We point out the similarity in rhetoric used by the Soviet Union.
 Chapter three addresses Ukraine’s relations with Russia from 1991 to 2013 . Chapter three highlights that Russia sought to control Ukraine from the very beginning, that it sought greater control over Crimea .
 Chapter four examines the conflict in Crimea and Donbas . The Orange Revolution began with the Orange Revolution in 2004 . Chapter four focuses on Crimea, Donbas.
 The chapter shows both the medium-term build-up to the conflict and the application of specific Russian tactics in 2014 . The chapter also shows the development of Russian tactics .
 Chapter five surveys the international repercussions of the crisis and international efforts to resolve it . Chapter five survey the international ramifications of the global crisis .
 We see little common ground between Russia, Ukraine and the West over either principles or territory . Like many others, we are pessimistic because we see littlecommon ground between them .
 In the EU, sensitivities about a ‘new Yalta’ will make that very hard to accept .
 A brief conclusion then poses several questions that remain unanswered . A brief end to the question is then followed by a brief conclusion .
 The book was written in the belief that important questions have been overlooked and neglected . We make no claim to have addressed all of them .
 We do hope to have raised issues that will stimulate productive discussion, we say . We do not want to be left out of the debate, we hope to be able to raise issues that can be discussed .
 If this new cold war is anything like the original one, the debates will continue for some time . If it's anything like a cold war, it's likely to continue for a time .
 The crisis in relations between Russia and the West following Russia’s annexation of the Crimea and military intervention in Eastern Ukraine has led to a large number of publications .
 The conflict has attracted the attention of many scholars, regardless of whether they have worked extensively on Ukraine or Ukrainian-Russian relations .
 Newcomers to this conflict are forced to take at face value some facile characterisations of the situation, rather than recognising the complexity and contestation of many of the key drivers of the conflict .
Two gaps in the literature stem from viewing Russia’s actions as a response to recent events . We identify two gaps, both of which stem from views of Russia's actions.
 phenomena with deep histories are sometimes seen as recent events . As a result, phenomena with long histories are often seen as recently events .
 The issue of national identity is often treated superficially as a factor underpinning Russia’s actions . Second, and related, the issue of National identity is also treated superfically .
 A tradition has persisted from the Soviet era whereby scholars specialising in Russian politics claim expertise on the non-Russian countries which emerged as independent states after 1991 .
 Many of the works on the crisis use few primary sources from Ukraine (whether in Ukrainian or Russian) Few show evidence of extensive fieldwork in Ukraine .
 ‘Russia’s ‘Hybrid’ War — Challenge and Threat for Europe’, special issue of the Razumkov Ukrainian Centre for Economic and Political Studies Magazine 2 . The Sources of Russia's Great Power Politics dearth of Ukrainian sources.
 The Soviet government restricted travel beyond Moscow to sensitive republics . There is less reason today to approach countries such as Ukraine via Russia and Russian media .
The web sites of the Ukrainian government, president and parliament are in both Ukrainian and Russian . The web sites are in Ukraine and Russia .
 Scholars face a choice in perspectives that is likely to lead them to being criticised no matter what they do .
 Those who blame the conflict on Russia’s aggression face the accusation that they ignore the actions of the US, NATO, the EU and Ukrainian nationalists, all of which supposedly left Russia little freedom of action .
 Those who blame the conflict on the West and Ukraine can be accused of defending an attack on a weaker neighbour that clearly violates international law . To many resembles Germany’s aggression towards its neighbours in the 1930s.
 Those who try to take a more ‘balanced’ perspective risk being seen as naive or as apologists by both of the previous groups . Those who take more 'balanced' perspective risk not being seen by both groups .
 While these perspectives compete fundamentally, they tend to share two underlying characteristics . The two types of perspectives are different.
First, they are largely focused on assigning blame, regardless of where they locate it . First, they're mostly focused on assigning blame .
 Many in their efforts to make their cases, though not all, provide clear and simple explanations of the conflict . Second, many in their attempts to make cases, in their own efforts, provided clear andsimple explanations of their cases .
 ‘facts’ are interpreted completely differently depending on one’s pre-existing perspective . This leads them to choose and assemble facts and interpretations to support their argument rather than exploring the many areas in which causes are intertwined .
 A good example is the question of the rightful ownership of the Crimean Peninsula . A good examples is a good example of the Crimea's rightful ownership .
Few scholars of international politics paid much attention to the crisis . The crisis was the first time international politics had been involved in a crisis .
 Those who blame the West for the crisis see Russia's annexation of the Crimea as returning the National Security and Defence, nos.
 Relatively few scholars in the West have a command of Ukrainian, increasing the likelihood of relying on Russian sources .
 Zerkalo Nedeli and Ukrainska Pravda, for example, are published in both Russian and Ukrainian .
 Russian control of the peninsula from the 1780s to 1954 . The notion that the 1954 transfer was a ‘gift’ or even a whim is based on certain facts .
 The viewpoint of the Crimea being more ‘Russian’ than Ukrainian remains widespread, particularly among Western scholars of Russia . It is commonplace among critics of United States foreign policy and realists .
 Those who blame the conflict on Russia focus on a different set of facts . The U.S. military says Russia is responsible for the conflict .
 The territory was legally part of Ukraine, and thus its seizure violated international law . To judge Russia’s seizure legal on historical or linguistic grounds would set a disruptive precedent .
Crimeans had a chance to vote on their future in a well-prepared referendum . In 1991, 54% voted for Ukraine’s secession from the Soviet Union .
 If length of time within a State is the criterion we use to decide who Crimea should belong, then it should be returned to the Tatars . The Tatars ruled the peninsula from the 13"" to the late-18"" century .
 The peninsula was Ukrainian for a slightly shorter period of 60 years, but under Tatar rule for four hundred . The peninsula, Ukraine, was Ukraine for 60 years .
 The March 2014 referendum claimed an unlikely ‘Yes’ vote of 97% when Tatars boycotted it . Tatars make up approximately 15% of the population, who make up about 15%.
 Most analyses choose the version that supports the allotment of blame that has already been predetermined . Unfortunately, rather than doing so, most analyses choose a version of blame.
 The first emphasises Western expansion as the cause of the conflict . The first portrays Russia as a passive victim compelled to respond .
 This includes those arguing primarily from a leftist position against American influence in the world and those invoking realism to indict Western policy . This includes both those arguing mainly from a left-wing position against U.S. influence .
 The second and third schools are complementary in that they both see Russia as the driver of the conflict . But they diverge on the drivers of Russian policy, they say .
 The second school focuses on Russian geopolitical expansion . It also focuses on its desire to undo at least some of the results of 1991 .
 Some in this school criticise the West for not doing more sooner to help integrate Ukraine in the West .
 The Debate 5 final approach sees the conflict as an effort by the Russian government to reassert a particular notion of Russian national identity .
 We save it for last because it is relatively underdeveloped and we seek to give it extra attention . This perspective fits with others that blame Russia, but we save it because it's underdeveloped .
 In theory these causal factors are distinct, in practice they tend to be combined . We stress that while in theory they are distinct. In practice, these factors are combined .
 Russian leaders could be motivated by both the geopolitical and domestic payoffs of seizing Crimea . Russian leaders, for example, could also be motivated.
There is a strong tendency to combine different analytical arguments that support the conclusion . Almost all of the literature seeks to apportion blame, but there is a tendency to Combine different arguments .
 The legality of the annexation of Crimea, the role of local Ukrainian versus Russian forces in the Donbas secessionist movements, and the wisdom of NATO enlargement are three entirely distinct questions . But there is a strong tendency to join them together, says the author .
 Those who downplay the international legal aspect of the annexation of the Crimea also tend to argue that the Donbas conflict was essentially domestic and that NATO enlargement was at best foolish and at worst aggressive .
 These positions correlate well with views on Western sanctions against Russia . These positions are similar to those of the United States and Russia .
 The work of Richard Sakwa, Stephen Cohen, Jonathan Steele and John Mearsheimer focuses on NATO, the United States and Ukrainian nationalists in explaining the outbreak of conflict .
 Russia is a great power, and because of its power and history, it is entitled to respect and to rights that other states are not . Russia is entitled and to respect rights that others are not, says the author .
 By enlarging NATO into countries that Russia once controlled, the West was a threat to Russian national security . The West was the threat to Russia's security .
 The list of misdeeds by the US/NATO/EU includes multiple rounds 2017 . i Taras Kuzio, Putin’s War Against Ukraine, is Putin's War against Ukraine .
 The presence of radical nationalists among those on the Maidan created an immediate threat to ethnic Russians or Russian speakers in Ukraine . They claim that Yanukovych’s ouster was illegitimate, and that the presence of those on Maidan was illegitimate .
 The strength of these perspectives is that they capture many of the same points made by Putin and other defenders of Russia’s policies, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The realist claims to invoke the timeless lessons of realist theory, and to identify Western missteps in those countries’ theoretically-misguided adoption of liberal international relations theories .
 Realists in particular prioritise the immediate external environment and therefore largely ignore domestic factors in Russia and Ukraine . Realists focus on the external environment.
 These perspectives are as notable for what they do not discuss as for what it does . They are also notable for their perspectives on what they say .
Realist scholars downplay the importance of Ukraine's sovereignty or international law . It is less clear why those claiming to criticise the dominance of the United States do so .
 The Debate 7 says Russia has invaded a third country, Ukraine . It's not clear if this caused or justified Russia's invasion of Ukraine .
 Advocates of these two positions have also interpreted data concerning Russian involvement in Eastern Ukraine selectively . The two positions are also interpreted by advocates of these positions .
 NATO, NATO, Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers, Western journalists, think tanks and Ukrainian military intelligence have all documented Russia’s military involvement . This has become more problematic as an increasing volume of evidence from satellites, NATO and other observers .
 Ukrainian military intelligence estimates there are up to 6,000 Russian forces in the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic . An additional 35,000-40,000 proxy forces are estimated to be in the region . There are also up to
 De Ploeg cites on thirty occasions Ivan Katchanovski’s claims that ‘Ukrainian nationalists’ were responsible for the sniper killings on the Euromaidan** . Katchaovski in turn draws on a highly selective use of sources glean
Ukraine in the Crossfire also frequently cites Sakwa who endorses the book on the cover . De Ploeg, Ukraine in the crossfire, also frequently cited Sakwa .
 A similar conspiracy theory blames 'Ukrainian nationalists' for the deaths of 42 pro-Russian protestors in Odesa on 2 May 2014 .
Realist analysis of the Ukraine conflict is not realist at all. Put differently, in many respects, in some respects, the realist analysis is notrealist .
 Mearsheimer’s current views have evolved from the 1990s when he supported Ukraine keeping the nuclear weapons it inherited from the USSR??.
 Russia Times, 4 January 2015 and Tom Parfitt, ‘Families of victims in Ukraine massacre slate investigation into deaths’, The Daily Telegraph, 19 February 2015 .
 Mearsheimer, ‘Why the Ukraine crisis is the West's fault’ and R Menon and E Rumer, Conflict in Ukraine, are both responsible for the crisis .
 NATO and Western policy toward Ukraine goes against the dictums of realism . It is not clear the enlargement of NATO and West policy toward the Ukraine actually goes against realism .
 Realism finds that states live in an insecure world, and counsels that the smart ones will always try to increase their power .
 realism would likely have advised the U.S. and its allies to expand their alliance while they had the possibility to do so . If that is the case, then realism would probably have advised them to expand.
In realist theory, states are always seeking to expand their power, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It is a contradiction of realism to argue that U.S. policies and NATO enlargement made Russia more aggressive .
 Realists would expect Russia to take advantage of the opportunities open to it regardless of whether Russian leaders were angry or felt betrayed by the West .
Self-described realists have scorned liberalism for generations . They also adopt the position of liberalism, which realists scorned for generations.
 A key concept in realism (and liberalism) is the ‘security dilemma’ The idea that when a state takes steps to make itself more secure, it undermines the security of its neighbour .
 Realists regard this as an immutable characteristic of the system, one that is foolhardy to try to overcome . Realists say this is an immutable condition of the world .
 States that refrain from pursuing power are likely to find themselves endangered . U.S. states that stop pursuing power may be at risk of losing power .
 Liberalism, anticipating an escalating cycle of response, counsels that both sides can be better off through restraint .
 Liberals, not realists, advocate that states try to mitigate the security dilemma by either unilaterally or via a formal agreement .
 Mearsheimer is adopting a liberal, not a realist, position, he says . NATO should have refrained from enlargement, he writes .
 Those invoking realism are applying it more consistently when they criticise the West for adopting policies recommended by liberalism . They rely on 10 The Sources of Russia's Great Power Politics the spread of democracy .
 Hopes by Western policymakers that the problem of security would be solved in Central Europe have not been held up .
 It is not clear that realism would counsel a carve-up of Eastern Europe on Russia’s terms rather than an effort to strengthen resistance to potential Russian expansion .
 Mearsheimer and others argue that international politics is about the interests of 'great powers'
 Great power war is so deadly, avoiding it is a moral imperative, says John Sutter .
Great powers can force the lesser ones to bend to their needs, they will . Leaving morals aside, great power can force lesser powers to bend.
 The implication is that preserving some kind of great power condominium between the U.S. and Russia requires dividing Europe in a way that leaves Russia satisfied, and hence a ‘status quo’ Henry Kissinger’s terms .
 Much of the debate over who is to blame and what should be done next hinges . This aspect of the argument has received relatively little attention, for this is the point .
 It is in large part a normative debate, but it also points back to the long-standing disagreements between liberalism and realism . It is also in part a normality debate.
 Liberalism believes strongly that respect for international law and state sovereignty is essential to maintaining the security order in Europe .
 France and Germany fought three wars in 70 years. This is what has brought peace, for example, after they fought 3 wars in the last 70 years . This has also brought peace to Germany and France .
 Liberals find Russia’s invasion of Ukraine not only destructive for peace but normatively appalling .
 Most realists would hold that lasting peace simply is not possible in international affairs . Most realist would hold the idea of a lasting peace just not possible.
 The second body of scholarly work focuses upon Russia seeking to expand its influence and gain recognition of its status as a great power . Assessing the Debate 11 ‘The Russians Went Ape’
 Russia's hybrid war in Eastern Ukraine is the continuation of its long-standing policy of creating frozen conflicts since the early-1990s in Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan .
 This literature also analyses Russia’s revanchist policies within the context of Putin lamenting the disintegration of the USSR and the Russian desire to build new unions, in this case the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Those who blame Russia draw on a set of events and policies that those who blame the West largely ignore . In this respect, those blaming RussiaDraws on events that the West mostly ignore .
 Many in Russia view Ukraine as being an artificial country and failed state . But little of this scholarly work drills down deeper to pursue national identity issues .
 Russia's view to that seen in previous cases of colonial collapse, such as that of the United Kingdom's colonial relationship with Ireland and France's relationship with Algeria .
 In both cases, the colonial power viewed these territories as an integral ‘Near Abroad’ rather than as distinct colonies .
 The British, French and Russians differentiated between peoples closely bound to the metropolis and foreign colonies further afield .
 Russia appears not to view Ukraine and Belarus in the same manner as Georgia or Uzbekistan and especially the three Baltic States .
 De-colonisation in the Near Abroad was more intense and bitter, producing a strong sense of betrayal in London, Paris and Moscow .
 The third body of scholarly work agrees that the conflict is largely driven by Russian behaviour . But sees that behaviour rooted in Russia’s autocratic domestic politics rather than in its international aspirations .
 Mark Galeotti believes there is no inconsistency between widespread corruption and nationalism in Putin's Russia . After all, kleptocrats in many parts of the world are also nationalists .
 There is often the ‘thinnest of lines’ between organised crime and paramilitaries in many conflicts .
 Russia's hybrid war is ‘foreign policy as raiderstvo’ Wilson writes that Russia’s hybrid war has extended beyond Russian borders . The same techniques that define the mix of business and organised crime that prevails in Russia .
 Evidence for this is seen in the massive corporate raiding of the Ukrainian state and private assets following Russia’s annexation of the Crimea .
 Yanukovych as president undertook a systematic campaign to gather key business assets among his family and a small circle of allies . The Donbas was regionally prominent in the Donbas before 2010 .
 The search for the domestic sources of Russian policy goes all the way down to the individual level and Putin himself .
 The Debate 13 East Germany during the fall of communism tells us a great deal about Putin as a leader. Assessing the Debate 13 during the Fall of communism tell us a good deal about him .
 Putin took away from the GDR a uniformly negative view of political instability under Presidents Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin . Political strife could be used by Western intelligence agencies to foment regime change .
 Putin's roots in the Soviet secret services go much deeper through his father who was one of only a few who survived as a member of an NKVD unit sent behind enemy lines in Nazi occupied Estonia .
 The fourth perspective sees the conflict as part of a broader geopolitical competition between Russia and the West. Geopolitics is the fourth perspective.
 This perspective focuses on relations between the West and its institutions on the one hand and Russia on the other . It tends to reduce Ukraine’s role to that of a battleground in a competition between Russia and the West .
 Russia is increasing opposition to the extension of Western institutions eastward . Russia has been accused of extending its own institutions in Russia .
 This school of thought sees the source of the conflict in the reliance of the West on a postCold War security architecture in Europe that excluded Russia .
 Menon and Rumer see this ‘architecture’ problem as the fundamental cause of the conflict . Charap and Colton see it as only a permissive cause .
 NATO has been criticised for assuming its enlargement could not be seen as a threat by Russia . Much of this literature criticises the EU for ignoring the ‘geoeconomic’ consequences of its expansion eastward .
 By 2013, it was the EU, not NATO, that was taking the lead in pushing into territory that Russia considered vital to its security . By 2014, it had taken the lead.
 Ukraine in a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU would undermine Russia’s long-term efforts to build its own Eurasian Union trade bloc .
 Many of the authors, including Menon and Rumer, Charap and Colton, strive to be even-handed in criticising both Russia and the West for their roles in the conflict .
 This is captured in the title of Charap and Colton’s book Everyone Loses . The book is published in the first edition of the book .
 Ukrainian ‘nationalising state’, colour revolutions in Russia’s neighbours, NATO and EU enlargement and state dynamics. These factors included a Ukrainian ’nationalisingState’ and colour revolutions .
 The final body of scholarly publications analyses national identity in Ukrainian-Russian relations and Russian chauvinism towards Ukrainians .
 Russian nationalism has been underemphasised as a source of Russian behaviour in Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: In Ukraine, nationalism is much less salient and extreme nationalists much less influential than in Russia .
 No Ukrainian nationalist party managed to cross the threshold to enter parliament in the 2014 elections . In the same year Russia invaded Ukraine, no nationalist party entered parliament in 2014 .
 In Ukraine, civic patriotism rather than ethnic nationalism has greater public support because of the country's regional and linguistic diversity .
 Polls show that three-quarters of Ukrainians hold negative views of Russian leaders but not Russian people . It would be expected if ethnic nationalism was dominant in Ukraine.
 The relative imbalance in attention to nationalism in Russia and Ukraine might stem from two factors . The imbalance may be due to a lack of attention to nationalism in Russia.
 Russian leaders are trying to exaggerate the role and extremism of nationalism in Ukraine . That is especially true in light of a second factor, the Russian leader says .
 In this section, we review the role of nationalism and national identity in explanations both of Russia's and Ukraine's behaviour . In the section of the article, we look at the roles of national identity and nationalism in Russia .
 The role of Russian nationalism underpins, to some extent, the literatures discussed above focusing on Russian great power aspirations and Russian domestic politics as sources.
 Some see Putin the conservative and not Putin the realist who violated Ukraine's sovereignty . Some also see nationalism as the direct cause of Ukraine's crisis .
 In the 1990s, the red-brown coalition opposed to Yeltsin, the regime’s controlled ‘nationalist opposition’ Vladimir Zhirinovsky and Aleksandr Dugin had been on the extremes of Russian politics .
 Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians are parts of a single Russkii Mir civilisation . The division of which into separate states is artificial, says author .
 In Russia’s domestic minorities policy, there is no recognition of Ukrainians, who by numbers are the second largest minority . Ukrainians are not seen as distinct and do not possess autonomous territorial institutions .
Russkii Mir civilisation which Russian nationalists fear is under threat from the West . It is this RusskiiMir civilisation which they fear is in danger from the west .
 Putin embraced nationalism after the colour revolutions, and went further after street protests to his return to the presidency in 2012 .
Assessing the Debate 17 view in his February 2007 speech to the Munich security conference . Assessing the debate 17 view is his first appearance at the Munich Security Conference .
 Russian nationalists are on the same page as Putin, the majority of opposition political leaders . Russian nationalists also support Russia's annexation of the Crimea .
 Russian nationalism is not isolated to Putin and his team, and therefore will not automatically pass when he eventually leaves office . This is significant because it indicates that Russian nationalism, and in particular its views toward Ukraine, are not isolated. This indicates that Russia's views on Ukraine, and its views
 The role of nationalism in Ukraine has attracted more attention, primarily from those who see Russia's intervention as justified .
 The coalition that came to rule in Ukraine after the Euromaidan was illegitimate and threatening because it contained representatives of extreme nationalist parties . First, the coalition came torule in Ukraine in the wake of the Euromsaidan .
 The role of those groups in the protests constituted sufficient danger to ethnic Russians and Russian speakers to justify their desire to secede and Russia’s intervention to protect them. Second, the role of the groups in those protests constituted enough danger to those groups to justify them.
 These arguments appear in ‘Cultural Contradictions’ in Sakwa’s Frontline Ukraine .
 A common framework for understanding the crisis is to portray Ukraine as divided between governments pursuing pluralist policies and governments pursuing what Sakwa calls ‘monist’ policies .
 ‘civil war’ was caused by ‘monist’ nationality policies which are intolerant of Russian-speakers and espouse Russophobia. In this view, the 'civil war' was cause by pluralism.
 As scholars of Ukraine have explored for over two decades, simple binaries are highly misleading in Ukraine . As scholars have explored, simple binary binaries have been found .
 Critics of ‘monism’ oddly ignore the politics of Yanukovych, who was assiduously trying to eliminate any potential political competitors .
 The desire to stop him before he fully consolidated autocracy in the country was one of the underlying sources of support for the Euromaidan protests .
Talk of multiculturalism in Russian-controlled regions is a myth, according to the Russian media .
 In Crimea, Tatars have come under sustained repression, its leaders have been banned from returning to the Crimea . Their unofficial parliament Mejlis has been banned .
 In the DNR and LNR, Ukrainian language schools and media have been closed down . Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kiev Patriarchate and Protestant Churches banned .
 Upwards of a quarter of citizens in Eastern Ukraine considered themselves to have mixed Russian-Ukrainian ethnicity . Majority of Ukrainians speak both Russian and Ukrainian, depending on the circumstances .
 Even Russian/Ukrainian is in some cases a false distinction, as people often intermingle the two .
 Predictions of Ukraine disintegrating into a civil war between its eastern and western regions have been published since as long ago as the early 1990s .
 nationalism can be used by politicians instrumentally, it is compatible with various explanations concerning underlying driving forces .
 The Russian leadership appears to be exploiting nationalism to build support for itself, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The fact that it appears to work so well means that nationalism must be part of our understanding of the current conflict .
 Even if Ukrainian nationalists are adept at gaining attention, they may not be having much influence on policy .
 A major difference between Russia and Ukraine is that invoking nationalism is a successful strategy to win votes in Russia but not in Ukraine . No Ukrainian president has ever won an election with a nationalist programme .
 Tied to the question of nationalism is that of identity which can be either ethnic or civic or, as is the case in most Western democracies .
 The confusion lies in the use of only word to describe both ‘English’ and ‘British’
 Putin’s military aggression has strengthened Ukrainian identity and made Russian understanding of Ukraine and Ukrainians even more obsolete .
 The field has not yet developed a clear set of analytical debates that define the topic . The fragmented nature of this literature review has demonstrated, the study has demonstrated .
 The dominant debate — over who is to blame — is one that is unresolvable . The dominant question is over who's to blame .
 The works on the topic come from a bewildering array of paradigms, levels of analysis, geographical foci, and conceptualisations of the problem .
 A series of issues seem to shape much of the discussion even if they are not addressed directly . Underlying these, however, is a number of issues that appear to shape the discussion .
 A first basic problem concerns the principal of the sovereign equality of states . The first problem is a first basic issue.
 Russia’s position, and that of many works on the topic, answers the question clearly in the negative, or at least with considerable qualification . Russia's position is not clear, but it is clear that Russia has a strong position .
 Many believe Russia has special rights or privileges due to its size and power . But many others who do not claim to be realists accept the idea .
For those who do not espouse realism, the question is what are those privileges and where do they end. For those who don't espouses realism, it's not clear if they end .
 One suspect that the ‘legitimacy’ claim does us little good, because it runs head on into other legitimate claims . One suspects that the 'legitIMacy' claim is little good.
 Russia’s concept of its role as a power has been consistent over time, and has been impinged by the events of the post-Cold War period. Thomas Graham and Menon lay out a compelling case .
 Russia's conception of its great power status. But they leave unaddressed the crucial question of how far we should impinge on other states .
 One country's interests are beyond its borders, and how far they extend geographically. Assessing the Debate 21 one country’s interests are Beyond its borders is a key question .
 Russia and the West have no shared agreement between Russia and West on a second question .
 There may be too few historical cases to arrive at good empirical generalisations .
 analogies will be used, and in this case the comparison to Germany’s territorial demands in the 1930s has been made .
 Russia’s behaviour since 2014 is ambiguous enough to be consistent with the view that it stopped where it did because it was satiated . Russia's behaviour is ambiguous, both from within Ukraine and from the international community . The view is consistent with that of pushback,
 There is a good case to be made that Russia can be satisfied within the boundaries of the former Soviet Union .
 Russia shows signs of being a revolutionary power, hoping to overturn both the prevailing distribution of power and the rules of the game . Russia has accepted some of the rules that others in Europe have accepted .
 Russia's ambitions are not as urgent as correctly assessing the extent to which concessions will satisfy, or stoke, Russia’s ambitions . Perhaps no task is as urgent.
 If the questions above seem to push the answers into the realist court, we have to acknowledge as we did earlier in this chapter that realism too has its limits .
 Mearsheimer’s argument points directly to such a ‘grand bargain’ But others are silent on where the new line should be, and how it should be redrawn .
Russia's foreign policy is a key source of foreign policy in Russia . The relationship between the domestic and international sources of Russian foreign policy has been questioned .
 Those who see Russian behaviour as the main cause of the conflict can draw on both its great power aspirations and several aspects of its domestic politics .
 In this instance, those arguments are complementary, but that complementarity makes it hard to say which might have more influence in the longer term .
 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics say a change in government in Russia would lead to a less assertive foreign policy . But it is not clear that the prediction will come true .
 In the 1990s, Yeltsin was often exhibiting autocratic control, not democracy . He held back the mix of communist and nationalist revanchists that came to dominate the State Duma .
Frozen conflicts in Moldova, Georgia, and Azerbaijan happened on Yeltsin's watch in the 1990s .
 The assumption that a democratic Russia could be part of a ‘Europe whole and free’ has yet to be decisively tested .
 We need to understand the domestic dynamics of Russian foreign policy better than we do, says the Russian Foreign Minister .
 These are questions on which we can imagine fruitful debate and in some cases, progress on empirical questions . These are not the only questions one can pose, but these are questions that can be answered .
 These questions would allow us to bring to this case large literatures in international relations, history, and comparative politics . By framing these issues as specific instances of broader problems, these questions would let us bring to these issues .
 The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 25 Z. The Soviet origins of Russia’s use of hybrid warfare, assassinations, information and cyber warfare .
 Ukraine and Ukrainian nationalism were key targets for Soviet and Russian hybrid and information warfare . Ukraine and Ukraine are still key targets in the war .
 The EU’s weekly Disinformation Review documented nearly 1,000 fake news stories issued in one small period October 2015 — July 2016 directed against Ukraine and the three Baltic States .
 Putin actively intervened in the 2004 Ukrainian presidential elections . He visited Kiev during the first and second rounds of the presidential election .
 Andrew Wilson's study of Russia’s political technologists’ manipulation of the media and election campaigns was published a decade before the 2014 crisis . Wilson's work was published 10 years before the crisis .
 As Brian Whitmore writes, Estonians were getting hacked by Russia long before it was cool .
 Ukrainians had to deal with Kremlin interference in their elections before it became trendy . Ukraine had to do with it before it was trendy .
 It's a good idea to pay very close attention to what Russia does to its neighbours . It often foreshadows things Moscow will later try out farther to the West .
 The first is a comparative study of Soviet and Russian hybrid and information warfare . The second is a study of Russian and Soviet hybrid and Information warfare .
 The second and third sections analyse Soviet and Russian approaches to non-linear warfare through goals, tactics and results . The second, third and fourth sections examine Soviet and Russia's approaches to Non- linear warfare .
 The USSR was ruled by Leonid Brezhnev, Yury Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko from the mid-1960s to mid-1980s and under President Putin since 2000 . The Soviet Union and Russia Compared Very active periods of Soviet and Russian hybrid and information
 Putin was socialised into the Soviet system during the Brezhnev era when he joined the KGB in 1975 . He was a member of the KGB during the Soviet era .
 Soviet conservatives and Russian nationalists look with nostalgia to the Brezhnev era . They denigrate liberal anti-Stalinist reformers Nikita Khrushchev and Gorbachev .
 The myth of the Great Patriotic War was created during the Brezhnev era . Joseph Stalin built a modern, industrialised Soviet superpower that won the war and with its mighty nuclear arsenal was feared by the West .
 Anti-Western xenophobia and Russian great power nationalism are driving forces underpinning the information warfare against NATO and EU members .
 The 2003 and 2004 Rose and Orange Revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine respectively influenced Putin’s first move to the right .
 Putin’s second turn even further to the nationalist right came after his re-election in 2012 when he focused on integrating Ukraine into his Eurasian project .
 Putin believed the Rose and Orange Revolutions and large street protests in Moscow in 2011-2012 were Western conspiracies against Russia .
 The protests came during the midst of what Moscow viewed as the Western orchestrated Arab Spring in Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria and Bahrain .
 Shekhovtsov argues the colour revolutions, Moscow protests and Arab Spring generated widespread paranoia in the Russian leadership . The need to find international allies led to the need for international allies, she says .
 Russian cooperation with populist nationalists and neo-fascist groups in Europe and North America . This in turn led to a predilection to Russia's cooperation with anti-Russian groups .
 The USSR had long undertaken ‘wet actions’ against opponents of the Soviet regime .
Symon Petlura was assassinated by a Soviet agent in Paris only four years after the USSR was founded . The Ukrainian nationalist leader and social democrat was assassinated in Paris .
 The USSR undertook hybrid warfare in pursuit of regime change in Afghanistan, Africa and Central and Latin America . The USSR undertake hybrid warfare. The USSR undertaking hybrid warfare on the continent .
 USSR long deployed Special Forces in developing countries in advance of invasions or to train local forces and national liberation groups .
 Russia has greater opportunities to use hybrid, informational and cyber wars . Modern technology and social media provide Russia with greater opportunities for cyber warfare .
 The term has often been used to describe British socialist George Bernard Shaw and Duranty .
 Unlike the USSR, contemporary Russia does not just offer an alternative truth but also deconstructs the very idea of objective reporting .
 Russia’s postmodern approach to information warfare propaganda has been undertaken alongside an increasingly effective use of digital media . Russia's post modern approach to propaganda is being used alongside an increasing use ofdigital media .
 Russia has invested large resources in its information and cyber warfare capabilities . Russia has spent large resources on cyber warfare and information security .
 The biggest nationalist threat came from Ukrainians and the three Baltic States . The biggest threat was from Ukraine and the Baltic states .
 Soviet propaganda and ideological campaigns had attacked Ukrainian and Baltic dissidents and nationalists and émigré diasporas . They portrayed them as ‘Nazi collaborators’ and agents of Western and Israeli intelligence agencies .
 The Polish communist regime had fought a brutal war against Ukrainian nationalists in its Southeast from 1944-1947 and ethnically cleansed 150,000 Ukrainians in Akcja ‘Wista’
 KGB-controlled Society for Cultural Relations Abroad published the free weekly newspaper News from Ukraine/Visti z Ukrayiny .
 The term ‘Banderite’ is used by the Soviet regime to denote a sadist, murderer and Nazi accomplice . It was revived by Putin’s regime in its information war against Ukraine .
 A Nezavisimaya Gazeta Russian journalist writes ‘The idea of an independent Ukraine is Russophobic by definition.
 In August 1991, the Russian SFSR did not declare independence from the USSR . The annual 'Russia Day' holiday is based on the June 1990 Russian Declar-ation of sovereignty .
 NATO was always viewed as a major threat to Soviet security . NATO was also an important target for all manner of Soviet active measures .
 Russia's use of poisons and other agents predated the attempted assassinations of Yushchenko and Alexander Litvinenko by more than seven decades . Russia’s use of poisoned agents predates the attempted assassination of YUSHchenko and Litvinko by more.
 Yevhen Konovalets in Rotterdam in 1939 and Lev Rebet and Bandera in Munich in 1957 and 1959 respectively .
 The assassination of Rebet was viewed as a trial run for Bandera, using a cyanide poison gun that the KGB had developed which left no traces and simulated a heart attack .
 The USSR continued to undertake ‘wet operations’ through to the mid-1980s . Despite the embarrassment produced by the defection of KGB assassin Bohdan Stashynskyy in 1961, the USSR continued.
 Bulgarian journalist Georgi Markov was murdered in 1978 using ricin poison administered by an umbrella .
 In 1981, an attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, whom the Soviet Union feared was supporting the anti-communist Solidarity movement, by a far right Turkish nationalist failed .
 The plot revealed many details of how the USSR used false flag operations to disguise its involvement . The plot was revealed in an interview with CNN's Tom Charity .
 Soviet archives brought to the West by KGB defector Vasili Mitrokhin show extent of Soviet penetration of Italy and other European countries . GRU was behind the attempted assassination of the Pope.
 The USSR backed national liberation movements in Africa and Central and Latin America . The USSR also backed national independence movements in the region .
 The Soviet Union employed extensive dezinformatsiya, producing false stories and conspiracy theories . The SovietUnion employed extensive Dezinformatatsiya.
 Soviet active measures actively fanned anti-Americanism during the 1980s . The Soviet government was heavily involved in the fight against Americanism .
 The USSR imprisoned and executed Ukrainian nationalists as late as 1987 . The anti-nationalist propaganda declined in intensity only in the late-1980s .
The Soviet Union’s decades of antinationalist propaganda had successes and failures . The Soviet Union's decades of anti-Russian propaganda had success and failures.
 The stereotype of the Western Ukrainian nationalist who collaborated with the Nazis was established among many in Russia, some in Eastern Ukraine .
 In Eastern Ukraine, old stereotypes were enhanced by Russia’s information warfare in 2013-2014 . In Ukraine, the information warfare contributed to transforming protests into an insurgency .
 Amnesty International described the summary executions of Ukrainian prisoners as amounting to war crimes .
 Popular support for the extreme right in Ukraine is comparatively low by European standards . Today, civic nationalism remains strong, and popular support for extreme right is comparatively lower than in Europe .
 In large part due to Russia's actions, greater numbers of Ukrainian citizens have re-identified as ethnic Ukrainians . In the 1989 Soviet and 2001 Ukrainian censuses respectively to 92% today .
 Ukrainian scholar Volodymr Kulyk has outlined the increase in popularity of Ukrainian over Russian language media, film and books since 2014 .
 The role of new technology, beginning with the use of mobile phones and text messaging, alerted Russian officials to the power of social media .
 The response has been a concerted effort to develop these weapons for the purposes of the state . They are now deployed systematically to promote Russia’s revival as a great power and to sow dissension within the Western alliance .
 Russia believes it can intervene in U.S. and European elections . If the West can interfere in the 2012 Russian presidential elections and foment regime change during the Euromaidan, it could intervene .
 The details of these efforts and of their impact are still being uncovered, so rather than dig into this episode in detail, we simply note that it comprises an important example of Russia’s broader strategy .
 Putin believes Russia was meant to keep Russia down and weak . A second goal is to use information and cyber warfare to undermine the world order .
 This means challenging the norms on which U.S. hegemony relies, and promoting a multipolar world guided by traditional norms of non-interference .
 Russia continues a long-standing Soviet objective of seeking to replace NATO with a pan-European security organisation led by the OSCE . The OSCE would hold a veto if it held a veto .
 Russia’s efforts to promote separatist movements in the West are in tension with its own determination to prevent Chechen independence . So far the contradiction has not appeared to be a problem .
 Russia has supported a range of separatist movements in the UK and elsewhere . Government-backed Anti-Globalisation movement invited to congresses in Moscow in September 2015 and August 2016 .
 Alex Salmon has launched a chat show on Russia Today . Former SNP leader and First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmon is a former SNP leader .
France and Germany have been key targets of Russia’s information and cyber warfare . France and Germany are the two countries that have been targeted by Russia .
 Russia undertook a range of ‘active measures’ against Macron during the election campaign . It included the opening of 70,000 Facebook accounts and tens of thousands of 'bots’ to spread anti-Macron content .
 Thousands of emails were hacked from Macron election campaign servers and dumped on the Internet two days before the second round .
 The KGB was divided into parts separating foreign and domestic intelligence into the SVR and FSB respectively . The SVR was created to create independent structures for government communications and Border Guards .
 The KGB had backed the August 1991 putsch and hoped the president could control the new institutions better . The driving force was distrust in the KGB which had backed putsch .
 The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 37 sometimes separately, with the Presidential Administration in central control .
 Former Soviet intelligence officers provided support to Abkhaz separatists in Georgia . In Georgia, former Soviet intelligence officials provided support for separatists . Georgia was on the verge of being defeated.
 Russian proxies were re-armed by Russia and provided with Russian FSB and GRU advisers . A ceasefire was called, Russian proxies was re-armed by Russia .
 The proxies then re-launched the war, winning territory and forcing Georgia to accept the freezing of separatist control . Georgia then agreed to allow the proxies to re-launch the war .
 Russian regular army forces have been used repeatedly in Moldova, Georgia, Georgia and Ukraine . Russia's military forces have also been used in Ukraine's Donbas and Moldova's Trans-Dniestr .
 Russia’s promotion of proxies in contested regions within its neighbours’ borders has foreshadowed its tactics in Ukraine . The Russian view that Ukraine itself is an artificial construct is a Russian view .
 Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s ‘Rebuilding Russia’ published in 1990 and his appeal issued a year later during Ukraine's referendum on independence both called into question Ukrainian control over Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 All of these were intended to bolster the notion that Yushchenko was an extreme anti-Russian nationalist, and even a neo-Nazi .
 Many of the strategies pursued in 2014 were already being pursued a decade earlier in Ukraine . Ukraine was not on the radar of NATO and EU enlargement .
 Russia’s reaction in both cases far surpassed its typical response after the expulsion of Russian spies from Europe and North America . Russia's reaction to expulsion of spies far surpassed the typical response to the expulsion.
 President Medvedev sent an open letter to Yushchenko with a long list of demands to change its domestic and foreign policies .
 Russia's information war continues to disparage Ukraine's official views of the Holodomor . Russia’s information war has been dubbed Russia's Information War .
 The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare are 39 ‘Wet operations’ by intelligence agents, Russian proxies and organised crime working on behalf of the Russian government have continued into the present day .
 Russian intelligence conducts assassinations and terrorist campaigns inside Ukraine . Russian intelligence conduct assassinations, terrorist campaigns in Ukraine .
 There are close parallels between the attempted poisoning of Yushchenko in 2004 and that of former KGB agent Alexander Litvinenko in 2006 . The dioxin and radioactive polonium used in their poisoning produced in Russian laboratories inherited from the USSR and run since 1991 .
 Ukrainian authorities accused Russia of being behind the poisoning of Yushchenko . It remains unclear exactly who carried out the attack .
 British government enquiry into the assassination of Litvinenko blamed the murder on Russian authorities . Investigation concluded that Putin ‘probably’ approved his murder .
 Since 2014, Russian intelligence services have conducted a targeted series of assassinations in the West and Ukraine . The assassinations have been carried out since 2014 .
 United States intelligence ties 14 assassinations abroad to Russia . U.S. intelligence ties fourteen assassinations to Russia.
 Denis Voronenkov was a key witness in the criminal case against former President Yanukovych . He had fled Russia into exile in Ukraine and was murdered in March .
 Colonel Maksym Shapoval, commander of Ukraine’s military intelligence Special Forces, was murdered in March and June .
 Colonel Oleksandr Kharaberyush was assassinated in Mariupol and Security Service of Ukraine Colonel Yuriy Voznyy was killed . Three others wounded in a car bomb in the village of Illinivka, near the anti-terrorist operation front line .
 Adam Osmayev was seriously wounded in an attack by a Chechen organised crime leader . He had led a battalion fighting Russian forces in Chechnya .
 In October 2017, a second attempt assassinated his wife Amina and wounded him while they were driving a car in Kiev . A second attempt was also attempted in October 2017 .
 Timur Mahauri, a Chechen with Georgian citizenship and a volunteer fighter in the Chechen battalion of Sheykh Mansur, was killed in a car bomb in Central Kiev . Four months later, TimurMahauri, who had Georgian citizenship.
 Invasions are conducted with stealth, deniability and confusion with the blurring of the truth about the presence of forces, their objectives, combat readiness and numbers .
 USSR always denied it was behind terrorist groups active in Europe and used a false flag operation to blame Turkish nationalists for the assassination attempt on the Pope .
 Putin sardonically replied, ‘There are many military uniforms’ in Crimea, he said .
 Putin's repeated denials of Russian troops in the Donbas have been replicated in news stories broadcast and printed by Russian, Crimean and DNR-LNR media . Reports of clearly staged Ukrainian ‘terrorist attacks’ that have been supposedly foiled .
 Russia, Trolls, and the Information War against Ukraine’s in Olga Bertelsen ed., Revolution and War in Contemporary Ukraine: The Challenge of Change .
 Dorji Batomunkuev from the Russian fifth tank brigade in Ulan-Ude sensed they were being sent to Ukraine to fight . The wounded tank driver was wounded in the attack .
 Oscar Jonsson and Robert Seely describe Russian hybrid warfare as ‘full spectrum conflict’ where military and non-military factors are placed under one command and directed to a single strategic goal .
 Political subversion — seizing of state buildings, sabotage, assassinations, terrorism, propaganda and insertion of agents . Political subversions — seizing state buildings and assassinations .
 Proxy — consolidation of continuous areas, arrival of volunteers, creation of ‘self-defence militias’, destruction of government infrastructures and beginning of recruitment of local proxies .
Government security forces, provision of logistics and support, and disruption by cyber-attacks . Intervention — threats and preparations for invasion, destruction of government security forces .
 Coercive Deterrence — shows of force by the larger neighbour, nuclear posturing and hints and threats of escalation to pressure the country under attack to capitulate .
 The massing of Russian troops on the border has been used in Georgia and Eastern Ukraine as a deterrent against an attack on its proxy forces . They represent a security guarantee to Russian proxy-controlled regions .
 Christian Science Monitor, 30 July 2014, is published by Christian ScienceMonitor . They are also meant to deter the West from Ukrainian ruin’s Ukraine .
Escalation — from camouflaged hybrid warfare to intervention which is the least preferred outcome as it is easily detected . Escalation is from camouflage to intervention, but it is not the most preferred outcome .
Galeotti points out this tradition goes back as far as the role played by Stalin’s secret police, the NKVD, in the Spanish Civil War . Galeotti says it goes back to the role of Stalin's secret police.
In the 1940s, the NKVD had created fake UPA units, which committed massacres of villagers and stole food to turn the local population against the Ukrainian nationalist underground . Similarly, in the 1940's, theNKVD had made fake Upa units, that committed massacres
 The Soviet secret police had created fake underground organisations in the USSR . They gave their support to émigré groups in order to gather intelligence on the Russian and Ukrainian diasporas .
 Myron Matviyeko was captured in 1951 after parachuting into Ukraine . He agreed to work with Soviet secret police, pretending he was running a nationalist underground through to 1960 .
 In the Donbas, the GRU oversee Russian forces and Russian proxies while the FSB keep everybody in line . The GRU oversees Russian forces, Russian proxies and Russian forces .
 A major group drawn upon by the Russian authorities in the Donbas have been Cossacks . They have a tradition going back to the Tsarist Empire of acting as the state's vigilantes .
 The FSB permitted the smuggling to take place in return for the criminals being ready to provide favours in return . The smuggling was allowed by the FSB in return.
 Civilians — information warriors and hackers, pro-Putin oligarchs, and domestic and international bankers infiltrate targets in various ways .
 This huge amount of capital purchases real estate, buys places in private schools for the children of oligarchs and corrupt state officials . It hires legions of investment bankers, lawyers, consultants and accountants .
 Former KGB officer Alexander Lebedev is owner of UK's Independent, Independent and London Evening Standard newspapers .
 The goal is to gain entry and begin shaping the interests and views of the target country’s elite .
 As events played out in the Donbas, there were clear stages to the escalation of combat . There were clear signs of the escalating of combat.
 Mass anti-Ukrainian propaganda on Russian TV and social media helped transform public protests in the Donbas into an armed rebellion . Russian Special Forces were then strengthened by Russia's Special Forces .
Nationalist volunteers were recruited by Russian intelligence services and by Russian TV propaganda . Nationalist volunteers are recruited by Russia's intelligence services .
 Russian intelligence officers had also been financing and training anti-Maidan vigilantes in Kharkiv and elsewhere in Eastern Ukraine .
 Many of these vigilantes moved to join Russian proxies in the Donbas after the failed attempt to create a Kharkiv People's Republic .
 In July, Russia pounded Ukraine and the following month, with its proxy forces on the verge of defeat, Russia invaded Ukraine .
 Kiev could have defeated Russian proxy forces in Moldova and Georgia, according to reports . Ukraine is different from the frozen conflicts in Moldovan and Georgia .
 Russia is conducting a full-blown proxy war against Ukraine. Since the signing of the Minsk 1 accords in September 2014, Russia has been conducting a proxy war .
 separatist movement at this point is a de facto extension of the Russian military and an instrument of Russian national power . The separatist movement is a De facto extension.
 The Russian military has put in place a robust command structure in Eastern Ukraine . Russian General Staff officers overseeing operations down to junior officers .
 Russian personnel conduct communications, intelligence gathering, direct military operations, and help correct artillery fire . Russian people conduct communications and intelligence gathering .
 Separatist fighters have publicly acknowledged that they are operating under instructions from Moscow . Separatists are operating from Moscow, they have said .
With neither side defeated in the Donbas and the war on-going, it cannot be defined as a frozen conflict . With neither side defeating, it can't be described as a Frozen conflict .
 The Russian Imperial Movement, with links to Igor Girkin and paramilitaries fighting for Russian proxies in the Donbas, is training neo-Nazi groups from Central and Western Europe .
 Russia attempted to halt Montenegro from joining NATO through a coup attempt and assassination plot . Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic was the target .
 The plot brought together nationalist Serbs and Russian Cossacks who had fought for Russian proxies in the Donbas . Russia’s GRU provided United States dollars, sophisticated encrypted mobile telephones, a large arsenal of weapons, and training .
 Cossack General Viktor Zaplatin, a Russian citizen, told a rally in Montenegro, 'The Orthodox world is one world'
 Montenegro issued an international warrant for a further two Russians and three Serbs . Twenty Serbs and Russians were arrested by Montenegro which issued a warrant for two more .
 Nemanja Ristic was photographed next to Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergei Lavrov during his 12 December 2016 visit to Belgrade .
 Serbia arrested Ristic and another Serbian nationalist Predrag Bogicevic for their involvement in the Russian-backed coup .
 Montenegro accused GRU officers at large Eduard Shishmakov and Vladimir Popov of being the main instigators of the failed coup d’état . Montenegro accuses GRU of being main instigator of failed coup.
 Twitter, Facebook and other forms of social media became central to mass protests in Iran, the ‘Arab Spring’, Russian mass protests and the Euromaidan Revolution .
 Authoritarian regimes fought back by imposing controls on the Internet and using trolls and unleashing bots to flood social media with false and biased information . Authoritarian governments fought back.
 Social media that were used to undermine states a decade ago are today being used by states to undermine their critics . Social media is being used as a tool to undermine state critics .
 In Russia, the long Soviet tradition of ‘agitation and propaganda’ is being empowered by social media .
 The EU’s External Action Service began publishing a weekly Disinformation Review in 2016 to keep abreast of the large volume of disinformation originating in Russia .
 The head of Britain’s MI6 intelligence service has made comments about colour revolutions against Russia . An example is that of a highly realistic counterfeit article apparently from The Guardian .
 The article was reprinted in the Russian media and elsewhere in the world . The article is published in Russia and other countries .
 In 2016, Russian media widely disseminated a false story that a 13-year-old Russian-German girl had been kidnapped and raped by Muslim migrants, triggering protests in Germany .
 A high-level diplomatic spat broke out between German officials and Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Lavrov . Lavrov publicly fanned the false story .
 Russia's aim was apparently to increase the popularity of the anti-EU extreme right Alternative for Germany .
 Ukraine is a frequently occurring target in pro-Kremlin disinformation . Ukraine is often targeted by pro-Russian disinformation .
 Some of the more astonishing allegations were even brought to us by the TV channel owned by Russia's Ministry of Defence .
 The claim that Ukrainian forces crucified a three-year-old boy in Eastern Ukraine is the most ridiculous claim .
 Russia presented the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight 17 as having been carried out by Ukrainian forces attempting to assassinate Putin .
 The disinformation was repeated in several outlets, and in one it was illustrated by a photo of a soldier eating a hand .
 The most repeated piece of disinformation was the old favourite linking Nazis and Ukraine . But, it was also a favourite linking the Nazis with Ukraine .
 The country was accused of being a neo-Nazi monster created by the West, as well as being occupied by Nazis who follow in the footsteps of Joseph Goebbels .
 There was no specific mention of the actual occupation of parts of Ukraine . No specific mention.
 Ukraine was presented as a victim of the ‘Evil West’ in some outlets . Ukraine was also presented as an example of a recurring disinformation theme .
 50 journalists from Russia’s leading television channels and newspapers arrived in Tskhinvali, South Ossetia .
 Russia accused Georgia of committing ‘genocide’ against South Ossetia . It is similar to the many Russia has made against Ukraine since 2014 .
 Russian propaganda and information warfare mobilised antiUkrainian hysteria in the Donbas and Crimea to fever pitch levels during the Euromaidan and spring 2014 .
 During the height of the crisis, a hacked mobile phone conversation between U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine Geoffrey Pyatt and US Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland was released .
 Nuland was captured uttering a vulgarity about the EU, complicating US-EU collaboration . Nulan was captured.
 The image presented by Russia’s information warfare of Ukraine in spring 2014 is of a mortal threat to Russian speakers .
 Putin said Euromaidan revolutionaries resorted ‘to terror, murder and riots’ In Putin’s 18 March 2014 address welcoming the Crimea as part of Russia he said the Eurom Maidan revolutionaries had resorted ’to terror.
 Russia has been strengthening control of the Internet in Russia, a practice with deep roots in the Soviet regime . It has been exploiting social media itself, it has been using social media to strengthen its control .
 Luke Harding points out how the FSB inherited KGB-style paranoia, xenophobia and conspiratorial worldview . Harding says FSB is obsessed with searching for domestic and foreign enemies . The FSB has been accused of being obsessed with looking for foreign enemies.
 The Soviet Ministry of Communications suggested that callers dial not only the number they wanted to call, but also their own, so that no one would go unidentified .
 Nothing has changed on Lubyanka Square, says people on the square .
Seven years earlier Russia had initiated a cyber and information warfare attack on Estonia . It was ostensibly in retaliation for Estonia’s decision to relocate a Soviet memorial .
 The cyber-attack affected Estonia’s functions for a month . The information campaign prompted riots against the relocation of the memorial .
 A year after the attacks, NATO opened a Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre in Tallinn . The centre was opened a year after NATO opened the centre .
Ukraine and Russia are as closely intertwined as were Ukraine and Russia until 2014 . Coping with cyber warfare and hacking is a difficult undertaking when countries are closely intertwined .
 Ukrainian officials continued to use Russian email addresses after the 2014 crisis . Russian mail servers, and Russian search engines, such as Yandex .
 In May 2017, a Ukrainian presidential decree banned VKonakte, Yandex and Russian email servers . The decree was issued in May 2017 .
 Cyber-attacks cut off electricity to nearly a quarter of a million Ukrainians just before Christmas . Another attack hit Ukraine’s power grid in December 2016 and a third was unleashed in June 2017 .
 In France, Greece and elsewhere in Europe, extreme left anti-Americanism has a long pedigree .
 UK Labour and Conservative MPs have been criticised for accepting large fees in exchange for appearing on Russia Today .
 Registering with FARA is usually only a requirement for lobbyists and consultants working on behalf of foreign governments .
 Registration under FARA automatically led to the removal of Russia Today and Sputnik’s official accreditation to attend press conferences and undertake media activities in the United States Congress .
 Russian information warfare can be credited for the growth of pro-Putin sentiments . It is difficult to say as they could be a product of many factors, such as the domestic populist backlash against the liberal establishment .
 Anti-Americanism and support for Putin have also grown among the extreme right in Europe . Anti- Americanism and supporting Putin are also growing in Europe's right .
 In the US, it is not clear whether Russian information operations or other factors are the cause of a flip in attitudes toward Russia and Putin .
 Fully a third of Republican voters expressed confidence in Putin in 2017, up from 17% in 2015 . Only 13% of Democratic voters were confident in Putin .
 Nearly two-thirds of Democratic voters see Russia as a threat to national security . 46% of Republican voters do not see it as a national threat .
 This reverses a long historical trend in which Republicans have been more hawkish on Russia . This reverss a long history of Republican support for the country .
 disinformation to swing a close referendum vote in the Netherlands on approval of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . Another success was the use of disinformation to sway a close vote on the agreement .
 Numerous theories about the shooting down of MH17 failed to change Western public opinion about who shot down the airliner . The most colourful was that the flight was full of shop floor dummies rather than real people .
 Russia’s English-language television station RT has been an increasingly visible tool of Russian information efforts .
 RT has sought to build its Western audience by luring Western journalists and public figures to work at its English-language television channel .
 CNN senior anchor Larry King was paid $250,000 to interview Ukrainian Prime Minister Nikolai Azarov . Azarov is in exile in Moscow and wanted by Interpol . King received his own show on Russia Today .
 The adoption of new tougher United States sanctions in summer 2017 was a backlash against Russia’s interference in the U.S. 2016 elections .
 France and Germany once broadly supportive of Russia's interests in Europe . Now opposing Russia's position on Ukraine and supporting sanctions .
 There are two potential difficulties with the pursuit of hybrid warfare . There are also potential difficulties.
 In Crimea, Russian hybrid warfare found perfect conditions which were far less prevalent in Eastern-Southern Ukraine . In the Crimea, Russia's hybrid warfare was found to be more prevalent in the Crimea .
 Critical views of Putin and Russia are especially prominent in the U.S. and Europe . Critical views are especially important in the United States and Europe.
 RT has been unable to capture large audiences in key Western states such as Britain, Germany, the U.S. and Canada . RT has not been able to capture big audiences in the West .
 In the UK, RT has 0.04% of viewers, according to the Broadcast Audience Research Board . In the U.S. RT has 1.4% of the UK's viewers .
 The second problem is a backlash from the country that is the object of Russia’s hybrid warfare . The second issue is the country's hybrid warfare.
 Russia’s unprecedented intervention in the 2016 U.S. presidential elections mobilised support in both houses of Congress for far tougher sanctions against Russia . The United States may be considering sending military equipment to Ukraine .
 Peacefully integrating Ukraine with Russia is less likely now than ever before. Peaceful integration with Russia will be less likely than ever.
 The different outcomes of Russian hybrid warfare in the Crimea and the Donbas shows how local conditions matter . The Crimea and Donbas are the two areas of Russia's conflict .
 In Crimea, there was a near complete Russian penetration of the security forces that were locally recruited, a large Black Sea Fleet base and a receptive Russian-speaking population with a history of supporting separatism in the 1990s .
 None of these six factors existed in the Donbas and South-East Ukraine . None of the six factors were known to exist in Ukraine .
Kent believes that Kiev looked upon the Crimea as ‘a region apart’ and the ‘Cinderella of the Ukrainian state’ Kent believes that the country’s military and Ukrainian nationalists were not willing to fight for the Crimea .
 Russia appears to have achieved only limited success in Eastern-Southern Ukraine . Russia has failed to spur a more decisive rebellion in Donbas or a broader rebellion into Novorossiya .
 Russia’s need to maintain a permanent military commitment to the Donbas will be a continuous drain on resources and a continuous sore spot in its relations with the West . Russia's need to keep a permanentMilitary commitment to Donbas is a continuous draining on resources .
 The invasion has strengthened the Ukrainian state and civil society, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukrainians volunteered in a wide range of areas to support the war effort and to fight Russia on the battlefield . Ukrainians volunteered to help Ukraine fight Russia in the information sphere and collect for and deliver supplies .
 StopFake,’*° established by academics and students at Kiev Mohyla Academy, began exposing Russian disinformation three years before the EU set up its own unit .
 StopFake had gone from ‘provincial do-gooders to international media stars’ offering advice to European countries . By the 2016 U.S. elections, StopFake has gone from 'provincialDo-gooder' to 'international media stars'
 Ukrainian authorities have also undertaken a wide range of policies to reduce ties with Russia . The Ukrainian authorities are also taking steps to reduce relations with Russia.
 Ukrainians have become more sceptical towards Russian media sources, polls show .
 Sanctions against Russian media outlets have reduced Moscow’s ability to pursue information warfare against Ukraine, while raising concerns about freedom of speech .
 Russia is using the newest information technology for influencing people’s minds in Ukraine . Russia is aiming to inflame national and religious tensions, spread propaganda and spread propaganda, advocating aggressive war .
 The most contentious areas where Russia’s actions have led to Ukraine pushing back has been in the sphere of national identity . Russia's actions have been the most contentious area where Ukraine has been pushing back .
 Ukraine’s relations with Russia will no longer be ‘fraternal’ and ‘brotherly’ at the very least while Putin is in power . As chapter three and chapter four show, Ukraine's relations with Russian will be no longer ‘
 An important area for Ukrainian national identity has been the establishment of a distinct Ukrainian mythology of World War II to replace the Soviet/Russian version .
 Ukraine's version focuses on World War II, beginning with the Nazi and Soviet invasion of Poland/Eastern Ukraine in 1939 . The Russian/Soviet version refers to the Great Patriotic War beginning with Germany’s invasion of Russia in 1941 .
 Ukraine has celebrated the end of the war on the 8"" of May — as in Europe, rather than on the 9"" ofMay . Since 2015, Ukraine has been celebrating the end in Europe.
 This symbolically refutes Soviet history, replaces the notion of a common wartime experience with Russia to that of a distinct Ukrainian experience . Ukraine's suffering in World War II to the current war in Eastern Ukraine.
 Ukrainian TV advertisements have brought together veterans from both wars with fathers sending their sons off to fight the latest invader of Ukraine .
 Russia’s use of hybrid warfare in Ukraine was novel, according to the author . Russia had deep roots in the practices both of the Soviet Union and in Russia before 2014, he says .
 During the Cold War, dezinformatsiya and maskirovka were constantly employed to undermine the regime’s challengers, especially national independence movements .
 The Soviet regime employed more sporadically, imprisonment and assassination of Ukrainian opponents of Soviet rule . The death of Stalin in 1953 was also part of the Soviet repertoire .
 The tactics were aimed westward, providing finance and disinformation to support the groups that most undermined Western unity . In addition to undermining internal threats to Soviet rule, these tactics were also aimed at undermining Soviet rule .
 When the Soviet Union disintegrated in 1991, the Russian government took over its institutions, including the KGB and GRU, essentially intact .
 While the KGB was renamed and reorganised into the Federal Security Service and Foreign Intelligence Service, it was not fundamentally reformed . The KGB was not reformed.
 Russia under Putin is increasingly run by people whose roots were in the Soviet security apparatus . This is especially true since Russia is increasinglyrun by people who have roots in the security apparatus.
 The tactics we see in Ukraine since 2014 bear strong resemblance to those employed from the beginning of the post-Soviet era, in Trans-Dniestr and Georgia .
 Russian forces deny involvement of Russian forces, seeking to insert Russia as a peacekeeper or mediator . They include sponsoring and arming proxies to pursue separatism .
 The focus on hybrid operations, while its roots are deep, took on new life due to three factors . The focus is on hybrid ops, while the roots of hybrid operations are deep .
 The first was the increasing Russian focus on the concept of ‘soft power’ and the mutation of the concept from one of passive influence to promoting active control .
 The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 57 interpretation of the colour revolutions as ‘hybrid’ operations driven by external actors that both justified and demanded hybrid responses .
 The third factor has been the explosion of new media, including social media . Social media has opened up considerable new opportunities for disinformation . The potential for cyberwarfare has also been created .
Long-term continuity underlying Russian hybrid operations is important. What happened in 2014 was not an improvised response to a temporary challenge, says Peter Bergen .
Business will likely continue until something very substantial happens to disrupt it. Rather, it was a way of doing business that has long-standing precedent .
 If we perceived a lull in activity after 1991, that period now appears much more likely than the current one to appear anomalous in the long term .
 'Soviet Nationality Policies in Soviet Ukraine' and 'Nationality Policies, Regionalism, and the Crimea in Ukraine' in Ukraine .
 Russia-West-Ukraine: Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 . The idea that there was a clear post-Soviet order in the region that subsequently collapsed .
 Russia did not accept the political independence of Ukraine and the territorial loss of Crimea and the Donbas . The fundamental problem with these perspectives is that these putative causes emerged well after the initial signs that Russia didn't accept Ukraine's independence .
 Ukraine's relations with Russia from the Soviet collapse in 1991 to the 2013-2014 crisis . In this chapter, we examine Ukraine’s relations with the Russian state .
 Russia never voluntarily accepted Ukraine’s independence, analysis shows . Russia made several attempts in the 1990s to assert control over part or all of Crimea, and showed elsewhere tactics .
 President Putin referred back to the adoption of Christianity by the Kievan Rus Grand Prince Volodymyr the Great in 988 . President Putin justifying the seizure of Crimea in a 2014 speech .
 One strand concerns geopolitics — about threats and opportunities now and in the future . One strand is about threats, opportunities and opportunities.
 A second concerns international law, which on this case is unambiguously in favour of Ukraine . On this case, the case was unambiguous in favour.
We leave these two issues aside for the moment to consider arguments about history and about people . These profoundly affect claims about what state should control a particular territory and the people who live on it .
 The literature on the topic is immense, and here we simply identify themes that are relevant to Russia’s claims . Russia's claims.
History helps explain why Russians take at face value claims about Russia’s rights in Ukraine .
Today’s ‘facts’ about demographics and language use are based on histories which lead to conflicting interpretations .
 The territory that became independent Ukraine in 1991 had spent various lengths of time under rule from Moscow . Ukraine became independent in 1991 .
 The Western region of Galicia had been ruled from Moscow only since 1939 . The Soviet Union, under the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, invaded Eastern Poland in 1939 .
 Crimea had been part of Ukraine since 1954, when control was transferred from the Russian SFSR to Ukraine . Crimea was part of the country when it was transferred to Ukraine in 1954 .
 Crimea was connected to and supplied from Ukraine, not Russia . This transfer is often referred to as a ‘gift’ but appears to have been a matter of administrative convenience .
 Crimea (along with much of Southern Ukraine, including Odesa and the region that Putin has referred to as Novorossiya) was seized in the late 18"" century from the Ottoman Empire .
 Kiev and most of the territory to the east of it had been part of Russia since 1667 . Kiev and the east had been in Russia since the early 1667.
 The region west of the Dnipro River was mostly acquired as a result of the partitions of Poland in the late 18"" century . The region was largely acquired by the partitioning of Poland.
 Many in Russia regard much of Ukraine as ‘naturally’ part of Russia .
 Russia gathered nearly all this territory by the use of force, so the legitimacy of Russian control was never uncontested . The territory was gathered by Russia.
 The Baltic States were controlled by Russia for many years before their independence . Their ‘Russianness’ was never accepted uncritically .
 Many of the people on this territory did not identify as Russians, a matter that became complicated over time .
 The national identity of the residents of different parts of Ukraine has become an important part of discussions over who the territory should belong to .
 Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 63 Ukraine, is based on what language people speak and whether they are ‘really’ Russians or a separate Ukrainian people .
 Polish nationalists through to the 1940s believed Ukrainians were not a nation . This is not that unusual as it may sound .
 Russian and Polish nationalists both saw evidence of foreign conspiracies lurking behind Ukrainian attempts to claim a separate national identity and build an independent state .
 National identity, language, ethnicity, ethnicity and regionalism have been the most thoroughly researched topics concerning Ukraine . Ukraine's national identity and language are the most researched topics.
 The results show a complicated and nuanced mixture of identity factors . The results of this research show a complex mixture of identities .
 The language question becomes politicised when a choice must be forced . It comes up primarily in schools and in government business .
 Ukraine’s tumultuous history has made it harder to address these issues today . Ukraine's tumultuous history makes it harder for the country to address today .
 The question of whether the Ukrainian language should be promoted for its own sake or for the interest of the country's unity is made much more fraught by the legacy of Russian and Soviet policy .
 The Tsarist Russian government in 1876 passed the Ems Ukaz, banning publications in Ukrainian, in order to block a rise in Ukrainian national sentiment . The EmsUkaz was passed by the Russian government.
After the Soviets took control and briefly allowed a flourishing of Ukrainian cultures, Stalin cracked down and imprisoned Ukrainian nationalists and national communists .
 The Holodomor fell heavily on the Ukrainian-speaking peasants of Central and Eastern Ukraine and the Kuban region of Northern Caucasus .
 The current high level of Russian-speaking in Eastern Ukraine is a direct result of the suppression of the Ukrainian language and the starvation of millions of Ukrainian speakers under Soviet rule, many Ukrainians regard as Russian rule . The result is a history everyone in Ukraine knows.
 The Russian government disclaims responsibility for Stalin's repression . Many Russians suffered as well, even as Putin increasingly praises Stalin’s legacy .
 The result is that simply ratifying the status quo seems to some to acquiesce in and perpetuate the results of Tsarist and Stalinist repression .
 Those seeking to promote the Ukrainian language see it as undoing that oppression . Others see oppression in efforts to change the language in which people are schooled or interact with the government .
 One might simply hold a plebiscite, as Russia did in Crimea under very questionable conditions . One might just hold a Plebiscites.
 Language policy is a very complicated question in Ukraine, and it has been made more complicated by politicians using it to instil fear and mobilise voters .
 The Russian Empire and then the Soviet Union controlled vast swaths of Ukraine for many years before 1991 . The broader point, and it is essential, is that the Russian Empire controlled vast swathes of Ukraine .
 It is not hard to see why many in Russia regard the idea that Ukraine — and especially Eastern Ukraine and Crimea — is not part of Russia .
 Many in Ukraine believe there is something to fear from Russia. It is precisely these attitudes that convince many in Ukraine that there is nothing to fear.
 The same history that shows some that Ukraine is part of Russia shows others that Russia is a threat to the language, culture and lives of Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian distinctiveness persisted despite efforts of two very autocratic regimes to eradicate it . Ukrainian distinctness persisted despite the concerted efforts of both regimes to eradicate it .
 Ukraine is a distinct place and a distinct people, but was always ruled by foreigners . In this view, Ukraine will be again if it does not guard its independence jealously .
Much disagreement about the appropriate relationship between Russia and Ukraine, both within the region and outside it, comes down to one's prior beliefs about the relationship .
 Stalin deported the entire Tatar population from Crimea in 1944, increasing the Russian ethnic majority now observed in Crimea .
 Of 13 ‘Hero Cities’ identified by the Soviet government after World War II, four were in Ukraine . Four were in the Ukraine .
 Two of these, Sevastopol and Kerch, are in Crimea and are now controlled by Russia . The Crimea region is in Crimea .
 Supporters of Russia and critics of the West tend to fall back on the first view of Russia . Supporters of the Russian government and the West fall back.
 Supporters of Ukraine, and of Western support for Ukraine, tend to fall back on one of the latter two views . The two views are different, and the two are different .
 Ukraine and Russia Since 1991. We turn to the period since 1991 for a review of history and national identity issues .
 Russia objected to Ukrainian sovereignty from the very beginning of this period, and repeatedly contested it in the following years .
 Russian objections to full Ukrainian sovereignty predated NATO enlargement and the rise of Putin . Only a very narrow group of pro-Western reformers advocating that Russia write-off Ukraine for the sake of concentrating on domestic reform .
Boris Yeltsin was President of Russia from 1990 to 1999 . He was one of those who sought to put the Ukraine issue behind Russia . The Ukraine issue has been the subject of much controversy .
 Yeltsin sought to prevent Ukraine from becoming fully independent, but once it seemed beyond his control, he sought to move forward . He sought revision of 1991 arrangements, even as many in his government continued to seek revision .
 This chapter reviews several key periods and incidents between Russia and Ukraine since 1991 . This chapter includes key periods, incidents and incidents.
 It highlights several key episodes that provide insight into the historical depth of contention over the proper relationship between Ukraine and Russia .
 The long contentious struggle over ownership of the Black Sea Fleet and its base at Sevastopol, in Crimea, has been ongoing for years .
 The 1997 Friendship Treaty between Russia and Ukraine appeared to signal Russia's acceptance of Ukraine’s independence . The treaty was signed in 1997 .
 The treaty was ratified by the state Duma and Federation Council in 1998-1999 with Russian deputies linking the question to the Black Sea Fleet, Crimea and Sevastopol .
 Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov voiced territorial claims against Ukraine . He intervened in Crimean affairs throughout the two decades leading up to the crisis in 2013-2014 .
 Combined 66 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics with ‘colour revolutions’ in Serbia, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan . This episode increased Russian sensitivity to the threat of transnational diffusion of prodemocracy movements to Putin's rule .
 The Collapse of the Soviet Union and Formation of the CIS both Soviet leaders and Russian leaders opposed Ukraine’s independence in 1991 .
 The battle between Gorbachev and Yeltsin for control in Moscow provided Ukraine with the leverage to insist on complete independence . But the battle between the two sides provided the leverage.
 Ukraine’s parliament declared independence on 24 August 1991 . It scheduled a referendum on independence for 1 December, to be accompanied by elections for President .
 In one of these, Yeltsin sought to seize control of the levers of power from President Gorbachev in Moscow . In another, he sought to take over the power of the Kremlin .
 Soviet foreign, defence, finance, finance and other ministries became Russian ministries . As a result, the Soviet foreign and defence, defence and finance ministries become Russian ministries.
 Moscow tried to retain some form of devolved control over Ukraine . Leonid Kravchuk rejected any new agreements until after the 1 December 1991 election and referendum .
 On 1 December 1991, Ukraine’s citizens voted decisively for independence and for Kravchuk as president .
 First, of the leading candidates, Ukrainians chose the less nationalist one over former dissident and nationalist leader Vyacheslav Chornovil .
Every oblast of Ukraine, including Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk, voted in favour of independence . Second, while the independence vote was regionally skewed, with higher support for independence in the West than in the East and South .
Kravchuk met with Yeltsin and Belarusian leader Stanislav Shushkevych on 7-8 December to agree on a new formal relationship between the three states . Kravchuk was in a powerful bargaining position when he met with the three countries
 Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 dissolving the Union Treaty, legally, meant total independence for Ukraine and Belarus .
 The only way to square the circle for Yeltsin was to simultaneously negotiate a new agreement to create a looser union . The deal would also create a Looser union for the city .
 Yeltsin faced the choice between finding another way to defeat Gorbachev or accepting Ukraine’s independence for the time being . The decision was made by the Russian government.
 Gorbachev chose to sign the agreement, which led directly to the cessation of the USSR as a subject of international law . The agreement was signed on 25 December, accompanied by the replacement of the Soviet hammer and sickle by the Russian tricolour .
 The deal that cemented Ukraine’s independence and the collapse of the Soviet Union was not welcomed by Russian leaders, Yeltsin included .
 There was no other clear way to complete Yeltsin’s takeover of the government in Moscow . Rather it was accepted because there was no clear way.
 Russia sought with growing frustration to reel back in, insisting certain prerogatives belonged to the CIS or Russia, rather than Ukraine . In the subsequent months, Russia sought to reel in this concession back in .
 Russia sought to maintain as a single military, while Ukraine saw a separate army as a defining attribute of an independent state .
 The same was true of nuclear weapons and monetary policy, among other issues, as well as nuclear weapons .
 Ukraine refused to maintain a single currency and monetary policy in 1993 . It was due to a lack of enthusiasm for macroeconomic stabilisation, leading to hyperinflation .
 Russia continued to contest Ukraine’s sovereignty along two different axes, the CIS and the ownership of the Black Sea Fleet and its base at Sevastopol .
 Russia promoted a federal role for the CIS throughout the early post-Soviet years . The CIS would have legitimised a hegemonic role for Russia in the region .
 In the first and third of Russia’s goals, Russia's goals were at least in part supported by the international community . In the second and third, Russia scored three goals in the first half .
 There was a conflict of goals on how any cooperation would be organised . But there was a fundamental conflict on how to organise cooperation .
 Russia was unwilling to create an organisation which limited its power . Several others, including Ukraine, refused to be part of an organisation that limited their sovereignty .
 The Soviet economy was badly in need of structural reform, fragmenting it into 15 separate economies created a separate economic shock .
 Western Europe was implementing the Single European Act in order to gain the advantages of a larger single market . The post-Soviet states were moving in the opposite direction .
 The collapse of the single currency, as the Soviet ruble became the Russian ruble, caused further economic harm . The collapse was caused by the collapse of a single currency .
 Each of the new governments was capable of emitting currency and credit, creating a massive collective action problem . The new governments were able to emit currency, credit and credit .
 As each paid its salaries in newly created credit, the effects were spread across the entire region .
 Russia and Ukraine oddly ended up supporting the same policy. On the currency question, Russia andUkraine oddly endedup supporting thesame policy .
 Russia was trying to implement structural adjustment, or ‘shock therapy’ It meant controlling the money supply to limit inflation .
 Ukraine continued to create currency and credit to keep enterprises afloat, causing inflation in Russia as well as Ukraine . Ukraine continues to create money and credit.
 Ukraine created its own currency, and Russia introduced a new ruble, essentially kicking the other states out of the ruble zone . Both countries gained monetary autonomy when they created their own currency .
 volatility of these two currencies considerably undermined trade in what was still a highly integrated economic space . The downside was that volatility of the two currencies significantly undermined trade .
 As the European Union had concluded, a functioning economic union required delegating some sovereignty to an international or supranational organisation .
 Ukraine and some others were unwilling to do this, given their historical record of briefly living independent statehood . Ukraine and other countries have been questioned by Russian questioning of their sovereignty and independence .
 There was a fundamental conflict of interest involving voting rules for any supranational decision making . There was also a fundamental problem with voting rules.
 Ukraine did not participate extensively in much of what the CIS did, and this caused great frustration in Russia . Ultimately, Ukraine didn't participate extensively, and that caused great frustrations in Russia.
 Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 69, rejected Russia’s natural leadership in the region .
 For Ukraine, Russia was trying to reassert the control that Ukraine had only recently escaped .
 Conflict had broken out between Armenia and Azerbaijan even prior to the Soviet collapse . In late 1991, Russian speakers in the Trans-Dniestr region of Moldova declared their independence . Moldova continued to be located there after Moldovan independence .
 separatists in Abkhazia, supported by Russian forces, were fighting Georgian government forces . Further unrest was taking place in Georgia, where separatists are fighting Georgian forces .
 Russia requested permission to be identified as a peacekeeper for these conflicts, based on the argument that only it had the capability and interest to provide the needed peacekeeping forces .
 Both the Georgian and Moldovan governments resisted Russia being identified as a peacekeeper . Russia had also been involved in supporting one side in the conflict .
 Ukraine also opposed Russian peacekeeping, as it feared what Russia might do either in Crimea or Eastern Ukraine .
 The pattern that was exhibited in 2014 was already in place, and was already a source of tension between Russia and Ukraine . In 1993, already by 1993, the basic pattern was in place. In 2013, the pattern was also in place in Ukraine .
 In both Moldova and Georgia, Russia fomented separatism, supported it militarily . Then proposed that more of its troops enter the conflict zone as peacekeepers .
 Nuclear Weapons more important for many in the West was the question of control over nuclear weapons . Nuclear weapons are more important than nuclear weapons for many.
 Ukraine’s inheritance of the weapons on its territory gave it the third largest nuclear arsenal in the world . The same principle, applied to Belarus and Kazakhstan, meant that the number of nuclear powers grew from seven to ten .
 Bush and Bill Clinton viewed Ukraine primarily through the lens of nuclear weapons . Bush and Clinton viewed the country primarily through a lens ofnuclear weapons .
 Ukraine's 1990 Declaration of sovereignty was a binding commitment to denuclearise . U.S. and Russian perspective: Ukraine’s desire to become an independent and non-nuclear state .
 Russia’s assertiveness in the region had convinced many in Ukraine that it should either keep the weapons or insist on ‘binding’ security guarantees in return for surrendering them .
 Ukraine's insistence that it be compensated for material in weapons that had already been transferred to Russia led to the impression in the U.S. that the Kravchuk government was seeking to extract as much money as possible .
 Ukraine was in an increasingly desperate position, and found that the nuclear weapons issue kept it isolated . The Ukrainian economy in freefall, partly due to the Soviet legacy, and partly to the breakup of the Soviet economy, was in a desperate position .
 The final issues holding up an agreement were the amount of compensation and the nature of security guarantees Ukraine would receive . The final issue holding up a deal was the amount and nature of the security guarantee Ukraine would get .
 Ukraine sought something akin to the NATO Article V guarantee . Ukraine sought a commitment that an attack on Ukraine would be regarded as an attack by all NATO members .
 The United States and others were unwilling to make such a commitment . Ukraine had to settle for security assurances by Russia, the UK and the U.S. that they supported Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The fact that these commitments were a crucial issue in 1994 shows the deep roots of Ukraine’s security fears . Ukraine's security fears were a key issue.
 The absence of a mechanism for enforcing the commitments left Russia free to violate them in 2014 . The U.S. and Britain were uncommitted to doing anything about it .
 Ukraine had few options to change the deal. This was as they wanted it, and Ukraine had little options to do it . It prevented Ukraine’s ostracism and reduced economic pressure, but left it militarily vulnerable .
Russian officials believe Crimea's separation from Russia is less likely than in the rest of Ukraine’s .
 In 1992, President Yeltsin stated ‘The Black Sea Fleet was, is and will be Russia’s. The Black Sea fleet was, in January 1992, as well as the Soviet Union .
 The issue was not just the fleet (the ships of which were mostly obsolescent), but rather Crimea, where it was based .
 Russia’s claims on Crimea were based partly on history, partly on ethnicity and language, and partly on strategic military importance .
 Russian demands concerning Crimea persisted throughout the entire post-Soviet era . Regardless of the exact motives (and different Russians likely emphasised different reasons) Russian demands for Crimea remain .
 The Russian Congress of People's Deputies passed a resolution in January 1992 questioning the 1954 deal that gave Ukraine sovereignty over Crimea . In keeping with Yeltsin's position, the resolution was passed in 1992 .
 In June 1992, the two sides agreed to split the assets of the fleet . The details of the split and of basing rights continued to prevent a deal from being finalised .
 In September 1993, Russia cut off the gas supply to Ukraine and offered to restore it on the basis of receiving a favourable division of the fleet and rights over the Sevastopol base .
 The problem was complicated during this period by a move among Crimean leaders to secede from Ukraine .
 Crimean parliament declared Crimea’s sovereignty in May 1992, but a compromise was reached in which Crimea's autonomy was increased . The Crimean parliament rescinded the sovereignty declaration .
 In 1995, President Kuchma dissolved the institution of the Crimean presidency . The move took the wind out of the sails of Crimean separatism .
 That essentially resolved the question of secession from within Ukraine, but the conflict over Sevastopol continued . The conflict continues to continue .
 Russia insisted on its right to continue basing its part of the fleet there, and Ukraine resisted . Russia insisted that Ukraine resisted, and Russia resisted .
Russia 8 Sobchak and Yeltsin were quoted in John Rettie and James Meek, ‘Battle for Soviet Navy’, The Guardian, 10 January 1992 . In 1997, the two sides finally reached a compromise which gave Russia 8 SobCh
 Russia-Ukraine Friendship Treaty with the issue of the Black Sea Fleet and Sevastopol apparently resolved . Russia and Ukraine were able to sign a Friendship Treaty later in 1997 .
 The treaty was seen as putting the two states’ relations on a clear basis in international law . It was seen to address many issues that had been left hanging .
 This was the high point in post-Soviet Russian-Ukrainian relations, as it appeared to signal Russia’s recognition that the disintegration of the USSR in 1991 would not be reversed .
 Yeltsin: 'My friend President Kuchma and | vow at this sacred place, at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, that the treaty that we sign today will be fulfilled’
 In 1999, when the Friendship Treaty finally came to the Federation Council for ratification, Luzhkov and others opposed it, fearing that it would reduce Russia's leverage over the region .
 In 2010, after Yanukovych extended Russia’s lease on the base, Luzhkov continued to assert that Sevastopol is a ‘Russian city’ In sum, the issue was never really settled for many Russian elites, including moderates and radical nationalists .
 The hope was that the treaty would put that contestation to rest, but it did not . The hope is that it would put it to rest .
 The Ukraine-Russia conflict arose after a period of relative comity. From our post-2014 perspective, it demonstrates nearly the opposite of conventional narratives that see the Ukraine- Russia conflict as something that arose after an period ofrelative comity .
 In actuality, the relationship was fraught from the beginning due to Ukraine's insecurity and Russia’s dissatisfaction with the status quo of an independent Ukraine .
 NATO expansion irritated Russia and that Putin’s approach to democracy, to Ukraine and to the West did not help . But they cannot have been the root causes of the tension that was present from the moment of Ukraine's independence .
 This was rooted more fundamentally in Russia’s conception of its national identity, its borders, and its role in the region . This is rooted more deeply in Russia's conception of the country's national identity .
 NATO added three new members (Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland) in 1999, over Russia's objections .
 NATO engaged in a bombing campaign to force the government of Serbia to stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo . Second, at almost the exact same time, the NATO campaign was launched to force Serbia to end ethnic cleansing .
 Third, Putin replaced Yeltsin as president, and initially had very constructive relations with the West . He methodically reduced pluralism in Russia by gaining control over the press, the oligarchs and the regions .
In doing so, he sought to emulate Russia in reducing competing sources of power . He sought to do this while maintaining good relations with both NATO and Russia .
 In both Ukraine and Russia, politics in the years before 2004 were increasingly about whether democracy would survive .
 President Kuchma's efforts to consolidate power encountered considerable opposition . But he seemed to have won a decisive victory when a constitutional referendum in 2000 appeared to have strengthened his power .
 Kuchma decided not to seek to circumvent a constitutional ban on a third term as elections approached in 2004 . In 2004, Kuchman decided to not seek to try to circumvent the constitutional ban .
 Former Prime Minister Yushchenko joined the broader anti-Kuchma opposition . His opponent was Yuliya Tymoshenko, another former Prime Minister under Kuchma .
 There was wide consensus that Yanukovych would align Ukraine with Russia, and that Yushchenko would align it with the West . So the country appeared to be at a tipping point .
 Yanukovych's campaign team was largely composed of Russian political technologists . Yanukovych’s campaign team is mostly composed of Russians .
 Putin personally travelled to Kiev to support Yanukovych in both rounds of the elections . Russian media gave extensive support to Yanukovych, which was widely watched in Ukraine .
 Putin appeared at a military parade in Kiev, standing shoulder to shoulder with Kuchma and Yanukovych . Shortly before the first round of the election, Putin appeared in Kiev .
 Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 1 leader Bandera, whose legacy was highly contested . He was the first leader of the group in the 1990s .
 Russian media also helped present Yushchenko as a pawn of the United States . His wife is an American-Ukrainian, which was unpopular in Ukraine .
 These were themes to be used in Russia’s information warfare again in 2014 . They resonated in Russia, and they resonated with Russia .
 Russia continued to insist that the election was valid and should stand . After the exposure of fraud in the second round of the 2004 election, Russia continued, along with Yanukovych .
 A compromise to end the crisis led to the second round of the election being re-run . A Commonwealth of Independent States election monitoring team deemed it illegitimate .
 The Orange Revolution was a turning point in Russia’s relations with Ukraine and the West . It was not for the reasons people expected at the time .
 In 2004, the Orange coalition was going to reform Ukrainian government, reduce corruption, build a more ‘European’ state, and align itself with the West .
 Yushchenko’s election receded, but it set an example for Putin and other Russian leaders . The immediate danger to Russia posed by the election recedes, but the immediate danger is not .
 The lesson from the ouster of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia in 2000, of Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia in 2003, and then of the blocking of Yanukovych coming to power in the Orange Revolution, was that colour revolutions were camouflage for the real purpose of
 In response, Russia began a series of domestic and international initiatives aimed at preventing such protests in Russia .
 Russia collaborated with China to form the Shanghai Treaty Organisation . It was to promote the value of a pluralist international order in opposition to the West's universalist claims about liberal democracy .
 Ukraine was important to the West in terms of the West's relationship with Russia, it was clear . Ukraine was not as an important factor in its own right, according to the 'prehistory' of its independence .
 Ukrainian leaders have tended to exaggerate Ukraine's importance to the West . This frustrated Ukrainian leaders, and took them some time to come to terms with, as Ukrainian leaders (including Yanukovych) have been frustrated .
 Ukraine's relations with Russia have always interacted with Russia’s relations with the West . The eroding relations between Russia and the West increasingly made Ukraine a battlefield, rather than the bridge that it hoped to be .
 In the early post-Soviet years, the United States was the primary external actor in the Ukraine-Russia relationship . Europe was focused on its own transformations .
 These included implementing the Single European Act and single currency, managing the reunification of Germany, and making the transition from state planning and communism to a market economy .
 Ukraine struggled to find an important place in the U.S. foreign policy for three reasons . Ukraine struggles to find a place in United States foreign policy .
 The U.S. was focused on Russia, the success or failure of which was seen as much more important than that of Ukraine .
 U.S. interests in the international politics of the region were essentially conservative . Both Bush and Clinton administrations were focused as much on preserving the status quo in arms control and political stability .
 The U.S. feared breakdown of Soviet-era arms control agreements, nuclear proliferation and ethnic unrest . The threats seemed better prevented by preserving Russia’s dominance than by undermining it .
 Ukraine's reconsideration of its nuclear status played into this conservatism . Ukraine’s reconsideration has played into its conservatism .
 The notion that Ukraine might provide a necessary check on Russia was not widely shared . Zbigniew Brzezinski articulated this argument cogently in early 1994 .
 First, the signing of the Trilateral Agreement on nuclear weapons removed the primary obstacle to a closer U.S. relationship with Ukraine .
 Russian events in 1993 and 1994 undermined U.S. confidence in Russia, Russia's willingness to join the Western community in foreign policy . Russia's economic and democratic reform was also undermined by the events .
 Ukraine and U.S. interests increasingly aligned in favour of supporting Ukraine . Ukraine provided a hedge against Russian reassertion, says Peter Bergen .
Domestically within Russia, events called into question both whether Russia could reform economically and whether it could adopt democracy in some form .
 The two issues were joined in the violent conflict between Yeltsin and the Congress of People’s Deputies in 1993 .
 A sizable majority in Russia's parliament steadfastly opposed Yeltsin’s reform plans . The West criticised the West in promoting them .
If democratic norms were followed, economic reform would likely cease, and hardliners might return to power . If democratic norms are followed, hardliners may return topower .
 Western leaders were torn between their desire to see Yeltsin triumph and their distaste at the means needed to do so .
 Yeltsin most strongly supported the measures he undertook . Ultimately, he believed that there could be no Russian democracy and reform without Yeltsins .
 At the same time, the need to think about other contingencies was clear, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia sent its armed forces into the republic of Chechnya in 1994, beginning a brutal campaign to prevent its secession . It was reinforced even more in late 1994, when Russia sent the armed forces in the republic .
 The arrest of Aldrich Ames for spying for Russia was substantively a minor matter, but received huge attention in the United States . It appeared to show that Russia still considered the U.S. an adversary .
 Bush chose to focus on energising the U.S. economy rather than Russia’s .
 All those events pale in long-term importance next to the outbreak of war in the former Yugoslavia .
 The conflict was central to the worsening of relations between the U.S. and Russia . It has far-reaching consequences for Ukraine .
 In December 1994, Russia vetoed a UN Security Council Resolution intended to limit Serbian economic support for forces fighting in Bosnia . Russia vetoed the resolution in December 1994 .
Over the next few years, as efforts to limit the conflict continued, two things became apparent . Over the next several years, the two things were apparent .
 Russia and the U.S. supported very different outcomes in the conflict, undermining the notion that they had become partners rather than adversaries . First, Russia and United States supported very Different outcomes, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As a result of the Yugoslav wars, the notion of including Russia within an expanded NATO appeared increasingly problematic . The notion of included Russia within the expanded NATO appears increasingly problematic.
 This toxified the discussion of NATO enlargement, because the discussion was increasingly about expanding NATO but not including Russia . This toxifies the discussion, says the author .
 disagreement over Yugoslavia peaked in 1999 with NATO’s intervention over Kosovo . That inevitably raised the question of where NATO enlargement would end .
 The Russian position on the Yugoslav conflict convinced many U.S. policy makers that they needed to hedge against the possibility that reform would fail or that Russia would become an adversary in Europe .
 Russia’s second war in Chechnya, beginning in 1999, began in 1999. Russia's second war started in 1999 . Russia's first war in the region began in 1998 .
 Russia is becoming sidelined in Europe increasingly dominated by the U.S. Russia's role in the 1990s has been undermined by events since 1991 . Russia is being sidelined in a Europe increasinglydominated by the United States, says Russia .
 U.S. and Russia more interested in Ukraine in the 1990s . This made both the United States and Russia less interested in the country .
 Throughout the period prior to 2013, there was an imbalance of interest in Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine was seeking closer integration with Europe and the West . Ukraine was being held at arm’s length due to the absence of reform .
 The IMF struggled with the dilemma of whether to continue aiding Ukraine even though it had not met the conditions of previous loans, or cut off aid and risk an economic crisis that might drive the country into Russia's arms .
In the realm of military reform, NATO found that programmes for transformation of the military were consistently unimplemented . But in the field of reform, they hesitated to cut off aid and military contacts .
 Kuchma had used various tactics to limit the competitiveness of the 1999 election . Yeltsin's second-round opponent was a communist . The United States supported him anyway .
 The West's concern grew more intense as he threatened civil liberties and political competition . The West’s concern grew even more intense.
 The first was the murder of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze and the crackdown on the opposition of which it was a part . The crackdown was the first.
 Ukraine made a deal to supply Kolchuga air defence radar systems to Iraq in the run-up to the US-led invasion in 2003 . The second was the revelation that Ukraine had made the deal.
 This infuriated the Bush administration, which responded by dramatically reducing interaction with Kuchma’s government .
 Increasing suppression of Kuchma’s rivals, including the incarceration of Tymoshenko, deepened the sense that Kuchmma could no longer be a partner .
 It is not clear whether the Kolchugas were ever delivered to Saddam Hussein’s regime . Those hopes were 18 .
 For democracy promotion advocates, the Orange Revolution justified further investment in their programs . For democracy advocates, it justified further investments in their program .
 For Russia, the U.S. role bolstered the notion that the revolution was sponsored from outside rather than being internal and hence more legitimate .
Western governments were disappointed and mystified when Yushchenko appointed Yanukovych to the position of Prime Minister in 2006 . Yanukovych had been responsible for attempting to steal the 2004 election .
 At this point, the West in general and the United States in particular lost interest, amid what was often known as ‘Ukraine fatigue’ and preoccupation in the U.S. with Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The 2008 global financial crisis further distracted the U.S. and Europe from Ukrainian affairs . The Ukrainian crisis also distracted the United States and Europe.
 Membership Action Plans would pave the way to membership to Georgia and Ukraine . On the agenda was the question of whether to extend membership plans .
 Both German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicholas Sarkozy advocated deferring a decision in order to placate Russia . Both Merkel and Sarkozy advocate deferring the decision.
 Putin appeared pleased to have avoided something Russia was strongly opposed to . Many viewed this as a deferment of a decision, not as a decision against extending MAPs, and eventually offers of membership to Georgia and Ukraine .
 The communique issued at the summit stated the intention of offering membership to Ukraine and Georgia in the future . The summit was held in Ukraine.
 Out of forty-five million people, in line with the official census, 17 million are Russians .
 According to the most recent census, 8. of Ukraine’s roughly 48 million citizens identified as ethnic Russian . 17% of the population, down from 22% in the 1989 census .
 He overstated the portion of Russians in Crimea in the next sentence . Similarly, he overstated a portion of Russia in Crimea .
 Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013: 81 the Russian population lives in Crimea . In 1991- 2013, the population in Crimea was 81 .
 Ukraine, in the form it currently exists, was created in the Soviet times . It received its territories from Poland after the Second World War, from Czechoslovakia, from Romania . At present not all the problems have been solved as yet in the border region with Romania in the Black Sea
 Then, Russia received huge territories from Russia in the East and South of the country . Then, it received huge territory from Russia.
 If we introduce into it NATO problems, other problems, it may put the state on the verge of its existence . The state may be in danger of being left in NATO .
 We do not have any right to veto, and probably, we do not pretend to have . We don't have any rights to veto. We have no right to do so, and we don't pretend to do it. We do.
 All of us want that all of us, when deciding such issues, realise that we have there our interests as well . But we also want to be able to make sure we have our interests in the same way .
 There were not even any state procedures on transferring this territory . There were no state procedures to transfer this territory.
 The EU supplanted the U.S. as the main Western interlocutor with the Ukrainian government . The topic shifted from NATO membership to deeper integration with the EU, which was more popular and less divisive .
 Russia objected to EU Association Agreement and to Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement . Such an agreement would preclude Ukraine from joining the CIS Customs Union . One country cannot be a member of two customs unions .
 The EU was adamant, however, that no third party could effectively veto an agreement between the EU and another country . The EU is adamant that no party can effectively veto a third party.
 This norm underpinned the notion of a Europe governed by norms and rules rather than by great powers . This norm was extremely important, as it underpinned Europe's idea of a European democracy .
 Russia believed that Russia as a great power should wield an acknowledged veto over arrangements, especially in its sphere of interest . Russia believed the exact opposite, namely that Russia should wield a veto .
 This combination of incompatible economic plans and contradictory norms set the international stage for the events that took place in the fall of 2013 .
 Russia's desire to limit Ukraine's independence and retake control of Crimea did not emerge during the Putin era . Russia’s desire to control Ukraine”s independence and control of at least some part of Crimea didn't emerge during Putin era.
 The Orange Revolution was seen as threatening to Russia because such a revolution might be replicated in Russia . Second, the example set by the Orange Revolution, was seen by Russia as threatening .
 Democracy in Ukraine would undermine the claim that democracy could not work in Russia . It would undermine Russia's geopolitical position .
 The first point is significant because it undermines two arguments about the source of the 2014 conflict that are made by critics of the West and critics of Putin . The first points are significant because they undermine two arguments.
 Critics of the West assert that Russia's annexation of Crimea was the West’s fault .
 The second point is significant because it recasts the feeling of insecurity that Russia felt in the years after the Orange Revolution . The second points are significant because they recast the feeling.
 While Russian concern about NATO enlargement was real, this was not an existential threat, it was not a threat .
 Colton, Everyone Loses, devote particular attention to the role of the 2008 NATO Bucharest Summit . Colton: The summit was held in Bucharest, Romania, in 2008 .
 The Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013, was seen as a threat to the Putin regime and by extent to Russia . Increasingly, democracy was also seen as an threat to Putin regime .
 The Orange Revolution showed how street protests could turn dissatisfaction into regime change . This could undermine the legitimacy of Putin’s authoritarian model, according to the Orange Revolution .
 Some American officials openly hoped for such an outcome was not reassuring . That some American officials publicly hoped that such a outcome would not be reassuring .
 For Putin and for many Russian great power nationalists, a threat to Putin’s regime was tantamount to a risk to Russia’S national security . For Putin, for many Russians, a threats to Putin's regime was a threat.
 The view that only Putin had been able to stop the decay in Russia is not only a political threat but an existential one . The view is that the West sought to weaken and surround Russia, and that it meant that democracy was a threat .
 The West can be faulted for not being more sensitive to Russian fears, but the alternative was not without danger . The alternative is accepting Russia’s right to rule its neighbours .
 The deeper underlying problem was that as Russia receded from democracy, the assumption that common interests outweighed conflicting interests was reversed . The deeper problem is that Russia recedes from democracy .
 Yanukovych was indirectly forcing his own citizens to take a stand one way or the other . The disagreement over Ukraine's status increased in salience just at the time .
 One can see arguments on both sides. That is a much harder question, and one can see both sides' arguments .
 Russia had claims on Ukraine, that the West and Ukraine resisted those claims, and that Russia used force to get its way . But in terms of getting the historical and causal arguments right, instead of saying the West caused the crisis, it is much more accurate to say that Russia had claimed
 'Off the Cuff Politics' is a new book by Europe-Asia Studies . The book explores Russia's lack of a Ukraine Strategy .
 Russia’s problem with an independent Ukraine was not invented by Putin or brought on by NATO and EU enlargement and democracy promotion . Russia's problem with independent Ukraine is not invention by Putin.
 In this chapter, we analyse the annexation of Crimea and hybrid war against the Donbas . In a longer historical context, we go back to the 2003-2004 Rose and Orange Revolutions .
 The conflict in the Donbas is best defined as a civil or interstate war . We first address the question of whether the conflict should be called a civil war .
 The chapter analyses the Crimea and Donbas over five phases with the key drivers listed in each phase . The chapter then analyses the Ukraine and Crimea over five stages .
 The phases are important for arriving at an understanding of the dynamics of the triangular relationship between Russia, the West and Ukraine .
 This chapter shows that Russia’s actions in 2014 were consistent with long-term trends in its foreign policy aims and actions . This chapter is the first of the new chapter on Russia's foreign policy .
 Russian intelligence, political technologists, information operations and local proxies were as active in the decade prior to the crisis as were Western democracy promotion efforts .
 Scholars have differed on whether to characterise events in Eastern Ukraine as a civil war or interstate conflict .
 If the conflict there is a civil war, then its roots are within Ukraine, says the U.S. State Department .
 If the conflict is seen as an interstate war, the involvement of Russian regular army forces becomes a Annexation and Hybrid Warfare in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine becomes a natural focus .
 Russia must still be part of the solution, but it must also be regarded fundamentally as part of problem . Russia must be considered part of solution to the problem, according to the Russian government .
 Its role in resolving the conflict will be as a belligerent, not as a mediator . The conflict will not be as as a mediation.
 Whether the war is a civil war or interstate war changes our view of what is at stake. Equally important, whether the war's outcome changes our views of what's at stake .
 If the war is an international war, then the question in large part is where the border will be drawn between Russia and Ukraine . Russia's ability to determine certain aspects of Ukraine’s policies is also at stake .
 If the conflict is a civil war, then it is more fundamentally about who will run the government of Ukraine and under what political system . The conflict is more fundamental than who will be in charge of the Ukraine government .
 DNR Prime Minister Aleksandr Zakharchenko proposed a new territorial entity of Malorossiya to replace Ukraine in 2017 . This was made clear again in 2017, when DNR prime minister proposed new territorial entities of Mal orossiya .
 Zakharchenko was not proposing secession from Ukraine, but the takeover of Ukraine by a new regime . The new regime is a fundamentally different regime .
 The proposal reinforced the framing of the conflict as one among Ukrainians over the government of Ukraine . The proposal is one of the most controversial in Ukraine .
Little Russia would be a weak federalised state with Donetsk as its capital city . Donetsk would join the Eurasian Union and no longer seek NATO and EU membership .
 Those who tend to blame the conflict on the West see it as a civil war, and those who blame it on Russia as an interstate war .
 The first is the chronology of events from the Euromaidan through to the invasion of Russian spetsnaz led by Alexander Girkin in the second week of April 2014 . The second week is the first of the month, the second of the week of
 The evolution of the protests into an armed movement was a homegrown rebellion or was a Russian proxy war . The second is to what extent the protests were a homegrown protest or was from the outset a Russian proxies .
 Russian strategy from the outset has been to obscure who is doing the fighting . While many conflicts include both civil and interstate components, this conflict is not accidental .
 Both fighters and supplies from Russia have been hidden or disguised as coming from Ukraine . This was most visible with the ‘little green men’ deployed in Crimea .
 Russian information operations portrayed Crimea and the Donbas as internal Ukrainian secessionist movements . These actions were coordinated with Russian information operation portraying both Crimea and Donbas.
 One combatant in a civil war is the state, and another combatant aims to take power at the centre or in a region, or to change government policies . Most also add the notion that one combatant is a state, or another aims to change the government policies.
 The definitional question in the case of Ukraine is whether Ukraine is fighting domestic rebels or Russia .
 In practice, it is fighting both, and judgments differ on whether Russia’s involvement is central or peripheral . Russia's involvement in Russia is not clear whether it is central, or peripheral.
 The conflict in Donbas is more fundamentally driven by Russia than by internal Ukrainian forces, our judgment says . It has produced the level of casualties it has, largely because of the forces and supplies contributed by Russia .
 There is disagreement over when exactly Russian involvement in Eastern Ukraine became a driving force in the conflict in Donbas .
 There was extensive evidence of Russian involvement following artillery attacks from Russia, entry of Russian army forces into Eastern Ukraine, and supplying, training and leading of Russian proxy militias in the region . From summer 2014 onward, there was relatively little dispute, as there was no dispute .
 Some argue that Russia intervened in what was already a civil war in Ukraine, rather than actually fomenting the conflict .
 Scholars downplaying Russian intervention have tended to frame Ukraine’s conflict as a civil war between Russian and Ukrainian speakers .
 A 2014 analysis by Laruelle differentiated between nationalist volunteers and mercenaries travelling to the Donbas, leaving out entirely the question of those sent by the Russian government .
 A secondary reason was defining the conflict as a ‘war’ would require full scale mobilisation of military resources and mass conscription . There was opposition to this within Ukraine .
 There was not serious and organised opposition in Eastern Ukraine to the events taking place in Kiev in early 2014 . This is not to say that there was notserious and organized opposition to events in Kiev .
 A central question is how these grievances were transformed into mass violence . The question is whether these grievances have been transformed into violence .
 The violence in Kiev occurred when the state unleashed violence against protestors, in Eastern Ukraine . The state had no ability to do so .
 Yanukovych fled from Kiev and Euromaidan revolutionaries took power . When Yanukovych fled, the Ukrainian state was too weak and fragmented to use its security forces to crush protests .
 The vast literature on civil conflict focuses both on grievances and on capacity . It also focuses on factors that sustain or undermine rebellion, such as capacity .
 Ted Gurr has stressed the salience of ethno-cultural identities and their capacity to mobilise, levels of grievance, and availability of political activities .
 The Donbas has been relatively passive and, as seen in the Orange and Euromaidan Revolutions, unable to mobilise on the same level as that of Western and Central Ukraine .
 Weaker mobilisation might be explained by the fact that elites from the Donbas were always heavily influential in national level policy .
 The Donbas never needed exit because its voice was so powerful. Albert O Hirschman’s traditional choice of exit, voice or loyalty, was the Donbas' choice .
 Mobilisation would be assisted by relative levels of hostility, intensification of political cleavages, disintegration of institutions, and loss of government legitimacy . Mobilization would be aided by relative level of hostility and intensification.
 High levels of tension during the Euromaidan and Russia’s barrage of propaganda and information war widened political cleavages further .
 The influence of elites was shown by the ability of Rinat Akhmetov, Ukraine’s most powerful oligarch, to halt an attack on Mariupol in the summer of 2014 .
 Akhmetov had chosen not to intervene when the conflict first emerged in the spring . The conflict first began in the Spring .
 Donbas oligarchs were either working in collusion with radical protestors (e.g. Donbas) or working with radical protesters (E.G. G.S. OAPs) Donbas is a city of Donbas in the eastern part of Europe .
 Donbas regional elites have been instrumental in mobilising protests in coalminers’ strikes in 1989, the transportation of political tourists to Kiev .
 Foreign powers have intervened in the majority of civil wars and the longer the civil war continues the more likelihood there will be outside intervention .
 All three factors highlighted by Sambanis exist in the Russia-Ukraine crisis. All three of the factors highlighted in the Ukraine crisis are related to the Russian crisis .
 Russia's intervention was decisive, defeating Ukrainian forces at llovaysk and Debaltseve respectively . In August 2014 and January/February 2015, Russia’s intervention was crucial, defeating Ukraine forces .
 Pro-Putin and opposition supporters have supported the annexation of the Crimea . Russians have mixed views of military intervention in the Donbas which has less symbolic value in Russian history and identity .
 Kharkiv and Odesa were historically symbolic and strategic cities in Novorossiya . The former was never part of this Tsarist region .
 In terms of aiding mobilisation, Russian support was crucial in three distinct respects . Russian support is crucial in terms of helping mobilisation .
 Russia provided extensive ‘information’ support, using mass media to paint the new government in Kiev as illegitimate and as determined to oppress Russian-speaking Eastern Ukrainians .
 Russia provided organisational and material support, using its state capacity to infiltrate organisers and equipment to help coordinate opposition . Second, Russia provided organisation, material support and organisation to help organise opposition .
Sambanis, ‘A Review of Recent Advances and Future Directions in the Quantitative Literature on Civil War’,235. Sambanis is a book on the Civil War .
 The anti-Maidan protestors in Eastern Ukraine would have lost out either to local elites or to Ukrainian government forces, says the author .
Russian intervention in the summer of 2014 is what nearly happened before increased Russian intervention . That is what almost happened before increasing Russian intervention in 2014 .
 The view that protests were internally self-sustaining raises the question of why Russia intervened at such high political cost if it was not necessary to sustain the conflict .
It is hard to imagine the rapid takeover of Crimea succeeding without Russian forces taking a direct role, says CNN's John Sutter . The annexation could have taken place so quickly without the Russian government coordinating processes, he says .
 The conflict over Crimea and Eastern Ukraine did not begin with the Euromaidan revolution and the ousting of Yanukovych . From Orange Revolution to Annexation and Hybrid War, the conflict began with the Orange Revolution and the overthrow of Yanukovych.
 Chapters two and three emphasised that the longer-term sources of the conflict reach back to the Soviet era and earlier . Chapters two, three emphasise that the long-term source of conflict reached back to Soviet era .
 This chapter includes the Orange Revolution and its impact on Russian views of Ukraine . The discussion in this chapter begins with the Orange revolution and the impact on Russia's view of Ukraine.
 We analyse the process leading to violent conflict in five phases . The discussion of each phase begins with a list of key developments .
 Russia's turn away from the West was clearly spelt out in Putin’s 2007 speech to the Munich security conference . The speech was unexpected and shocking to Western audiences . But ultimately ignored as not representing a harbinger of the future direction of Russian policies .
 Russia's turn away from the West has not been linear and has included two attempts at US-Russia resets after the 9/11 terrorist attacks and after Obama's election . Russia’s turn away has been not linear.
 President Kuchma would have never countenanced cooperation with them . The latter had been marginalised in the second half of the 1990s by the President .
 A resolution to that effect was adopted in the Crimean Supreme Soviet but a similar resolution failed in the Ukrainian parliament . A similar resolution was adopted by the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet .
 Russia's support for infringing Georgia’s territorial integrity. They were alone in the CIS in following Russia's backing for Georgia's territorial integrity . Georgia is one of the most populous countries in the region .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan have backed every integration project in the CIS . Even Belarus, Kazakhstan and Belarus have refused to recognise breakaway regions' independence .
 The action of these three Ukrainian political forces foreshadowed Yanukovych's support for Russia’s seizure of Crimea . The action foreshadowing Yanukovych's backing for Russia's seizure of the Crimea .
 Russian propaganda against 'Ukrainian nationalists' did not begin during the Euromaidan . It was already underway during Ukraine’s 2004 presidential campaign .
 In 2005, the Walking Alone pro-Putin fan club became the Democratic Anti-Fascist Movement Nashi . Nashi was a reaction to the widespread fear that Russia was next in line for a colour revolution .
 The specific goal was to link Ukraine’s ‘orange’ revolutionaries with the anti-Soviet partisans from the World War Il-era who wv T Judah, In Wartime,150 .
 Annexation and Hybrid Warfare in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine had long been demonised as Nazi collaborators . 95 had been accused of being Nazi collaborators.
 The launch of the Russkii Mir was compared to that of the British Council . It always had close ties with Russian intelligence and pursued more overtly political goals towards neighbouring countries .
 CIS Customs Union/ Eurasian Union directed at all CIS members . Russkii Mir aimed to maintain the unity of Eastern Slavic Orthodox civilisation of the three ‘brotherly peoples’ who had descended from Kiev Rus .
 Ukrainian-Russian relations became increasingly strained in the latter years of Yushchenko’s presidency . Ukraine's relations with the U.S. have become increasingly strained .
 President Yushchenko had infuriated Moscow when he travelled with Polish and Baltic leaders to Georgia to voice their support in the face of Russia's invasion .
 The EU and US imposed no sanctions against Russia and continued with business as usual . The EU, US, in contrast, impose no sanctions and continue with business .
 The EU’s September 2009 Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia blamed Georgia for the outbreak of hostilities .
 The report failed to understand the dynamics of Russia issuing passports to inhabitants of separatist enclaves . The report also fails to understand Russia's use of proxy forces, armed provocations and Moscow's desire for regime change .
 Russian leaders may have believed they had been sent a signal by the West that invading neighbours would not lead to sanctions .
 The West's mild reaction to the invasion of Georgia did not sufficiently reassure Russia .
 President Medvedev penned an open letter to Yushchenko listing a whole raft of changes that Russia sought in Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policies . This infuriated the supposedly more liberal-minded President Medvesev .
 The EU’s interest in enlarging for the first time into Eurasia brought about competition from a Russian counter-proposal that the EU never took seriously .
 Ukraine’s most pro-Russian president was elected by Ukraine's most anti-Russian leader . But the election led not to an easing of Russian activity, but to an increase in activity .
 Yanukovych fulfilled all of the domestic and foreign policy demands laid out by Medvedev . But Russia remained unsatisfied .
 Yanukovych became the first Ukrainian president to eschew characterising the Holodomor as a famine directed by Stalin . He avoided using the term ‘genocide’ which was particularly infuriating to Russia .
 Ukrainian presidential elections have generally been competitions between Eastern Ukrainian elites . Only one of Ukraine’s five presidents has been from Western Ukraine .
 Kuchma organised a worldwide campaign in support of defining the Holodomor as a genocide on its 70"" anniversary . It first enunciated EU and NATO membership as Ukraine's goals .
 The 1997 Black Sea Fleet agreement had provided for a ‘temporary’ lease of the Sevastopol naval base until 2017 . The 1997 agreement had given the base a temporary lease until 2017.
 The Kharkiv Accords extended the lease to 2042 (with the option of a fiveyear extension) in effect making this a permanent Russian naval base . The lease was extended by the end of the 2042 lease .
 Russia re-establishing Russian ownership of Sevastopol and Crimea had long been popular across the political spectrum . This was a major strategic achievement for Russia, where it was a big strategic achievement .
 Russia made further demands for Yanukovych to drop EU integration . Russia also pressured Yanukovych to stop EU integration.
Joint ventures in practically every area of Ukraine’s economy, including military industrial complex and energy .
 Russia sought the same control over Ukraine’s gas pipelines that it had acquired in Belarus, Armenia and elsewhere . Russia sought same control of Ukraine's gas pipelines.
 Russia's proposal for a consortium over Ukraine's pipelines would have given Moscow a majority shareholding . Russia’s proposal for the consortium would have been given Moscow's majority sharehold .
 By 2012 elections, Russia and Russian leaders had become more nationalistic and anti-Western xenophobia had become a staple in the Russian media .
 The US-Russian reset had again failed and Hillary Clinton’s support for protestors in Moscow made Putin suspicious that the West was fomenting another colour revolution .
 Putin’s reelection pushed him even further to the nationalist right . He espousing ‘conservative values’ and anti-Western xenophobia, aligning with anti-EU populist nationalists .
 Putin began referring to Ukrainians and Russians as ‘one people’ with their joint origins in Kievan Rus that could not be separated .
 Russia's chauvinistic rhetoric towards Ukrainians became more visceral and public after Putin's re-election . But they were by no means new.
 Russian views of Ukrainians as not constituting a ‘real people’ and of Ukraine as a failed and artificial state have deep roots in Russian national identity .
 Putin’s counter-attack against Western encroachment came in the creation of the CIS Customs Union in 2010, which would evolve into the Eurasian Union in 2015 .
 Ukraine would hold its next presidential elections in the same year the CIS Customs Union would transform into the Eurasian Union . Yanukovych's re-election for a second term would be necessary for Ukraine to join Putin’s pet project .
 Attempts to create CIS structures and unions had taken place throughout Yeltsin’s presidency .
 In 1992, the Tashkent Treaty established CIS collective military forces that became the Collective Security Treaty Organisation . A decade later, the Collective security Treaty Organisation was established .
 Yanukovych signed a memorandum in May making Ukraine an ‘observer’ in the CIS Customs Union . In spring and summer 2013, Russian trade boycotts of Ukraine and other forms of pressure compelled Yanukovych to sign a memorandum .
 The EU dropped its earlier insistence that Yanukovych release Tymoshenko from prison before an Association Agreement was finalised . The EU, meanwhile, dropped its previous insistence on Yanukovych release from prison .
 The concession actually increased pressure on Yanukovych. By removing the obvious reason why the Association Agreement could not go forward, this concession increased Pressure on Yanukovych .
 e Russian information warfare promotes portrayal of Euromaidan ‘fascists’ e Russian intelligence supports Ukrainian security forces in suppressing protests and training and financing anti-Maidan vigilantes .
 The Euromaidan and Yanukovych's ouster destroyed Putin’s well-cultivated plans for Ukraine to join the Eurasian Union . Putin's well- Cultivated plans were destroyed by the ouster.
 Yanukovych ‘suspended’ discussion of joining the Association Agreement in November-December 2013 . Putin believed he had successfully induced Yanukovych to join Russia’s regional bloc .
 Russia followed up by offering to buy $15 billion worth of Ukrainian Eurobonds and by lowering the price of gas from over $400 to $268 per 1,000 cubic metres . Russia also offered to buy Ukraine's Eurobond worth of $15billion .
 The second price was still higher than that charged to Belarus but similar to what the Ostchem gas intermediary owned by gas tycoon Dmytro Firtash had been paying .
 Russia’s support for paramilitary hybrid warfare on the ground was backed by a barrage of anti-Ukrainian, ‘anti-fascist’ and anti-Maidan propaganda that inflamed passions and reduced the chances for compromise .
 Russian intelligence was not only training and financing anti-Maidan vigilantes but organising the transportation of protestors to Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv from Russia .
 Russian nationalists radicalised the crowds who captured state buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk . Russian nationalists were quickly on the scene and radicalised.
 Sergei Yeliseyev was born near Moscow . He graduated from a Soviet naval school in the Russian city of Kaliningrad . He had served with the Russian Pacific fleet .
After defecting during the crisis, he was appointed deputy commander of Russia’s Baltic fleet . He was appointed Deputy commander of the Baltic fleet.
 Ukraine’s naval commander Denis Berezovsky also defected, along with several of his commanders . He was appointed deputy commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 In Crimea, thousands of SBU and military officers, Militsiva and prosecutors defected to Russian occupation forces . Thousands ofSBU officers, military officers and prosecutors defect to Russia .
 The only other Ukrainian region where security forces defected en masse was in the Donbas .
 Berkut riot police and Internal Troops from the local Militsiva had been sent to Kiev to quell the Euromaidan protests .
 One hundred thirty protestors and 18 Militsiya officers were killed on the Euromaidan . One hundred 30 protestors were killed and 18 officers died .
 In the majority of regions in Eastern and Southern Ukraine a large proportion of the security forces continued to operate . They defeated pro-Russian forces .
 In Moscow’s eyes, the key battleground cities and strategic prizes were Kharkiv and Odesa . Not Donetsk and Luhansk, not Donetsk andLuhansk .
 In Kharkiv, Russian political tourists stormed the opera and ballet theatre mistakenly believing it was the city hall .
 Interior Minister Arsen Avakov oversaw defeat of pro-Russian forces in his city by the end of the first week of April . Avakov, who is from Kharkiv, oversaw defeat by pro- Russian forces .
 street fighting between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian forces ended after a day of violence on 2 May . 48 protestors were killed by gunshots and fire .
 Protests, Hybrid War and Annexation, 2014 e« EU peace deal falls flat after protestors are killed .
 The EU engaged in negotiations over the Euromaidan in February 2014 . It has been prominent in roundtable negotiations during the Orange Revolution .
 Yanukovych had to step down rather than submit to early elections . Anger at the bloodshed has radicalised the crowds of protestors .
 Yanukovych fled to Donetsk and later to Crimea as it was being seized by Russian forces . Yanukovych then fled to the Crimea as the Russian forces seized the region .
 Scholars have debated whether Putin’s decision to invade Crimea was pre-planned or a spur of the moment decision brought on by the victory of the Euromaidan . The two explanations are not contradictory .
 Russian political forces laying claim to Sevastopol and Crimea, adoption of numerous resolutions by both houses of the Russian parliament, open interference by Moscow Mayor Luzhkov and extensive Russian intelligence activity in the Crimea . It would be highly unusual for Russia not to have prepared a range of plans for
 Russia reacted sharply in 2008 after Yushchenko threatened to not allow Black Sea Fleet vessels that had participated in the invasion of Georgia to return to Sevastopol .
Before Russia’s invasion, Lukashenka claimed to have seen Russian plans for military intervention in the Crimea .
 Russia’s intervention in the Crimea was welcomed by many local residents because of their long-standing pro-Russian and proSoviet sympathies, as well as by the fear generated by Russia's information war .
 Russia's forces consisted of GRU spetsnaz without country insignia, Black Sea Fleet marines and intelligence, defectors from the SBU, Ukraine’s military and Militsiva .
Former organised crime boss and Russian nationalist Aksyonov was appointed Crimean Prime Minister . The two had long been linked and the role of organised crime was reflected in the installation of former crime boss Aks Lyonov as Crimean PM .
 Widespread pro-Putin and pro-Russian/Soviet sympathies in the Crimea did not necessarily translate into the ludicrously reported referendum result of 96.7% in favour of joining Russia .
 The majority of Ukrainians and especially Tatars, who numbered 15% of the population in Crimea, backed union with Russia . That figure would require that the majority of Ukrainian and Tatars backed union.
 According to leaked data, the real turnout was only 30% , and of these only half voted in support of union with Russia .
 Throughout the post-Soviet period, support for separatism had never had majority support in the Crimea .
 Novorossiya is the name for the Tsarist-era gubernia that encompasses Eastern-Southern Ukraine . Kharkiv had been the centre of the province of Slobozhanshchyna .
 Pro-Putin sentiment and support for separatism proved to be weak in Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk . The region is known for its anti-Russian sentiment .
ProUkrainian protestors outnumbered pro-Russian protestors in every one of these regions . ProUkrainians were outnumbered by pro-Russians in every region, including Ukraine .
 His actions belie the notion that Nazism was a major force in Ukraine. His actions and those of other Ukrainians with Jewish backgrounds belie the idea thatNazism was an important force .
 Kolomoyskyy supported the Euromaidan and Ukraine’s fight against Russian military intervention . He was a Russian speaker .
Anti-Semitism was more prevalent in the DNR and LNR, whose media routinely condemned the alliance of ‘Jewish oligarchs’, Ukrainian ‘fascists’ and Western governments .
 Ukrainian leaders such as Poroshenko and Yatsenyuk were mocked for allegedly Ukrainianising their Jewish roots .
 Girkin’s spetsnaz made the strategic decision to concentrate their support in Donetsk, where pro-Russian protestors had made headway .
 Girkin’s forces captured the towns of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk in western Donetsk oblast . They were able to hold on to them for four months before being forced to flee eastward .
 Ukrainian forces re-captured Mariupol in Southern Donetsk oblast with relative ease . Ukrainian forces also re- recaptured Mariupsol.
 In Luhansk oblast’s Northern regions, pro-Russian forces had little local support . The region had historically been part of Slobozhanshchyna .
 Overall, the 'Russian Spring' engendered some local support in the Crimea . Overall, it had limited appeal in the Donbas and barely any in Kharkiv .
 Ukraine's ATO was launched a few days after Girkin's invasion but only gathered steam the following month . Ukraine’s ATO has been launched just days after the invasion .
 Two decades of neglect, corruption, and asset stripping left Ukraine a limited number of reliable military forces . Russian penetration of the SBU and military high command, combined with Russian penetration, left Ukraine with few reliable forces .
 elite parachute units who took the brunt of the fighting. These did include elite parachuting units who were involved in the fight .
 Donetsk airport held off Russian marines and spetsnaz and Russian proxies until early 2015 . Donetsk airport had been re-built for the 2012 European football championship .
Volunteers played a key role as fighters in the over 40 battalions that were 32 . Ukrainian armed forces in shambles.
Large numbers of largely women civilian volunteers* collected and transported supplies to the front line . Large numbers of women volunteers collected supplies .
 Ukraine has strengthened its military capacity and volunteer battalions have been integrated into the army and National Guard . Over time, Ukraine has also strengthened its army and national Guard .
 The Ukrainian armed forces of the year 2017 now number 200,000, most of whom have come under fire . Most of them are seasoned in battle, and are experienced in battle .
 Russia has no chance of winning a potential military clash with Russia, but they have a reason to fight . Russia have no chance to win a potential clash with the Russian military .
 The Ukrainian armed forces of the year 2014 were incapable of mounting an adequate response to foreign troops . The Ukrainian army was occupied by foreign troops in 2014 .
 The changes since the Donbas war started mean that Ukraine now has the best army it has ever had in its history . The changes mean that the country now has a better army than ever before .
 OSW Studies no. 2: Changes in Ukraine’s Armed Forces since the Russian Aggression’, OSW studies .
 Minsk II was signed in February 2015 . Despite the agreement, intense fighting continues and leads to the signing of Minsk 2 .
 Ukraine’s ATO was successful in re-taking control of Western and Southern Donetsk oblast and neutralising Russian proxy activity in Northern Luhansk .
 At that stage, Putin had to choose whether to abandon his proxies to their fate or to assist them by invading Ukraine . At that time, Putin's proxies had to decide whether to help them.
 He chose the latter, further damaging Ukrainian-Russian relations and Russia’s relations with the West . He said he chose the second, further damaged Ukrainian- Russian relations .
 Artillery pounded Ukraine from Russian territory making it difficult for Ukrainian forces to maintain control over its border regions .
 Russia sent surface-to-air missiles, such as the Buk, to shoot down Ukrainian Air Force planes . Instead, Russian planes were sent to Ukraine by Russia's military .
 This sophisticated military equipment could only be manned by trained Russian soldiers — not Russian proxies or Cossacks . The equipment could be used to train Russian soldiers .
 Russia’s increased military aggression and the shooting down of MH17 stiffened U.S. and EU responses to the crisis . New sanctions against Russia have been imposed .
 Putin's claim that Russia was not militarily intervening in Eastern Ukraine. Western government policymakers did not believe Putin's claims .
 Ukraine’s continued use of the term ATO, until a change in legislation in January 2018, was also confusing as it did not designate Russia and Ukraine as in a state of war .
 The EU (represented by Germany and France), Ukraine, Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE were parties to the negotiations . The OSCE was represented by the EU, Ukraine and Russia .
 In accepting Russia as a partner in the negotiations, the West was playing its own game of maskirovka . The West was accepting Russia's participation in the talks .
 Putin rejected Putin's claims that Russia was uninvolved in the war in Eastern Ukraine . Russia was at the same time willing to include Russia as a mediator rather than as a participant in the conflict .
 Ukraine’s President Poroshenko sat down to negotiate peace with the Russian president . Putin insisted that Russia was not a party to the conflict .
 The Minsk process did not include discussion of Crimea, which for Russia is a closed question . The process didn't include talk of Crimea .
 Some European leaders have called for the EU to recognise Russia’s sovereignty over the Crimea .
Donald Trump said he would rather be with Russia than Crimea than where they were . He said if he were elected he would recognise Russian sovereignty .
 NATO and Ukraine estimate there are between 5,000-10,000 Russian soldiers in the Donbas . There are larger numbers stationed just across the border with larger numbers .
 Putin’s policies towards the Donbas were little different to those pursued by Yeltsin in the Trans-Dniestr, South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 The West and Ukraine on one side and Russia on the other have held diametrically different approaches to the implementation of the Minsk accords . Russia and the West have been on the same side of the negotiations .
 Ukraine and the West have insisted on implementing security provisions first, including withdrawal of Russian forces, demilitarisation of proxy forces and reestablishment of Ukraine’s control over its border with Russia .
 Putin disagrees, insisting Ukraine should first change its constitution to provide ‘special status’ for DNR and LNR and hold local elections .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Zakharcheko has said Ukrainian parties could not participate in today’s elections .
 There is an understandable absence of trust on the Ukrainian side towards any promises made by Putin that security steps in Minsk II would be implemented after Ukraine introduced constitutional changes .
 Russia’s ability to bargain is undermined by its record of deception . It will be difficult to take Russian assurances seriously when Putin continues to claim there is no Russian military intervention in Ukraine .
 President Poroshenko seen as capitulating to Russian demands . A second factor is the potential for further political instability in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has not been defeated in the Donbas, so there is less basis upon which to give in to Russian demands . In contrast to Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan, Ukraine hasn't been defeated. There is no basis for Russian demands.
 The Ukrainian parliament’s attempt to debate the changing of the constitution in August 2015 led to nationalist riots and the deaths of three National Guardsmen from a grenade thrown by a veteran of the war .
15% of Ukrainian voters are veterans and their families . 15% of voters in Ukraine are veterans, according to Ukrainian media .
 Russia's overall goals for Ukraine have not changed since the 21 February 2014 agreement . Charap and Colton point out that Russia’s overall goals have not change since the agreement .
 Ukraine is viewed as one of three key countries in the Russkii Mir and central to the success of the Eurasian Union . As this book has shown, Ukraine is seen as a key part of the Russian Union .
 To the extent that Russia seeks Ukraine’s membership of the Eurasian Union, ‘Finlandisation’ will not do.
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov implied that neutrality might satisfy Russia . But it is not clear that this is a firm offer .
 Moldova and Azerbaijan have never sought NATO membership and yet Russian proxies have occupied the Trans-Dniestr and Nagorno-Karabakh since the early 1990s .
 Putin proposed to Lukashenka that Belarus, which has never sought NATO or EU membership, unite with Russia in what would amount to a Russian Anschluss of Belarus .
 In Georgia, Russian proxies took control of South Ossetia and Abkhazia more than a decade before Georgia raised the goal of NATO membership . Georgia raised its goal of joining NATO in 2009 .
 Georgia’s interest in NATO was an ex post facto justification for invasion, not a cause of it . Georgia's interest inNAT was not the cause of the invasion, but it was a justification for it .
 Lavrov was being doubly disingenuous as Russia's understanding of returning Ukrainian territorial integrity did not include the Crimea .
 Sweden is a country with no interest in NATO membership . Russia's self-declared ‘sphere of interest’ in Eurasia is a target of Russian hybrid and information warfare .
 There is no way to bridge Ukraine’s insistence on independence and Russia's refusal to accept Ukraine as a fully sovereign country .
 Russia’s plan is for Ukraine to be a fully-fledged member of the Eurasian Union . Russia's plan is to become a fully members of the Union .
 Russia demands that the West recognises its droit de regard over Ukraine and Eurasia . Russia also seeks to negotiate a grand bargain with the United States over the heads of Ukrainians .
Brezhnev claimed Soviet satellites in Central-Eastern Europe possessed ‘limited sovereignty’ and Warsaw Pact countries invaded Hungary and Czechoslovakia in 1956 and 1968 .
 Putin did not bring anything to the table that had not already been proposed by his Soviet and Russian predecessors . Russia's capabilities have recovered dramatically since the 1990s, in terms of goals .
 The conflict in Ukraine is going to be difficult to solve, for several reasons highlighted in this chapter . The Ukraine conflict is a difficult issue to solve .
 First, the conflict is not primarily a civil war but an international war . First, it is not a war but a war.
 Russia is a party to the conflict, and therefore cannot effectively mediate it . Russia cannot effectively Mediate it, according to the U.S.
 Russia's aggression in Ukraine was many years in the making, even if it took the events of 2014 to provide the opportunity . Second, Russia’s aggression in the Ukraine was several years in making, despite the events in 2014 .
 Crimea and the Donbas were not responses either to the West's actions or to the specific events in Kiev . resolving those issues will not be sufficient to secure Russian withdrawal from Crimea .
 Russia has announced its intention to keep Crimea permanently . This is particularly true in the case of Crimea, which, through its annexation, Russia has said .
 Russia’s unwillingness to change its behaviour in the Donbas, never mind in Crimea, has been factored into the July 2017 U.S. sanctions . Russia's unwillingness to changed its behaviour is now factored in the United States sanctions .
 Treasury and State Departments to analyse the ‘potential effects of expanding sanctions...to include sovereign debt and the full range of derivative products’*® which would represent a significant escalation of economic pressure on Russia .
 Third, it appears that there is no path toward a negotiated solution, or that the existing path is a dead end . Second, it seems that the current path is not a path to a negotiated agreement .
 Neither side accepts its basic commitments under the Minsk process . Neither Russia nor Ukraine (nor the EU or US) benefits from walking away from the process .
 Regaining control over Ukraine is a long-term Russian foreign policy goal . As emphasised throughout this book, this book is a book about Russia's foreign policy .
 Ukraine invasion has solidified Ukrainian opinion against Russia and in favour of stronger ties with the West . But the invasion of Ukraine has also solidified Ukraine's support against Russia .
 Russia's goal is to achieve Russia’s objectives. That means that force and subversion will be more necessary than before, not less, to achieve the objectives .
 Russia’s ethnic minorities and expansionist ethnic Russian nationalism’ in P Kolsta and Helge Blakkisrud eds., The New Russian Nationalism .
 Command, Control, Crime and the Minsk Peace Process, Research Report no. No. 1 .
Tymchuk, Dmytro, Karin, Yuriy, Mashovets, Kostyantyn, and Husarov, Vyacheslav, Vtorhnennya v Ukrayinu . Tymchuk is the son of a former Ukrainian soldier .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea, hybrid war and military interventions in Eastern Ukraine caused a dramatic transformation of the international landscape, especially in Europe . Some regard it as a new cold war .
 The traditionally liberal Washington Post ran an editorial entitled ‘We're on the road to a new Cold War’ It placed the blame for the deterioration in relations entirely on Russia .
 What happened is a response to bad choices taken by President Putin of Russia of Russia .
 This chapter reviews the international ramifications of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and hybrid war against Eastern Ukraine . This chapter also reviews the Russian military action against Ukraine .
 The Minsk process is needed to manage the conflict, but cannot resolve it . We summarise the Minsk | and Minsk II agreements, showing why the process was needed .
 We then examine the politics of sanctions, stressing that the symbolic impact was more important than the economic effects . We also examine the political impact of sanctions .
 We then pull back to examine the dynamics of the new cold war, which includes Syria and the broader Russian information and cyber war against the West .
 Ukraine is the central battleground in this new cold war, and the weakness of its government's commitment to reform causes difficult dilemmas for its supporters in the West . Ukraine is a key battleground in the new Cold war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is little likelinood of an improvement, because the different sides differ so profoundly in their goals, we say . We examine the prospects for settling the conflict, concluding that there is littlelikelinood.
 Russia’s interference in European and US elections consolidated the view in the West of Russia as an adversary that could not be trusted and needed to be confronted. Changing Attitudes on top of its intervention in Ukraine.
For Russia, complaining about Western behaviour was replaced with confronting it . Russia's ostracism has strengthened old fears about Western hostility and consolidation of domestic support .
 These dire consequences did not result automatically from the annexation of the Crimea and interventions in Eastern Ukraine, says the author .
 The US military actions spurred a rapid hardening in the US, but Europe remained much more hesitant .
 Many German elites supported a pragmatic policy of accom-modating a great power rather than sacrificing for a small one with little independent history .
 Timothy Snyder warned the German Bundestag, ‘to overlook a people which was not regarded as a people'
 All of the language about Ukraine as a failed state, or Ukrainians not as a real nation, that is not innocent . All the language that is about Ukraine is in the German language, not innocent.
 In March 2014, Chancellor Merkel described Putin as ‘in another world’ after a phone call discussing the Crimea invasion .
 The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 in July 2014 cemented the change in opinion in opinion . Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 was the first flight from Malaysia Airlines to Malaysia.
Because many of the passengers were Dutch, the war was brought home for many in Western Europe . Because the flight had taken off from Amsterdam, many were Dutch .
 The fact that Russia supplied the weapons and the crew that downed the plane made it much harder to ignore Russia's role in Eastern Ukraine . The Russian government has been criticized for its role in Ukraine .
 In Western Europe, it was now much harder for respectable politicians to counsel compromise with Russia . It was now more difficult for politicians to work with Russia.
 By autumn 2014, Western Europe and the United States were more united on Russia than they had been since the days before West Germany’s Ostpolitik in the 1960s .
 Russian, Ukrainian and EU leaders agreed to form a Trilateral Group to try to negotiate an end to the violence . In early June 2014, at a celebration of the D-Day invasion in World War II, Russian, Ukraine, and the OSCE were in attendance .
 The group began meeting within days, but not much progress was made until September, when battlefield developments forced everyone’s hands .
 Ukrainian forces nearly succeeded in separating Russia's Donetsk proxies from those in Luhansk . In August, Ukrainian forces threatened to completely surround and defeat them .
 Russia was ready to consolidate its gains and Ukraine to cut its losses . Russia was preparing to cut losses in Ukraine to reduce losses .
 The agreement was based on a plan that President Poroshenko had advanced in June . The agreement calls for a buffer zone from which heavy weaponry would be excluded .
 Two political provisions were to cause considerable acrimony in the following months .
 One committed Ukraine to giving Donetsk and Luhansk increased self-rule . One committed to giving the Donetsk andLuhansk greater self- rule .
This would require a change in Ukraine’s constitution, which Poroshenko could not unilaterally deliver, even if he wanted to . This would require change in the constitution, and Poroshenko would not unilaterally do this .
 In the short term, the priority was to stop the fighting before it got out of control . In the long term, however, it was to end the fight before it was over .
 The international community breathed a collective sigh of relief that the recent escalation had been stopped . In this, the agreement was only partly successful, but the international community breathes a collective relief .
 The agreement was violated frequently in the coming months, particularly as Russia’s proxy forces attempted to improve their positions .
 DNR proxy forces waged a new offensive that seized the Donetsk airport from Ukrainian government forces . It broke down completely in December 2014/January 2015, when DNR forces waged the new offensive .
 The offensive effectively killed the first Minsk agreement, but once the insurgents achieved their goal of seizing the airport, there was again potential for a ceasefire . The Minsk II agreement was negotiated .
 The terms were largely similar to those of Minsk I, but the ceasefire would be based on the new territorial reality . The terms would be similar to the terms of the Minsk ceasefire .
 The Minsk Il agreement has been in place formally since February 2015, though violations continue to occur on a daily basis . Each side tries to draw attention to the other’s violations .
 At the same time, as a way of signalling a willingness to accept the prevailing lines of control, it may have some stabilising effect . At the time, it could be a way to show a willingness of acceptance of the prevailing line of control .
Politically, there appear to be costs for being seen as violating the agreement . Politically, it appears to be cost of violating the deal .
 Ukraine is constrained from abandoning Minsk, even if it is widely viewed as dead, because doing so would likely trigger a move among some in the EU to remove sanctions .
 In many respects, the West was a peripheral actor, with much of the impetus for ceasefires being driven by the interests of Russia and Ukraine .
 Prior to Minsk agreements, Russian proxy forces were making gains at the expense of the Ukrainian government .
 The Russian side was willing to consolidate its gains via a ceasefire. When those gains had been achieved, the DNR had been able to seize Donetsk airport in January 2015 .
 The West's role was to encourage the ceasefire, to help broker the deal, and probably most important, to disabuse the Ukrainian leadership of the hope that significant Western military assistance would be forthcoming . The West also helped broker the ceasefire and disabuse Ukrainian leadership.
 The OSCE also played an important role, providing the observers who were meant to report on whether heavy weapons had been pulled back in accordance with the agreement .
 It is important to recognise that these were observers, not peace-keepers, and they struggled to do their job effectively and safely . It's important to recognise that they were observers.
 Especially in Russian held areas, they repeatedly found themselves denied access . In some cases, they were detained .
 The most notable Western response to the conflict has been the sanctions enacted against Russia by the EU and the U.S. Sanctions against Russia have been the most significant Western response .
 The diplomacy around the enacting and maintaining of the sanctions has been complicated . The fact that a relatively far-reaching regime of sanctions was enacted is testament to the breadth and strength of feeling in the West concerning Russia’s actions .
 The sanctions have had only a modest effect on the Russian economy, we say . We contend that symbolically the sanctions have been very important .
 Putin and Russia sometimes seem to relish being cast as outlaws in the West . Their reaction to sanctions shows that they are very sensitive about their perceived international legitimacy .
 The sanctions were the result of considerable bargaining within the EU and between the U.S. and the EU . The EU and the United States were also involved in the sanctions .
 Most analysts agree that the effects on Russia’s economy have been limited . The decline in the Russian economy in 2014 was driven primarily by decreases in global petroleum prices, not by sanctions .
 Measures aimed at the energy sector were not intended to have a short-term effect, but rather to deprive Russia of the capital and technology it will need to bring new sources of oil and gas on line in the long term .
 Whether Russia has deterred other actions by Russia is a matter of speculation . Russia's actions in Ukraine have not been deterred by Russia, says CNN .
 Russia’s countersanctions, which focused on food imports, may make Russia more self-sufficient and boost prices for domestic producers at the cost of increased prices for consumers .
 To the extent that trade decreases, Russian oligarchs will be more dependent on the Russian economy, and therefore on Putin .
 Officials no longer allowed to travel to Europe or to buy property will find it much harder to develop a ‘Plan B’ in case they fall out with Putin .
 Many have argued that the sanctions have actually helped Putin by providing an excuse for the economic stagnation that has resulted from the absence of reform in the Russian economy .
Both Western governments and the Russian government have incentives to exaggerate the impact of the sanctions . Oddly, both Western governments have incentives for exaggerating the impact.
 Connolly concludes that the likely long-term effect of the sanctions will be to turn Russia further away from a Westernstyle economy to a more closed and statist economy .
 People, Politics, Propaganda and Perspectives (Bristol: E-International Relations, March 2015),213.
 Some Western businesses have incurred significant costs for some Western businesses . They are a 'costly-signal' which is taken more seriously.
 The sanctions signal both to Russia and within the West the seriousness with which Russia’s actions are regarded . More actions might be taken if the situation worsens, according to the U.S.
 Economic sanctions represent a middle point between ‘cheap talk’ and a military response, which would be a costlier signal, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most importantly, the sanctions demonstrated that the West would come together rather than fragmenting. Most important, it showed that the sanctions showed that West would not fragment .
 Whether unity can be maintained is a question, and for those reasons, the symbolic importance of the sanctions will endure . Whether that unity is maintained is the question .
 It is important to recognize what has been left out of the sanctions. Finally, it's important torecognize what has was left out.
 The German government has continued to support the Nordstream-2 gas pipeline project, which is wholly owned by Russia’s Gazprom . The pipeline project will have an impact on EU and NATO members Poland and the three Baltic States as well as on Ukraine’
 Nordstream-2, when completed, will allow Russia to completely circumvent the Ukrainian pipeline network for its gas deliveries to Germany and much of Western Europe . It will be possible for Russia to shut off gas to Ukraine without harming its customers further west .
 Nordstream-2 will achieve a strategic goal that Russia has sought since the early 1990s . Russia has been trying to achieve the strategic goal since the 1990s.
 The project demonstrates the strong interest Germany and other European states still have in commercial relations with Russia . The strong incentive they have to sacrifice Ukraine’s interests for their own.
 Putin established a very close relationship with Merkel’s predecessor, Gerhard Schroeder, and then hired him to lead the original Nordstream project . In one of the earliest and most successful efforts by Putin to gain influence inside Western governments .
 There is no agreed definition for a ‘cold war’ but the application of the label to the current era seems appropriate, despite the differences between the present era and that between 1945 and 1991 .
 Until 2003, it was widely believed that a modernising Russia might be accommodated into the international system as a constructive and benign actor .
 Russia cannot be a partner or ally, and that differences outweigh any common interests . Russia is not an ally in any way, according to the Russian government . Russia's relationship with Russia has been criticised by some in the past .
 The Ukraine crisis has brought about is not territorial, but rather strategic and mental . The change that the Ukraine crisis had brought about was not territorial .
 Russia has quit policy of trying to integrate into the West and become part of the Euro-Atlantic system . Russia has finally quit its policy of attempting to integrate with the West .
 There are not issues on which collaboration will be mutually beneficial, as with the extensive array of arms control and crisis prevention efforts during the first Cold War .
 leaders and citizens on both sides now advance incompatible norms . It does mean that rather than agreeing on the basic norms and rules of the game, the two sides’ interests conflict .
 The period from 1991 to 2013 will be regarded not as a period between two cold wars, but as a temporary lull, analogous to the era of détente in the 1970s .
 The dynamics of the present era resemble those of the first Cold War in other respects as well as those of that era .
 Russia once again is seen by many as a revisionist power seeking to overthrow widely accepted norms . Some say Russia is trying to defend its security .
 The conflict has a strongly domestic and normative component, with the West claiming that the conflict is in large part about democracy and autocracy . Russia points at various elements of hypocrisy in the West's position .
 The current era shares a dynamic not only with the postWorld War II era, but of the much deeper history of politics in Central and Eastern Europe . In another sense, the current era share a dynamic.
 At the end of World War II, the question was where the line between Russia and the West will be drawn . In the era of Catherine the Great, the line was where Russia and West would be drawn.
 In each of those cases, it was determined by primarily troops on the ground . In each case, the decision was made by troops on ground .
 Each side tends to see as normal or as the status quo the dividing line that best serves its interest today . Unsurprisingly, each side tends.
 The West focuses on the status quo post-1991, when Russia was pushed from territory that it had held since the 17"" century .
 From the realist perspective, all the rhetoric about self-determination and history is simply ammunition in a contest for territory . The realist view is that the rhetoric is just ammunition for territory.
Several important dynamics of the Cold War have returned, even if the boundary between Russia's 'sphere of influence' and the West has moved eastward .
 Russia complained bitterly about NATO's eastward movement, and some Western authors blame NATO expansion for Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine have ensured a renaissance of NATO and the deployment of more NATO forces to regions closer to Russia's borders . That remains in dispute, but it is clear that Russia’s actions have ensured the revival of NATO .
 A post-Soviet regime would be less implacable that the Soviets were, there is less reason to be optimistic that a post-Putin government will be friendlier .
 The available evidence is that Russia’s actions in Ukraine, and especially its annexation of Crimea, are highly popular in Russia . The available Evidence is that Russian actions in the Ukraine are not merely the project of an unpopular government .
 The majority of Russian opposition leaders and groups, including Alexei Navalny, support the annexation of the Crimea .
 Navalny did not criticise Putin’s military policies towards Ukraine on principle . Only in terms of the cost to the Russian economy .
 nationalism appears to be genuinely popular in Russia, as it is in many other states . More broadly, nationalism appears more broadly in Russia .
 Many have asserted that Russia annexed Crimea was that doing so bolstered Putin’s popularity in anticipation of the 2018 presidential elections .
 Putin’s power relatively well consolidated, he probably has more room to manoeuvre and to make deals with the West than would a successor seeking to build popularity .
 A change in regime will be sufficient to improve relations between Russia and the West. Overall, given what has happened in post-Soviet Russia, we may have less reason to believe now than we did during the first Cold War .
 Putin’s view that Ukraine is ‘Russian’ and is rightfully part of the Russkii Mir and Eurasia Union reflects a broad consensus among Russians . Putin's view of Ukraine is 'Russian' and is rightly part of Russia and Russia is part of
 NATO and the West may need a long-term strategy that does not depend on Russian democracy solving the problem . NATO and West may also need to focus on Russia's democracy solving problem .
 The EU Response The EU was inadvertently at the epicentre of the Ukraine conflict . The EU responded to the conflict with the EU Response .
 The EU was the central arena through which the West discussed economic sanctions and efforts to broker a resolution to the conflict . ‘he EU brought a low-politics toolbox to a high-politics construction site’
 A March 2015 resolution made implementation of the Minsk Il agreement a prerequisite for lifting economic sanctions . These two issues were linked in a March 2015 Resolution making the implementation a prerequisite.
 Minsk Il is widely viewed as dead, but the sanctions now look semi-permanent . The measure was intended to promote Minsk II .
 This is especially the case following the adoption of tougher U.S. sanctions in summer 2017 . This is particularly the case after the adoption.
 Arkadiy Moshes argues that the EU rejected a Georgia-style response is not because of Ukraine’s particulars, but because Russia's behaviour in this case appears to be a much more fundamental challenge to the European order .
 There is considerable opposition in some quarters to entering a long-term conflict with Russia, which so recently seemed like a partner . In part this is about Russia, because there is some opposition to entering the conflict .
 At the extreme, sympathy for Putin’s style of rule among the left and populist nationalists in various countries engenders opposition to sanctions and other measures .
 The annexation of Crimea and hybrid warfare in Eastern Ukraine prompted European leaders to take a fresh look at their militaries . European leaders are looking at how to strengthen their forces .
 The end of the Cold War and presumption of a new order in which violence was ‘off the table’ in Europe allowed European states to focus on non-military aspects of security, such as migration .
 That changed rapidly in 2014, in particular for those states directly bordering Russia . That changed quickly in 2014.
 Russia is likely to see it as further proof of a Western plan to expand NATO at Russia’s expense . NATO itself has acknowledged, while NATO sees its response to Ukraine crisis as just that .
 Were Russia to engineer a rapid invasion in this region, NATO would be hard pressed to defeat it with conventional forces .
 Western leaders believed the rules of the game had fundamentally changed . That reality had led many to oppose membership for those states to begin with .
 NATO members face the imminent possibility of being unable to resist Russian invasion and hybrid warfare against a member state .
 NATO forces responded to Russian hybrid warfare in Eastern Latvia in 2016 . Such a scenario was played out in a 2016 BBC drama where NATO troops responded to Russia's hybrid warfare .
 A 60-mile-wide stretch of rural land called the Suwalki Gap between the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad and Belarus is NATO's weakest spot .
 The Russian enclave of Kaliningrad is isolated being surrounded on all sides by NATO members .
 The first major NATO response was the adoption of a series of ‘assurance measures’ beginning in May 2014 . A broader ‘Readiness Action Plan’ was adopted at the September 2014 Wales summit .
 Crimea annexation could lead to a major war in the Baltic States . There was a fear that Russia might not take the Article V commitment to the Baltic states seriously .
 NATO increased fighter jet patrols, naval patrols, and training exercises in the region . NATO increased military patrols and naval patrols in the area .
 The Readiness Action Plan added a set of ‘adaptation measures’ intended to materially improve NATO’s ability to provide the defence to which it has committed .
 Germany’s ‘Framework Nations Project’ is an idea which predated Russia's military actions . It has become much more relevant because of them .
 The idea is to strengthen the relationships by which the smaller militaries in Europe could be operationally integrated into the larger ones . Many of which have specialised in particular missions, could be integrated into smaller ones .
 The centrepiece of this more coordinated army would be Germany’s Bundeswehr . The German Army would be the country's largest army .
 Russia’s military interventions in Ukraine would have undermined a key Soviet and Russian goal in place since 1946 . Germany has been trying to limit the military power of Germany .
 Russia’s military interventions in Ukraine have increased a sense of urgency within NATO . But they have not solved the long-standing problems that have eroded the alliance's military capabilities, says CNN .
 Many of the member states spend relatively low shares of GDP on defence . The issue has been raised in visibility by United States President Donald Trump .
 German social democrats are opposed to increasing German military spending to reach the goal of two percent . Social democrats oppose increasing military spending.
 The issue has been salient since the 1960s, but it will not be resolved any time soon . That is a major reason for the Framework Nations Project .
 Russia's Policy Russia has met the West's outrage over the Ukraine conflict with defiance . Russia’s policy Russia has been criticised by the West over the conflict .
 It has continued to maintain the legality of the annexation of Crimea, its noninvolvement in what it terms a ‘civil war’ in Eastern Ukraine . The West has been the fault of the West for both conflicts .
 It has continued to sustain the conflict in Eastern Ukraine and to increase its capacity to act elsewhere . It has also continued to continue to sustain its conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 It has upped the stakes by increasing the extent and transparency of its influence campaign in Western capitals . It has also sought to interfere in several Western elections .
 Russia’s interference in Western politics is no different than the transnational support for democracy promotion in the post-Soviet region . This initiative has galvanized resolve in the West and contributed to the further deterioration in relations between Russia and the West .
 Russian scholars and leaders focused for years on Joseph Nye’s concept of ‘soft power’ Nye interpreted it differently than Nye .
 Russian thinking on the topic tended to focus on it as an instrument, to be deployed to advantage in a conflict . Nye conceived of ‘soft power’ largely as a resource that increased one’s prestige and attractiveness .
 Russia’s deployment of its version of soft power has had the opposite effect, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia expects to have a veto on major international questions . Russia's central assertions that continues from the Soviet period are that as a great power it expects to be able to veto major questions .
 The United States and NATO deployed force without UN Security Council approval . That helps explain its outrage at cases where the U.S. and NATO deploys force without approval .
 Russia has a great deal of ability to maintain the current situation, or to respond to something it cannot control by making things much worse . Any solution, or any change from the status quo, must be something that Russia considers an improvement .
 Russia’s annexation of the territory and its rhetoric indicate that Russia intends to retain the territory permanently .
 It is hard to imagine what would convince Crimea to change its mind, or how Crimea's status could change over Russia's objections .
 If there is to be normalisation at some point, it will almost certainly have to come via a Western and Ukrainian willingness to accept that .
 On Eastern Ukraine, it is much less clear what Russia’s preferences are .
 The status quo, that of a low-level conflict that can be escalated at any time, provides Russia much leverage . Russia can be much leverage, and prevents Ukraine from tackling many of its domestic issues .
 The Minsk provision that Ukraine’s constitution would be modified to provide for regional autonomy and local elections also appears very good for Russia . This would keep the most-pro Russian regions of Ukraine, over which Russia could likely retain extensive influence, within Ukraine .
 The insistence upon autonomy for Ukraine’s Eastern regions has been one consistent aspect of Russian policy . Ukraine's Eastern regions have been one of Russia's most important regions .
 Ukraine would be prevented from doing anything to which Russia strongly objects . Either way, Ukraine would not be allowed to do anything that Russia strongly object .
 It is not clear whether Russia prefers a ‘frozen conflict’ or a reintegration of the territories into Ukraine with a high degree of autonomy .
 Michael O'Hanlon has proposed the creation of ‘permanent neutrality’° for countries currently not in NATO stretching from Finland and Sweden through Ukraine to Serbia . O’Hanlon: ‘Permanent neutrality' would be for countries not in the
 The proposal relies on the questionable assumption that Russia views all of its neighbours in a similar manner . The proposal is an interesting proposal .
 Russia does not contest Finnish or Serbian sovereignty, this is not true of Ukraine . It is highly unlikely that Putin would withdraw from Crimea and abandon the Donbas .
 The EU would rule out joining the CIS Customs Union. That does not address the problem that joining the DCFTA with the EU would also be a problem .
 In 2014, Russia intervened in Ukraine when only this EU ‘enlargement-light’ was on offer .
 A completely different problem with proposals to make Ukraine neutral is that doing so would rewrite the norms of European politics in a way that the EU has staunchly opposed .
 Europe would be accepting a return to a world in which ‘great powers’ imposed rules and territorial revisions on smaller states . Europe would accept a return.
 ‘non-bloc’ status is economically unviable in a globalised world economy . A third problem is that ‘ non-blOC’status is economicallyUnviable.
 After 1945, free trade areas were not so important, but in the last two decades, with the EU on one side and Eurasian Union on the other, the countries in the middle would be left in an untenable economic position .
 A reasonable conjecture is that the Russian leadership has a better sense of its tactics than of its goals . The Russian leadership is more likely to be more focused on its goals than its goals.
 Both in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine, Russia played a long game, waiting and preparing until the time was right to move . Both in Ukraine and in Crimea, Russia waited and preparing for the time.
 Russia may have a more favourable settlement with time than now, says Peter Bergen . Russia may not have a specific strategy, he says .
 Russia sees no need to make concessions in terms of resolving the Ukrainian conflict . This may mean that Russia will not make concessions to Ukraine .
 The larger question for Russian strategy is whether another several decades of cold war is in its interest . The bigger question is whether Russia's strategy is in their interest .
As China's power continues to grow, Russia will perceive as much threat from China, as it does from the United States and Europe .
 Currently, and most likely for the indefinite future, Russia needs China more than China needs Russia . Currently, Russia is most likely to be in the middle of the world's economic crisis .
 The structure of international relations is becoming increasingly complex . The structure is becoming more complex .
 Globalisation has led to the formation of new centres of economic and political power . Globalisation led to formation of centres of political and economic power .
 Global power and development potential is becoming decentralised, and is shifting towards the Asia-Pacific Region . The region is eroding the global economic and political dominance of the traditional Western powers .
 Many Russians do not believe the basic outline of the Russian policy, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The notion that the U.S. and the West are declining relative to Asia is not limited to Russian thinkers . The notion is that the liberal agenda of democracy and free markets is on the wane, he says .
 The EU is in the key spot in the run-up to the crisis in Ukraine, according to a report by the European Union .
 During the Euromaidan itself, the United States and EU struggled, generally successfully, to adopt common positions regarding a resolution of the crisis .
 Both the EU and the U.S. sought an outcome to the protests that maintained constitutional and legal processes in Ukraine . Both the European Union and the United States sought an end to the Ukraine protests .
 The EU brokered a deal at the height of the crisis on 21 February that appeared to deescalate the crisis . Yanukovych agreed to restoration of the 2004 constitution and holding of early presidential elections in December 2014 .
 The United States supported that deal, but opposition leaders on the Euromaidan rejected it . The U.S. supported it, but the opposition leaders rejected it, insisting that after the killings of protestors Yanukovych must leave office .
 The U.S. and EU accepted the 21 February deal, but Russia saw it as evidence of bad faith . When Yanukovych fled and was stripped off his office, both the United States and EU agreed .
 The EU had to find a solution amenable to its 28 members. This is consistent with the long-term differences in policies and with the fact that the EU has to find an solution is amenable.
 The United States supported further-reaching sanctions than did the EU . The differences were not insurmountable, and the two sides were able to agree on a common front .
 The U.S. and EU were able to arrive at common positions on economic and financial support for Ukraine .
 The U.S. has imposed sanctions on Ukraine . The United States is considering what kind of military assistance the United States should provide .
 Some policymakers and think tank experts supported supplying military equipment to Ukraine . The Russian military was deploying and making available to its proxies in Eastern Ukraine .
 Lethal weaponry might directly support Ukrainian fighters on the ground, and indirectly raise the costs of Russian intervention, making it less sustainable .
 Such a policy would echo U.S. support for the Afghan resistance after the 1979 Soviet invasion, leading to high casualties and eventually forcing the USSR to withdraw .
 Many others in the U.S. opposed providing military assistance to Ukraine .
 Russia could match any increase in the quality or quantity of weapons being deployed in the conflict, it was argued . The only result of providing weaponry would be to increase the number of casualties .
 Many felt that increased U.S. involvement would validate Putin’s arguments about United States aggression and increase, rather than decrease, Russian resolve . Many felt the increased United States involvement would validation Putin's arguments .
 Ukraine and the U.S. had to accept that Ukraine did not have a military path to resolving the conflict, opponents argued . Instead, they would have to rely on diplomacy .
 The U.S. ended up choosing a policy that matched where the EU already was .
 For the US, the Ukraine conflict became subsumed in a much larger set of conflicts with Russia, which together constituted the new cold war . For the U.S., the Ukraine war became a much bigger set of conflict with Russia .
 The U.S. and Russia were supporting opposite sides in the Syrian civil war . The disagreement only worsened after 2014, and that disagreement worsened .
 Russia’s actions surrounding the 2016 U.S. presidential election toxified the relationship with the United States . Then, Russia's actions around the 2016 United States presidential election led to a dramatic change .
 Ukraine is increasingly a battleground in a larger conflict, rather than an objective of policy in itself . Ukraine was increasingly a battlefield in a bigger conflict, not a policy objective .
 Russia's support for Trump's election made it politically dangerous for his administration to do anything that might be seen as a concession. Most important, perhaps, was the belief that Russia’s support for Donald Trump’'s election.
 The US Congress, generally bitterly divided along party lines, nearly unanimously passed a law requiring Congressional approval to lift sanctions . The law was passed by a bipartisan majority of Congress .
 Trump was reportedly inclined to veto the law as an encroachment on executive prerogatives . But he feared being seen as soft on Russia .
 Bipartisan support in the U.S. for a hard line on Russia is stronger than it has been in many years, perhaps since the 1970s .
 If the conflict began in part because of Ukraine’s pivotal position between the West and Russia, the war has only increased Ukraine's salience . Ukraine and the West have a pivotal position in Ukraine's pivotal position .
 The EU began more seriously applying in Ukraine the same strategy it had applied in the remainder of post-communist Europe . The attractiveness of a closer relationship with the EU as a means of promoting and consolidating democratic transformation .
 This notion was crucial to European notions of the post-Cold War order in Europe . This notion is crucial to Europe's notions of a post- Cold War order .
 Russia’s insistence on this point, and its subsequent military intervention, has provoked opposition in Europe . Europe is generally sceptical about Ukraine's European credentials and sup-portive of good relations.
 The EU became more committed to Ukraine's success than it had been previously . As a result, following Russia’s military intervention, the EU is more committed than previously .
 The United States position was compatible to that of the EU, though with different emphasis . The U.S. position was similar to the EU position, but different emphasis.
 The U.S. was less focused on the principle of Ukraine’s freedom of choice, and more on the broader challenge that Russia's action appeared to present .
 aid has likely helped the Ukrainian government to persist in power without seriously tackling corruption, corruption and the rule of law . The government has made specific commitments to its donors .
 donors would stop aid programmes on the grounds of non-compliance . Under normal circumstances, donors, represented by the IMF, would stop Aid programmes .
 The West has hesitated to do this in the case of Ukraine for fear of the government collapsing . The West is concerned about the country's political instability .
 In 2014, there was some hope that the threat from Russia would change the political game in Ukraine . Some promising steps were taken, including the appointment of Mikhail Saakashvili as governor of Odesa oblast .
Anti-corruption bodies have been prevented from prosecuting high-level officials . Saakashvili did not last and the anti- corruption bodies have not been prevented by the bodies . The anti-corruption body has not been able to prosecute high- level officials .
 More progress has been made on economic, social, fiscal, fiscal-monetary and energy reforms . More progress was made on social, social and economic reforms .
 Efforts underway to transform Soviet-era Militsiya into a European-style Politsiya and Interior Ministry Internal Troops into a National Guard .
 President Poroshenko has presided over the creation of a powerful army . He has also presided over a powerful military army .
 Ukraine continues to lag in the fight against corruption. Nevertheless, Ukraine continues.
 A related question is whether a new round of protests might again induce turmoil in Ukrainian politics . The Ukrainian government is trying to prevent a repeat of the protests .
 Prospects for peace in Ukraine appear to be dim, say experts .
 The minimally acceptable outcomes for the various sides are too far apart to bridge until something significant changes are made . It's time for both sides to make changes to the situation .
 The Ukrainian conflict is now subsumed in the broader cold war between the West and Russia, making it even harder to address .
 None of the actors can reach a better solution without the acquiescence of other parties who have different preferred outcomes .
In such a situation, only the exercise of greater power, and the inflicting of higher costs, might persuade one side or another to change courses. In such a case, only a greater power might persuade a side to change course .
 For Russia, the optimal solution appears to be that the DNR and LNR are rejoined with Ukraine, but with a high degree of autonomy, and with a political leadership controlled by Russia . Russia's political leadership is controlled by the Russian government .
 This would provide Russia with a direct and legitimised way to interfere in Ukrainian politics . Ukraine would see this as a threat to its sovereignty . This would allow Russia to interfere with Ukraine's political processes .
 Any such deal would encounter stiff resistance from Ukrainian public opinion, including veterans of the war .
 Russia appears to be well served by a conflict in which it can ratchet up or down the level of violence as it pleases . Russia claims the DNR and LNR are breakaway regions of Ukraine over which Russia has no control .
 Ukraine’s government holds to the implausible position that it is going to retake control of the Donbas and Crimea as well . Ukraine's government is holding to theimplausible position.
Both politics and principle prevent Ukraine from dealing with the situation realistically . Both politics and Principle prevent the situation from being dealt with realistically .
 Politically, the notion of recovering the territory is popular, and leaders cannot admit that the territory has been lost . The notion of recovery is popular.
 In terms of principle, it seems wrong to acquiesce in what was a clear violation of international law, says the author .
 Russia is exceedingly unlikely to give back Crimea, and Ukraine has never shown any inclination to fight for it . However, Russia is extremely unlikely to return Crimea to Ukraine .
 The prospects in the Donbas are better, in that Russia has not formally annexed them . Russia hasn't formally annexed the region, but the prospects are better .
 Russian forces might seek to forge a ‘land bridge’ from Russian territory east of Mariupol to Odesa . It was widely discussed by Western commentators in 2015-2016, or that Russian forces invade Ukraine from Belarus .
 The idea would be for Ukraine unilaterally to acknowledge the separation of the DNR and LNR from Ukraine . It would allow Ukraine to move forward with a much more cohesive polity .
Alexander J Motyl's policy has been advocated by Alexander J. Motyl . Some steps were taken in early 2017, when trade between the occupied regions and the rest of Ukraine was significantly diminished, forcing Russia to step in .
 The cutting off of water to Crimea forced Russia to come up with a plan to address the peninsula’s water supply . Russia also came up with plans to address its water supply to Crimea .
 Russia as the ‘aggressor’ state introduced for the first time . Such a strategy would include changing the legal definition of the war from that of an ATO to recognising the Crimea, DNR and LNR as ‘temporarily occupied territory’
 The new approach will permit the Ukrainian authorities to use the army in the ATO outside anti-terrorist legislation . The ATO will be allowed to be used by the military in the Ukraine .
 Russia would like to see the Donbas reintegrated into Ukraine, Russia says . Ukraine would be better off without it, he says .
 The loss of Crimea and the Donbas dramatically shifts the balance of electoral politics in Ukraine away from Eastern Ukraine and Russia and toward Central Ukraine and Europe .
Both politics and principle make such a strategy implausible, but it is implausible .
 A variety of other possible settlements have been put forward by commentators in Ukraine and elsewhere in the West .
 Many proposals include a cease-fire that freezes the existing lines of control . Many include the delaying of consideration of the permanent status of occupied regions .
On both sides, there are strong feelings that these questions are already answered and are nonnegotiable . The second of these seems inevitable, but on both sides.
 Russians tend to believe that the annexation of Crimea is an established fact . Many in Ukraine and in the West cannot accept the idea of legitimising it .
 Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine Steven Pifer has argued that Russia will actually implement its side of Minsk Il, withdrawing heavy weaponry and returning the border to Ukraine .
 Ukraine must fulfil its side of the deal, including revising the constitution to greatly increase regional autonomy . This would obligate Ukraine to fulfil the side of its side. This would also include revising its constitution and increasing regional autonomy.
 Ukraine would be in breach of the agreement while Russia was not . If the Ukrainian government could not deliver on that, it would be a breach of that, while Russia is not .
 This might tip support in Europe toward normalising relations with Russia . This might help Europe normalise relations with the Russian state .
 Pifer speculated that Russia has not chosen this gambit because it may get what it wants without any concession . U.S. President Trump seemed favourably inclined, that the EU would likely be occupied with Brexit . Marine Le Pen was expected to do well in French presidential elections in 2017
 Russia has taken steps to withdraw and stay withdrawn from Ukraine . It is not clear whether those steps would prompt Russia to withdraw or stay withdrawn .
 Pinchuk's proposal is that Ukrainian distrust of Russian leaders is at an all-time record high . A major pitfall is that Ukrainians distrust of Russia is at a record high.
 Ukraine's position is heavily dependent upon economic and financial support from the West, which may not last forever . A complicating factor for Ukraine is that its position is highly dependent on financial and economic support from West .
 The West has a wide range of interactions with Russia . It is not beyond the realm of possibility that Russia could offer something to the West that it wants more.
 North Korea's nuclear programme or North Korea’s active programme would be tempting to U.S. leaders in particular .
 Russia has numerous possibilities to foment new problems, which it can then offer its help in solving . Russia has many possibilities to solve new problems .
 Russia has made a deal between Russia and the West at Ukraine’s expense, but that could change . So far, the heavy-handed way that Russia has played its cards, especially in interference in Western elections, has been seen .
 Russia will return Crimea to Ukraine, a difficult diplomatic task for the players in the coming years . Russia will not seem to reward its aggression or undermine the principle that invading one's neighbours and changing borders by force is not acceptable .
 Russia, Ukraine and the West are ever to move beyond the Crimea annexation, some means must be found to legitimise what seems entirely illegitimate. Put differently, if Russia, Russia and West want to move into Crimea, some mean it is illegitimate .
 One alternative would be to follow the policy that the United States took relative to the Baltic States during the Cold War .
 The United States never recognised the annexation of the three Baltic States by the USSR . U.S. treated their looming independence differently in the waning months of the Soviet Union .
 At the same time, the U.S. did not allow the illegality of the Soviet annexation of the Baltic States to block normal relations with the USSR .
 Russia appears to want neither to annex the territory nor to completely give up control . Finding a solution of this nature will be much harder on the Donbas question .
 The status of Trans-Dniestr has been in limbo since Russia assisted its proxies to 39 Viktor Pinchuk . ‘Ukraine Must Make Painful Compromises for Peace with Russia'
 Russia supported de facto independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia for several years before recognising their independence after it had invaded Georgia in 2008 .
 Russia’s policy of supporting proxy dependencies around its borders is in some respects reminiscent of the Cold War . The Cold War saw nominally independent governments in Eastern Europe.
 It is sometimes hard to sustain that control over time. As that example shows, it is often hard to maintain that control .
 Russia’s policy represents a throwback to a much earlier period, before the twentieth century, when sovereignty was often incomplete and contingent on deals with great powers .
 Russian scholars believe the EU system is returning to Russia . It is precisely that system that the EU rejects, they say .
 Ukraine in the New Cold War is a reminder of the first Cold War to the second is that it endured for 45 years .
 The dividing line between East and West was determined largely by the disposition of forces in May 1945 .
 No one could change the line unilaterally, and the changes that one side would have preferred were unacceptable to the other . No one can change it unilaterally .
 A major difference between the Cold War and the new cold war is that there is no ‘iron curtain’ separating the sides .
 Information, cyber and to some extent hybrid warfare can be conducted in the ‘enemy’s’ territory much more easily than when the Warsaw Pact faced NATO in Central Europe .
 Ukraine could play a role roughly analogous to that of Berlin . In the absence of some new disruption, the current division of territory could last a long time .
 Trans-Dniestr has already persisted for a quarter of a century, and could not be resolved even when Russia and the West were at the height of post-Cold War comity or when Moldova elected a communist president .
 The situation in Ukraine could still be disrupted, perhaps suddenly . Just as the Hungarian revolution in 1956 and Prague Spring of 1968 threatened to undo the post-World War II status quo .
 A new contest for power in Ukraine could lead to the fragmentation of the Ukrainian state, as in the Euromaidan Revolution .
 Protests in Russia could give Russian leaders increased incentives to pursue a new adventure in Ukraine to rally unity .
 Growing popularity of the opposition could lead to declining support for Russian military involvement in Eastern Ukraine .
 Russian efforts to foster separatism and terrorism in Ukraine beyond the Donbas could be renewed with the aim of pressuring Ukraine to change the constitution to provide the DNR and LNR with special status .
 The DNR and/or LNR could unilaterally restart full-scale hostilities, dragging Russia with them . The D NR and LNR may unilaterally restart the hostilities .
 Georgia is trying to militarily return South Ossetia to Georgian sovereignty . This scenario would be similar to that in Georgia where provocations led to Georgia’s attempt to return the region to sovereignty .
 Georgia’s leadership wrongly believed in the likelihood of U.S. military support, failed to appreciate Tbilisi had weak support within the EU and did not foresee that its actions would trigger a Russian invasion .
 Western governments could move towards tacitly acknowledging Russian sovereignty over Crimea, as Trump hinted at during the 2016 election campaign .
 The West could seek to broker a deal whereby Ukraine drops its claim to sovereignty over the Crimea in return for a deal on the Donbas . The deal would see Ukraine drop its claim of sovereignty over Crimea.
 Putin could quietly withdraw Russian forces in the Donbas without being publicly backing down . Having claimed that there are no Russian forces, Putin can quietly withdraw them without publicly backing them .
 Putin might be threatened by a nationalist backlash from nationalist groups who already believe that he 'betrayed' Novorossiya .
 1991 was a historically unique event. What we should probably not expect is a repeat of 1991, which was a historic unique event .
 Even if Russia were to have an anti-authoritarian revolution, it does not necessarily follow that a pro-Western government would result . It is just as likely that Russian nationalists would take power, and it is as likely as it would be.
 In the first Cold War, the conflict appeared to be inexorably linked with communism as an ideology and form of government . In this case, leaders on both sides could assume that with communism gone, the grounds for conflict were gone . But in this one, the
 Putin’s government is pragmatic rather than ideological; or rather its ideology is that of power politics . Putin's government is more pragmatic than ideological .
 There is less reason to hope that a new Russian regime would want to give up territory that Russia has long claimed . There is therefore less reason for a new regime to want to take territory .
 Ukraine became independent not because Soviet or Russian leaders acquiesced, but because they could not prevent it . Also, we should also remember that Ukraine becameindependent not because they acquiesced .
 Russia's weakness could emerge again, but there is no good reason to expect it . Russia has been in trouble for years, but it is not expected to recover .
 The longer they remain outside Kiev’s control the more difficult it will be to re-integrate them . The longer the longer they stay outside Kiev's control it is more difficult.
 A strong, prosperous Ukraine closely connected with Europe might be more attractive to Russia . Russia could stymie progress that could someday emerge in Ukraine’s domestic politics .
 We use the word ‘solutions’ carefully, because there is little prospect for re-establishing the level of confidence or the norms that prevailed prior to 2014 .
 In this brief conclusion, we set out some of the key findings of the book, and pursue their implications for the future . The book is published in the summer of 2013 .
 This book has differed from many others in its understanding of the timeline of the conflict . First, this book has differing from many other books in its timeline .
 The conflict that emerged in 2014 had its roots at the very outset of the post-Cold War period . Russia sought to prevent Ukraine’s independence and sought to limit it both in terms of sovereignty and territory .
 Each reset has ended in disappointment on both sides’t . structural problems undermine efforts at re-setting Ukrainian-Russian relations . Even pro-Russian Ukrainian presidents struggled to find a stable accommodation with Russia .
 In terms of national identity and tactics, the story begins even earlier . The story begins in terms of the national identity.
 The approach to information warfare and the use of unconventional tactics has deep roots in the Soviet era . As chapter two demonstrated, the approach to cyber warfare has deep Roots in the USSR .
 Russia’s conception of its national identity, including the view that Russians and Ukrainians are one people, has sources going back centuries .
 Russia's military conflict in 2013-2014 did not provide both an incentive and opportunity for Russia to use force . This is not to say that military conflict was inevitable, or that the events of 2013- 2014 did not give Russia an incentive .
 The desire to revise the territorial arrangement in Ukraine did not emerge in response to NATO or EU enlargement . But it does indicate that the desire to change the territorial arrangements did not emerged in response.
 Russian interest in controlling Ukraine predates them, according to reports . Russian interests are seen as dangerous to Russian interests .
 The notion that Ukraine is in part or entirely Russian territory is not limited to Putin or a narrow slice of the Russian elite . The nature of Putin’s regime helps explain the decision to intervene in Ukraine in 2014 .
 Catherine the Great is seen as the basis for Novorossiya . It would appear that Russia's territorial aspirations in Ukraine have not been satisfied .
 The effort to promote further separatism in Novorossiya in 2014 indicated that had the opportunity existed, a much larger slice of Ukrainian territory might have come under the sway of Russian proxies .
Realist analysis does not yield a clear policy recommendation without the help of further assumptions . This leads us to a second important conclusion, which is that realist analysis, is not a clear recommendation .
 The most prominent realist analysis of the conflict is based on the assumption that Russia was a defensive power, protecting the status quo . Mearsheimer says Russia is a "defensive power"
 To the extent that this assumption is true, the West’s acceptance of that status quo might be seen as the basis for a stable peace going forward .
 The assumption that Russia seeks further revision of the status quo is equally plausible . However, it is also plausible that Russia is seeking further revision.
 Territorially, the Novorossiya probe, threats against the Baltic States, and continuing pressure on the front lines in the Donbas indicate that Russia might take more territory if it can do so .
 Few expected Russia to seize Crimea in 2014 despite its long record of claiming the territory . We should perhaps take Russia's hints about Kiev and Novorossiya seriously .
 realism points the West to opposite strategies, depending on whether we believe Russia is or is not satisfied with the status quo . The West is trying to change its approach to Russia .
 If Russia is satisfied with Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, then the West can aid its own security by acquiescing to these gains . The West can make Russia less aggressive, and thus make it less aggressive .
 If Russia is not satisfied, then realism, as it traditionally has done, would counsel that power be met with power . But if Russia isn't satisfied, if realism is not, it would counsel to be more realistic .
 The most basic realist argument is that force is the ultimate determinant of outcomes . If there is no agreement on the dividing line between Russia's sphere and the West, then it will be determined by the use or threat of force .
 The best way to prevent conflict is to deter it with the threat of force, says the U.S. government .
 The West erred in believing that Russia could be satisfied with a Ukraine integrated into Western institutions .
 Russian leaders may disagree, and they may not even have a fixed idea . Russian leaders themselves may disagree .
 The possibility of Ukraine joining NATO was not on the West's radar screen in 1991 . Russia's notion of where its sphere of interest might end could well be determined by opportunity as by some pre-determined notion .
 As hard as it is to assess intentions looking backwards, it will be even harder to assess them looking into the future . The Cold War is still hard to assess.
Policy recommendations toward the Ukraine-Russia conflict reflect the authors’ assumptions. As a result, we should continue to expect that policy recommendations toward Ukraine- Russia conflict reflect those assumptions .
 Repeated attempts at ceasefires have not lasted more than a day . Ukraine's proposal to invite UN peacekeepers into the Donbas has been blocked by Russia .
 Ukraine and the U.S. seek to have peacekeepers on the internationally recognised Russian-Ukrainian border . Russia proposed that they be based on the ceasefire line .
 Perhaps, rather than thinking of how to resolve the conflict, we should be thinking about how to manage it .
 The analogy with the Cold War might be most fruitful. It is in this respect that the analogy with Cold War may be more fruitful .
 The Cold War never ceased, over time increasing attention was paid to managing the conflict to minimize the danger of it spinning out of control .
 The various sides’ understandings of the sources of the conflict and the acceptable solutions remain far apart. First, the various sides' understandings are far apart .
 Many in the West recognise that Russia is extremely unlikely to reverse its annexation of Crimea . But recognising it officially and legitimising it will be much more difficult .
 Ukraine's territory is not to return to Ukraine, and it does not appear that many in the West or in Ukraine are near to finding that acceptable, in part because doing so might set a dangerous precedent .
 The assumption that a harmony of interests had largely replaced conflict of interest in the West's relations with Russia helped smooth over a large number of disagreements . The assumption after 1991 that a harmonious relationship with Russia was largely replaced by conflict of interests .
 The assumption that the two sides are adversaries again undermines cooperation . Now, the assumption that they are adversaries is again undermining cooperation .
 Trust is at a minimum and bad faith is widely assumed, undermining the conditions to even search for common interests . Trust is a key to finding common interests, says the author .
 In the U.S. and Russia, domestic politics rewards an adversarial stance toward the other .
 Russia's influence campaign in the 2016 presidential election will be difficult for a U.S. administration to be seen as making deals with Russia .
 Neither Russia's relations with the West nor Ukraine could return to the antebellum state of confidence, low as that was . This increased level of hostility means that even if a deal were brokered to recognise a new status quo including Russian sovereignty over Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, neither Russia's
 Western governments would have to continue to live under the new assumption that military action is now part of relations among these countries . Western governments have to keep living under the assumption of military action in these countries.
 Ukraine is Ukraine's second largest country in the world . Ukraine's conflict with Russia has been blamed for the Ukraine crisis . Ukraine has been a key part of the conflict between the West and Russia .
Germany's belief that war is impossible helps make it so. That confidence could potentially have become as powerful as that between Germany and France .
 Instead, we are seeing the re-militarising of relations between East and West . We are seeing a re- militarisation of relations.
 This discussion of conclusions belies the reality that at this point we have far more questions than answers about the evolving nature of relations between the West, Russia, and Ukraine .
How will the regimes in Russia and Ukraine develop, and second, how will that affect their relationships with each other and the West .
 Russia appears to be in a period of international ascendance, most observers believe that it is fragile domestically . Most observers believe Russia is fragile domestic .
 The economy continues to depend heavily on natural resources and to be plagued by corruption and crony capitalism . The economy is plagued by crony Capitalism and corruption .
 The political system has become increasingly personalised, leading to the question of whether it can survive beyond Putin himself . The question is whether the political system can survive.
 After two ostensibly democratic revolutions, the country’s oligarch-driven politics appear remarkably unchanged .
 The contest among oligarchic groups for power and access to the benefits of corruption and rent-seeking drives the political system .
 Sustained Western support for reform after the Orange Revolution produced few reforms and no structural change . The Orange Revolution was the first major reform in the Western world .
 Ukraine continues to be characterised by oligarchic influence on the economy and media . Despite the Euromaidan, economic, fiscal and energy reforms have made headway, but Ukraine is still being characterised as oligarchs .
 As a result, the country remains susceptible to Russian penetration and influence and reliant on Western financial support .
 Poroshenko continues in a long line of Ukrainian presidents to support NATO and EU membership . Poroshenko has been in the forefront of support for the Ukrainian president .
 NATO remains cautious because of on-going territorial conflicts with Russia . If Ukraine was invited to join would become NATO’s war.
 The West has been frustrated by Ukraine’s inability to meet all of its commitments to reform . Ukraine has also been routinely frustrated by the country's lack of reform in the rule of law and corruption .
 Since the Cold War, much policy has been based on the presumed link between democracy and peace, much to the derision of realist scholars .
 Rather than rehearse that debate, we ask what the future might hold if Russia becomes more democratic . Or if Ukraine does not, or if Russia does not.
 That has been the guiding assumption of Western policy since 1991, but throughout history . Western policy has been in place since 1991 .
 The assumption could never be put to the test until 1991, and the evidence since then is not conclusive . The assumption was never put into the test.
 Yeltsin's power to push back against revanchists in the 1990s provides evidence against the argument that a democratic Russia would be pro-Western .
 The majority of Russians, irrespective of their attitudes toward Putin, share a consensus that Russia has the right to control the Crimea . The majority say Ukrainians are not a separate people .
 People in Russia and the West have assumed this, but the evidence is mixed . People in both Russia and West believe this.
 Yanukovych was autocratic and sought Russian support for his autocracy . He was not always a willing participant in Russia’s efforts at integration .
 Kuchma moved Ukraine toward a competitive authoritarian regime in the late 1990s and early 2000s . He paved the way for Yanukovych to try to steal the 2004 election, also drove a concerted effort to strengthen Ukraine's ties with NATO and to consolidate Ukraine’s ‘multi-
 The West supported Kuchma’s heavy-handed methods of adopting a constitution with very strong presidential powers . The West was seen as needed to overcome leftist conservatives in parliament .
 Both policies rely on the assumed links between regime type and foreign policy, and both rely on flimsy foundations . Both policies are based on the assumption of the regime's regime type.
 Ironically, breaking the presumption of a link between regime type and foreign policy might help ratchet down tensions .
 You can then navigate through the search results and find what you are looking for . You can also search for what you're looking for in search results .
 In practice, this method can prove much more targeted and effective than consulting an index . This method can be used to help people find out what to do .
 The 2014 Russia-Ukraine conflict has transformed relations between Russia and the West into what many are calling a new cold war . Many are calling it a "new cold war"