 The U.S. Department of Defense has issued a statement on the issue . The statement was made by Derek Corker, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs .
 Bob, U.S. Senator from Tennessee, opening statement 2 Glaser, Hon. Bob, United States Senator.
 Daniel L. Daniel L., Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing, U.S. Department of Treasury, Washington, DC, 7 Prepared statement .
37 Prepared statement: 39 Menendez, Hon. Rice Hadley Gates, LLC, Washington, DC, 37 Prepared Statement .
 The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:45m., in room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Hon.
Sen. Menendez, Shaheen, Murphy, Murphy and Markey are all Democrats . Sen. Johnson, Johnson, and Barrasso are also Democrats .
 Two distinguished panels today to help us look more closely at developments in the Ukraine . We have two distinguished panels.
 Two former National Security Advisors will brief us on the situation on the ground . The panel will also look at the broader geopolitical implications of Putin's actions in Ukraine .
 In the past week, Ukraine appears to have mobilized around its new President . Ukraine's new President.
 Ukrainian Armed Forces have been actively re-closing their border with Russia and pushing back Russian separatists .
 President Putin’s instigation of this conflict continues to breed uncertainty as to whether a corner has been turned .
 President Putin is entirely capable of trying to divide Ukraine one day and then, when the international community applies pressure, withdraw from the scene long enough to avoid international scrutiny . Putin is effectively continuing his aggression to achieve his intended goal .
 In June I wrote to President Obama, asking him to seriously consider implementing additional targeted sanctions as soon as possible to deter Putin from further destabilizing Ukraine .
 I fully appreciate the importance of acting in concert with our European allies to ensure that sanctions have their intended effect . At the same time, we should not hesitate to act unilaterally to support an independent Ukraine and counter malign Russian interference .
In the long run, a stable and secure region will serve our national interests and enhance opportunities for U.S. and European businesses .
 Putin will position himself to fill the power vacuum when the government cannot fulfill the needs of parts of the Ukrainian people . Putin will continue to ensure that the Ukrainian Government will not be able to stabilize the situation, he says .
 We look forward to gaining a deeper insight into what is happening on the ground, as well as the broader geopolitical ramifications of Russia’s actions .
 Senator Corker is the ranking member of the Senate's ranking member . He was asked to respond to questions about his comments .
 I think we have got an outstanding group of people here today that I know will be very informative . I think they have got a very outstanding group. I know that we have a very interesting group ofpeople here today .
 Russia seems to be a master at escalating and de-escalating at the same time. I know this is almost becoming a cliche, but I know it is almost become aCliche . Russia is a master of escalating and De-escaling at thesame time, acts of
 I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today at what phase they think we are in relative to Russia . So, I lookforward to hearing to hear from their witnesses today .
 I have to say, sometimes I am embarrassed for you as you constantly talk about sanctions, and yet we never see them put in place . We have some people here that are very committed public servants that I respect, but, I'm embarrassed for them, I have
I hope you will enlighten us today as to where we might be in that regard. So, I hope you'll enlighten me as to what we might need to do .
 Media outlets have talked about another round of sanctions that you are preparing . The sanctions are expected to come in the coming days .
 The chairman of Russia's government says Russia needs to change its stance on Russia . He says Russia's actions are needed to change the situation in Russia . The chairman says Russia should not be blamed for the situation .
 The sanctions threats have been hollow, he says, but they have some of the same characteristics of the redline we talked about in Syria .
 Ukraine's security advisor fears that our policy is taking us to a place where we are going to have a bitter peace with Russia . "We sweep under the rug the actions that have taken place in Crimea and continue to take place in eastern Ukraine," he says .
Over time, over time, could lead to some more major consequences in Eastern Europe and the world . It looks like that is where we may be heading, which could be where we might be heading .
 I hope that is not the policy that this administration is embarking on. I hope it is not a policy that the administration is embarked on .
 I thank the witnesses for being here today, and look forward to your testimony . I thank you for your testimony, and I thank your witnesses for their bravery .
 Let us remind our panelists that your full statements will be included in the record . Let me remind ourPanelists that our full statements are included in our record .
I would ask you to try to summarize them in 5 minutes so we can enter into a dialogue . I would ask for you to do it in five minutes .
 VICTORIA NULAND is the State of the U.S. for EUROPEAN and EURASIAN AFFAIRS . She is also the Secretary of State of State for the United States .
 Chairman Menendez, Ranking Member Corker, and members of this committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you again on the situation in Ukraine .
 Assistant Secretary Chollet will talk about our security support for Ukraine and our allies .
 Voters from across Ukraine took to the polls on May 25 and elected President Poroshenko with 54. percent of the vote .
 Just weeks and days earlier, many doubted that the elections would even take place . Many doubted that they would even happen .
 It was the determination and courage of millions of Ukrainians to choose their own future that made free, fair elections possible along with the support of the international community . The international community supported the decision to hold free elections .
 Ukraine’s security remains under threat as fighting continues in eastern parts of the country . Crimea remains under occupation .
 The U.S. is supporting Ukraine in this hour of its need . The United States is helping Ukraine in its need, says the U.N.
 Assistant Secretary Chollet will discuss security assistance. We have stepped up our security assistance .
 Ukraine to succeed as a democratic, freemarket state, and to beat back the corruption, dependence, and 4 external pressure that have thwarted Ukrainians’ aspirations for decades .
 Ukraine has been given a billion-dollar loan guarantee specifically targeted to soften the impact of economic reforms on the country's most vulnerable .
 We are providing approximately $196 million in other assistance to Ukraine this year . We are also providing about $196million in other aid to Ukraine .
 $75 million has been authorized in support of economic reform, anticorruption measures, nonpartisan electoral assistance, nonlethal security assistance, and humanitarian aid for Ukrainians internally displaced from Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 We will be sending up a formal congressional notification very shortly, but let me just give you some highlights .
 Ukrainian banking sector will be strengthened by World Bank and IMF programs . Ukraine will diversify its export markets and make the business climate more competitive .
 Our anticorruption support will help support the government’s new 3-year program . It will bolster its ability to detect, investigate, and prosecute corruption wherever it festers .
 Ukraine will help restructure the energy sector and deploy new technologies to increase energy yields and efficiency . Ukraine will also help develop national plans for sustainable use of natural resources .
We will help the government implement the constitutional reform and broad decentralization of power at the local and regional level . We will help implement the Constitutional reform, we will help government implement it, we say .
We have worked in lockstep with the Ukrainian Government and our European allies and partners to try to de-escalate the tensions with Russia and with Russian-backed separatists through repeated rounds of diplomacy .
Ukrainian Government offers to address concerns of eastern Ukrainians and Russian speakers .
 President Poroshenko's peace plan offers amnesty to separatists who lay down their arms, political dialogue, broad decentralization of power . In short, virtually all of the things separatists and their backers in Moscow have said that are needed .
 President Poroshenko also initiated a 10-day unilateral cease-fire to try to provide space for dialogue with separatists .
 Russia simultaneously allowed tanks, heavy artillery, and fighters to flow across the border . But, as you also know, this cease-fire was met 5 with 10 days of violence, bloodshed, and land-grabs .
 EU leaders again called on Russia to end all support for separatists, to control the border . They also called for Russia to use its influence with separatists to return the three border checkpoints to Ukrainian authorities .
 The United States is continuing to use to measure Russia’s willingness to de-escalate tension in Ukraine . These are the same criteria that the U.S. is using to measure Russian willingness to De-escalated tension .
 The United States and Europe have imposed repeated rounds of sanctions to increase the cost Russia pays for its choices . The U.S. and Europe has imposed repeated Rounds of sanctions.
 Russia is facing more sanctions if it does not decisively change course and break its support for separatists .
 Russia's economy teeters on the bring of recession, in part from the cost of its intervention in Ukraine and the impact of our sanctions . Russians need to ask themselves what their government’s policy has really delivered for them or for the people of Ukraine, other than economic hardship,
 Ukrainian Government is delivering humanitarian aid and restoring services in Slovyansk . Ukrainian forces recently retaken the town of Kramatorsk .
 Ukrainian people's faith in their government's ability to provide a better future . They are also working to restore the Ukrainian people’s faith in the government .
 Ukraine’s success or failure in its struggle for peace, reconciliation, and human dignity will impact the future of the entire region . With it, the prospect for achieving America's 20-year objective of a Europe whole, free, and at peace is possible .
 The Ukraine government is supporting the people of Ukraine in their quest for a more stable, democratic, and prosperous future .
 Congress' continued bipartisan support, says CNN's John Sutter . "In this effort, we deeply appreciate Congress’ continuing bipartisan support," he says .
 Victoria Noland Chairman Menendez spoke to him on the situation in Ukraine and for his personal investment in the country’s future .
 Ukrainians deeply appreciate the committee's bipartisan engagement on behalf of their country’s security, democracy, and sovereignty .
 A/S Chollet will talk about our security support for Ukraine and our NATO and partner reassurance measures .
 Just weeks and days earlier, many doubted the elections would take place, let alone result in such a strong mandate for change .
 Millions of Ukrainians chose their own future that made free, fair elections 6 possible . It was the determination and courage of millions of Ukrainians to choose their own Future .
 President Poroshenko has launched a 15-point peace plan, reached out to the east with offers of dialogue and reconciliation . He signed the final economic chapters of Ukraine's historic Association Agreement/Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the European Union .
 The U.S. is supporting Ukraine in its hour of need . The United States is supporting the country in itshour of need.
 A/S Chollet has stepped up its security assistance, which they will discuss . The company's security assistance will be discussed .
 Ukraine to succeed as a democratic, free market state, and to beat back the corruption, dependence, and external pressure that have thwarted Ukrainians’ aspirations for decades .
 Ukraine has been given a $1 billion loan guarantee specifically targeted to soften the impact of economic reforms on the country’s most vulnerable .
Nearly $75 million has been authorized in support for economic reforms and anticorruption measures . The OSCE's special monitoring mission and other election observers are also on the agenda .
 We will send up a congressional notification very shortly, but let me share some highlights . We will be sending up a notification very soon .
 Ukraine will complement World Bank and IMF-led fiscal and financial sector reforms with programs to strengthen the banking sector . Ukraine will help Ukraine diversify its export markets .
 We are also looking at how we can support President Poroshenko's plan for economic revitalization of the country’s east and south . We also look at how they can support the President's plan.
Ukrainian government announces 3-year anticorruption strategy and 6-month action plan . Ukraine's ability to deter, detect, investigate and prosecute corruption wherever it festers .
 United States support in the energy area will include expertise and advice to the government . The government will deploy new technologies to increase energy 3 delds and promote efficiency .
 Ukraine will assist Ukraine in developing national plans for sustainable use and management of natural resources . And we will assist the country in developing its own national plans .
 President Poroshenko has pledged to rebuild national unity as part of his peace plan . We will help government with constitutional reform and broad decentralization of power .
 This will include support and advice at the federal, regional, and local level to implement political reform and decentralization . It will also support for free and fair parliamentary elections when they are called .
 As we support Ukraine economically, we have worked in lock-step with the Ukrainian Government and our European allies and partners to try to de-escalate tensions with Russia and Russian-backed separatists .
 U.S.-Ukrainian-Russian-Russian and EU Foreign Ministers to the June 5th G7 declaration . Kerry's bilateral meetings with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov in March to the April 17th Geneva Joint Statement .
 President Poroshenko’s peace plan offers amnesty to separatists who lay down their arms, political dialogue, and decentralization of power .
 The cease-fire was instead met with 10 days of violence, bloodshed, and land grabs by Russian-backed separatists .
 EU leaders again called on Russia to end all support for separatists . They also called for Russia to control the border and use its influence with separatists .
 The United States will continue to use to measure Russia’s willingness to deescalate tensions in Ukraine . These are the same criteria that the U.S. will still use .
 President has said we will judge Russia by its actions, not its words. As the President said, we will Judge Russia by the President's actions.
 Russia has made too many commitments at the diplomatic table over the past 4 months that have been rendered hollow by the weapons, cash, and fighters that continue to flow across the border .
 The United States and Europe have imposed repeated rounds of sanctions to increase the cost Russia pays for its choices . In response, the U.S. and Europe are imposing more sanctions .
 Russia is facing sanctions if it does not decisively change course and break its ties with separatists . And we are ready to impose more costs, including targeted sector-specific sanctions .
 Russia's economy teeters on the brink of recession in part from the cost of its intervention in Ukraine and the impact of U.S. and international sanctions . Russians need to ask themselves what their government’s policy has really delivered for them or the people of Ukraine
In Crimea, inflation has risen to 16. percent, tourism down 35 percent, and exports are plummeting . In Crimea, tourism has dropped 35 percent and exports have fallen 35 percent .
 In Donetsk and Luhansk, separatists have engaged in looting and bank robbery . They have prevented the payment of pensions and wages, and held much of the civilian population hostage in their homes .
 separatists set up landmines and roadside bombs and destroy bridges and other critical infrastructure . Now that separatists are on the run, their tactics have become even more brutal .
 Slovyansk, Kramatorsk and the surrounding towns that Ukrainian forces have recently taken back from separatists’ control . The government is focused on delivering humanitarian aid, water, food and supplies .
 Ukrainian citizens' faith in their democracy, their govenunent and its ability to serve people who have been abused for too long . They are working to restore Ukrainian citizens’ faith in the country's democracy .
 Ukraine’s success or failure in its struggle for peace, reconciliation, and human dignity will impact the future of the whole region . The prospect of achieving America's 20-year objective of a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
 We continue to have a profound interest in supporting the people of Ukraine in their quest for a more stable, democratic, and prosperous future .
 Congress' bipartisan attention and support, says CNN's John Sutter . "We deeply appreciate Congress’ bipartisan attention," he says .
 DANIEL L GLASER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY for TERRORIST FINANCING, U.S. DEPARTMENT of TREASURY, WASHINGTON, DC. DANIel L GLaser, ASSistant SECRETary for T terror
 The administration's response to Russia’s occupation and purported annexation of Crimea, and its continued provocative actions elsewhere in eastern Ukraine, he says .
In his remarks today, I will discuss our continuing efforts to impose additional costs on those who seek to destabilize eastern Ukraine and maintain the occupation of Crimea . In his remarks, he will discuss the continuing efforts.
 I will describe the impact that our actions have had on those targeted, as well as on the already faltering Russian economy . I will also describe how the impact has been on the Russian economy.
 I will discuss the support we and the international community have provided to Ukraine for its economic recovery . I will also discuss support we have provided for Ukraine's recovery .
 President Obama has issued three Executive orders granting Treasury authority to target those responsible for ongoing unrest in eastern Ukraine . President Obama issued the orders in response to the unrest in Ukraine .
8 total of 52 individuals and 19 entities, including four banks, have been designated . We have now issued five rounds of designations under those Executive orders .
 Ukraine has threatened the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, says U.S. State Department .
Our actions have been complemented by designations announced by other countries, including the EU, Canada, and Australia . Our actions have also been announced by the EU and Canada .
 Treasury designated seven individuals who attempted to establish illegal governments in eastern Ukraine or assisted in arming separatist groups . Most recently, on June 20, the Treasury designated 7 individuals who tried to set up illegal governments .
 The United States is working with Ukrainian authorities to identify and disrupt financing to those and other separatists . The U.S. is also working with Ukraine to identify the separatists .
 The United States remains prepared to impose additional sanctions, should circumstances warrant, says President Obama .
 Russia does not take immediate steps toward de-escalation, including actions involving a broad range of sectors . Currently, we are developing a number of options, in the event Russia doesn't take immediate Steps to de- escalate .
 The Russian economy has been hit hard by economic downturns in recent years . Russia's economy has suffered a sharp decline in recent months . The Russian government says it is working to improve the economy .
In the past 2 weeks alone, I have personally traveled to France, Germany, and the U.K. to advance preparations . In the past two weeks, he has personally traveled in Germany, France and the United States .
 Russian economy weakened by years of mismanagement, says U.S. State Department . Measures and threat of future measures have exacerbated preexisting vulnerabilities of Russian economy, says agency .
 IMF growth projections have heen downgraded twice this year and currently are close to zero . IMF growth growth projections are currently close tozero .
 The combination of Russia's conduct in Ukraine and the threat of sanctions has led to challenges for Russia’s economic outlook, its most prominent companies, and its economic policymakers .
 President Putin himself has said that Western sanctions imposed on Russia have had real impact on domestic businesses . Russian companies have been limited to funding for many Russian companies .
 Russian Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak conceded that Western sanctions are having a significant impact on the Russian economy .
 The IMF and the Russian Central Bank project that net outflows will reach $100 billion for the full year . More than $50 billion in capital flight this year, according to the IMF and Russia's Central Bank .
 Increased risk premiums have caused a spike in borrowing costs . Many Russian companies have been shut out of external debt markets .
 Russian politicians project confidence in the face of sanctions, their government's actions show otherwise .
 The Russian Central Bank has raised key interest rates twice this year . It has spent approximately $30 billion on foreign exchange reserves since March to stabilize the ruble .
 The Russian ruble has depreciated by 5 percent since the beginning of the year . Despite these interventions, the Russian Ruble has declined 5 percent .
 President Putin admitted last month that the Government of Russia may need to intervene with budget funds to support Russia's banks .
 Russia needs to look into recapitalizing Gazprom by the amount it would cost to build infrastructure in the Far East . President Putin has said Russia must look at recapitalize Gazprom .
 Russian Government is focused on short-term crisis-fighting, says CNN . Russia's actions are costing Russia the investment needed to reverse long-term downward economic trends, it says .
 Ukraine is working with the IMF, World Bank, and others to ensure that Ukraine has the support it needs over the coming months . The IMF and World Bank are working with Ukraine's government to ensure it has support .
 Ukraine is prepared to take additional strong measures to impose severe costs on Russia in defense of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . Ukraine is preparing to take more strong measures on Russia.
Daniel L Glaser: Russia's occupation of Crimea and its continued provocative actions elsewhere in eastern Ukraine . He says the administration's response to Russia’s occupation and purported annexation of Crimea has been criticized .
 In his remarks today, I will describe our continuing efforts to impose additional costs on those who seek to destabilize eastern Ukraine and maintain the occupation of Crimea .
 I will describe the impact that our actions have had on those targeted, as well as on an already faltering Russian economy . I will detail the impact of our actions on the Russian economy, including those targeted .
 I will discuss the support that we and the international community have provided to Ukraine for its economic recovery . I will also discuss support for Ukraine's recovery from the world community .
 The President has issued three Executive orders granting Treasury authority to target those responsible for ongoing unrest in eastern Ukraine and Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea .
 We have now issued five rounds of designations responding to Russia’s actions and Russia-backed separatists in Ukraine . The designations include a total of 52 individuals and 19 entities, including 4 banks .
 Ukraine has threatened peace, security, stability, sovereignty, sovereignty or territorial integrity of Ukraine . Russia has sought to have the greatest impact on those whose actions have threatened the peace .
 Our actions have been complemented by designations announced by others, including the EU, Canada, and Australia . The EU, Australia, Canada and Australia have also been announced .
 Treasury designated seven individuals who attempted to establish illegitimate governments in eastern Ukraine or assisted in arming separatist groups . Most recently on June 20, Treasury designated 7 individuals who tried to establish legitimate governments in Ukraine .
 Denis Pushilin, self-appointed leader of the so-called "Donetsk People's Republic" Sergei Menyailo proclaimed himself “acting governor” of Sevastopol . Valery Bolotov declared himself ‘governor’ of the Luhansk
 The U.S. is working with Ukrainian authorities to identify and disrupt financing to separatists . The United States is also working with Ukraine to identify the separatists and disrupt their financing .
 Executive Order 13662 authorizes the targeting of individuals and entities operating in sectors of the Russian economy . Secretary of the Treasury has consulted with Secretary of State .
 Russia does not take immediate steps toward de-escalation, Russia says . Currently, we are developing a number of options to take action under this authority .
 The Russian economy has been hit by an economic downturn in recent years . Russian President Vladimir Putin has pledged to help the country's economy . The Russian government says it is working with the EU, G7, and other international partners .
 Secretary Lew has said, if we need to take additional steps, we will be prepared to do so .
 Russian economy weakened by years of mismanagement. Measures and threat of future measures have exacerbated preexisting vulnerabilities of Russian economy .
 IMF growth projections have been downgraded twice this year, and currently are close to zero . IMF growth growth projections are downgraded two times this year .
 Moody's and Fitch have revised the outlook on Russia's sovereign BBB rating from stable to negative . Standard and Poor's downgraded the sovereign rating by one notch to BBB , its lowest investment grade category .
 The downgrade forced similar ratings cuts on Gazprom, Rosneft, and VTB Bank . This downgrade was similar to similar cuts on other major Russian corporations .
 The combination of Russia's conduct in Ukraine and the threat of sanctions has created challenges for Russia’s economic outlook, its most prominent companies and its economic policymakers .
 Russian Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak conceded that Western sanctions are having a significant, though indirect, impact on Russian economy .
 IMF and Russian Central Bank project that net outflows will reach $100 billion for the full year . More than $50 billion in capital flight this year, according to the IMF .
 The Russian Central Bank has intervened heavily in order to stabilize the ruble amid persistent outflows . The ruble has been stable in recent weeks .
 Many Russian companies are shut out of external debt markets . An increase in risk premium caused a spike in borrowing costs .
 Russia’s Lukoil has indicated that it will cut spending in order to reduce dependency on international debt markets .
 The bottom lines of Russian financial institutions demonstrate the effects of a weakening ruble and deteriorating investment climate .
 Russia's two largest banks by assets, Sberbank and VTB, reported 18 and 98 percent drops in quarterly profits . In late May, Russia’s two largest bank by assets reported 18 to 98 percent drop in quarterly profit .
 Russian asset prices continue to underperform relative to their emerging market peers . It is important to note that despite the more recent recovery in asset prices, Russian assets are still underperforming .
 The Russian Central Bank has raised key interest rates twice this year . It has spent approximately $30 billion in foreign exchange reserves since March to stabilize the ruble .
 credit institutions’ liabilities to the Central Bank of Russia have increased by over $30 billion since February . Credit institutions' liabilities to Central Bank have also increased by more than $30billion .
 As a result of sanctions, the Russian Government has openly discussed diverting government funds to support Russian industry .
 The Russian Ministry of Trade and Industry has proposed an import substitution program . The program would increase annual domestic volume of production by $890 million starting from 2015 .
 Russian Government is focused on short-term crisis fighting, which is costing Russia the investment needed to reverse Russia’s long-term downward economic trends . Russia's decision to intervene in Ukraine is costing the Russian Government the investment.
 To grow, Russia needs foreign direct investment and to integrate with the global economy . Russia needs to grow, to grow and to integrated with the world economy .
 Russia now faces as a result of its actions in Ukraine will have a significant impact on Russia’s growth prospects over the medium term . As a consequence, the isolation Russia faces will have an impact on its growth prospects .
 The approval on April 30 of a 2-year, $17 billion IMF reform program has unlocked additional bilateral and multilateral financial support . The approval will set Ukraine on a path to sustainable growth .
 The IMF is at the center of a broader, $27 billion international support package . It is best placed to support Ukraine’s implementation of robust and market-oriented reforms .
International assistance totaling nearly $6 billion has been disbursed to date . International assistance totaling almost $6billion has been received .
 The government successfully issued $1 billion in 5-year, U.S.backed debt at a reasonable borrowing cost in mid-May . The government issued the debt at reasonable cost .
 The first review of Ukraine’s IMF program began at the end of June . Approximately $2 billion is expected to be provided by the IMF, World Bank, and other donors . Additional resources are scheduled for disbursement by theend of the year .
 Ukraine’s new government has already completed key policy reforms that demonstrate its willingness to make tough decisions necessary to restore economic stability to Ukraine . This momentum must be maintained.
 Retail natural gas prices have been increased, a fiscally responsible budget has been passed, the procurement law has been amended . The central bank has allowed market forces to determine the value of the currency .
 Still, significant challenges remain, including continued implementation of difficult reforms by the Ukrainian Government and ensuring Ukraine has a stable supply of gas .
 conflict in eastern Ukraine is taking a significant toll on Ukraine’s already vulnerable economy . At the same time, conflict in east Ukraine is also taking a major toll on the country's economy .
 Economic activity in parts of eastern Ukraine has ground to a halt . Security situation is undermining confidence and international investment, according to a report .
 We are working with the IMF, World Bank, and others to ensure Ukraine has the support it needs over the coming months . We are also working with World Bank and the IMF to ensure the country has support .
 Treasury's Office of Technical Assistance deployed to Kiev to help Ukrainian authorities stabilize the financial sector and implement reforms .
 Treasury advisors working closely with the Finance Ministry, National Bank of Ukraine, and Deposit Guarantee Fund to develop strategies to manage public sector debt .
 Mr. Chollet is the U.S. Defense Secretary for the United States . He is also a former Secretary of State for the Defense Department .
 The Department of Defense is working to help Ukraine address its security needs, Corker says .
 The Russian military remains very active in facilitating the movement of forces, equipment, and finances across the border . We remain deeply concerned.
 Russian irregular forces and Russianbacked local separatists remain active inside eastern Ukraine . Both are supported by Russian financing .
 Russia's pledge to stabilize the situation and seek a negotiated outcome is not consistent with Russia’s pledge to stabilise the situation .
 Ukrainian leaders have made clear that they want our help, and we are committed to assisting them . President Obama, Vice President Biden, Secretaries Kerry and Hagel have met with Ukrainian counterparts in the past month .
 On security, we are working to support Ukraine along three lines of effort . We are working on security, security, and support Ukraine on three lines .
 President Obama has approved $33 million in security assistance for Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis . President Obama approved the money for the Ukraine crisis .
 This is an order of magnitude beyond our assistance in previous years to Ukraine, and more than four times what we provided Ukraine last year . This is more than 4 times the amount of assistance we provided last year, according to the Ukrainian government .
 We have delivered 2,000 sets of body armor, first aid kits, tactical radios, and 5,000 uniforms . We have also delivered 5,00 uniforms and first aid kit .
Soon, we will send night-vision devices, thermal imagers, EOD robots, Kevlar helmets, and additional radios . Soon, we'll send night vision devices, Thermal imagers and EODs .
 We are actively pursuing additional sources of assistance, which we will apply to Ukraine’s most pressing needs . We will apply for more help in Ukraine.
 Ukrainian military needs support through enhanced training and exercises . Second, beyond the immediate supply needs, the Ukrainian military need support from the military .
 President Obama made clear after his meeting with President Poroshenko last month . We are discussing additional steps to help train and professionalize Ukraine's military .
 The U.S. European Command has established a Senior Steering Committee with Ukrainian counterparts . The committee aims to improve bilateral military cooperation and conduct assessments .
 Third, and perhaps most importantly, we will work with Ukraine on reforming and rebuilding its defense institutions . We will work on reforming, in some cases, rebuilding the country's defense institutions.
 Ukrainian Defense Minister said the biggest obstacle to reform is the military mind-set still largely oriented toward the old Soviet way of doing things .
 He requested our assistance in reform and improving military education . And he requested our help in reforming military education and reform .
 U.S. defense advisors will help Ukrainians develop a feasible and sustainable reform program . The Ukrainians will be able to develop a viable and sustainable program .
 A five-member initial scoping team visited Kiev a few weeks ago and met with various Ukrainian defense and security officials .
 embedded U.S. civilian advisors in the Ukrainian Defense Ministry can help the government build a national security strategy that provides a cohesive vision for the military, border guards, national guard, and other security institutions .
 Ukraine is endowed with an advanced defense industrial base that employs more than 40,000 people . Ukraine is in danger of collapse due to the current reliance on the Russian market .
 Ukrainian Government has stopped all military sales to Russia . Russia's aggressive actions in Crimea, Donetsk, and Lugansk, and elsewhere, have stopped sales .
 United States advisors can help 13 Ukrainians develop long-term investment plans . The U.S. can help them to attract other markets and shift away from reliance on Russia .
 The U.S. cannot achieve success in these three areas of security assistance by itself, says the chairman of the committee .
 NATO allies who have experienced their own challenging defense reforms over the past decade can provide expertise on similar reforms in Ukraine . For example, NATO allies such as Poland and the Baltic States can provide abundant expertise.
 NATO allies need to step up and help Ukraine security forces to reform and professionalize over the medium to long term .
 President Obama announced on his trip to Europe last month. We will continue to rely on the leadership from Congress, especially in supporting the European Reassurance Initiative .
 If approved, this initiative of $1 billion will help the U.S. military increase its defense presence in Europe . It would cover enhanced training, readiness, exercises, and facility improvements in Europe to reassure our allies .
 The initiative would bolster our materiel assistance to key partners, such as Ukraine . It would also bolster the effort to help Ukraine .
 The House of Representatives is holding a vote on a bill to pass the bill . The House is expected to vote on the bill in the next week .
 The Ukraine crisis was precipitated by Russia’s occupation of Crimea and its destabilization campaign in eastern Ukraine .
 The Department of Defense is pursuing to help Ukraine meet its immediate security needs, and help Ukraine develop a more professional and capable military .
 Russia’s actions are as unacceptable today as they were in February. We are many months into the crisis, and Russia's actions are unacceptable today, says CNN .
 General Breedlove described Russia’s posture and actions in a recent press conference . He described Russia's posture and behavior in a press conference.
 He said Russian regular forces are very active along the border of Ukraine . He said they are facilitating the movement of forces, equipment and finances across the border .
 Russian irregular forces, and Russian-led and -backed local separatists, are active inside eastern Ukraine . They are supported by Russian financing .
 Russia's actions fly in the face of international commitments and standards governing relations among states . Russia has taken concerted actions as a government to raise Russia’s costs for these blatantly unacceptable actions .
 I visited Kiev just before the inauguration of Ukraine’s new President Poroshenko in June .
 Ukrainian President has pledged to increase cooperation with Europe . He has just signed a trade agreement with the European Union to accelerate that process .
 Ukraine has a long history of security cooperation with the United States . It has been a steadfast coalition partner in Afghanistan, Iraq, Kosovo, and Bosnia, as well as in counterpiracy operations .
 Ukraine wants Ukraine to continue on this trajectory, and to do so we’re helping in three ways . We want Ukraine to be able to stay on its path, and so we're helping in two ways .
 Ukraine has the right to restore order and stability within its territory through the use of its armed forces, internal security forces, and border guards . Ukraine has been clear that there is no military solution to this crisis .
 President Obama approved an additional tranche of $5 million in nonlethal security assistance for Ukraine on June 4 . Vice President Biden announced an additional $10 million for assistance to the 14 State Border Guard Service on June 7 . The total since the beginning of the crisis to $33 million currently
 Nonlethal assistance started to flow during the months of June and July .
 Ukrainian military requires support through training and exercises . Second, beyond immediate needs, the Ukrainian military needs support from the military .
 Ukrainian Governments starved the military not only of modern equipment, but also of sufficient training . But prior Ukrainian Governments, especially that led hy former President Yanukovych, starved the army .
 The new Ukrainian Government, under President Poroshenko, is clear about its desire for more military cooperation, including training and development .
 The United States European Command has established a senior steering committee with Ukrainian counterparts to identify areas where we can improve our bilateral military cooperation, conduct assessments, and identify requirements .
 Ukraine must spend its defense budget more wisely, says U.S. ambassador to Ukraine . Ukraine must expand and empower a cadre of noncommissioned officers, he says . Russia seized Ukraine's naval assets unlawfully seized by Russia .
 The biggest obstacle to reform is a military mindset that is still largely oriented toward the old, Soviet way of doing things . The Ministry of Defense requested our assistance in improving military education .
 Department of Defense will help Ukrainians develop a feasible and sustainable reform program . To do so, advisors from the Department of defense, including USEUCOM, will help the Ukrainians .
 embedded U.S. civilian advisors in the Ukrainian Defense Ministry will help build a national security strategy for the Ukrainian Armed Forces, border guards . Also, embedded United States civilian advisors.
 Ukraine is in danger of collapse due to its current reliance on the Russian market . Ukraine is endowed with a strong and advanced defense industrial base — employing more than 40,000 people .
 Ukraine has stopped all military sales to Russia due to Russia’s aggressive actions in Crimea, Donetsk, and Luhansk .
 United States advisors can help them diversify this industry to attract other markets, develop long-term investment plans and shift away from reliance on Russia .
 The U.S. cannot realize success in these three areas of security assistance by itself . The United States can't realize success by itself.
 NATO allies have experienced their own challenging defense reforms over the past decade . Poland and the Baltic States can provide abundant expertise on similar reforms for Ukraine .
 We will engage with these allies and others to build a comprehensive and multifaceted approach to help Ukraine defend itself . Ukraine will become a more secure and capable partner.
 Chairman Menendez, Ranking Member Corker, and committee members, we need Congress’ help too .
 The administration recently announced its European Reassurance Initiative . It was reflected in the budget amendment submitted last month .
 If approved, this $1 billion initiative would help the Department increase its defense presence in Europe . The initiative would cover enhanced training, readiness, exercises, and facility improvements .
 ERI funds could be used to bolster our material assistance to key partners such as Ukraine . The proposal is being considered by Congress to help Ukraine .
 President Obama and the G7 promised more economic sanctions if Putin did not stop inciting violence in eastern Ukraine . Putin has been accused of inciting violence.
 Putin made gestures that suggested the appearance of Russian withdrawal, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Putin's actions are hostile by anyone’s standard .
 Russia has made too many commitments at the diplomatic table over the past 4 months . Russia has been rendered hollow by the weapons, cash, and fighters that continue to flow across the border .
 OSCE was calling on Russia to end all support for separatists to control the border . It was also calling for Russia to use its influence with separatists to return the three border checkpoints to Ukrainian authorities .
 I certainly do not disagree with your assessment that we have not seen progress on any of the areas that the G7 outlined or that the EU Council outlined. Well, I certainly don't disagree with you, I say .
 President Poroshenko came into office with a broad and deep peace plan . He was committed to testing it, he said .
 He first wanted to try to negotiate a cease-fire that was bilateral . So, he first tried to negotiate an agreement that was not bilateral .
After a couple of weeks of effort, he decided to initiate his cease-fire unilaterally . After a few weeks of efforts, he started the cease- fire unilaterally .
 Putin asked the U.S. and Europe to see if separatists would meet him halfway, he said . The test was a test that he asked the United States, Europe to support, to see whether they would meet .
 Ukraine lost territory to separatists, it lost border control posts, and weapons continued to flow . The cease-fire came and went, and, as you have noted, it went and went .
 The Europeans continue to try to bring the sides together to see if a cease-fire can be reestablished . The Europeans are still trying to bring both sides together .
 separatists have refused to meet in any location that is safe . They have failed, over the last week, to do that, because separatists have not met in any safe location .
 The President, the Secretary, and all of us, have been in constant day-by-day discussion with the Europeans to assess .
 The next round of sanctions is expected to be announced next week . The sanctions are expected to come in the coming weeks .
President Obama has said sanctions will be more effective if the U.S. and Europe work together . The sanctions are more effective, says President Obama .
 The 16 Ukrainian Government has bent over backward to try to get to a peaceful resolution that will get the Russians to go along . I think the 16 Ukrainian government hasbent over backward. I think it will ultimately go along with the Russians .
 All the Russians call for are cease-fires, and then they take advantage of it, and they do nothing in return . But, all the Russian call for were cease-fire.
 The case is clearly a violation of international law and human rights. Well, thank you for citing that case, which is clearly violation of human rights, says the author .
 Ukrainian servicemember taken hostage on battlefield by separatists about a month ago . She has now turned up in a Russian prison, clearly making obvious link between Russia and separatists .
 The last meeting of European heads before the summer break is on July 16 . European leaders are expected to discuss sanctions at the end of the summer .
 President has always made clear that, if necessary, he will act on his own . Chairman, as I said, our goal is to act in concert with Europe, he said .
 We see the Russians creating a cessation of oil deliveries and gas deliveries to the Ukraine .
 The fall of the world is expected to continue into the fall, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he would love to hear what that looks like, if it continues .
 U.S. companies helping Russia learn how to drill offshore in the Arctic and exploit their shale resources .
 Russia has shown clearly that they are willing to use its energy weapon. Now, I do not think we should necessarily create a Russian shale revolution, I say .
 Chairman says U.S. business risks of continuing to provide high-tech investment in the current climate .
We have also focused intensively on what we might do in the next round with regard to high-technology investment . We have also, in the context of our sanctions work internally and with the Europeans, focused on what they might do .
 Russia depends on outside investment in order to take its energy exports to the next level and to the Chairman . You are not wrong that Russia needs outside investment.
 The U.S. would not want to be in a situation of denying our companies and having Europeans backfill. This is in the category of a set of measures one could take that would only be effective, in terms of the goal that you seek, if they were done in concert
 There is no doubt that there is anyone in the world as advanced as the U.S. on the specific technologies as it relates to shale exploration .
 It seems to me that we fight with one hand behind our back, maybe two, with a leader who has no limitations, from what I can gather, other than when he is faced with an equivalent countervailing force that is either military .
 I don't know how much longer there are going to be those of us willing to wait before we act independently . I do not know how long we will be able to act independently, I say .
 Some of your questions really are the kind of questions I want to pursue. And some of the questions I wanted to pursue are the sort of questions we want to ask .
 Secretary Nuland: "I know that you do a good job of staying in touch with us, and I appreciate that"
 Foreign Service officers feel like resigning when they are put out there to continue to sort of sound tough, but know that nothing is really going to happen .
 The fact is, everything we said we were going to put sanctions in place for, relative to Russian actions, has occurred . The fact that we said it was in place is what we said, and it has occurred. The fact was that we had been put in place.
 They have never responded to the threats, the threats we put out there . The threats have never been responded to, says CNN .
 Chairman says it is his great honor to serve in this position at this very vital moment .
 He has been struggling to find a way to get out of bed in the morning and practice . But he has been very frustrating, though, to continue to wake up in the mornings and look in the mirror and talk tough .
 Corker: "It is important to go back and look at the last few months" He says it's important to look at what might have happened, had we not had the rounds of sanctions .
 The rub is within the administration that is keeping it continuing to lay out redlines and make threats, but not act, he says . The administration is continuing to undermine our credibility, he adds .
 Tell me what is keeping us from taking action today like putting military equipment on the ground . Tell us what is preventing us from doing so.
 We know they are playing this duplicitous game of escalation and deescalation, we say . We know it's a game of escalating and de escalation, we tell them . They are playing a duplicitious game of escalate and de escalateation, they say .
 President Poroshenko wants to test his peace plan, he says . Poroshenko says it was the desire, first, to test the peace plan .
 We are now talking to the Europeans about when it is appropriate to move together . We are quite clear that we have not seen the results that we are seeking from Russia, so we are now discussing it .
 We are building the package as we move forward. So, we are looking at the evidence, and we are building a package . We are looking to find out more about the case.
 The last meeting we were going to have was the end of June, he says . "You remember you told me, that the last meeting was the last"
 "Everybody on this panel has to b^e incredibly frustrated. And I know that everybody on this Panel has to be incredibly frustrated," says Tom Charity .
 The White House is trying to keep sanctions in place, he says . "I just wish that you would explain to me what it is," he adds .
 Europe's sanctions will be stronger if we move together, he says . The primary desire, at the moment, is to stay tightly coordinated with Europe as we move forward .
 There was a moment when 40,000 Russian troops were ringing the border, says the chairman .
 Our 19 NATO friends kept saying they were moving away, and they kept saying that they are not moving away . And they kept telling them they were not moving .
 A lot of them moved back, but you are not wrong that we have a significant number of them returned . "A lot of they moved back," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 There was a time when we thought we would not have an election in Ukraine. There was also a time in the past when we were worried about an election .
 The threat of sanctions helped preserve the space for those elections . It was the solidarity between the U.S. and Europe, including the threat to sanctions, that helped preserve that space .
 Ukraine has been able to provide time and space for Ukraine to recover, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin has said he wants to help Ukraine recover from its crisis .
 We need to, to the extent that we can, continue to work with Europe, says David Cameron . "We need to work to make this policy as effective as possible," he says .
President Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of the White House . President Obama has said that he is not going to act . Obama's White House has said it will not act, Obama says .
 Glaser: "We do not ach Secretary Glaser, you talk about the damage we have done to the economy. We don't ach secretary Glaser," he says .
 The Russian stock market is up 22 percent since March . I just had someone look — and maybe we read the chart wrong — and I just looked at it briefly, and I apologize for not having done it an hour or so ago .
 The Russian economy has been hit by an economic downturn in recent years . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been blamed for the country's economic woes .
I do not know if that is the exact right number, but I am sure that is correct . I do not think that is exactly the right number .
 A few oligarchs are having some unpleasant travel experiences and maybe having some assets frozen. So, just out of curiosity, I know there are some oligarchs.
 "I guess people around the world realize that our threats are hollow, that we are never going to do anything," says John Sutter . Sutter: "People around the globe realize that their threats are Hollow"
 Chairman and I were at a dinner one night, where that was clearly pointed out . It was clearly points out .
 I do not think that short-term gains in the Russian stock market counterbalance the long-term real damage that we have done, and are continuing to do, to the Russian economy. I don't think short- term gains in Russian stock markets counterbalance long- term real damage
 Russian Government recognized by Russian Government, as I note in testimony . That is been recognized by the Russian Government .
 Russian banks are having a hard time raising capital in international capital markets . It is recognized by foreign investors, as demonstrated by the fact that Russian businesses, Russians banks, are having hard times raising capital . Russian banks, Russian banks.
 Russian capital flight is estimated to be at $100 billion by the end of the year . It is recognized by the Russian people, themselves, as reflected by the $50 billion in capital flight .
 Russian Government, Russian people, and international investors, all recognize that 20 Russian economy has been severely damaged . Russian government, people and investors, say 20 Russian economies have been damaged by Russian mismanagement .
 Toria says Russia has had some deterrent impact on Russia, particularly in terms of tactics . I do think that, as Toria said, at this point, we have had a deterrent impact, he said .
 It is clear to all of us that, as a broad strategic matter, their strategy remains the same . But, it is clear, it's clear, that as an important matter, the strategy remains same .
 Toria says he is working so hard to make sure that when the time comes, we have a very strong package of measures . Toria: "We are working soHard internally and working sohard with our friends and partners in Europe and in the G7"
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he is confident of a strong package of measures . He says the package will do severe damage to the Russian economy .
 I just want to close by saying that, again, I respect each of your service to our country . I just wants to say that,again, I justwant to close. I just wanted to close with that, once again, by saying I respect your service.
 I know each of you have to be somewhat disappointed in the actions that have not been taken. I know that each of them have been somewhat disappointed with the actions. I'm not sure if they will be taken.
 Secretary Chollet: $33 million in assistance to the Ukrainian military is nice .
 We still have not done the things that they have really asked us to do. We are still not doing the things they have asked them to do . We have been asked to do more than anything we have done.
 Russian economy will see long-term damage, says Secretary Claser . "Our country acting like such a paper tiger to the world on this," says Claser.
 The administration continues to tout the things it continues to do publicly . I do hope, at some point, the administration will actually follow through on the things that it tout publicly .
 There were a number of reports over the weekend about successes of the Ukrainian military .
Russia's success in Russia has been attributed to Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We attribute those successes to what we are seeing out of Russia"
 There have been some significant successes by the Ukrainian military in the last 4 or 5 days. You are absolutely right, there have been, there has been, some significant success .
 A major city, Slovyansk, was liberated and is now in control now of the Ukrainians . The city is in control of a major city.
 There are several other key cities that are now largely surrounded by the Ukrainian military . The Ukrainian military is now largely surrounding several key cities .
I think there is probably not one single answer to why we have seen the tide turn, at least for the moment . I think there's probably not a single answer.
 The trendline is good for now, but we need to watch this very closely. So, although it's good, we must watch this closely .
 It could be that the cease-fire period allowed the Ukrainian military to regroup, orient itself . It could also be that it could allow the military to orient itself.
 President Poroshenko has been very active in the planning and the leadership of this, says the Ukrainian president .
 He was just yesterday dressed in military fatigues in the field, talking to his troops and his generals . He was, just yesterday, dressed inMilitary fatigues .
 weapons appear on one side of the border, and then mysteriously appear on the other side, that are clearly Russian origin . We are still seeing weapons appear.
 Russia has lessening of support by Russia, but also an opportunity for Ukrainians to regroup, says CNN's John Sutter . The Ukraine crisis has been very quickly cascading over the previous months .
 Russia has pulled back on sanctions, but I do think the sanctions have helped. So, on why Russia is pulling back, I think it has helped, I do.
 Putin’s calculation on how much support he would be willing to give and how deep he would get into this. I think this was — they did have an effect, and they did having an effect. It certainly changed Putin's calculation on whether he would support him .
 The border between Ukraine and Russia is not even demarcated, the Border Security chief says . He says that has helped, and he thinks that's helped .
 I think we have to be very mindful of what the Russian response could be, and that is why we are watching this so closely . I think that we have been very mindful. I think it is a good idea to watch this closely .
 The Ukrainians need to be vigilant, themselves, on how they handle the situation, in terms of civilian casualties in the surrounding cities .
 They have stressed to us that they are going to be very careful about how they handle this situation . And they have stressed that they will be very carefully about how to handle it .
 Russian response is expected to be the worst in terms of Russian response, he says . But he says we have to really expect the worst, and that is why we are watching it so closely .
 Senator says it depends on how Putin ultimately calculates his interests . Senator says Putin's interests are important to Putin .
 He has other ways to create pressure and destabilization on Ukraine, including the energy card and the economic card . He has also created pressure on Ukraine.
 Ukrainians are harden the border and make it more difficult to covertly support the separatists, Assistant Secretary Chollet said . But, our hope would be that, as the Ukrainians, as he said, that the choices become more stark for Russia .
In the towns that separatists have held, Slovyansk and Kramatorsk before they were liberated, human rights abuses, looting, abuse of the civilian population have gravely turned those in the east who may have had affinity toward Russia .
 Ukrainian military has benefited 22 from improved intelligence from the population that wants these guys gone . The population wants them gone, the military says .
 Ukrainians continue to deploy careful, judicious tactics to make a success and restore good livelihood in places like Kramatorsk and Slovyansk that are free .
 The government published its 3year anticorruption plan and its 6-month action plan last week . The government, just last week, published its plan and action plan .
 The Rada was part of the IMF conditionality . Senator has started to put a legislative base in place through the Rada .
There is more legislative base required as part of their association with the European Union . There is more to be done with the EU.
 The 6-month action plan is aimed at preventing conflict of interest for public servants . The key focuses are preventing corruption, judicial reform, and creating transparency .
 The European Union is committing significant U.S. assistance to help in the anticorruption effort, as is the European Union .
 It is a very difficult, pernicious problem throughout society, as you know . It is very difficult to deal with, as we know, it is a difficult problem .
 It was the number one plank on which President Poroshenko ran for office . It was one of the top three plank of his presidential bid .
Anticorruption, clean government, clean Ukraine, Europe, and peace were his three platforms . He was known for his anti-corruption and clean government .
 In eastern Ukraine, the number one concern is economic opportunity . The economy is essentially, essentially, a rust-belt, heavyindustry economy .
 Ukraine is reaching out to the European Union for support for microprojects and other things that will quickly jump-start the economy . The Donbas will be diversification of that economy away from heavy industry and extractive .
 I would suggest that energy efficiency, as they are looking at projects, is one great opportunity that they should take advantage of The Chairman . The Chairman.
 Secretary Nuland: "We are all buoyed by what we have heard in the last couple of weeks, particularly the military successes, and how we attribute that"
Ukrainian military is showing more strength then they seemed 23 to have before. I think we are all surprised that the Ukrainian military is more strength than they seemed before .
 The elections were good, went well, the government has legitimacy, he says . But he says a lot of it is the fact that the election was good, and people have some hope, in the east .
Russian sanctions are multilateral, not unilateral, he says . I could not agree more that the sanctions are more effective, he adds .
 Russia plays this game, maybe the Ukrainian military is successful on and off. Say the same situation that we have today, roughly, persists .
 If Russia does not stop rearming separatists, we will have European support for another round of sanctions . It is my judgment, based on hours and hours of consultation with Europeans and trips across some 20 of the 28 European Union countries .
 It may not be completely parallel to everything that we want to do, but this is a process moving forward . It may be completely different to everything we want, but it is moving forward.
 There is no one in Europe who thinks that what is happening in eastern Ukraine is in the EU's interest or Europe's interest . Everyone wants to get back to a place where there are civilized relations between Russia and Ukraine .
 We have also, working with Europe, put in place an intensive campaign of diplomatic and political and, to some extent, economic isolation . We have worked with Europe for years .
 The United States has ceased virtually all military-to-military cooperation with Russia . For example, as you know, the U.S. has ceased nearly all military cooperation withRussia .
 We have ceased virtually all economic cooperation at the government level . We have stopped virtually all government-to-government cooperation, all that kind of thing, says the author .
 The G8 was downgraded back to a G7, and had it in Brussels without the Russians . The G7 was also downgraded from a G8 to the G8 .
 None of us, with the exception of Normandy and a couple of other things, have been welcoming senior-level Russians in our capitals . The Russians have been welcomed by many of us.
We have been restricting the work we do together to those things that are clearly in our global shared interest. We have been restricting the work they do together. We've been restricting our work to things that were clearly in their shared interest .
 NATO partners have operated with U.S. and NATO forces in places like Kosovo and Iraq and Afghanistan still today . It has helped them over 20 years that they have been a NATO partner .
 There is no doubt that NATO's partnership with NATO has helped them in the course of this crisis, says the author .
 The fact that they were a partner with NATO has helped us diplomatically and militarily, in terms of supporting Ukraine in various meetings in Brussels .
 There is a lot of support that they get, and there is practical help. So, there is a lots of support. There's practical help that they getting, says the author .
 NATO is also seeking ways to continue to help Ukraine reform and further professionalize its military . U.S. bilateral efforts are also in addition to bilateral efforts .
 The then-Ukrainian Defense Minister is now the new Defense Minister . He says he talked a lot about the support that they were looking for .
 We have pledged to do — we can pay for — things like night vision, and border security is something that they are very, very focused on . We have promised to do, we have pledged. We have vowed to do. We will pay for, we will
 Secretary Hagel has had discussions with European Command team in Kiev, says David Cameron . Hagel is to talk with them in more detail about further needs that they have, he says .
 The world does not revolve around who is with the U.S. and who's with Russia any longer .
 Russia is creating a contrast with Russia for the countries that lie along the faultline between East and West . But, it has similarities, in the sense that this is a long-term engagement, says the author .
 The work that we do over years and decades is to rebuild the economic and military capacity of those countries, says President Obama . "What matters most, really, is the work that I do," he says .
 I join Senator Corker in lacking envy for the position that you are in, but for different reasons . I join with Senator Corker, who is in the Senate for the first time .
 I think we want to be careful not to be too responsive in the short run so as to pollute the efforts that we need to make in coordination with the Europeans to win the long-term game . I think it is important to be more responsive to the Europeans in the long run
 The Russians used to be the best at playing the long game . That is how they expelled Napoleon from Russian territory .
 Secretary Nuland wants to challenge optimism about where Europe is heading .
 I agree with Senator Flake that we have to do this, to the extent possible, in coordination with Europe, he says . I agree that we must do this to the fullest possible, he adds .
Russian aggression presents Russia with a threat of existential threat, he says . He says he is not envious of the position he is in, because he is working with a continent in which they fundamentally disagree .
 We tell them 25 that they have to be serious about this, and they turn around and have a very different view . We told them that they had to beserious about this .
 Russia has a historic structural dependency on Russia . Russia is a key part of Europe's economic and political power .
 Ukraine, in Moldova, in Georgia, is a democratic free-market model . Georgia is a country in Ukraine, and Moldova is a former Moldova state .
 U.S. ambassador to Bulgaria: "You made a good impact when you were in Bulgaria" "That was very important for United States diplomacy," he says . "I had a very good impact on South Stream," he adds .
 The EU has suspended support for South Stream until it can further evaluate the larger dependency impact of that project . I would also give a shout-out also to the EU, which has suspend support for the South Stream .
 The European Union is working intensively with the European Union on energy diversification . The nation-states are also considering interconnectors, LNG, other sources of energy to reduce their dependence .
 The European Union wants to create less dependency on autocratic countries that use trade as a weapon . The EU has a vibrant market set of principles within Europe .
 U.S. sanctions were in Bulgaria when they were in the country . The European Union has imposed unilateral sanctions on the United States .
 Russian individual, Timchenko, was potentially going to be connected to the construction of the South Stream Pipeline into Bulgaria . Timchenko was a Russian individual. He was also a member of a group that was working on the project .
 Bulgaria halted construction in response to U.S. sanctions on an individual who was sanctioned unilaterally by the United States . I am not exactly sure why Bulgaria decided to halt construction .
There is some impact when the U.S. acts alone, says John Sutter . Sutter: There seems to be some evidence that if the Europeans are not willing to move with us, that there is some effect .
 President Obama has repeatedly emphasized that we will be prepared to act alone if we need to do it alone . Obama has said we will act alone.
 The U.S. plays a pivotal role in the international economy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "That does give us power, and it gives us leverage. It gives us power"
Sen. John McCain says Russia has been using leverage in the case of Russia . "It is leverage that we have been using," he says .
 We have repeatedly shown that when we act alone, we can act in a meaningful way and we can have real consequences, as I tried to outline in my testimony . We have shown that, when we acted alone, our actions can be meaningful, as we have shown .
 I do think that the time spent trying to put all that together is time well spent. So, I don't think that it's been a good time, I think that time is spent.
 The State Department is doing a lot of work with Europe. Some of the work is more important to U.S. national security interests than Ukraine, the State Department says .
 There was some dispute amongst our second panel as to who benefits and who is hurt by a continued dispute over gas supply from Russia into Ukraine through to Europe .
 Some think that will ultimately hurt Ukraine, because they will be seen as having to make a choice between their own citizens and passing along the gas to Europe .
 Others thought that maybe that would move Europe more quickly to energy independence if they continue to see the downside of reliance on transit through Ukraine . Others thought it would move the continent more quickly.
 Both Russia and Ukraine lose because they do not have other options than to deal with each other . I would say, in the short run, both Russia and Ukrainian lose, because they don't have other Options .
 Ukraine, as you know, makes valuable revenue by being a transit country . Ukraine is a transit nation . It makes valuable money by being an transit country.
 Ukraine has to focus more effort on diversifying, including diversifying as a transit hub . Ukraine, obviously, has tofocus more effort, and that is part of the assistance that we are providing, says Ukraine .
 Russia can also be a transit hub into other countries from Europe, if we can energize the market . It can also, through reverse flow, be a transport hub into others from Europe .
 European Commissioner Ettinger is trying to midwife negotiations between Russia and Ukraine . Russia has not been willing, as yet, to guarantee a year-long price to Ukraine, as you know .
 Secretary Nuland is focusing on a bill that has been filed in the Senate that Senator Corker’s taken the lead on .
 Putin is playing a very careful game, says CNN's John Sutter . But, it seems to be, he says, that what he is playing, here, is avery careful game .
 He wants to coerce Ukraine and ICev into an agreement that guarantees Russian influence over Ukraine’s foreign policy . His ultimate goal, of course, is to coerced Ukraine into a deal with ICev .
 At the same time, they are also keeping alive the threat of military intervention .
Ukrainian forces are beginning to redeploy military units along the northeastern Ukrainian border for the first time since the May withdrawal of forces .
Given the recent offensive gains made by Kiev, the threat of military intervention will rise again. My sense is that, given the recent gains, it will be a threat again .
 Kiev is the aggressor. The flip side of it is, they play this very careful game of, you know . They now have of calling for a cease-fire so they can appear like they are the mediators .
 Up until now, they have actually played that game fairly well, I think . I think, quite frankly, they've actually played it fairly well .
 The EU Foreign Ministers decided not to impose additional sanctions on Putin . Putin asked that the force of authorization — the use-of-force authorization — be lifted .
 This is part of a broader strategy that they have of cutting into Western unity on the idea of new sanctions, says Peter Bergen .
 There is probably some serious divisions in Moscow about the way forward. But, I also think, this is my guess, here, here. But I would be curious to your input on it.
 Putin may be one of the hardliners that want to see a tougher stance on Russia . Putin is known for his tough stance on foreign policy .
 separatists are feeling like Moscow has done more than it has done, it should be more . And you probably have the separatists, themselves, feeling like, themselves .
Russian government elitists worry about the broader implication of more sanctions . On the other hand, you probably have a bunch of elitistists in the government in Russia .
 Asia is going to overtake Europe as Russia’s leading export market, especially after this latest deal . Asia will soon overtake Europe's top export market.
 But, I believe, they are going to really struggle to meet their demands and commitments . But, they will really struggle, I think, to meet the demands they have made, she says .
 Sanctions have made it harder for them to access foreign financing and Western technology . Sanctions make it harder to access Western technology and foreign financing .
 China has high levels of helium deposits in the eastern Siberia fields . The field is going to be harder to develop than most others, because they have high deposits of helium .
 Sakhalin Islands, where they are having, are 10 years off base, in terms of doing that . It is similar to the challenge they are already facing off the coast of — I think it is the — am I pronouncing it right? I think they are
 I would — again, I do not know, and they obviously have not shown me the deal, I would say . I would, again, say, and I would not know. I would ... but they obviously haven't shown me a deal, he says .
 The Bank of China has probably reserved the right to revoke lines of credit if Russian companies cannot access credit or cannot access the technology because of broader Western sanctions . But, I would bet you that, in the deal that they have done with China, the Bank of Chinese banks
 China and other Asian countries are trying to cut deals or figure out how to access more Russian energy . I believe this would also have an impact on China and others who are trying.
 The U.S. is considering additional sanctions against Russia, including in the hightechnology area . President Putin has been in talks with President Putin about additional sanctions, he says .
 Russia is working intensively with Europe on these kinds of measures, says CNN's John Sutter . "It is not just American companies that have this technology that Russia needs," he says .
 If we move in the direction of those kinds of sanctions, they will be stronger and more effective and nonpunitive, vis-a-vis our companies, if we do it together with Europe, says the author .
 The European Union is "very much on the docket, it is very much in the conversation with Russians and with the European Union," says the Russian government .
 The first is if we go on our own, if we do this by ourselves, it may undermine the Western unity that we seek, says the author . Other countries in the region also have similar technologies they can provide, he says .
 U.S. companies are denied the opportunity to invest in Europe, says Sen. Rubio . Rubio: "We have an ineffective sanction"
 President Obama says he's open to working with Russia's Rubio on a bipartisan bill . Rubio says it will be effective on Russia's 29-year-old senator .
 The U.S. would not put ourselves in the position of hurting the American economy without hurting the Russian economy, he says .
 I think that sort of American leadership will bring us closer to the kind of unity we seek from our allies. And I think this sort of leadership will, in fact, bring us close to our allies, he says .
 Mr. Chairman. I truly hope that this is the direction that we will head, Mr Chairman.
 Yanukovych’s unwillingness to sign the EU association agreements was a precipitator of the massive street protest in 2013 .
 President Poroshenko ran on and that made him a popular and overwhelming candidate . It was one of the major tenets that he ran on . It made him popular and a popular candidate .
 Europe has offered Ukraine visa-free travel for all of its citizens, but also virtually tariff-free entry to the European market . Europe has also offered Ukraine, through these agreements, for its products .
 The Russians expressed concern that because they have tariff-free trade with Ukraine now, there would be unintended impacts on their economic situation . The Russians, throughout this process, expressed some concern that, because of the tariff- free trade, it would be an unintended impact .
 They pushed very hard for consultations on the implementation of the agreement . They push very hard. They pushed for consultations.
 The EU, Ukraine, and Russia will discuss trilateral talks on how to implement the agreement in a way that has least market disruption across the region and potentially benefit Russia .
 NATO announced that no new nations were going to be coming into NATO — Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine — anytime soon . Right at the same time as the June agreement was being signed with the EU, shortly thereafter, NATO met .
 President Poroshenko has made clear that the question of closer integration between Ukraine and NATO is not on the table .
 Ukrainian side has not been a demand of the Ukrainian side, and the alliance respects that . So, it hasn't been a Demand of the Ukraine side, says the alliance .
 The chairman and Senator Rubio made comments about sanctions on energy and technology . I want to associate myself with some of the comments made by the chairman and Sen. Rubio .
 The U.S. is considering sanctions ahead of Europe. But it is important for us, as we weigh sanctions, and particularly if we might have to do sanctions unilaterally .
 The last time we had a hearing on this matter, I hypothesized, not knowing anything, about the impact of financial sanctions on U.S. credit card companies . About 90 percent of current credit card transactions in Russia are in Russia .
 The Russian Government is now pursuing the creation of its own credit card infrastructure . The two major American-based credit card companies have been targeted .
 unilateral sanctions from our side do pose some significant risks if they are not done carefully, says Glaser .
 Russia imposes sanctions on itself Senator Kaine . I would say that some of the retaliatory or countermeasures that Russia takes to protect itself from sanctions really are just examples of Russia imposing sanctions .
 Russia is pulling itself out of the international financial system, isolating itself from the international economy . It is the exact opposite of what Russia needs to be doing in order to address its economic difficulties .
 I think American businesses and American companies understand what is at stake, and they understand that it is not business as usual with respect to Russia . I think U.S. businesses understand what's at stake.
 Ukraine is the country's largest country in the world . Ukraine is a key part of the European Union and the EU . Ukraine has been a major part of Europe's future .
 I think, as always, we are prepared to move forward if we need to, I think . And, asAlways, we will move forward, I say, but we will be prepared to do so .
 It should go without saying, but I think it bears repeating, it is always going to be more effective, both politically, practically, and in terms of fairness to American companies . It is time well spent and effort well spent, to try to achieve that, I think
 U.S. financial sanctions have led Russia to do legal reforms that would essentially make it near impossible for Visa and MasterCard to operate in that country . "The effect of our sanctions has been for Russia to move forward with legal measures that will make it virtually impossible"
 Russia has been to move forward on ideas that, frankly, have been circulating within Russia for quite some time . The measures would require credit card companies or other types of financial entities to locate within Russia .
Visa and MasterCard would create serious problems for companies like Visa and Master card .
 I was watching the interaction between Senator Corker and Secretary Nuland on this. I was also watching this.
 I mean, I think unilateral sanctions without the EU could have some effect on Russia, but it also has very significant effects on us . I mean. I think unilaterally sanctions without EU could be some effect, but also have very significant effect on us, he says .
 If it opens up opportunities for European businesses to take the business that we are doing, then we at least have to grapple with that kind of cost-benefit equation in moving forward .
 unilateral sanctions have already had a pretty significant effect on some U.S. businesses . That does not mean we should not do unilateral sanctions, but the ones we have done already have not only affected the European economy .
President Obama has urged Ukraine to make energy security the centerpiece of engagement with the new leadership 32 .
 Russian troops may be more powerful than Russian troops when it comes to the new Ukrainian Government . Both threats are related to energy, and both related to Ukraine's new government .
When winter arrives and natural-gas demand spikes, this could become a crisis . When winter arrives, natural- gas demand spikes could be a crisis.
 The $17 billion loan package approved by the IMF to stabilize the Ukrainian economy includes requirements that Ukraine gradually eliminate these subsidies . The IMF approved the loan package to stabilize Ukraine's economy .
 retail natural-gas rates in Ukraine will rise by 56 percent this year, another 40 percent next year, and another 20 percent in 2016 and 2017 . Retail natural- gas rates will rise 56 percent in Ukraine this year.
 Ukraine’s energy subsidies do make energy markets opaque, inefficient, and susceptible to corruption . But they are also extremely popular, and are very popular .
 A brand new government coming in and ushering in a doubling of energy prices. Now we are talking about a brand new Government coming in .
 He wants nothing more than a Ukrainian population distrustful of their government . He is looking for alternatives to the government .
 Ukraine needs an Apollo-project-like effort to become more energy efficient and increase production within their borders in order to get off of Russian gas . Ukraine needs to increase energy production within its borders to avoid Russian gas.
 failure is not an option in this area, either, according to the Apollo project . The Apollo project, like the Apollo Project, has not been successful in the area .
 There is a narrow window of time to help this new government consolidate support and give Ukrainians a credible bulwark against Russia .
 It is also a priority of the Ukrainian Government and it is a priority for the Ukrainians . The Ukrainian Government has been working with the Ukrainian government to help Ukraine .
 Ukraine's energy price hikes were part of the IMF requirement for Ukraine to get healthy, he says . "We earmark, in coordination with the Ukrainian Government, to help insulate the most vulnerable"
For the remaining $59 million we have this year for assistance, you will see a large chunk for the whole complex of energy issues, he says . "When you get our congressional notification, that I make reference to in my testimony, for the remaining £59 million.
 Ukraine wastes a third of its energy out the windows and in other inefficient ways. You, yourself, have said in previous hearings, accurately, that Ukraine wastes one third of the energy out of its windows .
 We are working aggressively with European allies and partners on reverse flow . But we are also working aggressively to reverse flow, we say .
 reverse flow gas into 33 Ukraine from Bulgaria, Slovakia, Hungary . We have had good success in beginning reverse flow Gas into 33 Ukrainian countries .
 The European Commission will continue efforts in coordination with the European Commission. We are going to continue those efforts, says the EU .
 Thirty-five Ukrainian mayors sent a letter urgently requesting assistance in increasing the energy efficiency of their buildings and district heating systems .
 Soviet-era boilers, buildings without thermostats, uninsulated steam pipes, are the lowest of low-hanging fruit all right there . mayors begging for help.
 The government is establishing some kind of goals that the government is trying to establish . We need to have some goals that we need to establish, says the government .
 The Energy Department will provide an assessment of how quickly they can move . The Department of Energy will provide the assessment .
 Ukrainian industry has to change the tax base to change its incentive structure . Ukraine's tax base is set to be changed by the end of the year .
 Ukrainian Government's focus is on energy efficiency and recapturing revenue that is lost in rust-belt industries . Ukraine's east and recovering if they can bring peace and security back .
 Congress is to be able to use funding from the Western New Independent States Enterprise Fund for microprojects in the east . Some of the microprojects are targeted specifically at retooling old factories .
Natural-gas prices are up 56-percent this winter, with 35 mayors writing about their old Soviet-style buildings and boilers . Mayor: "There is a big appetite right now to make a quick change. I would like to see enhanced, increased attention to this area"
 I just think that we have to front-burner this issue to help them to move very, very quickly. And I justthink that we must do this very quickly, I say . We have to back-burners this issue.
 Putin and Gazprom will be sleepless at night, if they do believe that they are responding to their mayors, who realize the bills, which are going to be run up .
 "I urge you to have a program of that nature, and to set real goals," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "So, again, I urge you. And so, again," he urges you to set a program.
 I think we should have a telescoped timeframe that we create, then, for a doubling of natural-gas production inside of Ukraine . I think if we are going to be helping them with new technologies, we should be able to help them with technology .
 We should set benchmarks, set benchmarks and then let us meet them, we should be able to meet them . And we should set those goals, set them, and then meet them.
Once we do that, I think that country will feel a lot better about its ability to cope with this threat that is almost primarily energy related. And once we do this, we will feel better about our ability to deal with it, I say .
 Putin will say Ukrainian Government is unnecessarily being inflicted by Ukrainian Government on his own people . That will counter the propaganda that is going to come in from Putin as to the suffering that he will say is unnecessarily inflicted by the Ukrainian Government .
 I just think we need a counter message that is very concrete and not vague. I just want to see a more concrete message, not vague . I justthink we need to be very concrete.
 I think we will take them and try to move them forward in the committee. I think they will take it to the committee . I think that we will be taking them and trying to take them forward .
 Senator Murphy and Senator Kaine made thoughtful remarks. Let me just say, I appreciate the thoughtful remarks of Senator Murphy .
 As we close this panel, I want to go to our second distinguished panel before the 12 o’clock vote that is coming up next . I understand that there are never simple or great choices in these matters, I understand .
 Senator Markey says he can wait out the U.S. and the European Union and maintain enough instability in Ukraine to damage its economy .
 He only needs to generate a frozen conflict in eastern Ukraine that he can exploit when the world has moved on .
 Russia has used it in Georgia and Moldova, where Russian troops continue to occupy territory and back separatists . It has been his standard operating procedure for years .
 Putin successfully gave those who wish to avoid the G7 sectoral sanctions at the end of June ammunition to argue against action at the time .
 I would just hope, as I said to Chancellor Merkel when we had the opportunity to have dinner with her, that we should be able to not have the movie repeat itself with the same ending .
 I do not see us, at this point in time, where we are headed, changing the course of events in Crimea, says Putin . "Nobody even talks about Crimea anymore," he says .
 Stephen Hadley is the former National Security Advisor to President Bush . He is now a principal at Rice Hadley Gates, LLC; and Zbigniew Brzezinski, counselor and trustee at Center for Strategic and International Studies .
 Both of these gentlemen back to the committee . We are incredibly pleased to welcome both of these men back to their committee .
We would remind you that your full statements will be included in the record . We would remind us that you will be able to make a full statement .
Members have a lot of questions on these issues, and would like to take advantage of your expertise . There is a 12 o’clock vote, and we want to have time for that.
 Brzezinski will answer questions from Mr Hadley . Then we will get to questions from Brzezzinski, and then we will talk to him .
 Dr. ZBIGNIEW K BRZEZINSKI, COUNSELOR and TRUSTEE, CENTER for STRATEGIC and INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, WASHINGTON, DC Dr. Dr. KBRZEZinSKI is a U
 I do not think I am going to read to you my statement, even though it is actually fairly short . Since I know your time is very limited, I don't think I'm going to reading to you, I'm not going to .
 Putin tried to do 3 months ago in regards to Crimea is not the same thing he is trying to do as a whole . I acknowledge the fact that what he tried todo is not same thing as he is doing in relation to Ukraine .
 The Russian Parliament at which he presided on March 18 was like a jamboree on the subject of chauvinism, Russia’s world role, and the unity of all Russian speakers around the world .
 Ukraine is not resigned to being simply a member of a renamed version of the Soviet Union or of the tsarist empire . There is a rising will in Ukraine to deal with their legacies of wasted 20 years of Ukrainian independence . Major reforms are necessary, but also acts of will designed to
 Putin has to realize by now that he has to think of alternative choices. And I think Putin must realize that by now, he must think of alternatives .
 I outline them more fully in my statement, but the first is, of course, some sort of an accommodation with the West . The first is a sort of accommodation with West .
 Russia would like to see Ukraine subordinated to Moscow in the context of the so-called Eurasian Union . The West would like Ukraine to be a member of the European Union, but also of NATO .
 There are other specifics that would have to be considered, but that would be a possible framework for an accommodation . There are also other specifics, but in a sense, it strikes me as a potential framework for a accommodation .
 Putin has the option of continuing more directly to destabilize Ukraine. Eailing that, Putin has a more direct option of destabilizing Ukraine, he says .
 The U.S. would like to see sanctions implemented sooner rather than later, writes David Frum . Frum says the sanctions would precipitate the kinds of sanctions that had been planned and which the United States would want to see implemented .
 The alliance remains a bone of contention in the alliance, but they are there. And that remains aBone of contention, but it is there .
 The initial sanctions have sent at least ominous signals to the Russians not to take these issues lightly .
 The third alternative, of course, is a complete showdown, militarily, on the model of Crimea . But overlooking the reality that all of Ukraine is far more complicated than a relatively small peninsula, the object of a sudden and unexpected attack .
 The risk of urban warfare for taking Ukraine over would entail the necessity of occupying the large cities . Kiev itself is something that no Russian leader can contemplate lightly, he says .
 It could become protracted, bloody, very costly, and the result would be a disaster, both for Ukraine and for Russia . It could be protracted and bloody, and it could become a disaster for both Ukraine and Russia .
 Putin should not confuse a brief triumph in which he exalted, a few months ago, in Crimea, with the larger dilemma of Ukraine and the longer range relationship of Russia to the global community .
 Russia’s international position has deteriorated. As it is, and I will end on this, I willend on this. Russia's international position have deteriorated, says the Russian president .
 There are more and more questions about Russia’s role in the world in Europe .
 China is concerned that there is an asymmetrical relationship between Russia and China . China, by far, is the senior partner that can insist on terms favorable to it, as was the case in the recent energy agreement with Russia .
 Russia is a junior partner, geographically, culturally, and culturally, culturally and borderwise . And Russia is vulnerable to Chinese pressure .
 More than 3 months have passed since Putin’s triumphalist speech to the Russian Parliament .
In it, he exalted in his military seizure of Crimea while basking in an orgy of unleashed chauvinistic sentiments . In it, the Crimea seizure was a military seizure, while in it he exalted the seizure .
 Putin relished the enthusiasm and apparently gave little thought to the larger and longer term strategic consequences of what he unleashed . Putin clearly relishes the enthusiasm of the enthusiasm .
 Putin faces three basic choices in Russia's future of relations with Russia . The future of RussoUkrainian relations is still uncertain .
 To accommodate with Ukraine by terminating the assault on Ukrainian sovereignty and economic well-being . To accommodate the Ukraine by ending the assault.
 This will not be easy to do, and it will require wisdom and persistence both from Russia as well as Ukraine and the West .
 Russia's tacit acceptance of Ukraine’s prolonged journey toward eventual EU membership. Russia”s tacit acceptance.
 37 Ukraine neither seeks nor the West contemplates Ukrainian membership in the NATO alliance . At the same time, it should be made clear to all concerned that 37 UkraineNeither seeks or the West does .
 It is reasonable for the Russians to feel uncomfortable about that prospect . It's reasonable for Russians to be uncomfortable about the prospect.
 Russia no longer expects Ukraine to become part of the “Eurasian Union,’ a designation which is a transparent cover for the recreation of the former Soviet Union or the Tsarist Empire .
 Both countries can benefit from normal and increasingly cooperative trade as well as financial relations . An understanding regarding this issue should not preclude a Russian-Ukrainian trade deal, however .
 The international community, specifically the West, could in some fashion reiterate their support for that outcome, not to mention the full scale resumption of more normal relations with Russia itself, including the lifting of sanctions .
 Putin's second choice is to continue the effort to destabilize Ukraine by sponsoring thinly veiled military intervention . Putin’s second choice was to sponsor a thinly veiled intervention designed to disrupt normal life in portions of Ukraine .
 The West would have to undertake a full scale, prolonged, and truly painful application of sanctions to Russia . The sanctions would convey to Russia the painful consequences of its unwarranted violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 Putin's third choice could involve the decision to invade Ukraine across the board, exploiting Russia's obviously much larger military potential . Putin’s third choice may involve the invasion of Ukraine, using Russia's much larger potential .
 The West could provoke prolonged Ukrainian resistance, especially based on spontaneous outbursts of anger in its larger cities . Such an action would not only prompt sustained retaliation by the West, but would provoke prolonged resistance .
 In these conditions, it is unlikely that the West would remain entirely passive . The West is unlikely to be entirely passive in these conditions .
 If resistance is sustained and intense, there would be growing pressure on NATO members to provide various forms of support for Ukrainians . The conflict would be much more prolonged and costly.
 For the Kremlin, the third option would be a permanently hostile Ukrainian population of more than 40 million people . The Kremlin is facing the growing possibility of increasing internal unrest .
 Russia has abandoned the use of force against Ukraine by Russia . Russia is seeking to find a formula for international accommodation . Russia has been accused of using force against the Ukraine .
 The issue of Crimea will remain unresolved for the time being, but it will be a reminder that chauvinistic fanaticism is not the best point of departure for the resolution of larger and more complex issues .
 Putin's actions are a threat to the West and ultimately to Russia itself The Chairman . This is why Putin’s actions are not only to the west but ultimately also to Russia.
 STEPHEN J HADLEY, FORMER U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR, PRINCIPAL, RICE HADley GATES, LLC, WASHINGTON, DC.
 I have submitted a statement that talks about what Putin is up to, what should be our objectives and strategy for dealing with it . I have a statement, which I've submitted, which talks about how far he is likely to press his current actions. I have also submitted
 Putin's objectives escalate as he succeeds and is not met with resistance or counter pressure . The bottom line I try to make is that we have seen in the past that Putin’s objectives escalate. The bottom lines are that Putin is not meeting with resistance.
I think it is important that we be putting together the elements of a strategy that will put on that counter pressure. And therefore, I think it's important to put together that we are putting together a strategy .
 I thought what I might do with my time is try to answer some of the questions that you have raised in the first session . I think what I may do with the time is to give you my answers to them, for what it is worth .
 The U.S. and Europe want to have unity with the Europeans, says Vladimir Putin . The Europeans do not want to let Putin drive a wedge between the United States and Europe, he says .
Russia is the 12th export partner, the 5th import partner of Russia . Russia is the country's biggest trading partner .
 If you really want to be effective, you want to have the Europeans along, it's where the investment and trading relations are . The European Union is a key part of the European Union .
 Third, I think they are reluctant because sometimes sanctions are more effective in the anticipation than they are in the execution . Third, she says, because they're reluctant because they are more likely to be punished .
 I think we have telegraphed this punch so often without delivering it, I think it raises a question of credibility . I think, though, as I say in the statement, we have Telegraped this punch, but we have not delivered it, he says .
 The European Commission is due to meet with the European Union on July 16 . The European Union is expected to decide on whether to act unilaterally on the issue .
 Senator Rubio is sponsoring a roadmap of what we and the Europeans will do together if Russia and Putin persist . Rubio: "I would hope it would not only have bipartisan support within the Congress"
 That does not mean that it has to be unilaterally — has to have to be multilateral at the time it is adopted . That doesn't mean that the U.S. must be unilateral .
 The European Union has been accused of failing to act properly in the past . It is not the first time the EU has failed to act in the last few years . But it is the last time the U.S. has been involved in a major crisis in Europe .
 Brzezinski’s article in the Post this morning was a very good statement, he says .
 Senator Kaine asked a series of questions about his work with the White House . Senator Kaine answered one of the questions he asked .
 We ought to be strengthening Ukraine’s capacity to defend itself, and other states that are at risk from pressure from Russia .
 The door is closed to Ukraine, but I would not like 39 to reward Putin for his pressure . But I would also not explicitly take it off the table and say that the door is open .
We need to stick to the principle that countries should be free to select alliances they choose, free of coercion, pressure, or use of force, says David Frum .
There are elements of policy that we need to put in place that are prohahly even more important than sanctions, he says . Last point is that there are elements that need to be in place, he adds .
 I think we need to leave the door open for a Russia that will change its policies and come back to the postcold-war consensus and want to move West . I think it needs to change its policy and move to the West .
 Russia should keep faith with those in Russia that hope for a more democratic and more Western-oriented future for their country, says Putin . "We should do that," he says .
 Stephen J Hadley RUSSIA will appear before the committee this morning . It is a great privilege to have the opportunity to appear.
 Russian President Putin is seeking to achieve by his actions in Ukraine, writes CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: What should be U.S. and allied objectives in dealing with the Russian challenge in Ukraine? He asks: What would be the elements of a strategy to achieve these objectives
 The views I will express are my own and not the views of any organization with which I may be affiliated . The views are not the view of any group with which he may beaffiliated .
 Putin is often quoted as saying that one of the greatest tragedies of the 20th century was the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers left outside the borders of Mother Russia .
 For two decades he has said his interests were in better treatment of Russian nationals living as ethnic minorities in countries outside Russia . He has said he wants to see Russian nationals in countries like Russia living outside Russia.
 President Putin went way beyond any reasonable action aimed at improving the situation of minorities in eastern Ukraine . But when he ordered the invasion of Georgia in 2008, the invasion and annexation of Crimea in 2014, he went beyond reasonable action .
 President Putin has an alternative vision for Europe that is less the recreation of the Soviet Union than the restoration of Russian greatness . President Putin's alternative vision is less a recreation of Russia's Soviet Union .
 President Putin hopes to establish a Russian-dominated confederation of states between the European Union and China on the one hand . The Eurasian Union, the Eurasian Customs Union, and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, are key to Putin's plans .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia as core members, and Armenia, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan likely additions . He is off to a good start.
 Ukraine needs Ukraine to give the organization real economic and geopolitical heft. But Ukraine needs to give it real economic, geopolitical hefts, he says .
 Ukraine, Georgia, Ukraine and Georgia have been involved in the Ukraine crisis . Ukraine's prime minister has been working in Ukraine for years . Georgia's president has also been working with Ukraine's government .
 During the crisis provoked by President Putin’s invasion of Georgia, his initial objectives were somewhat limited .
 The operation succeeded, and when he thought his actions might not be effectively opposed, his objectives expanded accordingly . But as the operation succeeds, the operation expanded accordingly.
 He ultimately embraced the objective of toppling the democratically elected Georgian Government in Tbilisi .
 Efforts by the U.S. and its allies, among other factors, caused the Russians to stop short of this objective . The Russians ultimately stopped short of that objective .
 President Putin might try something similar in one or more of the Baltic States, such as Latvia .
 The objective here would be to show that the article 5 security guarantee given to these countries as NATO members was not worth the paper it is written on and could not protect these countries from being destabilized and perhaps even losing part of their territory .
 President Putin might even seek to split or destabilize the European Union itself .
 We know that he has been cultivating relations with extremist political parties in Europe particularly on the political right . He has also been cultivating ties with extremist parties in the country .
 These extremist parties have mostly only one thing in common — they oppose the European Union .
 The EU could also preoccupy the EU with its own internal survival so as to distract it from efforts to reach out and embrace Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, and other countries between the European Union and Russia's Eurasian Union .
 The best way to prevent Putin from moving up the “objective escalation’s ladder is to seek to deny him success in his current efforts . Putin's current efforts will be effectively opposed, he says .
 I understand that this last point will be controversial in some quarters given the total unacceptability of President Putin’s actions . The last point is that some quarters will be controversial in some quarters .
 Russia is in the interest of the United States and the rest of Europe to keep the door open to Russia to take its place in a Europe based on the post-cold-war principles on which a Europe whole, free, and at peace can be built .
 This will require Russia to change its current behavior, either because of a change of heart on the part of President Putin or because of the efforts of those in Russia committed to a more democratic and peaceful future for their country .
 U.S. and allies have threatened more sanctions then they have delivered, undercutting the credibility of this element of strategy . So far, the United States and its allies have threatening more sanctions .
 The level of the sanctions imposed on Russia in the short term should not be the measure of the success or failure of the overall strategy, says the Russian government . Russia's response to the sanctions is not to blame for the sanctions, it says .
 Eor the goal of the strategy should be to change over time what might be called the “correlation of forces’ in Europe’s Europe so as to reduce Russia's leverage and deter the kind of Russian actions .
 The other elements of a comprehensive strategy outlined above are perhaps as important if not more important than short-term economic sanctions . In this context, the other parts of a complete strategy are also important .
 It takes tremendous talent to be able to synthesize major concepts in such a short period of time . It takes a long time to develop major concepts, says author .
 I always prefer multilateral sanctions, when we can get them. My concern is that we can't get them when we get them .
 I prefer not to have sanctions if we do not even need them in order to achieve our goals . I prefer to not have sanctions. I would rather not have them if we don't need them to achieve goals .
 If diplomatic discourse can ultimately lead us to a point where we can negotiate an agreement that is acceptable, that is desirable as well, says David Cameron .
 Russia's history with Georgia, Moldova, and now the Ukraine, at some point, may have alluded to this by saying we may have to go first . If there is to be no significant arming of the Ukrainian military so that the challenges of the Russians trying to take them on are
 Brzezinski has already said the Ukrainians will fight tooth-and-nail, especially in urban centers . He says that would be a concept that no Russian leader could fathom doing .
 Let me briefly make one comment on your observation of guarding the NATO issue . Let me make one.
 One can, I think, understand the Russian concerns here if one look at the map . One can also understand Russian concerns, he says, if one can .
 NATO membership would jut a large, large new area deep into what traditionally has been the Russian Empire . I cannot see the Russians ever accepting unless there is a significant accommodation of — larger sense of — bigger sense .
On the question of the arms, my view is that we should be very open about it, and not secretive. On the issue of the Arms, my views are that we shouldn't be secretive .
 Ukrainians need arms for their defense, but not for offensive actions, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says Ukrainians should be willing to provide them with arms for defense .
 The Russians would exploit any transfer of arms to the Ukrainians as a threat to their security . The Russian government would also exploit any arms transfer to Ukrainians .
 The Russian Armed Forces are prohibitively expensive to occupy large cities . If we are very deliberate, we can enhance their capacity, particularly to defend their cities .
 Russian Government would think twice of that option, he says . The political consequences of a prolonged conflict, financial consequences internationally, will have, then, political consequences, he adds .
 Mr Chairman says sanctions are an important element of a comprehensive policy . Mr Chairman, he says, may have to go ahead to lead by example .
 Putin's strategy will be more important in reducing Putin’s leverage and his ability to pursue these kinds of activities, he says .
 Putin's long-term commitments are what are really going to eliminate opportunities for Putin to make mischief in the future .
 From the end of the cold war, attempts have been made to draw Russia into the community of nations as a stable, prosperous, and democratic partner . Russia is now a stable and prosperous community .
 Putin’s high level of domestic support in recent polls. But there is some allure, among Russians, of the empire or power over other countries as being attractive .
 Russia's policy is to create opportunities for Russia's closer association with the West, but without compromising our fundamental principles, he says . Over time, internal change in Russia will contribute to the gradual democratization of Russia itself, he adds .
 Russian middle class thrives on essentially adopting as much as possible of the Western lifestyle and of connectivity with the West .
 The scale of the social opposition is being demonstrated by the scale of social opposition . The increasing number of commentators speaking up openly on this issue .
 Putin’s current moves are, in his judgment, a retrogressive aberration connected very much with his personality, his previous institutional connections, in particular with the instruments of compulsion, perhaps a certain touch of megalomania .
 He appeals to those elements of Russian society which feel themselves vulnerable, which are susceptible to chauvinistic appeals . And he appeals on that basis to those parts of Russia which are very nationalistic .
 "Triumph" in Crimea is seen as an easy so-called "triumph" In the wake of the seemingly very easy "tri triumph" in the Crimea, Crimea was seen as a result of the Crimea crisis .
 Putin views himself as a strong leader who wants to return to Russian greatness . But he has a definition of Russian greatness, I would say, that is 19th century, it is sort of a new neo-Russian Empire .
 Russia is going to be, not on 19th-century principles, but on 21st- century principles . We have to show him that, whatever his short-term tactical successes, his actions involve a long-term strategic loss . The real future for Russia is
 Russia should have a 21st-century role of as a secure and prosperous state, he says . We need to deter him from his 19th-century agenda and leave the door open for those who want 44 Russia to actually have a role of — as a 21
 National Security Advisors. We always appreciate having distinguished advisers here, and appreciate your comments .
 Ukraine, as an independent state, is going to be moving toward the West, says John Sutter . Sutter: It seems to be increasingly a fact, and no longer a speculation, that Ukraine is moving toward West .
 I think the regime that has now emerged in Ukraine is generally democratic . I think it's generally democratic, I think. I think that the regime is generally more democratic .
Over the last 20 years, Ukraine has been governed very badly. For, I am sad to say, over the last20 years, Ukrainian government has been very badly, I say .
 The regimes that have dominated the political scene were selfserving, self-enriching, and not dedicated to Ukraine’s well-being. And I think that it is evident to all concerned that the regimes are selfserving and self-serving .
 The use of force against Ukraine by the Russians was a stunning experience for the Ukrainians . The Ukrainians were stunned by the use of Force against the Russians .
 Over the last 20 years, they have started to enjoy the fruits of independence . But also, over the last two years, have also enjoyed the benefits of independence.
 The author has tried to stress that a prolonged adventure would be self-debilitating . But, otherwise, they will embroil themselves in prolonged adventure, he says .
 The costs of imposing a unilateral solution by the Russians are simply disproportionately high to the benefits that could be achieved thereby . I believe an accommodation is possible, because the costs of imposition by the Russian themselves are just disproportionately high .
 There was this exaltation when they occupied Crimea — liberation, reunification, all sorts of slogans . The Crimea was occupied by Ukraine in the early 1990s .
 6 million people come every year, on a scale of 6 million, including a great many from abroad . They come each year, including many from overseas .
 Investments in Ukraine are very difficult to make the moment they involve any international deal . The international community has not recognized the incorporation of Crimea, which means there will be endless legal suits .
 In brief, what seemed to be a great success 3 months ago is now becoming a source of concern . In short, what appeared to have been great success is now being a concern .
 This is where I sort of feel more confident about what is happening. And this is where he sort of feels more confident. And that's where he's feeling more confident, he says .
 Putin is pointed in the wrong direction, says CNN's John Sutter . He says it is becoming more clear to more Russians that Putin is pointing in the right direction . Sutter: "By and large, we are pointed in right direction"
 If I could, I know Hadley has to leave here soon, and I know Rubio wants to ask some questions . I will just ask one more. If I can, I'll just ask for one more questions, he says . If he could — I know
 Russia has been accused of Russia's bad behavior in recent weeks . Russia has not been punished for its behavior in the past . Russia's actions have been criticized by the United States .
 Nothing is really done about what has happened in Crimea and other places in Crimea . Nothing has been done.
 Russia's actions have never been countered, if you will, in Eastern Europe . And that is a bitter peace with Russia, where they just kind of fester, if they will, if it's not .
 The word “accommodation’s” suggests giving in to Russia . The word is used to give in to the Russian government .
 Putin sees that, and the Russian people see that, that this 19th-century nationalistic binge he has been on is not working for them. I think it is very important that Russia be seen as not to be able to succeed.
 The Russians see that it is a Ukraine that is not against Russia, but is allowed to maintain its historical ties with Russia . Ukraine is prosperous and secure, an outcome where the Russian people within Ukraine can enjoy that security and prosperity .
 Russian people are going to decide if Ukraine is a better model for their future than this kind of neo-Russian Empire that Putin is talking about .
 Thank you both for your service to our country over an extended period of time, both in government and outside .
 Brzezinski's dad is known as Mika's dad . Brzezzinski's father is a well-known figure in Washington .
 Putin is to reach a point where he has exorbitant influence over Kiev’s foreign policy, vis-a-vis his relationship to Russia . Putin is trying to pull off the 5,000-foot view of what he is tryingto pull off, here .
 Kiev is trying to make himself appear as the reasonable conciliator in the Ukraine conflict, he says . He says Kiev is the aggressor, and so forth .
 Moscow, Russia, has two opposing schools of thought, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he would venture to guess, but he is certain, that they, themselves, are looking at this dynamic .
 Russia's future short-term ability to export energy will be key to its success in Asian markets . Russia will be able to export its energy to the region in the future .
 Asia will become the world's leading export market, according to analysts . Asia will be Asia's leading market, they say .
 Some of the gas deposits there have high amounts of helium, and that requires extensive work . I pointed to the fact that they are going to struggle in eastern Siberia, because some of these gas deposits are high .
 Some of the Western technology is used to provide access to some of the world's most important technology . The technology is being used to finance the development of Western technology .
 Some separatists feel like Moscow is not doing enough; they want them to do more . Moscow is worried about sanctions, but we also have this group that is pushing for more, he says .
 The best way to nudge it, or to influence this in the direction we would like to see it head, is to make very clear what sanctions would look like . It is not a guessing game about what will happen if they do this; that, in fact,
 The ideal scenario is that if we do it, others will join us in it, he says . And I know that the ideal scenario would be that if it was done, others would join us .
 The President may decide to make specific actions, not what the President may do, that it would strengthen our hand in that regard . But, potentially, it would be the best way to ensure that is through American leadership, says CNN's John Sutter .
Mr Hadley said we may be getting closer to that point anyway . And I think, Mr Hadley, in his testimony, in your testimony, you said we might be getting close to thatpoint anyway . But I think he may have said that we may have got closer.
 Secretary Nuland was asked if she would both expand her role in the role of the White House . She said she was hoping that both would expand .
If time permits, I just had an issue related to Russia, but not directly to Ukraine . And then, if time permit, I had a problem related to the Ukraine . But then, I also had a matter related to Ukraine, not Russia .
 Congress is considering whether specific sanctions by Congress would further the direction of decisionmaking in Moscow . But I really want to focus on this question of whether specific penalties would further decisionmaking .
 One, I think your description of his strategy is accurate, and it is very, very important that it be seen to fail . One, he says, is very important to see that his strategy fail .
 I would hope that Angela Merkel would be leading the Europeans so they would follow our roadmap . I would also hope that we could coordinate it with the Europeans, though .
 We do not do it without them, but it will be more effective if we can bring them along . That does not say we do not. But it is more effective than it is without them .
 Germany beat Germany 2-0 in their first game of the season in Germany . The game was played in a friendly at the Stadz Arena in Berlin, Germany . Germany won the game 2-1 in the first leg .
 Third, I will go back to what I said before, this is not only about sanctions, it's about sanctions . Third, he will goback to what he said before. Third, it will be about sanctions.
 Putin's strategy is to be effective against Putin’s strategy, he says . But, if we are going to be successful against Putin, we need to do more . We need a comprehensive, long-term approach to this problem.
 sanctions, yes; but, take a look at the other things, and let us be moving out on the other elements of a comprehensive policy. So, yes, sanctions are sanctions, but, look at other things .
 The U.S. Air Force does not have the sea-born capability for air operations that we have, it's said .
 They would have to be secure, and they are probably very vulnerable, and probably not in very good shape . They would be very vulnerable and not in good shape, they would be vulnerable .
 The Russians want to avoid an entanglement with the whole host of issues that are being unleashed in the Middle East . I think they much prefer us to become more entangled with them .
 It seems to me that these are issues that are not likely to be solved entirely by the use of force. And this is one of the reasons why I have been urging restraint in our part, because it seems to be a problem .
 The use of force in these very complex ethnic, religious, national circumstances is a very, very costly and unpredictable undertaking . Afghanistan and Iraq have already learned from both countries, says the author .
Russian SU-22s, I think, are flying strikes in Iraq, says CNN's John Sutter . It is a murky area, and press reports say that Russian SU- 22s, he says, are striking .
 By contrast, billionaires around the world control between 1 percent and 2 percent of total wealth .
 The U.S. has imposed targeted sanctions on Russia's financial, energy, and defense sectors . The sanctions are in response to Russia’s ongoing violations of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Since the start of the Ukraine crisis, the U.S. has sanctioned 57 individuals (18 Ukrainians, 39 Russians), six Russian banks, 14 other crony-related entities . Two Crimea-based energy companies under Executive Orders 13660, 13661, and 13662.
 Designated Russian individuals include high-ranking government officials, business executives, and members of the Russian leadership’s inner circle .
 Broader sectoral sanctions may be deployed if Russia fails to stop destabilizing Ukraine . The sanctions could be deployed.
 The President’s Executive orders with regard to the situation in Ukraine do not, however, direct that sanctions determinations be made based on an individual’'s net worth .
 An individual’s net worth is not an independent basis for a sanctions designation under Executive Orders 13660, 13661, and 13662 .
 The U.S. and international partners continue to press Russia to end all support to separatists in Ukraine . They call on separatists to lay 49 down their arms, return the border checkpoints, and release all remaining hostages .
Until Russia takes these actions, the U.S. and its partners remain prepared to impose additional, tougher sanctions . Until Russia takes this action, the United States and our partners will continue to impose tougher sanctions.