 It is written by German politician Norbert Röttgen, head of the Bundestag foreign affairs committee . It is simply massively dishonest and one-sided, he says .
 The Kerch Strait is incredibly shallow . It has a canal carved into to the sea bed to allow deep-draft ships to pass .
 Using the canal requires a pilot, and ships can only go in single file . The canal can be used in a single file, using a pilot .
 Ships using the Kerch strait are required to give 72 hours notice due to the narrowness of the passage and the shallowness.
 There have been calls – both inside and outside Ukraine – to blow up the Crimean bridge . There have also been calls to blow it up.
 Ukrainian naval vessels were sailing with their guns uncovered and refusing to answer radio communications . The Ukrainian naval ships were sailing in Ukraine with guns uncovered .
 Petro Poroshenko, incumbent President of Ukraine, has an 8% approval rating heading into the Presidential elections in March next year .
 Poroshenko has declared martial law in the 10 Eastern regions of the country . In response to this “incident’s”
 The regions that voted for ousted President Yanukovych and will unquestionably vote against Poroshenko if the elections go ahead in march .
 This, among other things, was directly related to the Nordstream 2 pipeline . This, along with other things,. was directly linked to the pipeline .
 The usually fractious Guardian comments section seems to be broadly in consensus . However, a totally accidental upshot of this drive to keep everyone on topic is that the normally fractious comments section is in consensus.
Don't waste your time writing a comment that won’t get published over there. So don’s not wasting your time. Don't write a comment.
You won't pre-emptively censored for disagreeing with the government line. Instead, discuss it here – where you won't.
 There is a lot of organisation required to sort out the traffic flow and arrange for pilots, etc. There is obviously a lot to do .
 "The Kerch Strait is an international waterway, subject to international law of the sea" is simply NOT true, sorry .
 Kerch&Azov have become internal waters since the 2003 bilateral agreement . Kerch &Azov are now in internal waters .
 The Kerch Strait is an international waterway, subject to international law of the sea, not some Russian inland canal that they can police in any way they want .
 Ukraine’s harbour on the Azov Sea is threatened by Russia-backed rebels in its hinterland . Russia is effectively putting its naval resources at the disposal of the ‘little green men’ whose existence Russia has repeatedly denied .
 The two “Russian lakes’ under discussion. I suggest you read up on both concerning the two ‘Russian Lakes’
 The Kerch–Yenikale Canal was dredged inside it, where pilot assistance is mandatory . It is so shallow that the Kerch-Yenkale Canal has been dredged in it .
 The United States never gives up on regime change once a victim is on the enemies list . The U.S. never gives down on regime changes once the victim is a victim .
 United States will be there forever unless the American people rebel against all U.S. foreign bases, adventures and diversion of domestic resources to military . The United States is there forever.
 I believe that there must be a policy to have military presence in all countries, and paid for by these countries . I believe there must also be apolicy to have a military presence.
 The U.S. decreed a law pursuant to which sabotaging and disrupting pipelines of a hostile nation is legal . If this is true, the United States literally declared terrorism legal .
 A cursory perusal of USSA’s 2 centuries of genocide for profit should make that patently clear to even the most hubris bloated fan of the terror entity out there .
 Whether they blow it up or stab their accountants in the back, it’s still sabotage, it's still sabotage .
What is a sanction, other than an allegedly legal means to punish, hurt, injure, cripple an allegedly illegal action of the sanctioned party. What is a sanctioned action? What is the sanction?
 The Guardian censoring of any comments shows that is now a sad remnant of a once great newspapers .
 The violent coup was instigated by Victoria Nuland using armed Fascist to violently bring down the elected Government . The coup was a short time before an election was due .
 Yanukovych had been hopeless but an election would have achieved a much better outcome . Not Victoria Nuland or Geoffry Pyatt would have chosen their leader .
 Nulands recorded statements and subsequent admissions she spent billions on organising the coup and picking the leader . From Nuland recorded statements she spent £1bn on organising a coup .
 NATO has been busily building missile bases close to Russia's borders for years . U.S. missiles supposedly to stop nuclear attacks from a country without nuclear capacity, Iran .
 Should he become PM he'd be taken aside and told ‘Congratulations, now we’ll explain to you how things are done in your new position.
 He avoided it to be in the open through registering. Must have been something interesting because he avoided it. Must be something interesting.
 How ridiculous, an obligatory red-tag for immediate fake news deletion is ridiculous . How ridiculous? How ridiculous.
 She did exercise full spectrum dominance over the cookie platters though . She did Exercise full spectrum dominate over cookie platter .
 Sen. Tyahnybok inadvertently showed up behind Sen. Hillary Clinton on the podium . She says she instructed him how to hold up that teetering old doddard .
Nuland says she thought Tyahnybok was just an usher and not one of the co-founders of the leading neo-nazi party in Ukraine . Nuland is the current Speaker of the Rada, Parubiy .
 Kathy Ashton missed out on the 50th anniversary of the Civil War . But we'll just have to leave it to historians to muddle over in 50 years time .
 You know somebody has to be our watchdog, even when they moonlight as howling hyenas . You know something to be your watchdog, and you can't ignore it .
 The Guardian seems to have made its choice to be pro-US, for commerce and ads .
 The relentless EU/NATO expansion especially on the Balkan is never criticised because … but it will backfire quite badly when people discover that EU-NATO only cost but provide no goodies . The relentless European expansion is not criticised because it will be backfire when people
 Ukraine is a poor country of emotionally charged, not rational people, says the author . Ukraine is not a country of emotional charged, he says .
 Bulgaria had 1/3 of their population unable to heat their houses this winter . Bulgaria had one in 3 of its population was unable toHeat their homes this winter.
 The acknowledgement that EU/NATO membership is not a panacea takes some time to filter through in Ukraine .
 His incompetence is so glaring that they can’t possibly ignore it in the long term . He is so incompetent that he can't possibly ignore his incompetence in a long term.
 Even the other Banderastani parties, inclusive of the Nazis, are united in saying Porky instigated the Kerch provocation .
 If he loses it, he’s going to either have to do a Saakashvili and run for his life abroad or go to jail . His partners in crime turned rivals are as vindictive as he is.
 Yulia Tymoshenko would probably be a far better option on the face of NATOstanis .
 For one thing, she’s a woman and so will immediately command the knee jerk support of the western liberal warmonger caste . For one things, she's a woman .
 The Porky can present herself as a far better option than the thuggish Porky . She can also present herself to the public as a better option .
 Tymoshenko can't be trusted to maintain enmity with Russia indefinitely . She is known to speak Russian in private in preference to Ukrainian . She will not look for pragmatic adjustments to Banderastani relations with Russia .
 Lyashko, Tyahnibok, and the other out and out Nazis will never get elected to a majority, though they will continue to have major influence . Not one of them literally has his life and/or liberty riding on NATOstani support .
 Invisibility Cloak® makes them immune to bring photographed by satellites . So no evidence is available .
 The Ukranazis are readying for a renewed ground war against the Novorossiyan republics . However, what evidence does exist shows that the Ukranzis are readingying for the renewed war .
 NATO trainers can do major damage to the Donbass republics even if they can't defeat them . With their new weapons and NATO trainers, they can do big damage to them .
Ukranazis are expected to launch a renewed offensive against the DPR and LPR in January or thereabouts . If an actual Russian intervention would mean Russian tanks rolling down the streets of Kiev in three days .
Ukranazi attack on Donetsk airport will move on to Donetsk city and perhaps Lugansk as well .
 If the city is taken, Porky presents himself as a war winning commander . He can eke out a victory in the election if he wins .
 The ground has already been prepared for claiming it’s another Evil Invisible Russian Invasion . If this second phase of the attack is defeated or fought to a standstill by the Novorossiyan republics, well, then the ground will be prepared .
 Putin sent in a couple of battalions of Spetsnaz, overthrown the Ukranazi coup regime, reinstated Yanukovych and withdrawn with the clear warning that if there were any more Maidans coups Russia would be back and this time to stay .
 Russian invasion and occupation becoming necessary in order to get rid of this permanent threat to the Russian nation . Right now I don’t see any solution that stops short of an actual full scale Russian invasion .
 Lavrov promised that Russia was not going to go to war with Ukraine, end of story . Today in an interview, Lavrov promised to say that Russia wasn't going to war .
 Mother Russia wants all her Ukrop miscreants back in the warm embrace of Mr Bear and not just the decent folk of Novorossiya .
Natostan cancer spreading all the way to Donbas and Donetsk and the inevitable Anglozionazi terror that would ensue using their trained Ukrop apes as they are using their I$I$ human organ eaters to terrorize Syria, Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Libya and
 ‘Airstrip One’ has more than enough of its own sickness to deal with . Meanwhile “Airstri’s’ own sickness is more thanEnough of it.
 Newsweek has a microphone permanently attached to Porkshanks’ shank . It hits Newsweek’s presses faster than a speeding mortar round .
 Bandera's last blah blah was the Kerch Strait, the founding of OUN, the anniversary of some visiting Nazi dignitary or some patriotic pogrom . All true Ukrainian patriots are kneeling and distracted in deep prayer .
 GCHQ may have given heads up to GCHQ to alert their army of trolls to agree with the article .
As ships pass through in orderly fashion, there is a queuing system. Incidentally, as ships have to pass through, there are no queues .
 Blowing up the Kerch bridge would constitute a direct military attack on Russian territory .
 This could be the AZ-Empire testing Russia’s nerve, or it could be a provocation too far . It could be Russia's nerve test.
 There have been rumours of a Ukrainian offensive since 2015 which have never materialised . After all there have been rumors of a Ukraine offensive since 2014 .
 The problem for Poroshenko and the UAF is that they face certain defeat . The problem is that Poroshenko faces certain defeat. The UAF has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 How would that go down back home in Lviv, Kiev and Ternopil? It would mean the end of the Ukraine and end of Poroshenko. How would it go down?
 Of course the western media would go ballistic, that’s par for the course. Of course, that's not the case .
 From the Russian perspective you might as well be hung for a sheep as a lamb . But that’s nothing new and from the Russian view you may as well as as a sheep .
 Eduard Basurin the head of the DPR militia has said they have intelligence reports that Ukraine intends to launch an invasion iminently using a false flag drone bombing of a chemical works in Mariupol .
 The People's Militia of the self-proclaimed People's Republic of Donetsk reported on the concentration of more than 12,000 Ukrainian security forces .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine will start the attack on December 14, according to the RPD's leadership .
 Evidence was obtained on the preparation of an offensive in the region of Mariupol by the Ukrainian military . The military is aiming at conquering the regions of Novoazovsk and Telmanovo on the 'border' with Russia .
 The conflict in Donbass began in 2014 when Ukrainian authorities launched a military operation against the self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk . The new government of Kiev has refused to recognize the new government.
 The sides of the conflict later agreed to stop hostilities in the region through a truce agreement . The situation remains tense with mutual accusations of cease-fire violations .
 U.S. drone prototypes used to bomb Serbian chlorine plants . They could just say, sorry .
 It had a solar-charged battery and just kept flying around for 19 years . The battery had a battery that kept flying.
Just as believable as any other hooey coming out of what passes for ‘western civilization’ these days .
 The US/UK/EU/Israel attempt to overthrow Assad has backfired – but the U.S. is still occupying part of Syria and clearly has no intention of leaving . The US and EU/Israel are still occupying parts of Syria .
Trying to force it out militarily would be seen by the U.S. and its complicit allies as a casus belli .
 Ukraine is a major source of income for Ukraine and some of the EU members are probably tired of throwing yet more money into Ukraine’s empty hole . I guess because they can control it better that way – also because it is a big source of money for Ukraine .
 The Atlanticist cabal hates anything that empowers Russia. Ukraine certainly – and presumably – hates anything.
 I think Ukraine will continue to play ‘three wise monkeys’ over Ukraine, largely because they control the narrative to a great extent . I think they will play 'threewise monkeys' over Ukraine .
 The new EU/NATO unified military force needs Ukraine, so will likely continue to turn a blind eye to its fascism . The new European Union/NATo unified military forces need Ukraine .
 Germany will speak at the EU summit in favor of extending sanctions against Russia, Angela Merkel tells the Bundestag . The German Chancellor will speak on Wednesday .
 Merkel: "We will call for extending sanctions" She says she has concerns over Russia's steps .
 The captain of the main vesser openly admitted that he had consciously ignored Russian warnings to retreat . The captain had been warned to retreat by Russian authorities .
 A large cache of arms, including machine guns and other assault weapons, was also found on the vessels . Some sort of confrontation had been planned, indicating that some kind of confrontation was planned .
 There are strict safety rules for ships which want to pass through the narrow Kerch Strait . Under international rules they must notify Russian maritime controls of their intention to pass .
 President Barack Obama was forced to admit in a CNN interview6 that the U.S. had collaborated with Ukrainian Neo-Nazis and other right-wing and fascist groups .