 This report on Ukraine is one in a series prepared within the framework of the EU-LISTCO project, funded under the EU’s Horizon 2020 programme .
 EU-LISTCO investigates challenges posed to European foreign policy by identifying risks connected to areas of limited statehood and contested orders .
 The project assesses how the preparedness of the Union and its Member States can be strengthened to better anticipate, prevent, and respond to threats of governance breakdown .
 Ukraine’s security is fundamental to the stability of Europe, as well as EU–Russia relations . Ukraine's security is key to stability of the European Union and the EU .
 Ukraine has lost control over some 7% of its territory, including the Crimean Peninsula and some parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 The EU has imposed several restrictive measures on Russia for its destabilisation of Ukraine . It has supported Ukrainian authorities in their struggle to reform state institutions .
 areas of limited statehood in Ukraine have been to a large extent the result of external interference rather than domestic vulnerabilities . First, Ukraine has been to the large extent of internal interference.
 The biggest risks and threats to Ukraine’s security are those of a military nature, given the ongoing Russian aggression, rather than those of political origin stemming from the poor reform track record. Second, the biggest risks to Ukraine's security, which could potentially bring about violent conflict or governance
 Third, since 2014, Ukraine has been steadily building its resilience, although it is still based more on social trust rather than institutional design .
 Fourth, a key role in either strengthening or weakening Ukraine’s resilience is played by external actors .
 The authors give their final remarks and verify the research hypothesis . In conclusions, the authors give the final remarks.
 Report is based on the theoretical approach elaborated in the EU-LISTCO project . There are two challenges to external action by the EU and its Member States .
 The first challenge is represented by areas of limited statehood in which central government authorities are too weak or unwilling to set and enforce rules and/or do not have a monopoly on the means of violence .
 Some of them are reasonably well governed by state and non-state, domestic/local, and international . Others are not .
 The challenge for EU foreign policy is to foster good governance in areas of limited statehood . The challenge is to Foster good governance.
 The second challenge is represented by contested orders in which state and/or non-state actors challenge the norms, principles, and rules according to which societies and political systems are or should be organised .
 Order contestations might relate to already existing governance systems and polities . Order contests may relate to existing governance system and polity .
 orders can be contested in situations where actors compete to establish their own sets of rules . But orders can also be contested.
 At the global and regional level, powers such as Russia have challenged and called the liberal and law-based order into question .
 Order contestations always involve competing ideas and discourses about what is considered an appropriate political, economic, or social system .
 The challenge for EU foreign policy is to foster conditions in which order contestations remain peaceful and do not contribute to governance breakdowns in areas of limited statehood .
Only if and when contestation occurs in areas of limited statehood can turn into threats to the security and stability of the EU, its Member States, and citizens . Only if and if contestation happens in areas that are limited states, the risk of governance breakdowns is
 Whether risks turn into threats for European security depends on the extent to which resilient societies can successfully contain these risks through effective and legitimate governance .
 The report builds on a critical analysis of literature and documents, as well as on materials gathered during a study trip to Kyiv in November 2018 .
 The authors interviewed more than a dozen Ukrainian experts and officials . They interviewed officials from the EU Delegation in Kyiv and the EU Advisory Mission for Civilian Security Sector Reform in Ukraine .
 The authors applied the experience gained from the workshop ‘Mid-Term Risks for Governance Breakdown and Violent Conflict in the European Union’s Eastern Neighbourhood’ The workshop was held in November 2018 in Berlin .
 In this chapter, we identify key areas of limited statehood and contested orders in Ukraine . We try to assess how widespread they are, which dimensions they cover and where they originate .
 Ukrainian government has conducted reforms since 2014 to identify sectoral areas of limited statehood . We analyse selected reforms conducted by the Ukrainian government .
Next, we focus on radical groups in Ukraine that we perceive to be a particular example of the social aspect of limited statehood . Next, we look at radical groups that we see as an example of a particular type of statehood.
 We look at the situation in Transcarpathia and try to assess to what extent it constitutes a contested order . We also look at what is happening in the country's capital city .
 Ukrainian statehood is determined first and foremost by the ongoing Russian aggression against the country . The most visible results have been the illegal annexation of the Crimean Peninsula by the Russian Federation and the un-declared Russia Ukraine war .
 The Soviet Union, and then the Russian Federation, retained the image of Eastern Europe as a front against Western expansion . First against German Drang nach Osten, and later on against NATO's supposedly aggressive plans .
 The myth of ‘NATO encircling Russia’ has frequently been used by the Russian authorities to justify Russia's own adventurism .
 “Russian World’s’ concept builds on an intellectual tradition of Russia as a distinct and self-sufficient civilisation embedded in a geopolitical order of traditional values . The collapse of the Soviet Union brought negative consequences for the entire Russian nation .
 The “Russian World” concept provides the Russian authorities with justification for “reactivating’s inherited ‘Russianness’ It is allegedly based on a common language, culture, and heritage and serves as a link to the state .
 The Russian authorities use ‘Russian World’ to conceptualise the well-known 10th-century idea of Pan-Slavism . The Slavic nations are under Russian leadership .
 Russia does not see its neighbours as fully sovereign countries and perceives the current political situation in the region as temporary only . The narrative is built on the linear and unrealistic assumption that Russian speakers will always act and think as Russians wherever they live .
 The EU and NATO have been promoting the rule of law and resilience-building in the region . Russia’s own standards-setting policy has centred on a robust and resolute interpretation of sovereignty and national self-determination .
 Russian leverage in Ukraine was largely guaranteed by a strong pro-Russia lobby, which has always existed in Ukrainian politics and society, especially in southeastern part of the country .
 The 2014 Revolution of Dignity constituted an attempt by Ukraine to break its dependence on Russia . For the Russian authorities, the 2014 revolution was an attempt to break the Russia's dependence on the country .
 Ukraine lost control over the Crimean Peninsula and part of the Donbas region . Ukraine's military force was used to block Kyiv's closer integration with the EU .
 order contestation has led to the creation of areas of limited statehood . In this way, order contestations have led to creation of limited states.
 Ukraine's sovereignty over these territories is beyond dispute, as neither was Russia's annexation of Crimea legal 2, nor the Russia-controlled quasi-states in Donbas, so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics .
 Crimea and part of the Donbas are considered as areas of limited statehood . For the purpose of this report, therefore, we consider Crimea and parts of Donbas as parts of Crimea .
 Crimea and in some districts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, there is now practically no Ukrainian statehood at all . These areas are effectively under Russian occupation .
 The peninsula has been unlawfully incorporated into the Russian Federation, but in Donbas that has not been the case . The difference is that the peninsula was unlawfully incorporated.
 Crimea has been de facto a part of Russia since 18 March 2014 . Military units under Moscow’s control, acting without insignias, secured full control over the peninsula . An illegal referendum was held there .
 The Russian occupation administration has since pursued a policy of dismantling Ukrainian institutions in Crimea . The Ukrainian government has since then pursued a policies of dismantling Ukraine's institutions .
Ukrainian laws were substituted by Russian laws and Russian citizenship was imposed on the local population . Ukrainian laws were replaced with Russian laws .
 The Mejlis, the parliament-like body of the Crimean Tatars, was declared to be an extremist organisation and banned . The body was declared an extremist group and banned.
 Mandatory re-registration requirements were also imposed on NGOs, media outlets, and religious communities . Many of them were denied the right to re-register on procedural grounds .
 Tens of thousands of people decided to permanently leave Crimea 3, most of them settling in other regions . Most of them settled in other Ukrainian regions .
 Ukrainian authorities have started to provide basic administrative services in neighbouring Kherson Oblast .
 Russia systematically blocks the access of the OSCE observers to the region . Monitoring of the local situation remains a challenge since Russia systematically blocked the access .
 Russia established “a border’ between the peninsula and Kherson oblast, and Ukraine suspended air, train, and bus connections .
 transmission towers located in Kherson oblast and supplying electricity to Crimea were damaged in November 2015 . The contract between Ukraine's energy operator and Crimea’s occupation authorities expired .
 Water supplies were cut off, with failed supply negotiations and Ukraine building a dam on the North Crimean Canal, which subsequently led to water shortages and an environmental disaster in Crimea .
 Ukrainian assets were ‘nationalised’ and transferred to the control of Russian companies . Finally, Ukrainian assets are “nationalised,’s assets were transferred to Russian companies.
 Crimea was merged into the Southern Federal District in July 2016 . A bridge across the Kerch Strait, connecting Crimea and Russia’s Krasnodar Region, was partially opened in May 2018 .
 Russian authorities fully provide governance on the territory of occupied Crimea .
Part of eastern Ukraine has also been under Russian occupation . Russia/Moscow has been persistent denial of its involvement in the conflict .
 Russia has not fulfilled a single provision of the Minsk-II Agreement . The ceasefire has been violated on a daily basis and both sides continue to suffer battle casualties .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were taken over by the Russian army . They account for around 2.5% of Ukraine’s territory .
 Unlike in occupied Crimea, where Russia fully provides governance, in the Donbas region, governance is provided by Russia through its intermediaries, and the situation is much more complicated .
 The occupied part of Donbas has been on the brink of humanitarian and ecological catastrophe . A significant part of the economy and infrastructure of these areas have been destroyed .
 Local authorities are mainly engaged in the expropriation of private property and industrial facilities . They have been largely dependent on Russian subsidies .
 Most of the remaining enterprises have been transferred to the control of the South Ossetia-registered company Vneshtorgservis, associated with Serhiy Kurchenko . Kurchenko is a young fugitive businessman with close ties to the former Ukrainian President Yanukovych .
 Donbas has become one of the most explosives-contaminated areas in the world from the numerous minefields and remnants of war .
 Full reintegration of occupied parts of Donbas with rest of Ukraine will be impossible in the short to medium terms . Even if a political solution is found, it is impossible for the whole of Ukraine to be reintegrated .
 As many as 3 million people have left Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts 4, with most seeking a new place to live in other 4 . The exact figures are not known .
 There has been no accurate profiling exercise carried out for IDPs, but it makes it difficult to respond appropriately to their needs for assistance and protection .
 Another 2-3 million have remained in the occupied territories and have been in need of international humanitarian aid . Still, another 2-1 million remain in occupied territories .
 The EU has been one of the biggest contributors of humanitarian assistance for eastern Ukraine . With almost €120 million of aid since 2014, the EU is the biggest contributor of aid for the region .
 An OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has been deployed to the Donbas region . It faces regular restrictions from Russian troops, who prevent observers from accessing many parts of the occupied territory .
 The OSCE SMM has also had no access to the part of the Russian-Ukrainian border currently outside the control of the government in Kyiv . Moscow tries to hide evidence of its involvement in eastern Ukraine .
Even the limited presence of the mission has already contributed to decreasing tensions on the ground . The mission has also provided the opportunity to rebuild some basic social infrastructure .
 The Russian aggression has been a significant economic burden for Ukraine . It has also been an economic burden .
 Total damage inflicted by Russia on Ukraine is still beyond evaluation. Total damage to Ukraine is not yet considered beyond evaluation .
 Ukraine pushed to radically increase security and defence spending in 16 2019 . Almost 6% of GDP will be spent on defence and security spending in 2019 .
 The state is not fully able to implement rules at the central level regarding the country’s economic development . This created an additional area of sectorally limited statehood in which the state does not implement rules .
 The EU has provided Ukraine with €3. billion of macro-financial assistance since 2014 . It is the largest amount of aid of this kind ever given to any non-EU country . Ukraine managed to regain macroeconomic stability.
 In January 2019, the country’s foreign exchange reserves exceeded $20 billion for the first time since 2014 . It's the country's first time that the reserves have exceeded the amount in a year .
 Kyiv faces repayment of a vast amount of its foreign debt, more than $15 billion, in the short-to-medium term . However, the situation still remains volatile as Kyiv is facing repayment of the huge amount .
 After the Revolution of Dignity, Ukraine's new authorities embarked on an ambitious and comprehensive reform process . In fact, the new authorities had never been fully established and had been further undermined during Yanukovych’s presidency .
 The state had been unable to enforce its decisions in several policy areas . The EU-LISTCO definition of an area of limited statehood is a condition that satisfies the EU's definition of a statehood .
 Russian aggression has pushed Ukraine to prioritise strengthening its security and defence sector . Russia has increased the military potential of its armed forces, especially increasing its military potential .
 The pace of the reforms soon became affected by the interests of the most influential political and business groups, including the authorities themselves .
 The Alliance’s support led to several successful transformative examples, such as maintaining the rotating Ukrainian presence in the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq . But these were always fragmented reforms that lacked a systemic approach under successive Ukrainian governments .
 Yanukovych's administration further degraded the country's defence and security . Ukraine on the brink of disintegration in the wake of the Russian aggression .
Law enforcement officers failed to control the Euromaidan protests in February 2014 . They simply left the city after the mass shootings in Kyiv at the end of February 2014.
 Restoring public order required informal activities of protester organisations, such as Euromaidan Self-Defence . Ukraine's parliament was able to bestow these activities with a cloak of legitimacy .
 The state was unable to provide organised resistance to the Russian aggression in Crimea and the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . The state had to rely on groups of volunteers, local business and power elites, and even oligarchs, who joined their ranks and/or supported the regular security
 The Ukraine Armed Forces have nearly doubled to more than 200,000 people . The number of troops in active service has nearly doubled.
 The vast majority of volunteer units have been integrated into the army or other defence forces . National Guard and territorial defence units are among the most integrated .
 Some rudimentary small paramilitary groups have not yet been formally integrated . They are effectively controlled by the state and work within the unified command-and-control structure .
 The state has established forms of cooperation with volunteers who can be activated in case the armed conflict escalates or Russia invades other regions of Ukraine or opens ‘new fronts’ in the ongoing war .
 A key milestone in this regard was the adoption of the Law on National Security in June 2018 . Many more legal acts need to be adopted, including a new law concerning Ukraine’s security services .
Some areas may be regarded as having the character of limited statehood in Ukraine . Still, some areas may still be regarded by some as having limited state-hood .
 The monopoly of the state on the means of violence remains a challenge, too, with frequent attacks on civic activists .
Long-awaited state capacity-building process has been launched . But so far it has produced mixed results and the state remains in transitory mode .
 Russian aggression will remain a challenge for some time to come, but it has been compensated to some extent by 19 international community assistance .
 The Revolution of Dignity brought to the highest echelons of power representatives of the new middle-class and creative-class elite who had not belonged to existing networks of political patronage .
Without having achieved critical mass, they were unable to overturn the old system of governance . Many of them quickly left their posts within state institutions .
 The most visible change in the governance sector has been the EU-supported decentralisation reform . It led to the consolidation of local communities and increased their powers and financial autonomy .
 Many local vested interest groups are trying to block the voluntary amalgamation of administrative units . Some branches of the central administration fear loss of influence and support from local political elites .
 EU-funded public administration reform has contributed to the building of depoliticised, professional, and independent civil service . EU- funded public administration reforms have also contributed to building of a new civil service.
 The EU financial support from the EU helped to partially address one of the biggest problems of Ukrainian bureaucracy . The traditional compensation of official salaries with side payments, often arranged by oligarchs, is often arranged.
 The parliament abolished previously introduced obligation to select the heads of Oblast and Regional State Administrations through a competition procedure and granted the right to appoint them again to the president . The move marked the intention to strengthen the so-called “power vertical” of the presidential administration .
 Ukrainian efforts to fight corruption are the biggest failure of the post-Maidan authorities . The state is unable to enforce its rules, in which the state is not able to enforce rules .
 Anti-corruption policy was supposed to be a priority for both Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Volodymyr Hroysman .
 Some important institutional changes took place under pressure from the international institutions and civil society . The National Anticorruption Bureau and introducing an electronic system of asset declarations for officials and politicians .
 A new public procurement system called ProZorro has also been successfully launched . The new system is also being used to create a new procurement system .
 The key problem in fighting corruption remains the still unfinished reform of the justice system in Ukraine . It is possible for corrupt judges and prosecutors to sabotage anti-corruption actions at their final stage .
 The judicial system has been subject to some change after the Revolution of Dignity, too . The introduction of a new three-tier system of courts, restrictions on judicial immunity and a procedure for the evaluation of judges has not decisively affected the old practices .
 The top 10 wealthiest Ukrainians are worth about 10% of the country's GDP, compared to almost 30% in 2014 . The same situation has affected the top 10 richest Ukrainians, who are worth 10% .
 The main reason for these changes was the Russian aggression, as a result of which the richest Ukrainians lost many of their assets in Crimea and Donbas .
 The reforms also played a role, especially in the financial sector, in making it more difficult for oligarchs to use old moneylaundering schemes .
Oligarchs managed to largely maintain their grip on the energy sector, which traditionally has been a source of income . Still, oligarchs still managed to maintain their hold on the power sector, and even a few new “minigarchs’s” have emerged .
 As before, oligarchs exercise significant control over Ukraine's parliament, Verkhovna Rada .
 Study by the Ukrainian Institute for the Future says 65% of MPs in previous term may have been under oligarchic influence .
 Top oligarchs have maintained their monopoly position on the Ukrainian media market . They and their protégés an upper hand in every election campaign in the country .
 The oligarchs themselves may be considered a separate area of socially limited statehood . The oligarchy may be seen as part of a social group of oligarchs .
 The state is unable to enforce its decisions in different policy areas, especially in those being of particular interest to the most powerful oligarchs . But their influence on the state should be regarded as an example of sectorally limited statehood .
This greatly exceeds what Ukraine has ever borrowed from the International Monetary Fund . This greatly exceeds the amount that Ukraine has borrowed from IMF .
 Financial support from external actors is important in providing a lifeline to Ukraine’s authorities . Ukraine's performance in reforming the rule of law area depends on the country's performance .
 Ukraine's policy sector had not yet created any areas of limited statehood in the country, in contrast to the migration problems in the EU's southern neighbourhood .
 Ukraine has already brought about negative economic consequences for Ukraine that should not be overlooked . However, it has already been brought aboutnegative economic consequences .
 The State Statistics Service of Ukraine estimates the number of migrant workers at 1. million . But experts say the real number may actually be 2-4 million .
 Remittances from abroad have significantly increased at that time, ranging over $14 billion in 2018, and vastly contributed to the economic stabilisation of the country . Remittance from abroad has significantly increased in the past year, ranging from $14billion to $14bn .
 The Ukrainian workforce has shrunk by 5-8%, which has resulted in the economic recovery being slower than initially expected . The economic recovery has been slower than originally expected .
 The problem of mass migration has become exaggerated as a result of domestic political infighting in Ukraine, experts say . Still, as many Ukrainian experts point out, the problem is still exaggerated .
 The deliberate involvement of radical groups in the Ukrainian defence and security sector in 2014-2015, especially during the initial phase of the Russian aggression in the first phase of Russia's aggression .
 The area of limited statehood was not specific to any territory, although it was more characteristic of regions directly affected by the hostilities . The area was not specifically targeted to specific social groups .
 Ukraine is still suffering residual after-effects of its earlier loss of monopoly on the use of force . Ukraine may face, in the short-to-medium term, growing extremism and political violence as a result .
 Radicalism had manifested itself in Ukraine prior to 2014, with harassment and physical attacks against government-critical journalists and protesters .
 These incidents were committed by groups of unidentified men in civilian clothes . Usually members of sports clubs or plain criminals employed by the then authorities with remuneration .
 These groups later became collectively known as “titushky’s’. They played an active role during Euromaidan on behalf of the government, beating and kidnapping protesters, and even torturing some of them to death .
 Many radical groups had been, indeed, financed and supported by Russia long before 2014 . They actively joined the ranks of the Russian-controlled forces in Donbas soon after the beginning of the aggression .
 Kharkiv-based Oplot, an MMA fight club, was responsible for at least several acts of terrorism and sabotage in eastern Ukraine . Oplot members took part in attacks on Euromaidan protesters in Kyiv .
 Oleksandr Zakharchenko was the self-declared leader of the so-called Donetsk People's Republic in 2014-2018 . He was formerly the head of the Donetsk branch of Oplot .
 Ukrainian radical and paramilitary groups also participated in the hostilities on the Russian side . Cossacks and other irregular military groups bearing “Orthodox’s names, committing war crimes in Donbas .
 There are several pro-Russia “security groups, de facto mobile paramilitary units, which still exist in central and western Ukraine . Ukrainian experts believe these groups are closely monitored by the Ukrainian security services and the national police .
 Right Sector, Azov, Aidar, Donbas, and Dnipro-1 were volunteer battalions with their own chain of command, logistics, and funding . At the frontline they cooperated closely with the Armed Forces of Ukraine and often relied on artillery support from the regular
 The Russian army's presence in Donbas was crucial at the initial stage of the Russian aggression . Their presence was crucial in compensating for the deplorable condition of the army .
 At least several times they showed poor commitment and discipline, and later on, they were integrated into the official army structures . However, at least a few exceptions, they are integrated into official military structures .
 The Tornado battalion was disbanded by the Ukrainian authorities in June 2015 after it had transformed into a de facto organised crime group .
 Some Ukrainian radical groups and volunteer battalions are affiliated with right-wing political parties and organisations . Some commanders even managed to enter parliament in October 2014 elections .
 No far-right party managed to pass the threshold at that time . They largely stayed outside big politics, focusing on street marches .
 In March 2017, leaders of three nationalist organisations signed a joint political manifesto . The manifesto calls for the transformation of street actions into parliamentary politics .
 Support for the document was expressed by three other organisations . The Congress of Ukrainian Nationalists, Organisation of Ukrainian nationalists, and S14.
 The pair failed to prepare a joint platform or even put forward a single candidate for the March 2019 presidential elections . Together, they failed to prepared a joint Platform or put forward one candidate .
 The political weight of Svoboda, which was previously present in the Rada as a separate faction, far exceeds that of the other radical formations .
 Radical parties did not make it into parliament in the pre-term July 2019 elections . It is both possible that the radicals have become marginalised or that their radicalisation may even escalate .
 Of particular concern for Ukraine are those radical groups that are issue-driven and do not publicly adhere to any party ideology . The radical groups are not publicly affiliated with the Ukrainian government .
 radicals initiated the trade blockade of the occupied territories in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts in spring 2017 . The group is a mixed ad-hoc group .
 War veterans won support for their case to "stop trade with the enemy" from a substantial part of society . They forced the government, which opposed them, to approve their demands and permanently institute the blockade .
 There was no direct political agenda behind this action, but it nonetheless had a significant political effect on the national level . The state was again unable to enforce its will .
 Other examples are radical groups employed by oligarchs and business representatives, and sometimes by organised crime groups, in illegal activities . Other, although less pronounced, examples are Radical groups employed in criminal activities .
 Their task includes asset-grabbing, which is the illicit acquisition of a business belonging to a competitor, or intimidation of their patrons’ opponents .
 There have been cases in which war veterans have been employed as contract killers .
 The authors' own interview with Vyacheslav Likhachev was conducted during the study trip to Kyiv . 27 and helping them to cope with war trauma .
 New Ministry for Veteran’s Affairs will be established in November 2018 . It remains to be seen how effective this institution will be .
 The region hit the headlines only in autumn 2017 after a conflict between Ukraine and Hungary broke out over the rights of the local Hungarian minority .
 Transcarpathia is an interesting case for at least three reasons, including historic, historic and ethnic . However, it is also a case for more than three reasons .
Carpathian Mountains is an area squeezed between Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania . It is physically isolated from the rest of Ukraine by the Carpathian mountains .
 Infrastructure connections are better developed with Slovakia and Hungary than with Ukraine . Infrastructure connections with Slovakia, Hungary and Hungary are betterdeveloped with Slovakia .
 The local economy remains highly dependent on smuggling to the neighbouring EU countries .
Before it became part of Ukraine in 1946, the region belonged to the Hungarian Empire . It constituted an autonomous area within Czechoslovakia, and was partly occupied by Hungary .
 According to the 2001 nationwide census, the region was inhabited by about 1,250,000 people . 80.5% of those in the region were Ukrainians, 12.6% Hungarians, 2.6%) Romanians, 1.1% Roma, and 0.5%.
 The largest national minority, Hungarians, live in tight groups in the southern part of the region, especially in the Berehove, Uzhhorod, and Vynohradiv raions .
 In socio-political terms, Transcarpathia appears to be a relatively ‘distant’ 8 Jakub Pieńkowski from the Polish Institute of International Affairs contributed to this chapter .
 Pro-autonomy tendencies manifested themselves in the region during the 1991 independence referendum . A large majority of Transcarpathians voted for the region to have autonomous status within Ukraine .
Rusyn community is not recognised by the Ukrainian state as a national minority . It twice attempted to secure autonomy from the central government, but their demands never gained popular support .
 In 1993, a self-proclaimed local government was established but soon was banned by the central authorities . The self- proclaimed local government has since been established .
 Ukraine's security services to operate more decisively. That declaration pushed Ukraine’s security services more decisively, says Ukraine's chief minister .
 Dmytro Sydor, the chairman of the Congress of the Carpathian Ruthenians, was sentenced to three year’s imprisonment with two years’ probation for encroachment on the territorial integrity of Ukraine's borders .
 Sydor himself was an archpriest of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate . Petro Hetsko, the self-declared head of the 2008 “Rusyn government, conducts his political activities from Moscow .
 The ‘Ruthenian question’ may easily be incited in the future by an external actor as an instrument of order contestation . Still, the “ruthenians’ question” may be inciting in thefuture by an outside actor .
Hungarians living in Transcarpathia should have their own self-government and be allowed to obtain a second, Hungarian, passport . In May 2014, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán announced that Hungary should have a second passport .
 The move towards granting a second passport was put in motion by the Hungarian government already in 2010 . More than 100,000 passports have been distributed to Ukrainians of Hungarian origin in Transcarpathia since then .
 Ukraine adopted a new education law that, among other provisions, changed the existing regulations regarding the language used in teaching in schools . In autumn 2017, the conflict between Ukraine and Hungary escalated even earlier, when Ukraine adopted the new law .
 Hungarian minority enjoys numerous privileges in Ukraine, including bilingual information signs, its own organisations, media, educational institutions, and even political parties .
 Hungarian authorities block Ukraine's efforts to strengthen cooperation with NATO and the EU . In response, the Hungarian authorities started to block Ukraine’s efforts to stronger cooperation with the EU and NATO .
 Hungarian policy towards Transcarpathia largely satisfies the EU-LISTCO definition of contested order . It is imperative to acknowledge that Budapest has not aimed at any territorial changes in the region .
 Ukraine and other countries with Hungarian minorities, such as Slovakia and Romania, are concerned . This concerns not only Ukraine but also other countries in Hungary .
 The prospects for any “Hungarian separatism’ in Transcarpathia are low, says the author . There is no rapid governance breakdown in Ukraine resulting in a total loss of control in the region .
 President Yanukovych fled in 2014 after the change of power in Ukraine . The loss of control might not be enough, as it was in Ukraine after Yanukovych fled .
 The climate of distrust between Ukraine and Hungary that has recently appeared will soon go away . This is not to say, however, that the distrust will soon be gone away .
 The tension will likely continue in the near future, with Transcarpathia a potential spot for third-party provocations aimed at inciting ethnic hatred .
 Only if and when areas of limited statehood and contested orders deteriorate into governance breakdown and violent conflict, do the risks become threats .
 The moment is described as the "tipping point" at which governments lose the capacity to cope with, adapt to, or recover from security crises .
 In the following chapter, we examine four selected tipping points, at which areas of limited statehood and/or contested orders in Ukraine are likely to deteriorate into governance breakdown and violent conflict . The previous chapter, identified in the previous chapter.
 The most important risk for Ukraine’s security in the short-to-medium term is a resumption of the large-scale military operation by the Russian Federation .
Ukraine can count on 200,000-strong Armed Forces and another200,000 reservists with combat experience . It is still insufficient to repel a full-scale Russian conventional offensive and will remain so for the foreseeable future .
 For the last few years, Russia has been actively building up its military presence near the border with Ukraine . Russia has a strong presence in the region.
 The Ukrainian authorities estimate that there are at least 80,000 Russian troops deployed just in the direct vicinity of Ukraine’s borders, including Crimea and occupied Donbas .
 Russia's attempts to destabilise Ukraine through political meddling and economic pressure are less successful . The more it will be willing to use direct military force against Ukraine .
There are two main directions from which a potential Russian offensive might be launched . There are two major directions for the Russian offensive .
 There is no evidence of nuclear weapons present in Crimea, although some types of Russian weapons are able to carry nuclear warheads .
 The military capabilities of Russia’s Western and Southern Military Districts, which border Ukraine, have been systematically developed, both through re-arming and training .
 In occupied Donbas alone, there are 35,000 local armed forces, composed of Russian soldiers, foreign volunteers, and local fighters .
 A large-scale Russian offensive would obviously lead to a further violent outburst in the conflict between Ukraine and Russia . We identify one specific tipping point at which a governance breakdown would also be likely, namely further territorial losses .
 Such a scenario would likely enhance conflicts between former members of volunteer battalions who became regular army soldiers and their current military commanders, as well as possibly give rise to small-scale military operations undertaken independently by radical armed groups .
 Increased political infighting between the authorities and the opposition, including far-right parties and their armed formations, would be likely, leading to street protests and possibly even riots . It would additionally pose an enormous challenge to the law enforcement agencies .
 The full implications of this scenario are difficult to assess as they are dependent on the scale of the Russian incursion . However, it should be noted that the full implications are hard to assess .
 Ukraine’s security in the medium term is the loss of legitimacy by the government and a subsequent anti-government uprising . Political risk to Ukraine's security is also a risk to the country's security .
Both the Orange Revolution and the Revolution of Dignity were of political origin . This would probably be triggered by 33 political factors rather than economic ones since both the Orange revolution and the revolution were ofpolitical origin .
 The most likely background for social unrest would probably be the ongoing war with Russia . Russia is the most likely source of social unrest .
 The war in Donbas has already triggered social resistance at least twice . In both cases, the key role was played by radical and paramilitary groups .
 In 2017, Donbas war veterans started an illegal trade blockade of the occupied territories in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . It pushed the authorities to officially authorise it a few weeks later after yet another series of clashes had taken place .
 Both times, the subject of the contestation was the government’s policy towards occupied Donbas, which was considered to be too soft . The government's policy was considered too soft.
 Ukrainians largely favour making compromises with a view to ending the war with Russia . Two thirds of Ukrainians say it is necessary to end the war .
Only 16% would agree to any kind of compromise while 51% are of the opinion that only some compromise is acceptable . Only 16% of those polled would agree on any type of compromise .
 Ukrainians are even less inclined to make compromises with Russia, according to opinion polls . None of the ideas that are currently on the table enjoy popular support in the society .
 Only 30% of Ukrainians would advocate such a decision and 45% would be against . The most acceptable scenario encompasses parliament adopting a law on neutrality .
Anti-government protests would likely result in a governance breakdown and/or violent conflict in Donbas . The conflict would be perceived as seemingly based on Russian conditions and would not correspond to popular demands of Ukrainian society .
 Ukraine's military defeat or political capitulation would result from pro-Russia political forces re-taking power in the country and giving in to Russian pressure .
 The second is the full implementation of the political provisions of the Minsk Agreements . It would provide for legalisation of the Russian proxies in eastern Ukraine and enforcement of the abovementioned solutions .
 This would likely bring about the mass involvement of war veterans as well as radical and paramilitary groups in violent street riots . This would be the first time such violence has been seen in the past .
 Some members of law enforcement agencies defecting to the side of the opposition . The authorities would probably be recognised as traitors of the national interest .
 Social The Ukrainian state has so far quite effectively controlled radicalisation, in part through cooptation mechanisms . But risk remains in the medium term that violence without a political agenda, but which has a political effect anyway, would spread .
 Two of the risks and tipping points mentioned above are to a great extent based on the active involvement of radical groups . In fact, two of the risk points are based on radical groups.
 It is of key importance to identify the conditions under which such a threat emerged in the past. Therefore, it is of important importance.
 The MMA fight club's members were often employed to provide corporate security for questionable business activity . The club was started as a fight club, and its members often provided corporate security .
 The group cooperated with the police during Euromaidan, for instance, helping to transfer protesters to police stations . The group also helped transfer demonstrators to police station .
 Oplot opposed the glorification of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army and promoted Soviet values . Oplot also opposed glorification and promotion of Soviet values in Ukraine .
 Zhylin came up with the initiative to erect a monument to Stalin in Kharkiv in 2013 . It was supported by Russian nationalists .
 The Ukrainian authorities at the time reached for support from the radicals, especially when the regime was constrained by laws and norms that made it impossible to enforce punishment and terror .
 The far-right S14 group is widely believed to work in cooperation with the authorities . For instance, the group is often engaged in clashes with the police .
 Members of the group were engaged in dispersing LGBT marches and attacking Roma camps . Members of a group were also involved in dispersed LGBT marches.
 At the same time, they have received financing from the state budget for projects dedicated to national-patriotic education .
 S14 members supported anti-corruption activists demanding the dismissal of corrupt officials over the death of civic activist Kateryna Handziuk . Also may be regarded as a way of seeking legitimacy.
 Vadym Troyan was first appointed as head of the Kyiv Regional Police, then promoted to the rank of First Deputy Head of the National Police . Troyan became Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs in 2017 .
What we identify as a specific tipping point is a systemic institutional crisis within the country . The disorganised state apparatus loses control over the radical groups, as was the case after Euromaidan .
 One such scenario could be the mass contestation of election results by the society or opposition forces, which lead to street protests and result in governance breakdown .
 The combination of several tipping points would be likely as well since both further territorial losses and/or a resolution to the conflict imposed on Russian conditions would likely be followed by an institutional crisis and create the conditions for radical groups to use violence .
There is still the risk of another wave of migration in the medium term, if some conditions are met . Economic emigration from Ukraine has probably already peaked, but there is still a risk of more migration .
 Ukrainian migration has so far been a function of the economic situation in the country, especially the divergence in the standard of living and remuneration between Ukraine and the neighbouring EU countries .
 The rapid fall the hryvnia since 37 2014 in favour of other currencies has been the cause of the rapid fall . UAH 8 per $1 in Q1 of 2014 to about UAH 30 per $ 1 in 2015 .
 Political crises, on the other hand, did not affect the migration situation in Ukraine significantly, neither during the Orange Revolution nor the Revolution of Dignity .
 The reason is that there is no observable cause and effect between political crises in Ukraine and the depreciation of hryvnia .
 The first wave of hryvnia devaluation was caused by the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and the subsequent default of the Russian economy in 1998 . The Russian economy defaulted in 1998 after the financial crisis .
 The second wave is easily attributed to the impact of the global financial crisis of 2008 . The third wave is the second wave of the 2008 financial crisis .
 At that time, the exchange rate of the national currency remained quite stable, both during the “Ukraine without Kuchma’s campaign and the Orange Revolution. At the time, it was quite stable .
 There has also been no observable reverse link between political crises and depreciation of hryvnia . The Orange Revolution, or the Revolution of Dignity, were always driven by the internal political agenda .
 Ukraine's currency has been depreciating rapidly in recent years . Ukraine's economy is expected to be hit by a wave of migration from the EU .
 Two basic scenarios include the depreciation of the hryvnia as a result of a global economic slowdown or crisis . The fall in the exchange rate brought about by a renewed Russian military operation in Ukraine .
 The hryvnia’s depreciation would also be possible in the 38 event of the long-term suspension of cooperation between the Ukrainian authorities and the IMF . The drop would probably not be as rapid as in the other two situations .
 A new wave of migration could trigger a governance breakdown by means of a labour market crisis and subsequent perturbations in the social security sphere . It is unlikely that the depreciation of the national currency would lead to violent conflict .
 Risks do not always have to turn into threats to European security. MECHANISMS of RESILIENCE Risks are not always a threat to security .
 Whether or not this happens depends on the extent to which resilient societies in EU neighbourhood countries can successfully contain these risks through effective and legitimate governance .
 Resilience is likely to help societies, communities, and individuals manage risks in a peaceful and stable manner, says author . Resiliences are likely to be used to build, maintain, and restore livelihoods in the face of major pressure .
 resilience affects the tipping points in such a way that it can mitigate the effects of the risks and prevent a governance breakdown and violent conflict.
 Social Trust Social trust has been a key source of resilience in Ukraine . Social Trust social trust is a keysource of resilience.
 Trust in unfamiliar groups of people turned out to be of utmost importance during the initial phase of the Russian aggression . Volunteer movements financed the basic needs of the Armed Forces and the volunteer battalions operating on the frontline .
Both the Orange Revolution and the Revolution of Dignity proved the high capacity of Ukrainian society for selforganisation . In fact, both the Orange revolution and the revolution proved the highest capacity of the Ukrainian society .
 Ukrainians see the primary role of the Church as defending the interests of the poorest citizens . Ukrainians see government decisions negatively affect people's living standards .
 New Orthodox Church of Ukraine will likely further increase public role of religion. Church constitutes an important instrument of strengthening societal resilience, says Peter Bergen .
 There have been cases of Ukrainian Orthodox Church Moscow Patriarchate priests who openly advocated against the Ukrainian state and declared their support for Russian aggression on Ukraine .
Ordinary people have relatively low trust in internally displaced persons . On the other hand, ordinary people have only a +16 trust-mistrust ratio .
 The same low level of trust-mistrust, at +16, characterises Ukrainian NGOs . The same high level of Trust-Mistrust, in Ukraine, is the lowest level in the country .
 Many Ukrainians misunderstand the role of these organisations and believe they simply replace government services . The reason for this is probably that many Ukrainians misunderstand them .
 In Ukraine, which is still a country in transition, the legal system largely retains the features of the soft rule of law . The legal system in Ukraine is still in transition .
 Those responsible for law-making are strongly disapproved of by society . Also strongly disapprove of those responsible for making laws .
 The approval-disapproval balance of the activities of the parliament, the government, and the president in December 2018 were -60, -63, and -81 (International Republican Institute 2018) 9.
 Ukrainian elites have been forced to propose alternative concepts for maintaining the legitimacy of the existing social order, which was built largely on ideology .
 First is the idea of a national state and national renaissance, which refers to the history of Ukrainian statehood at the beginning of the 20th century . Further attempts to restore it during World War II, the Ukrainian Cossack State of the 17th-18th centuries, and even
 Second is the idea of a social or welfare state, to a large extent based on paternalistic expectations of the population inherited from Soviet times . Third is the concept of a state based on the expectations of people inherited fromSoviet times .
 The third idea is of a strong state, capable of establishing and maintaining the stability of the social order . It is derived from a positive perception of the results achieved by more authoritarian neighbours, such as Russia, Belarus, or Kazakhstan .
 Ukrainian society has largely defined the continuum of polarisation of Ukrainian society . Instead, these concepts have largely defined a continuum of polarization .
 Ideas of a national and European state were traditionally more legitimate in western regions of Ukraine . The population of the eastern and southern regions leaned towards ideas of a strong and paternalistic state .
 There has been an additional layer of social polarisation that followed the axis of liberal vs. conservative values . Within these regional dimensions, there has been even an extra layer ofsocial polarisation .
 Geographical distinctions are largely the result of the different history of the western and eastern regions of Ukraine and the collective memory of their population . Geographical differences are largely due to the different histories of the eastern and western regions .
After 2014, relatively country-wide legitimacy has been gained by the fourth concept of the European state . After 2014, the fourth state of the EU has gained more legitimacy than ever before .
 The regional differences are still in place, with the highest support for joining the EU in the western regions and the lowest in the eastern and southern regions . The region's support for the EU is highest in western regions .
 There is yet another relatively country-wide concept of legitimacy in Ukraine . It builds on the rejection of corruption and abuse of power by authorities .
 It served as a common denominator for the advocates of the different ideas of legitimacy mentioned above who took part in both the Orange Revolution and the Revolution of Dignity .
 Non-state actors promoting a “Western-oriented’ model of legitimacy, based on European and national aspirations, deposed a strong paternalistic state . In both cases, in fact, the non- state actors promote a ‘Western-orientation’
 42 perception allowed the social order shifts resulting from both revolutions to become legitimate for the majority of the population all over Ukraine . This 42 perception allows the socialorder shifts to be legitimate.
 Ukrainians tend to deeply distrust their state institutions, which are key to providing effective governance . The four legitimacy concepts mentioned above are important to Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian state institutions are at the very bottom of the list of institutions as far as the trust-mistrust balance is concerned . Ukraine is at the top of the world's most important state institutions .
 The most distrusted institution is traditionally the parliament, with a -72 ratio, followed by the government at -63, and the president at -54 10.5 .
 A negative balance of trust-mistrust characterises the law enforcement agencies . The security services have a -26 ratio and the national police have -20. The national police has -20 .
 The judiciary and law enforcement bodies have often been used against ordinary people while serving vested interests . The judiciary has been accused of using ordinary people against their interests .
 The distrust towards state institutions leaves much space for external actors to affect the country’s resilience . At the same time, the distrust towards the state institutions left much room for External actors to impact the country.
 The Eurasian Economic Union has a -19 10 President’s trust-mistrust balance . Zelensky's victory is likely to change the balance after his victory .
 43 trust-mistrust ratio, 75% of Ukrainians consider Russian influence on Ukraine to be negative . Only 8% say it has been positive . No new opinion polls on this issue have been released .
 Cooperation between two centres depends largely on informal arrangements, which makes the system vulnerable to personnel changes, and therefore unsustainable in the longer term .
 President Leonid Kuchma, each and every Ukrainian president after taking office has tried to expand his influence on other institutions .
 The most successful in this regard was President Yanukovych, who quickly monopolised power . He created a highly centralised management system, which eventually led to almost a full governance breakdown .
After 2014, many steps have been taken to prevent such a scenario in the future . After 2014, several steps were taken to stop such a situation .
Several state institutions have had their capacity increased and their independence strengthened . The National Bank of Ukraine has had its capacity increased .
 A decentralisation 44 process has been launched to decrease the dependency of local communities on the central authorities on the national level . On the other, a decentralisation process has also been launched .
 Nevertheless, the predominance of informal institutions over formal ones still exists, especially when it comes to the judiciary .
In 2014, it was largely parliament that mitigated the negative effects of the governance breakdown by reinstalling legitimacy to the political system . In 2014, the majority of parliament was largely Parliament .
 The current mixed majoritarian-proportional electoral system with closed party lists makes it difficult to enter the parliament without financial and/or media support from oligarchs .
 It favours building dependencies between the most powerful political and business groups . It also allows the inclusion of regional elites in governance mechanisms through co-optation .
 It is important to underline that during the first phase of the Russian aggression, many oligarchs and regional elites in the most vulnerable regions contributed to maintaining Ukrainian statehood .
 The system translates into extremely low legitimacy for parliament, as confirmed by the public's trustmistrust balance, mentioned above .
 In June 2019, parliament finally passed a long-awaited new electoral code . It provides for a fully proportional electoral system, with regional, open party lists .
 Ukraine’s resilience is building strong and independent law enforcement agencies that are able to deter both internal and external influence, which causes instability, and causes instability .
 Some steps in this direction have been taken, such as reform of the police . Some steps have already been taken.
 Even resilient societies may not be able to contain the risks and prevent them from turning into threats to European security if they become subject to external influence .
 Third parties can weaken societal resilience, making governance breakdown and violent conflict more likely . Third parties are more likely to weaken society's resilience .
Third parties can also strengthen resilience, allowing managing risks in a peaceful and stable manner . Third parties can strengthen resilience.
 Russian Federation After Euromaidan, Russian political influence in Ukraine has been in systematic decline all across the board . Russian Federation after Eurom Maidan, Russia's political influence is in decline.
 Ukraine’s new authorities embarked on a path of integration with EuroAtlantic structures and steadily cut ties with Russia . Politically, Ukraine's new authorities embark on an integration path with Europe .
 Kyiv never ratified the treaty, which was the first Russian integration project in the region . They withdrew from the bodies of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 The 46 traditional pro-Russia electorate has largely remained on the Russia-occupied territories . Pro-Russia parties were either banned or imploded on their own .
 Russiaoriented political forces managed to join ranks again and enter parliament in the October 2014 elections as the Opposition Bloc . But their impact significantly decreased as they entered parliament .
 The same decline has been seen in Russia’s economic leverage on Ukraine . Russia's economic leverage is also seen in Ukraine .
After Russia introduced several restrictive measures on Ukrainian goods, banned transit of the goods to Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, and imposed sanctions on Ukrainian enterprises, bilateral trade volume dropped significantly .
 Russian energy leverage on Ukraine is still in place, such as nuclear fuel supplies for Ukrainian power plants, as well as imports of Russian oil . However, some Russian energy Leverage on Ukraine remains in place .
 Ukraine has countered Russian soft influence by fighting Russian disinformation and propaganda . Ukraine has also countered Russia's soft influence.
 Ukrainian authorities banned prominent Russian TV stations, news agencies and social media . The Russkiy Mir Foundation was limited to the operations of the foundation .
 The annexation of Crimea and hostilities in Donbas have blocked Ukraine’s rapprochement with NATO and the EU . Moscow sees the area as its exclusive sphere of influence in the post-Soviet area .
 Russia has gained a durable instrument to destabilise Ukraine from the inside and shape its internal political agenda . By securing control over part of Ukrainian territory, Russia is gaining control over parts of Ukraine .
 Moscow has threatened to use force again in Ukraine . Moscow has also hamper Western political and military support for Ukraine .
 NATO and the EU even increased their cooperation with Ukraine . All these actions heavily undermined Russian influence within Ukrainian society, according to the author .
 Kyiv are in talks to join both clubs in the short-to-medium term . However, the chances for Kyiv to join either club remain very low in the long-term .
 NATO has been a key player in building Ukraine's resilience since 2014, counterbalancing to a high extent Russia’s destabilisation activities . NATO has also been a major part of the European Union's support for Ukraine .
 The NATO-Ukraine political dialogue has had its ups and downs, with Ukraine seeking closer ties with NATO during Yushchenko's term . Ukraine denied a Membership Action Plan at the NATO 2008 Bucharest summit .
 The breakthrough moment was the Russian aggression, which brought Ukraine and NATO closer as never before . The breakthrough moments were the first time the two countries had been closer together .
 The Alliance has been actively supporting Ukraine since then, both strategically, and tactically, through consultations on security and defence-sector reform . The Alliance is maintaining a firm political position in favour of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Priority has been given to the comprehensive reform of the Ukrainian defence and security sectors . It should contribute to both Ukraine's democratic development and building up the country’s defence capabilities .
 This includes the modernisation of the Armed Forces structure, command and control systems, logistics arrangements, and plans and procedures . This includes modernising of the armed forces structure and control system .
 NATO experts have also been advising Ukraine on the implementation of the Strategic Defence Bulletin . NATO experts are also advising Ukraine to adopt NATO standards and increase interoperability with NATO forces .
 The key objective of the reforms has been to strengthen democratic and civilian control over the Ukrainian Armed Forces and security institutions . The reforms are aimed at strengthening democratic and civilians' control of the armed forces .
 NATO advisors have been actively engaged in the preparation and implementation of the 2018 Law on National Security . The 2018 Law was finally provided for the appointment of a civilian Minister of Defence .
 NATO member states have insisted on increasing the transparency of defence spending and liberalisation of the defence industry market . NATO countries and Ukraine have also insisted on increased transparency of defense spending .
 In parallel, the Alliance has strongly contributed to building Ukraine’s defence capabilities on the ground .
 Individual NATO member states have been offering practical training for Ukrainian Armed Forces at the Yavoriv International Peacekeeping and Security Centre .
 The Alliance condemned the Russian aggression on Ukraine and decided to suspend practical cooperation with Russia unless Moscow withdraws its troops from Ukraine . The Alliance has suspended practical cooperation.
 The political dialogue between NATO and Ukraine has also stepped up, with regular consultations held . This format has been largely blocked since autumn 2017 given the Ukraine-Hungary dispute over the rights of the Hungarian minority in Transcarpathia .
 Ukraine declared its ambition to join the Alliance as one of its foreign policy priorities . After 2014, Ukraine embarked on constitutional changes to lay down Basic Law provisions on pursuing NATO membership .
 NATO and Ukraine remain key political importance for both countries . Further cooperation remains of key political significance for both NATO andUkraine .
 Ukraine has the opportunity to strengthen its security and independence from Russia . On the one hand, it provides Ukraine with the chance to stronger its security.
 Turkey has played an increasingly important role in Ukrainian foreign policy as a security provider and political status quo guarantor in the Black Sea region . Turkey has been an opponent of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea .
 Bilateral trade amounted to $3.78 billion in 2017, making Turkey's fifth-largest trade partner . Ukraine only 24th among Turkey’s trade partners .
 Ukraine had a positive trade balance with Turkey, with exports being more than twice higher than imports . Similarly, Ukraine had more than two times higher exports than Turkey .
 Turkish authorities have used their economic leverage to get a deal on terms favourable to Ankara on export-driven segments of the Turkish economy . The countries started negotiations to establish a free trade area.
 Ukraine and Turkey have been cooperating intensively on the military level . It is important to note that the two countries have been working intensively .
 Ukrainian market has been increasingly attractive for Turkey . Ankara aspires to become a leading global arms exporter .
 Ukraine won tender to modernise Turkish MI-17 helicopters, bought Turkish communication systems . Ukraine also declared its intention to buy Turkish strike drones .
 Both countries also participate in joint NATO military drills in the Black Sea . Both countries are part of the NATO military exercises .
Energy cooperation between the two countries has been more complicated because their interests often do not overlap .
 Turkey entered the Turkish Stream agreement with Russia, which will make it easier for Moscow to bypass Ukraine in gas transit . Turkey is dependent on energy exports .
 Ukrainian authorities may have been seeking a way to import Qatari LNG in partnership with Turkey . The readout mentioned trilateral energy opportunities with Qatar .
 Turkey’s president has played an important role as mediator in the Russia-Ukraine war . Turkey's president has also played a key role in the conflict in Ukraine .
 Turkey has supported the idea to deploy a UN peacekeeping mission in eastern Ukraine . Turkey has declared its intention to take part in the mission .
 Russia has been in possession of its own leverage on Turkey, which Moscow may use to restrain the Turkey-Ukraine partnership . Russia may use Turkey's gas deliveries to Turkey and the 53 Russian military presence in Syria .
 Ankara has opposed the creation of a permanent NATO naval mission in the region . This likely explains why Turkey’s political criticism of Russia has not been well articulated .
 China perceives its relations with Ukraine through the prism of economic benefits . China's relationship with Ukraine is similar to that of Turkey, like Turkey's .
 Kyiv has featured prominently on the Chinese radar as an important food producer and source of military technology . Kyiv is a major food producer for the Chinese military . It is also an important source ofmilitary technology .
 Bilateral trade had grown by 60% since 2015 and reached $9. billion in 2017 . Beijing ranked as Ukraine’s third-largest trading partner, behind the EU and Russia .
 Cooperation, however, remains far below its potential, and there are at least two reasons for that .
 China has taken a rather cautious approach to Ukraine, given its previous negative experience with the corrupt Yanukovych regime . China has also taken a more cautious approach towards Ukraine .
 China has managed to take advantage of disrupted Ukrainian-Russian economic relations . Beijing’s engagement has been significantly lower than that of the EU and Russia .
 Ukrainian authorities have been relatively eager to accept Chinese loans . But the Chinese loans come without reform strings attached. So far, Ukrainian authorities are relatively eager.
 President Poroshenko and Chinese leader Xi Jinping have met only once, on the margins of the Nuclear Security Forum .
 Ukraine’s proposal to join the ‘16+1’ format did not materialise, and China underlined that the cooperation between the two was to be within the BRI only .
 Chinese proposals to establish a free trade zone and visa-free travel with Ukraine did not gain traction owing to Ukrainian authorities’ reservations . Ukrainian authorities' reservations.
 China took an ambiguous approach to Russia’s aggression against Ukraine . China took a more ambiguous approach.
 Beijing has not recognised the annexation of Crimea, yet voted against a 2017 UN General Assembly resolution declaring Russia an occupying power on the peninsula . Chinese enterprises continue to do business in Crimea .
 Kyiv would likely welcome closer ties with China regardless, but Beijing considers Ukraine to be part of Russia’s sphere of interest .
 The current dynamics in Ukrainian-Chinese relations have made some of Ukraine’s foreign partners uneasy . The U.S. and Japan consider it a contribution to Beijing's growing military posture . Still, the current dynamics are still unclear .
 Many projects still in place, including the joint construction of two Antonov An-225 aircraft in China .
 CONCLUSIONS based on the circumstances, areas of limited statehood and contested orders interact with each other in different ways .
 The research conducted for the purpose of the following paper has proven that order contestation in Ukraine by a third party, namely Russian Federation, escalated and created areas of limited statehood on Ukrainian territory .
 Russia contested the Western-led security order and took advantage of weak spots in Ukraine, turning them into fault lines in battle over influence .
 Russia now seeks to play the “normal’s role of an external actor in order to build back state capacity in those areas . Russia has created areas of limited statehood within the territory of Ukraine .
 Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has already brought about a temporary 56 governance breakdown as well as territorially limited violent conflict in the EU eastern neighbourhood . It means a direct threat to EU security.
 The tipping point was the Russian military incursion into Ukrainian territory in 2014 . The Russian militaryincursion into Ukraine in 2014 was the tipping point .
 Authors argue that it is impossible to analyse existing areas of limited statehood and contested orders in the EU’s eastern neighbourhood in isolation from the prior involvement of external actors .
 The research conducted by the authors has allowed verifying positively the four hypotheses contained in the introduction of the new study . The research was carried out by the Authors of the study .
 First, areas of limited statehood in Ukraine are largely the result of order contestation by the Russian Federation rather than domestic vulnerabilities .
 Russia annexed Crimea and took control of some parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . Internal problems, such as weak institutions, made it easier for Russia to annex Crimea .
 Russia's use of force by Russia has brought about the violent conflict . Still, these by themselves have not amounted to a critical threat to the country, rather it was the use of Force by Russia .
 The biggest risks and threats to Ukraine’s security are of a military nature and related to the ongoing Russian aggression. Second, as of now, the biggest risks are of the military nature .
 Russia has gained a durable instrument to destabilise Ukraine from within . By securing control over part of Ukrainian territory, Russia is gaining control over parts of Ukraine .
 Moscow possesses the capacity to launch a new military offensive at short notice . Ukraine is still not ready to repel a full-scale Russian invasion on its own . Moscow will not be prepared to do so in the short-to-medium term .
 Third, since 2014, Ukraine has been steadily strengthening the country’s resilience, especially in the institutional sphere . Ukraine has seen a rise in resilience in recent years .
 Ukrainian authorities have started an ambitious and comprehensive reform process to build strong state institutions and strengthen the state’s capacity . The Ukrainian authorities are working on a 57-year-old reform process .
On several occasions, the pace of reform has slowed, given the financial interests of political and business elites . On several times, reform has been slowed, but the pace has been slower .
 Volodymyr Zelensky's election may constitute a turning point in this respect and lead to increase in the level of trust in the president .
 Fourth, a decisive role in either strengthening or weakening Ukraine’s resilience is played by external actors, especially NATO and Russia . The Ukraine's resilience is a key factor in its resilience .
 The former has significantly contributed to the state-building process in Ukraine since 2014 . The latter has been the main source of instability in Ukraine, repeatedly violating its territorial integrity .
 Operationalisation of the conceptual framework for analysing ALC/CO in the EU’s surroundings .
 Dysfunctional Institutions, Social Trust, and Governance in Areas of Limited Statehood. Dysfunctional institutions, social trust, and Social Trust are among them .
 Fostering Resilience in Areas of Limited Statehood and Contested Orders . Fostered Resiliences in areas of limited statehood and.
 The International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, & Centre of Policy and Legal Reforms, is based in New York .
 Far-right vigilantes imposing ‘Ukrainian order’ are strange partners for Ukraine’s National Police .
 Turkey's Foreign Policy Towards its Post-Soviet Black Sea Neighbourhood. Turkey’s Foreign Policy towards its post-Soviet black sea neighbourhood .
 Ukrainian losses as a result of the Russian temporary occupation of Crimea and its military aggression in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Ukrainian losses and costs are as result of Russia's military 60 aggression.
 Prospects for Settling the Dispute over the Rights of the Hungarian Minority in Ukraine are being discussed .
 Ukraine's Motor Sich aerospace enterprise attracts renewed Chinese interest . Ukraine’s Motor SICH aerospace enterprise attracted renewed Chineseinterest .
 Monitoring of process of decentralisation of power and local self-government reform as of 10 March 2019 .
Situation of human rights in the temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol 2014-2017 .
 Riven’s doviry do suspil’nykh instytutiv ta elektoral’ni oriyentaciyi hromadian Ukrayiny . Riven' dovir’n’tutiv
 Crimean Tatar Leader says Turkey’s Erdogan Promised ‘To Talk To Putin’ Regarding Ukrainians Jailed In Russia .
 Blocked Chinese takeover of Ukrainian aerospace firm no closer to being resolved .
 Senior Officials Urge Steps to Make Eastern Ukraine Ceasefire Irreversible . Telling Security Council Minsk Accords remain Largely Unimplemented .
 Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . Thesis submits to the Graduate school of Arts.