 The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin and the leaders of the West continue to hide the true nature of the three-year military aggression of Russia against Ukraine .
 From terrorist acts in the world killed far less people than the war in the Donbass, says the BBC .
 Thirty years of conflict in Northern Ireland killed 3,000 soldiers, police, terrorists and civilians .
 It allows him and his oligarchic allies to continue to earn on the illicit trade in so-called DPR, LPR and the occupied Crimea .
 President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Groisman justify their unwillingness to carry out reforms, they say . They say they will continue their own corrupt practices .
 The latest report from Vox Ukraine has shown a complete lack of progress in any reform during the past month . Ukraine ranked fifth from last among the 15 former republics of the Soviet Union .
 The state of anti-terrorist operation allows the President to avoid the need to develop military strategy . President plans to return control of Crimea and occupied territories of Donbass .
Thirdly, it gives the SBU control over the fighting of Ukraine is corrupt and nedokomplekta institution . Thirdly, the SBu control over fighting is corrupt, and it gives it control of the fighting .
 Britain with a population 20 million bigger than in Ukraine, has 6 thousand employees of the intelligence services . Ukraine has 34 thousand employees, while Britain has 6,000 employees of intelligence services.
 Westerners, in turn, use the term “ATO, but not the war, because it allows them to step back from the conflict and do nothing to resolve it .
 The West cannot provide Ukraine with defensive armament and with the expected implementation of the Minsk agreements, according to their official position .
 Poroshenko could hold a referendum on joining NATO at any time during the three years of his presidency . Poroshenko has been in power for three years .
 Putin this terminology gives him an opportunity to get everything at once, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Minsk agreement and the substitution of war “ATO’s turn a blind eye to Russian occupation of Crimea . Russia to avoid legal responsibility for the occupation of the territories of Donbass .
 Putin gave complete control of Russia for economic, financial and security aspects of the DNI, LC . After the signing of the Minsk-1, Putin gave full control of the Russian government . The DNI was grossly violating the document they signed .
 Poroshenko calls the conflict in the Donbas, a Russian-Ukrainian war, and to consolidate the territories of the DNI, LC status occupied by Russia . The reluctance Poroshenko called the conflict, a Russia-Ukraine war, has negative consequences .
First, it demonstrates once again that politicians are insincere with their own citizens and don’t respect them .
 According to survey results, vast majority of Ukrainians believe their country is at war with Russia .
 As most know that on the territory of Ukraine are Russian occupying forces . The Ukrainian territory is occupied by Russian forces .
 The substitution of the war on the ATO gives a false sense of detachment from the terrible conflict that takes place in the plant and along the line of contact in Donbas . The second negative consequence is that the substitution gives afalse sense of detached from the conflict .
 Walking on Kiev, it is impossible to realize that the war in the country is in Ukraine .
 The PACE and the international criminal court referred to the conflict that is happening in the Donbass war . The conflict is being fought in the region of Donbass .
 Putin lies about the ‘civil war’ and the absence of Russian troops on Ukrainian soil . Putin lies on the “civil war,’s absence of Russia troops on Ukraine soil.
 It is necessary to call the conflict a war, not “ATO, and enter the military situation in the conflict zone’s conflict zone . It is also necessary to enter the war zone, and call it a war.
 President Poroshenko has to declare that he had no confidence in the fact that the Russian President will once interested in the implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 Western experts have long noted that the Minsk process should be to admit failure . Former employee of U.S. state Department David Kramer says Minsk should admit failure. He says the process should have been more transparent .
 Ukraine has no right to trade with the invaders of her land . In the end, it is necessary to act according to conscience and cease all trade with Crimea and the DNI, LC .
 The first is to finally tell the truth about the Russian-Ukrainian war and implement the four steps . The four steps are to end the war in Russia .
 Second — to hold early presidential elections, allowing another leader to show courage inherent in soldiers and volunteers on the front lines . Third — to be a candidate for the White House . Third – to hold presidential elections .
 It’s time to declare publicly inside and outside of Ukraine that Russia is fighting with Ukraine .