 Turkey is now a dictatorship, in which no independent journalists are any longer permitted . The most reliable reporting about Turkey is coming from outside .
 The situation in Turkey keeps getting worse. According to this Syrian report, the situation is getting worse .
 The decline in the currency has impacted every citizen’s buying power . Private debt is out of control, the tourism sector is in free-fall, the government says .
 Turkey’s annual growth rate has already slowed. Because of increasing pressures on the central bank and political storms, it has slowed .
Without Erdogan in power for Turkey to serve as the transit route into Syria for jihadists and American weapons for those ‘rebels’ as well as by Turkey’s sale of Syrian oil stolen by ISIS, there’'s little hope to oust Assad .
 The former CIA officer, now turncoat against the U.S. regime, Philip Giraldi, headlined in The American Conservative magazine, back in December 2011 .
 Turkey takes the lead as U.S. proxy in Syrian conflict, reports say .
 Ankara’s foreign minister, Ahmet Davitoglu, has openly admitted that his country is prepared to invade as soon as there is agreement among the Western allies to do so .
 The intervention would be based on humanitarian principles, based on the 'responsibility to protect' doctrine . Libya was invoked to justify Libya .
 No qualms were expressed at this being oil which was stolen from Syria, marketed by Turkey .
 The Syrian people weren’t just being slaughtered, they were being robbed, the Western alliance says . The people weren't just being killed; they were robbed, by the West .
 All of them were allies together, to overthrow Assad, an ally of Russia . All of the allies were allies in the overthrow of Assad .
 In 1957, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy sat on a secret committee charged with investigating CIA’s clandestine mischief in the Mid-East .
Bruce Lovett Report described CIA coup plots in Jordan, Syria, Iran, Iraq and Egypt . The so called ‘Bruce Lovetto Report’ was a signatory .
All post-Soviet Ukrainian leaders have been corrupt, but they didn't mention that they were corrupt . One ‘justification’ was that he was corrupt, one said. Another said he was not corrupt .
 Russia supplied protection for Crimeans to be able to hold a plebiscite on 16 March 2014 in order to exercise their right of self-determination on whether to accept rule by the new Ukrainian coup-regime or to regain membership in the Russian Federation .
 Saddam Hussein, Muammar Gaddafi, Bashar al-Assad, Viktor Yanukovych and Vladimir Putin have been demonized in the West . George W Bush and Barack Obama are among the targets of the West, but not the worst .
 Obama still retains the example of Crimea as symbolizing a thus-far-successful excuse for economic sanctions against Russia, and perhaps for an invasion of Russia .