 The term ‘revolution’ has perhaps never been misused as frequently in the mainstream media as over the past few years .
 No longer does it refer to a vast social upheaval of the oppressed and exploited masses against a oppressive regime . No longer refers to a huge social upheaval.
 U.S. government agencies are now used to describe movements funded by government agencies to replace governments which have fallen into disfavour with United States puppets .
Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovich suffered from a fatal flaw . Yanukovich had been democratically elected, but suffered from the flaw .
 His wing of the bourgeoisie tried to perform a balancing act between Russia and the European Union . While the opposition was intent on bringing Ukraine firmly into the orbit of the EU – and of the US, including NATO membership .
 U.S. National Endowment Fund for Democracy poured funds into Svoboda party . Neither this reality nor the involvement of the fascist party did anything to dim the enthusiasm of petit bourgeois leftists in Western Europe .
 SARU organised a protest against Ukrainian fascist Andriy Parubiy who was in Britain to meet the Minister for Europe David Lidington .
 The racist British government has no qualms about meeting with fascist politicians .
 In the year since the February 2014 coup against President Yanukovych over 6,000 Ukrainians have been killed in battle, 15,000 wounded and more than one million people displaced . More than 1 million people have been displaced by the coup .
 The second Minsk ceasefire agreement between Ukraine’s government and its opponents in the south east of the country came into effect on 14 February 2015 . The second agreement between the government and the opponents was signed in February 2015.
 The United States and NATO are using Ukraine to target the Russian state . However, the U.S. and NATO continue to provoke conflict .
 To justify the ongoing war on the Donbass and aggression towards Russia, the Ukrainian ruling class and its imperialist backers have taken to rewriting history . To justify this, the Ukraine ruling class has taken to rewrite history .
Almost 4,000 people rallied in Kiev to celebrate Nazi collaborator Stepan Bandera as a ‘national hero’ In his 8 January speech in Berlin, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk recast Nazi Germany as the victim of ‘Soviet invasion’
 Kiev's pretences to a ‘ceasefire’ collapsed as it resumed massive shelling of the People’s Republic of Donetsk . Rejects Russian plan for removal of heavy artillery from eastern Ukraine .
 Kiev’s strategy has cost more than 5,000 lives and involved the use of cluster bombs, missiles and aerial bombs on towns and villages in the Donbass .
 Justification is sought in an ‘anti-terror operation’ against alleged ‘Russian aggression’ Yet after a year of conflict there remains no solid evidence for Russian military operations whatsoever .
 The imperialist countries remain silent on Kiev’s atrocities, instead offering it financial and military support .
 Kiev's snap parliamentary election called by the Kiev government on 26 October could not be greater . The contrasts with the snap election called on October 26 could not been greater .
 Official accounts placed turnout at 52%, a historic low, for an election marked by ballot stuffing, voter intimidation and violent repression of opposition groups .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk's People's Front party gained 22.14% of the vote and the President's Petro Poroshenko Block took 21.82%. Four of the five other parties meeting the 5% threshold to enter the Rada are openly fascist .
 The announcement of a ceasefire between the Ukrainian military and the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic on 5 September 2014 is a reflection of the utter failure of the Kiev government to crush opposition . More than 3,000 people dead, 6,000 wounded and over
The imperialists and their Ukrainian allies are now forced to reconsider their tactical approach . The imperialists have now been forced to rethink their tactics .
 Events following the tragic crash of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 in eastern Ukraine have exposed the cynical depths to which the U.S. and its allies will sink to exploit disaster for political ends .
 President Obama blamed the tragedy on soldiers of the Donetsk People’s Republic, who allegedly downed the plane with a missile .
 The claims have resonated most loudly in Washington, London, Canberra and Kiev . These claims have been heard most loudly.
 The Independent proclaims an ‘increasingly compelling’ case against the DNR, citing heavily-edited, unverified and contradictory footage from right-wing bloggers and Kiev’s secret service, as though they were proven fact .
 Ukraine is being pushed into chaos by the interim government and its NATO commanders . The interim government has been pushing Ukraine into chaos .
 Dozens of U.S. agents have been installed in Kiev to advise the interim government and direct its forces .
 fascist gangs have been recruited to the National Guard and put in government uniforms . The police and army have proved unreliable when directed to attack opposition forces in eastern Ukraine .
 Private security contractors, previously deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan, have been hired .
 Crimea and Sevastopol are incorporated into the Russian Federation . Russia's rulers have demonstrated they intend to halt U.S. encroachment into the territories of the former Soviet Union .
 A referendum was held in Crimea on 16 March to decide on the region’s future . Of these over 96% voted for unification with Russia .
 Hague accuses Russia of acting without respect for international law and of conducting a ‘land grab’ in Crimea . Hague accused Russia of conducting 'land grab' in Crimea in Crimea.
 The states that accuse Russia of occupying Crimea intend to take over Ukraine. The states accused Russia of taking over Crimea are in Ukraine .
 Lenin said that imperialism ushers in an era of wars and revolution this now has substance – menacingly so . He said that in the era of war and revolution, imperialism has substance .
 The deployment of Russian troops in Crimea and battleships off Crimea’s coast signals that the Russian ruling class views the 23 February coup in the Ukraine to be a strategic threat .
 United States strategy is to weaken Russia’s central state and fragment Russia . U.S. strategy: To weaken Russia's central state.
 U.S. wants to remove Russia’s naval base from Sevastopol in Crimea, break Russian military ties to industries in eastern Ukraine . The United States also wants to station NATO missiles on Ukrainian territory .
 Russian parliament voted unanimously on 1 March 2014 to deploy Russian troops in Ukraine . Russia’s rulers showed their intention to resist and reverse the United States encroachment into the former Soviet Union .
 US Secretary of State Powell, British Foreign Secretary Straw and European Commission President Barroso swiftly took the side of the demonstrators in Kiev .
 The U.S. did not accept the results of the election and warned of the consequences if the Ukrainian government did not act quickly .
 Russian president Putin congratulated Yanukovych before the results were announced .
 Powell visited the Ukraine during the election campaign and Putin visited twice to support Yanukovych . Powell visited Ukraine during election campaign .
 The Supreme Court has suspended the result of the election. As we go to press, the Supreme Court suspends the result .
 Yuschenko is a former head of the National Bank of Ukraine . His associates include those who benefited from privatisation of Ukraine’s industry .
 Yuschenko wants closer ties with the European Union and an open market economy . Yuschenko says he wants closer relations with the EU and open markets .
 Yanukovych seeks closer relations with Russia and received strong support from Ukraine’s Russian population, located mainly in east of the country .
 Russia stopped supplying gas to Ukraine on 1 January and a week later stopped all supplies to Europe passing through Ukraine .
 Russia accused Ukraine of stealing gas intended for other European countries . Russia accused the country of stealing the gas intended to be used in Europe .
 Supplies resumed on 20 January when the Ukrainian government agreed to pay a higher price for the energy . The Ukrainian government agrees to pay the higher price.
 About one fifth of the European Union's gas supplies are piped from Russia across the Ukraine .
 Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Romania, Romania and Croatia were particularly hit by the shut down . In the midst of freezing temperatures, the Slovakian Republic was particularly hit .
 Slovakia declared a state of ‘energy emergency’ and the French Peugeot-Citroen car factory was closed . Slovakia declared state of 'energy emergency' and French car factory closed .
 Britain does not import gas from Russia and so bombast was a luxury he could afford . Britain doesn't import gas.