 Vladimir Putin incensed that Turkey had the audacity to shoot down a Russian warplane flying in Turkish airspace . Putin has called Turkey a terrorist accomplice .
 Putin demands an apology and compensation at the very least, though he's apparently not responding to calls from Erdogan himself .
 Turkey is one of Russia's top tourist destinations . In the meantime Russia's Prime Minister Medvedev is proposing retaliatory measures .
 Russia has deployed its most advanced surface-to-air S-400 anti-aircraft missile system to Turkey-Syria border . The tension is palpable and frightening, particularly since Russia just decided to deploy the system .
 Russia has already amassed in Syria since September . That's in addition to the air-to-ground assault aircraft, attack helicopters, drones, air defense systems, ground assets and military personnel .
 Turkish and Russian foreign ministers have been less blunt, saying their countries don’t want war .
 The answer lies in Ukraine, the epicenter of Russia's unresolved bitterness of the Soviet Union’s fate since the end of the Cold War .
 The tensions between Russia and the West entered its heightened stage as a result of Russia’s intervention in Ukraine almost two years ago .
 Yanukovych’s flip-flop – moving toward Europe, then moving back toward Russia – felt like a stab in the back and a retreat to Ukrainians .
 They were already poised to become more integrated with Europe, finally on the brink of aligning with European values and moving beyond their Soviet legacy . They were so excited that they were already ready to becoming more integrated.
 Ukraine quickly formed a temporary government and began the painstaking work of putting the country on its long-awaited track toward Europe . The country is now in its first step toward Europe.
 Russia’s state-run media, particularly on influential Russian TV, kicked into high gear denouncing the protests as the work of violent neo-Nazi fascists and nationalist thugs backed by the U.S. Even calling the temporary government a CIA backed coup d’état .
 Russia's war of words escalated to a fever pitch on Russia's propaganda outlet ‘RT’ aimed at foreign audiences . Russia’s war of Words escalated to an fever pitch not only inside Russia but abroad .
 Russia used its international media resources to spread a false narrative in order to undermine the fledging new Ukraine . To counter the defeat of Russian policy in Ukraine, Russia used the international media to spread the false narrative .
 The war of words was a critical prelude to an even more critical series of events . In fact the war of Words was acritical prelude.
 Russia up to this point was Ukraine’s ostensible friend and strongest ally . Russia was Ukraine's ostensible ally .
 Russia's Black Sea naval fleet was based in Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula . Russian troops by the thousands began to descend into the peninsula .
 A stunned international community responded by imposing economic sanctions on Russia . The sanctions were imposed by the Russian government .
 Russian special forces crossed its border into Ukraine's Russian-speaking eastern industrial heartland known as the Donbas .
 Russian TV was declaring an insurgency and separatist states in Donetsk and Luhansk . It favored closer ties not to the new government in Kyiv, but to Russia, who else, Russia .
 Despite peace accords and ceasefires, deaths have surpassed 8000, injuries 3 times that . The toll is 3 times the number of injuries that have been caused by violence .
 Villages have been leveled, civilians spent their days and nights in dank basements, hungry, scared and confused .
International organizations confirm that eastern Ukraine is suffering a humanitarian crisis . International organizations confirm the crisis .
 The majority of the fighting has stopped, but people continue to live under dreadful conditions of war .
 Russia's war of words against Ukraine hasn't stopped, but it's less in the media foreground since Putin decided unilaterally to intervene in Syria’s civil war in September .
 Putin spoke at the UN of the need for a new coalition to fight terrorism in the Middle East . He called the West's present one ineffective and illegitimate .
 Putin's move into Syria is strategic and meant to shore up Russia as a power player on the world's stage . Putin’s move in Syria is a strategic move to shore-up Russia.
 The more the West accepts Russia’s help, the more likely Putin knows the West shifts its focus away from Ukraine . The more likely Western sanctions against Russia will be dropped in exchange for cooperation in Syria .
 He has announced in a press conference this evening an agreement to share military intelligence with Russia . He has already announced in the press conference that he will share intelligence with the country .
 This is a big step, though it’s unclear where it will lead, to more war or less . It's unclear where the war will lead to more terrorism or less, or less.
 Putin has made clear that those fighting Assad, even those supported by the U.S. and the West must be destroyed .
 “terrorist’ and “terrorism’ are powerful and malleable words, defined differently by different world players . As we’ve seen, “ terrorist’s and ‘terrorism” are powerful, malleABLE words, we've seen .
 In Ukraine, Russians helping to arm separatists and occupying Ukraine’s eastern regions are the terrorists, says CNN.com .
 In Turkey, Kurds who want more autonomy and freedom are the terrorists, says the Turkish government . "Kurders who want to be free are terrorists"
 In Syria, rebels opposing Assad’s brutal rule that has killed over 200,000 civilians are the terrorists .
 In the United States and France, it's al Qaeda and ISIL groups who have struck civilians in the West who are the terrorists to fight .
 It would seem a no-brainer for world leaders to unite against terrorism, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Donald Trump and Ben Carson only see this simplistic picture . Many people in the U.S. only see it .
 There are significant questions and problems beyond the level of word definitions . But there are significant problems and questions beyond the levels of words .
 The uncomfortable truth is, we can’t simply take leaders like Putin at their word, says David Frum .
 Putin has claimed Russia is fighting ISIL, but the bombs are overwhelmingly striking others on the ground in Syria .
 One of Russia's warplanes was shot down by Turkey in the first place . It was Russia's targeting of Turkmen in Syria's northern border with Turkey .
 Putin will indeed turn his focus to the same terrorists we consider terrorists. And perhaps Putin will also focus his focus on terrorists .
We are not on the brink of war but on the verge of an urgently needed united front that will turn back the tide of the horrific and ungodly ISIL terrorists . Perhaps we are not in war but we are in need of a united front.
 Putin's words may be just another instance of the brinksmanship that has so thoroughly flummoxed the West since Russia marched into Ukraine . Putin’s untrustworthiness on the world stage thus far, and his willingness to use aggression to insist Russia be recognized as a major