 The release of the money was confirmed Friday in a statement posted by the Ukrainian Embassy in Washington . The money was released by the embassy in Washington.
 The funding will provide equipment to support ongoing training programs and operational needs . The official said the equipment will include counter-artillery and counter-mortar radars, high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicles, night vision devices, and electronic warfare detection .
 The newly released money was part of the United States defense budget . It was contingent on Ukraine passing a series of defense reforms to help bring the country's defense practices into line with modern standards and practices .
 The Trump administration decided that Ukraine’s passage of a new national security law, signed by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko on July 5, met the requirements enshrined in the U.S. legislation . The Pentagon was able to release the funds .
 Full implementation of the Ukrainian law “will further deepen Ukraine’s Western integration,’ State Department spokesperson Heather Nauert said .
 The United States has provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in security assistance since 2014 . The U.S. has sought to bolster the country’s military which is facing an ongoing conflict with separatists .
 Trump administration ruled out the possibility of supporting a referendum on the future Eastern Ukraine . Eastern Ukraine is under the control of armed groups backed by Moscow .
 A so-called referendum in a part of Ukraine which is not under government control would have no legitimacy, he said .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry slammed the exercise, calling it “another attempt to provoke tension in the region’s region.
 Hundreds of U.S. National Guardsmen are in western Ukraine as part of an effort aimed at training and mentoring Ukrainian army units .
 NATO leaders met in Brussels, Belgium, last week . Russia invaded and annexed Crimea in 2014 . The move was criticized by NATO leaders following their summit .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense says it is ready for the “implementation of the agreements reached between Russian President Vladimir Putin and U.S. President Donald Trump’s Monday meeting in Helsinki .
 The Russian military “is ready to intensify contacts with the U.S. colleagues in the General Staff,’s spokesman says . Russia is ready to discuss the extension of the START treaty, cooperation in Syria, he says .
 James Mattis is open to talks with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, a U.S. defense official says . There are currently no plans for such a conversation .