 Sentsov was arrested in Crimea due to his involvement in the 2014 Revolution of Dignity and protest against the illegal annexation of Crimea . A Russian court sentenced him to 20 years on alleged terrorist charges .
 Sentsov demands that Russia release the other 70+ Ukrainian and Crimean political prisoners . Sentsov calls for Russia to release more prisoners .
 Ukraine along with other post-Soviet states became independent in 1991 . The country has seen several waves of “people power” revolutions seeking to push the country westward .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych turned away from a landmark accord with the European Union to sign more deals with Putin instead . A decade later, Ukrainians took to the streets again to protest then President Yanukovych’s decision.
 The Orange Revolution was an electoral revolution . Ukrainians wanted a fair election, and they succeeded in insisting on one . The Orange revolution was an election revolution .
 Russian special forces were already on the move to occupy Crimea . By then, Russia had already been in control of Crimea .
 shooting war in eastern Ukraine started in April 2014, starting in April 2013 . They then continued to move in to eastern Ukraine, starting a shooting war that continues to the present .
 Crimea was nearly bloodless, but a shooting war has affected the region known as Donbas for more than four years . Two major cities, Donetsk and Luhansk, have been affected by the conflict .
 The majority of IDPs moved to nearby Ukrainian urban centers, such as Kharkhiv, Dnipro, and Zaporhyzhya . Many resettled further away, in Kyiv, Odessa, and Lviv .
 Katerina Brukhanova, the deputy head of the Association of IDPs and a Crimean refugee herself, stated that the more accurate number would be 2 million IDPs currently within Ukraine .
 66% of IDPs in Ukraine are women, according to Natalia Karabowska, the Director on Strategic Development at the Ukrainian Women's Fund .
 Children still close enough to the active frontline fall asleep to the noise of shells being dropped on their homes .
 Parents have to completely uproot their lives and jobs and move to new areas that may not have available job opportunities . Parents must move to areas where they can't find jobs or opportunities .
 IDP children are given first priority when it comes to daycares and kindergartens . Some local families whose children are now on waitlists for children .
 It is difficult for families who do not have connections in other cities to integrate . When they relocate, it is hard for families to integrate.
 Katerina Brukhanova, head of the Association for IDPs in Ukraine, says many return to the conflict zone just after three months .
 Those who are not able to find a job with sufficient income run out of their savings . Some return to the eastern conflict zone and occupied territories .
 Many Crimean human rights activists involved in the EuroMaidan Revolution had to flee Crimea for their safety or face persecution and imprisonment like Sentsov .
 The estimated 50,000 Crimean IDPs and refugees first struggled with integration issues after Russia’s occupation and annexation in 2014 . They formed groups and organizations to help them find their way as well .
 Crimea-native Katerina Brukhanova became the head of the Association for IDPs in Ukraine .
Ukrainian Crimeans created organizations to help Ukrainians suffering the same displacement . After relocating from Sevastopl to Kyiv, she and her fellow Crimeans set up organizations to assist Ukrainians .
 International Organization for Migration Ukraine’s Chief of Mission, Dr. Dr. Ukraine. Ukraine's chief of mission, Dr., says he is a member of the U.S. National Migration Council .
 3. million conflict-affected people in Ukraine require humanitarian assistance, says Thomas Lothar Weiss . Over 3 million people need humanitarian assistance in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is facing the biggest displacement crisis in Europe since the Balkan Wars in the 1990s . The country is facing a huge displacement crisis since the Balkans Wars .
 Organizations like Katerina’s, the Association of IDPs, DonbasSOS and CrimeaSOS give IDPs a voice in helping address the integration process even as they hope to return home one day .