 Tatiana Zhurzhenko Russia's never−ending war against "fascism" is a conflict of historical master narratives . The fight for hegemony in Europe continues −− disguised as a conflict.
 The sixtieth anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany turned into a loyalty test for the politicians of neighbouring countries .
 The war in Donbas was provoked and supported by Moscow . It has been narrated in Russia as a war against Ukrainian ""fascism" that threatens Russians in Ukraine .
 The tank they used against the Ukrainian army had been taken down from the plinth of a local war memorial . The tank was repaired and refuelled .
In post-Cold War Europe, the politics of memory has often been about geopolitics . In post-cold war Europe, geopolitics of memory is often about politics .
 The decision provoked unprecedented riots among the local Russian population, which Moscow was happy to fuel . This decision sparked unprecedented riots.
 The conflict had far reaching consequences for Russian−Estonian relations . It gave rise to a number of new phenomena in the post−Soviet space, including cyber wars .
Local opponents of Yushchenko dubbed his rule an article from www.eurozine.com 2/6 .
 The conflict in and around Ukraine has thus become an article from www.eurozine.com 3/6 .
 The new quality of memory politics of 2014−15 is not particularly surprising . Taking into account the "memory wars" of the last decade, the developments are not surprising .
 A new phenomenon that goes beyond the usual instrumentalization of the past, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Accusing the West of silent support for neo−Nazism is part of a rhetoric that has its roots in the anti-Western propaganda of the Soviet era .
 " Reflecting on Competition and Conflict in European Memory"""", 15−16 December 2014, Vienna, Vienna .
 Anders Fogh Rasmussen, "A war of values with Russia" is published at www.project−syndicate.org .
 Beton International 2, no. 2015 8 Maxim Kantor, "Empire inside out" Novaya Gazeta, "The Empire inside out," is the latest in a series of popular TV shows .