 Anton Gerashschenko, MP and adviser to Interior Minister Arsen Avakov, used his Facebook page to announce publication of a list of email addresses and personal phone numbers belonging to 7,000 media workers .
 These journalists were said to have “collaborated with the terrorists’ following the outbreak of war in eastern Ukraine in 2014 .
 The Donbas is a rebel-controlled territory in the Donbas . It has been ruled out by rebel authorities for years .
 Many Ukrainians share a deep mistrust towards the Fourth Estate shared by many Ukrainians . This is an unfortunate consequence of the propaganda that surrounds the ‘hybrid war’ in Donbas, Ukraine .
 Opinion makers and internet commentators were quick to dub the people on the list ‘traitors’ as soon as the Myrotvorets scandal erupted, suggesting that they should be exposed .
 The majority of outraged patriots emphasise the public importance of information concerning who is collaborating with the enemy .
 According to this logic, every concerned Ukrainian should be able to access this information . According to the logic, all Ukrainian should have access to the information .
 U.S. Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt mentioned Simon Ostrovsky and Clarissa Ward, foreign correspondents kidnapped in Donbas during their assignments .
 OSCE and Reporters Without Borders have also issued statements expressing their concerns for journalists’ security . OSCE has also released statements expressing concern for journalists' security .
 Iryna Chulivska, an expert at Ukraine's Institute for Mass Information, says journalists’ safety is the biggest concern here .
 The accreditations in DPR were issued to journalists, fixers, video operators, translators, and photographers from Ukraine and Russia . The accreditation was also issued to other countries as well .
As Ukraine is not the hottest topic in the foreign media anymore, journalists often come here in their own initiative and at their own risk .
After being accused of helping ‘the terrorists’ in the ‘People’s Republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk, they might have second thoughts about coming here .
 For Ukrainian journalists, the situation will also get worse, reasons Chulivska will also be worse .
 Some journalists have started receiving anonymous threats at home . Not to mention the anonymous threats some journalists have begun receiving .
 Pyatt also addressed Arsen Avakov, Gerashchenko’s boss at the Interior Ministry, in the hope that the interior minister would condemn this leak . Pyatt was also addressed by the Interior Minister of Ukraine .
 For supporters of Myrotvorets, sending a journalist to the frontline is not an issue of security . For supporters, it is a matter of morality, not a security issue .
 Vitaly Portnikov, a leading Ukrainian television journalist, argues that he could not imagine an Israeli journalist getting accreditation for Gaza . He says a Ukrainian journalist doing so in the "People's Republic of Donetsk" is a hypocrite .
 Portnikov: This kind of accreditation isn’t a safeguard for a journalist, it is treason . Portnikov told Radio Liberty, it's treason .
 Butusov, Portnikov and other ‘patriotic journalists’ are satisfied without any journalists entering contested territory . They claim that official messages from the state’s army and security, as well as rumours from people fleeing the war, are enough for them .
 This isn't the first time a heated discussion has emerged over journalists’ ethics and propaganda in Ukraine. This isn’t the first. This is not the first .
 Stanko was the first to raise the issue of the Myrotvorets leak in 2015 . She found herself at the wrong end of popular resentment .
 A deputy minister initiated a lawsuit against Myrotvorets after a deputy minister filed a lawsuit . Right Sector and C14, two far-right groups, were behind the lawsuit .
 One publication was an update of the original list, and another was the list of journalists accredited in Russia . One publication is an update.
 The public significance of the latter publication, which was taken down shortly after, is unclear . However, it certainly played its role in polarising attitudes further .
 Ukraine’s “ultra-patriotic’ far-right have shown little interest in the Myrotvorets leak . They seem to be preoccupied with the upcoming LGBT+ pride march in Kyiv, where they would very much like to repeat last year
 Maidan emerged as a protest against a government that many perceived as a direct descendant of communist rule . Maidan has been described by many as a 'communist' government .
 The communists had little chance of finding a place in the Maidan’s ranks . anarchists and other far-left activists had been driven away along with them .
 Both groups have since found their place in post-Maidan activism . But they are not the major players here . Both groups are not major players in the UK .
 Maidan's public could be divided into two loosely-defined categories . Caught between these two extremes, Maidan’s public could have been divided between these extremes .
 There were “professional patriots’, members of the Ukrainian intelligentsia working at various state cultural institutions, as well as the patriotic element of the artistic world .
 These people were the ‘newly-initiated’ activists who provided the “mass’ for the mass protest. These people are the ’s newly- initiated activists.
 It is hard to single out a typical “neophyte, as they all come from different social backgrounds .
 urban office workers and small business owners have rediscovered and reshaped political and civil activism .
 Powerful movements of “volunteers’ have emerged largely thanks to this constituency . People donate money and buy equipment for army units, bypassing the often cumbersome logistics of the state .
 Maidan's newcomers are dedicated to European integration and European values . Those who have not identified as liberal left naturally drift towards moderate and centrist position .
 Ukrainian public is heavily polarised between right-wing populism and liberalism . But these people often find themselves in the more dominant far-right camp .
 This constituency’s centrism is right-leaning, with an emphasis on patriotism, ‘the national idea’ and national identities . Other issues generally associated with the right-wing agenda are also linked to the right .
 When someone is new to activism, they start by searching for information . The search for information can start by looking for information.
 They need to learn how to voice their opinions, how to identify important issues and how to analyse information critically . They should be able to use their opinions to help others with their opinions .
 The influx of new activists after Maidan required a strong media to educate them . Maidan requires strong media.
 The Ukrainian media were too busy serving the interests of the oligarchs who owned them .
 Many questions that required a thoughtful approach remain unanswered . People were left to their own devices in finding the most appealing explanation for pressing questions .
 This approach fails to account for other important factors and even contributes to the creation of that identity during wartime . This approach is not the same as that of others, says the author .
 propaganda is often exaggerated as a factor in the “hybrid war’s ‘hybrid War’ Second, propaganda is also exaggerated as an economic and military factor .
 propaganda becomes more frightening and demoralising than bombs and bullets . According to this rationale, propaganda, a weapon to frighten and demoralise, is more frightening than bombs .
 Dmitry Kiselyov, the Russian regime's talking head, is probably the most hated Russian person in Ukraine after Putin .
 For a person deeply trapped within the narrative created by the “hybrid war, a journalist who makes propaganda is perceived as a valuable asset . One who refuses to do it is a traitor that wastes their skills, says the journalist .
 Ukraine’s media have often favoured clarity over reliability. In these circumstances, Ukraine's media has often favoured reliability .
 Every event is explained in relation to a particular worldview, and that worldview serves as a tool to define and create an audience for the media . The world's worldview is a tool for media to define, create and create audiences .
 articles often fall into one of two extremes, jokingly referred to as “zrada’ and “peremoha’s’. That way, they often fall in one of the extremes, which are completely devoid of any half-shades .
 Ukrainian officials and opinion makers use social media to gauge and influence public opinion . The "zrada" and "peremoha" model thrives on Ukrainian social media .
 Each major event becomes a part of this black-and-white narrative, temporarily overshadowing every other topic for discussion .
Emotional arguments are always more effective, more appealing to this audience . Emotional arguments work on both sides, and that works both sides .
 It is difficult to construct an argument that would be effective as an anti-propaganda measure and critical to details at the same time . Attempting to counter the propaganda and sometimes blatant falsehoods is difficult .
 The very state in which Ukrainian society has found itself since November 2013 — experiencing revolution, annexation and war — has contributed to the public's apparent mistrust in journalism .
 It isn’t only external factors that undermine the credibility of the media. However, it is not the only external factor that undermines the media's credibility .
 Dovzhenko singles out media conflicts, such as Myrotvorets .
 The audience sees people joining either side of the debate seemingly at random, without any reference to their political views or prior opinions . This only further deepens the public mistrust against journalism .
 People turn to social media accounts run by soldiers, volunteers, local residents . Ukraine's pro-government media has no one left to believe in Ukraine's professional media .
 Even Ukrainian media that can't afford or don't want to risk sending their correspondents into the war zone might use such unreliable sources .
In a healthy media climate, alternative accounts in social media can ensure diversity . In a healthy environment, alternative social media accounts can help ensure diversity.
 In the present situation, these alternatives only serve to further polarise audiences and perpetuate the black-and-white narrative . But in the current situation, the alternatives are more likely to polarise the audience .
 This neurotic state of uncertainty, mistrust and equivocation can easily be exploited by oligarchs and the authorities . Ousted oligarchs could restrict freedom of the press with public approval or at least tacit consent .
 Ukraine’s parliament registered a draft bill on the protection of intellectual property . For instance, on the same day as the Myrotvorets leak was published.
 The government relented after a sharp backlash, and the site has since resumed its operation .
 The government might commit a “zrada’s’ themselves and fall victims to the vicious cycle . The government may be in danger of committing a ‘zrADA’
 ‘zrada’ and “peremoha’ are juggled in the realm of abstract, symbolic notions, like those related to memory .
 Ukraine's ‘decommunisation’ laws came into effect recently . Most noticeable provisions were related to the renaming of towns, cities, and streets .
 The “ban on propaganda of Communist and National-Socialist symbols’ may incur a prison sentence . The contravention of which might incur a jail sentence could incur a sentence .
 The "communist heritage" is the main reason for Crimea's annexation or the war in Donbas . But these laws greatly exaggerate the issue, as they often cite the “communist Heritage’s” as the reason for annexation .
 Only two types of opinions are heard — those who fully support the process, and those who are absolutely against it . The process has taken shape now, and only two types are heard .
Ruslan Kotsaba was recently convicted to 3. years in prison for obstruction of Ukrainian Army's war mobilisation effort . During the initial outbreak of the Myrotvorets scandal, one of the many internet troll attacks directed against Nastya Stanko castigated her for
 Kotsaba’s crime was to publish a video on Youtube where he called for resistance to the draft . The video was posted on Youtube .
 The trial was highly controversial, and Stanko merely expressed her disapproval of its “Soviet nature’s”
 Kotsaba is an active participant of nationalist protests during perestroika . He can hardly be accused of sympathising with the “communist’s legacy .
 The discourse on any major issue is polarised to the extremes, and moderate opinions are rare . Effectively, the discourse on a major issue has been polarised.
 The majority of people who have remained in political activism after Maidan are trapped within this one-dimensional paradigm . The majority are trapped by the propaganda frameworks of the hybrid war, says the author .
 In these circumstances, the mass of “moderates’s’ often finds itself powerless against the populist far-right .
 "moderates" who silently observe clerics and neo-Nazis team up to throw stones at LGBT+ Equality festival in Lviv . These are the people who cheer at hate speech and indulge in stereotypes about people from Donbas . It is they who are eager to imprison
 The authorities are playing along while the cycle of “zrada’ and “peremoha’s” keeps the public distracted . The public is also being distracted by ‘zrADA’
 The government has the power to crack down on opposition as soon as new groups are named as scapegoats .
 President Poroshenko finally commented on the scandal nearly a month after it broke out . He expressed his disapproval of the leak .
 President says government has no control over Myrotvorets . He urges journalists present to cease all criticism on this matter .
 Lviv Black Sunrise anarchist group accused by Ukraine's security services of “attempting to overthrow the state” for distributing leaflets ahead of May Day rally in Lviv .
 The public has other, more pressing concerns than indulging in a witch-hunt over this case, says Grytsenko .
For the past two years, Ganna has observed a rise in patriotism coupled with increased social distance towards Russians . People are also displaying somewhat elevated anxiety levels .
 The Myrotvorets scandal shows how the fear of losing an effective wartime instrument can be used to manipulate public opinion, Grytsenko told us in an interview .
 As tensions once again escalate on the frontline, the war in the Donbas is still very far from over .
 The traditional media remain in their pre-Maidan state, stymied by a lack of financing, dependence upon oligarchs and an inability to establish stable value systems .
 The war and the resulting stress are not the only problems that have to be solved if public polarisation is to decrease . Public polarisation has to decrease.