 The aim of this article is to classify the armed conflict between Ukraine and Russia in light of international law . The aim is to classify the conflict as an armed conflict .
 The Russian armed activities are qualified through the lens of use of force and it is shown that Russia committed an aggression . The Russian Armed Forces are qualified to use force in Russia . Russia is shown to have committed a aggression .
 The RussianUkra­i­nian conflict is qualified according to the law of armed conflict . This includes examining whether atrocities have been com­mitted and whether they are war crimes or mere crimes .
 The article posits that there is an international armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine . In ad­dition a non-international one between Ukrainian insurgents and governmental forces .
The methodology used in the article is legal analysis of documents and international law doctrine . The methodology used is based on documents and law doctrine, according to the article .
 Yanukovych escaped from Kiev and the very very * Patrycja Grzebyk, Ph.D., assistant professor at the Institute of International Relations of the Uni­ver­ sity of Warsaw .
 At the end of February 2014 armed forces without a state insignia, in cooperation with Crimean self-defence units formed by separatists, began to take control of the main points in the Crimean Peninsula .
 Crimean authorities organized a referendum in which the overwhelming majority voted for accession to the Russian Federation . On 16 March 2014 the Crimean authoritiesorganized a referendum .
 Crimea and Sevastopol signed an agreement on the accession of Crimea to the Russian Federation on 18 March 2014 . Their expressed “will’s” resulted in a declaration of independence by the Crimean authorities .
 The issue of the removal of the President of Ukraine from office in compliance with the procedure of impeachment shall be initiated by the majority of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall establish a special ad hoc investigating commission, composed of special prosecutor and special investigators .
 The conclusions and proposals of the ad hoc investigating commission shall be considered at the meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall, by at least two-thirds of its constitutional membership, adopt a decision to bring charges against the President of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian parliament elected Oleksandr Turchynov as the new Chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament and acting President of Ukraine . The Ukrainian parliament also elected the acting President.
 The Ukrainian government began its offensive only after the presidential elections which took place on 25 May 2014 .
 De­spite a cease-fire agreement of 12 February 2015 hostilities continue to take place in Eastern Ukraine . The cease-fires were reached in February 2015 .
 The Russian armed activities will be examined through the lens of the principles concerning use of force in order to answer the question whether there was an aggression .
 The Russian-Ukrainian conflict will be examined from the point of view of the law of armed conflict and international criminal law in order to identify norms which should be applied to the conflict . In order to determine whether the atrocities committed constitute war crimes, mere crimes, or acts of terror
 The methodology used in the article is a legal analysis of documents, including Security Council decisions and the international law doctrine .
 Crimea Russia denies its direct involvement in the Crimean crisis . Crimea Russia says the Crimean case is an example of execution by the Crimean people of their right to self-deter­mination .
 The alteration of international borders by force is considered inadmissible in light of international law . Any use of force, or even a threat to use force, against another state is prohibited .
 The use of force in Crimea was an example of the use of forces, says the Russian military . Crimea is the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol .
 The annexation of part of Ukrainian territory by Russia confirms that the military actions in the Crimean Peninsula had as their aim the violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity and reached the sufficient level of gravity .
 The fact that Russian operations were advancing without a fight does not 10 GA resolution 2625, 24 September 1970 .
 Classification of the Conflict... 43 impact this qualification as it is incontrovertible that in a situation when one state uses force to take a position and waits for the reaction of the state whose territory was invaded, the former must be labelled as an aggressor not the latter .
 Russia first used armed force which, by the principle introduced in GA resolution 3314 on USSR’s request, should be considered as prima facie evidence of an act of aggression . The principle was introduced by the USSR's request .
 Resolution 3314 defines acts which can be qualified as acts of aggression . Some of the acts can be directly applied to the situation in Ukraine .
 It should be stressed that this act requires invasion or attack on a territory . It says nothing about the necessity of attacking the armed forces of another state .
 Such an aggression can be committed without a single bullet being fired or a drop of blood being shed . In consequence, such an aggression is committed without the shot being fired .
 Invasion means a state sends its troops into the territory of another state and maintains them there for an extended period of time .
 Resolution 3314 considers as aggression any military occupation resulting from an invasion or attack on a territory . The territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and of the city of Sevastopol was occupied .
 This separation was done against the will of Kiev, in violation of the Ukrainian Constitution and with the use of armed forces . This separation is done against Kiev, according to the Ukrainian constitution .
 Resolution 3314 defines “the blockade of the ports or coasts of a State by the armed forces of another State’s forces as an act of aggression .
Ukrainians emphasize that the missile boat Ivanovets of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation blocked the Balaklava Bay . Ukrainians emphasize that they are not concerned about the situation .
 The sinking by the Russians of their own antisubmarine vessel Ochakov in the straits should be considered as a part of the blockade as it prevented Ukrainian navy ships from leaving a nearby base and going to sea .
 The soldiers of the Black Sea fleet outside the agreed-upon zones were in contravention of the provisions and constitutes an act of aggression . The undeniable moves of the soldiers were in violation of the agreement .
 aggression can be committed without the violation of frontiers, from within the victim state . It is in fact a variation of an invasion, but the purpose behind its enumeration was to emphasize that aggression is not an invasion .
 Russia has been accused of another act of aggression in the past . If it is proven that Russia had effective control over those groups, the operation can be attributed to Russia .
 The chapeau of the definition of aggression emphasizes that the use of force in con­ travention of the UN Charter should be considered as an aggression .
 UN Charter allows for use of force only when there is an authorisation on behalf of the UN Security Council or in case of self-defence in response to an armed attack .
 Russia attempted to justify its actions towards Crimea and Sevastopol through its right to defend its citizens . There was no such authorisation in the Crimean case, but there was no authorisation .
 This kind of defence is in fact admissible, but only in specific situations such as when there was an attack or imminent threat of attack on its nationals . The hosting state was unwilling or unable to protect those nationals .
 In case of Crimea, there was 19 See J Kranz, Kilka uwag na tle aneksji Krymu przez Rosj�’ (Some remarks on the annexation of Crimea by Russia), 8 Państwo i Prawo 23
 In state practice, none of the arguments advanced by states in order to justify military interventions in favour of their nationals has been accepted by the entire community of states .
 45 no attack on Crimean people, not even the slightest threat of an attack . The conflict is the most violent in the region .
 The Russian allegation that the Ukrainian authorities were working on the adoption of a new law revising the language policy does not constitute a reason justifying the use of force in defence of those minorities .
 The live and health of members of those minorities were not endangered and the Russian reaction was excessively disproportional . The Russian reaction to those minorities was excessive, says the author .
For the same reasons, the argument about the need for humanitarian intervention is invalid . For the same reason, it is invalid, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The concept of responsibility to protect has been limited only to situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing . It should be stressed that responsibility should be limited to situations such as genocide .
 The cultural aspect of genocide was purposefully eliminated from the definition of genocide . The argument about cultural genocide has been raised by some Russian scholars .
Only the most severe violations of cultural rights, equal to an annihilation of the culture of a particular group (e.g. burning libraries or a ban on education) could be labelled as some sort of genocide, which was not the case in the Crimean conflict .
 It must be stressed that they are allowed according to international law, but only under certain conditions . With respect to them, it must be stresses that they must be stress that they're allowed to be .
 In case of consent, there must be a clear request issued by constitutional authorities, says the attorney general .
 Russia has used the argument that Yanukovych was still president as he was toppled in violation of the Ukrainian Constitution . Russia has said he was not still president. Russia has also said that Yanukovych is still president in violation.
 Russia did not reveal any document which would confirm that such a request was made by Yanukovych . However, it did not confirm that it was made.
 This is a clear example of a request which raises major doubts about the intentions of the intervening power . It cannot be considered as a legal justification for the use of force, says the author .
International law does not allow intervention on behalf of insurgents,28 even in a situation of self-determination . The fact that such a request was also issued by Crimean authorities27 has no legal meaning .
 It would seem that the GA resolution could not have more clearly expressed the prohibition of intervention into the internal affairs of another state under the pretext of self-determination .
 The people of Crimea have no right to external self-determination, as this right was attributed only to people of a colony or Non-Self-Governing Territory . The so-called “secession remedy” would be allowed only if there was no other way to secure
 The right of self-determination does not give rise to a right of secession . The right is not a right to secession .
 The same mechanism of intervention as in Crimea was used in the case of Eastern Ukraine . Eastern Ukraine is the country's second largest country in Ukraine .
 The victim state decided to respond militarily, and not just through diplomatic channels . But in this case, the victim state chose to respond to the situation militarily .
 As in the case of Crimea, so too in Eastern Ukraine, Russia committed aggression, says Russian state media .
 There is no legal justification for the use of force by Russia against Ukraine in the Donbas region as there was no authorization on behalf of the UN SC . There was no armed attack against Russia by Ukraine which would have entitled Russia to use force .
 No human rights were violated in the Donbas territory, so the issue of humanitarian intervention or the need to protect Russian citizens could not be raised . The support of rebels is prohibited by international law .
 The Russian rhetoric about the need to answer the Western transfer of weapons to Kiev or the training of its army is incomprehensible, as according to international law support for the legitimate authorities of a state . The current Ukrainian powers have legitimacy after the elections.
 From the very beginning of the Crimean crisis Russia has amassed major armed forces near the Ukrainian border . From the start of the Crimea crisis Russian has amassed large armed forces in Crimea .
 The threat to use force cannot be considered as aggression, 34 it is prohibited in light of Art. of the UN Charter .
 The qualification of the use of force by Russia or Ukraine as aggression or self-defence does not have any impact on the appli­cation of the LOAC,35 . This issue is crucial for four other reasons, including the qualification of force use.
 The criminal codes of both states penalize the crime of aggression . If Russia committed aggression, individuals responsible for the crime can be prosecuted before Ukrainian and Russian courts .
 The law of armed conflict is sufficient to classify an armed conflict as an international armed conflict . Crimea is a part of the Crimea region of Crimea .
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has suggested that requirements of intensity also apply to international armed conflicts . However, it must be noted that the International Criminal tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has also suggested that the requirements ofintensity also apply .
Despite 25,000 members of armed forces engaged in armed activities on behalf of the Russian and Crimean authorities, there was no kinetic violence, or that there were just some minor isolated incidents with few victims,48 .
 A Paulus, M Vashakmadze, Asymmetrical war and the notion of armed conflict is a tentative conceptualization . The 91 International Review of the Red Cross 95, p.1. The Red Cross is the most comprehensive review of Red Cross .
51 The Hague Regulation of 18 October 1907 states that “erritory is considered occupied when it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army . The underlying rational of the provision was to eliminate any possible gap which would result in deprivation of protection of people hors de combat .
 The occupant must take effective control over the territory against the will of the state to which the territory belongs .
Secondary control must have been gained or be maintained due to the use of the army . This control must be gained or maintained by the army. Secondary control is needed to be maintained.
 Thirdly, the occupant must have established its authorities on the occupied territory and is able to exercise its powers . The occupant must also establish its authorities and exercise its power .
 It is sufficient to have overall control over a proxy executing the authority in the field . It is enough for a proxy to be in control of the power of a proxy .
 The Geneva Conventions broaden the concept of occupation in order to also cover those situations in which armed force was not used .
 Russia has had and still has effective control over the Crimean Peninsula since March 2014 . In case of Crimea it is undeniable that from March 2014 Russia has still has control over Crimea .
 Crimea gained control by sending thousands of soldiers and using those based in Crimea . It gained its control by using those who were based in Ukraine .
 Ukraine decided not to carry out armed actions, but it has not accepted the loss of Crimean territory . Ukraine decided to not carry out an armed action .
 Crimea has the status of an occupied territory and Russia must be identified as an occupant . In consequence Crimea has a status of occupied territory .
 51 since March 2014 Ukraine and Russia are engaged in an international armed conflict . LOAC shall be applied in the whole territory of the belligerent states .
 Crimean annexation seems to be a fait accompli and the perspective of restitutio quo ante in the near future is highly improbable . At least some provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War must be applied at all times .
 The “fact’s of annexation cannot deprive protected persons of their protections under the LOAC.59 2.2.59 . The ‘fact of annexation’ can’t deprive protected people of their protection under LOAC .
 The situation in Eastern Ukraine has been an evolving one, according to the LOAC . The LOAC must also be considered as evolving .
 There is no conventional definition of an armed conflict, but nonetheless the juris­ prudence has attempted to define this term .
 The International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia says a non-international armed conflict exists when there is “protracted armed violence between governmental authorities and organised armed forces.’s “armed 57 Kolb, Hyde, supra note 46, 94.
 The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 2187 UNTS 90, is the world's most important international court .
 Non-international armed conflict exists not only in a situation of hostilities between governmental forces and some organized armed groups, but also in situation where there are hostilities only between organized armed Groups without any engagement of governmental forces .
 There were sporadic clashes between so-called separatists and pro-Ukrainian volunteers . At the beginning of the conflict, there were little or no engagement of the state’s armed forces .
In order to classify a situation as an internal armed conflict a minimum level of intensity, including duration, must be achieved in order to distinguish armed conflict from isolated acts of violence . The ICTY's definition stresses that the conflict must be protracted .
 The number of casualties, displacement of civilians, detention of fighters, usage of heavy weaponry are all indicators of an armed conflict . Such factors like the deployment of armed forces instead of police, number of armed Forces and partisans involved in hostilities, collectiveness and frequency of fighting are all signs of
In international armed conflicts, the subjective opinion of parties to the conflict about its intensity is not decisive . The existence of an armed conflict is not a decisive.
 Prosecutor Ljube Boškoski, Johan Tarčulovski, Judgment, IT-04-82-T, 10 July 2008, paras. The jury will decide whether to find guilty of any wrongdoing .
 The trigger system for the application of the law of non-international armed conflict is not as effective as that of international armed conflict . It leaves a broad gap of doubt about the classification of the situation .
In such a situation the opinion of the engaged parties to the conflict has some value, says the author . In such a situations the opinions of engaged parties have some value .
 In case of Eastern Ukraine, from March until June 2014 separatists were taking control over consecutive cities and villages with little resistance .
 Ukrainian President's anti-terrorist ope­ rations did not change this situation much. Even the announcement by Ukrainian President on 13 April 2014 of the commencement of anti- terrorist ope ­ rations didn't change the situation much .
 Analysts emphasize that during the abovementioned period there were only some minor clashes resulting in few casualties . The clashes were exaggerated due to the upcoming presidential elections .
 The major fights commenced in July with the launch of the governmental offensive . The first major fights were held in July .
 The Donbas region is the most densely populated region of Ukraine . One of the biggest battles was over the Donetsk Airport and lasted 66 Vité .
 Prosecutor Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala, Isak Musliu, IT03-66-T, 30 November 2005, para.0.0 . See also ICTY, Prosecutor FatMir Limaj and Haradin.
 Artillery, tanks, combat helicopters and other heavy weaponry were used during these operations . Artillery and tanks were used in the operations .
 The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights assessed that from mid-April 2014 to mid-February 2015 the overall death toll exceeded 5,358 people . Another 12,235 wounded, with the death toll at the beginning of 2015 .
 Civilians were dying on a daily basis, as was emphasized by the UN Secretary General . Civilians are dying on the daily basis.
 The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre estimated there are at least 1,116,618 internally displaced persons in Ukraine as of March 2015 . The insurgents have had a clear command structure from the very beginning of the establishment of the so-called “South-East Army’s Army
In Eastern Ukraine, at least from July 2014, there was and continues to be an armed conflict . Taking into account the size of territory on which fighting has taken place, it is incontrovertible that in Eastern Ukraine.
 The ICRC considered at least from July 2014, the situation in Eastern Ukraine as an armed conflict . The above statement clearly confirms that the ICRC considers the situation as an Armed conflict .
 Classification of the Conflict... 55 of war crimes,e. crimes which by definition can only be committed within the framework of an armed conflict .
 conflict between governmental forces and dissidents continues to take place .
 The Russian-Ukrainian state border is part of the Ukrainian territory . The border is the Russian- Ukrainian state border .
 Ukraine's military clashes in Ukraine have been ongoing for years . Ukrainian military forces are able to conduct hostilities in an organized manner, according to reports .
 The Russian engagement in the conflict is not without an impact on the classification of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . The conflict in eastern Ukraine has been classified as a conflict in the region .
 Russian involvement in Donbas was direct from August 2014 to August 2014 . In response to the successes of the Ukrainian army in regaining control over different localities, Russian involvement was direct .
 The insurgents in Eastern Ukraine were from the very beginning inspired and supported by Russia to the extent that Russia had overall control over the dissident forces . However, this internationalization could even have happened earlier if it were confirmed that the insurgents were inspired .
 The ICTY does not require specific orders relating to every military action must be issued by the foreign state . The “overall control” test was established by the ICTy and adopted also by the International Criminal Court .
 It is sufficient to establish that a foreign state’s organs were involved in the planning, coordinating, organizing, organizing and supervising of the entire military operation, as well as in financing, training and equipping .
 The ICTY identified some indicators based on which the overall control can be assessed, likeg. sharing personnel, paying wages by the foreign state, coordination of actions, and some more obvious indicators like the issuance of orders by a foreign state .
 Russia provides insurgents with weapons, shields them with its air-defense system . Russian agents are among the commanders of the insurgents’ armed forces, according to the Russian command .
 This allows to at least suspect that Russia has had overall control over the separatist armed groups . This means that Russia is still in control of the separatist groups .
 ICJ’s test puts at a much higher level than the ICTY. The test puts the ICJ's test at a far higher level. The degree of control must be attained in order to trigger a state's responsibility .
 The ICJ,87 the test of overall control still merits consideration in classification of a conflict as international or non-international in light of LOAC . It is not agreed among scholars if a foreign engagement internationalizes the entire conflict,89 or if it means that two types of conflicts –
 The second option results in a complication of legal regimes applied in the case of Ukraine as it means,g., a necessity to distinguish between members of Russian armed forces and dissident forces .
 The Ukrainian case is an excellent example that the call to establish one definition of an armed conflict must be answered positively . Even if some standards of international and non-international armed conflicts are merging nowadays, still too many issues are resolved in different ways .
 ICJ, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo, Judgment, 19 December 2005, para.0.0 .
 The ICRC proposal made in the 1971 Report on the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts was rejected . The whole conflict would be internationalized if there was external intervention .
 Rome Statute declaration would give ICC jurisdiction over the Ukrainian situation . It would give the ICC jurisdiction.
 The Rome Statute does not create a separate definition of international armed conflict . But in case of a non-international armed conflict it differentiates between armed conflicts which are within the common Art of the GC94 and those which are protracted .95 .
 All articles concerning war crimes committed in a non-international armed conflict could be applied without doubt . ICC would have jurisdiction based ong. The Ukrainian-Russian conflict may be said to be the duration of the conflict .
 Some violent incidents resulting in many civilian losses took place during the conflict between Ukraine and Russia . This does not mean that those responsible for them could be sentenced for war crimes or even crimes against humanity .
 Killing civilians not taking part in hostilities is obviously prohibited by the LOAC . But in order to attach individual responsibility the appropriate mens rea must be proven .
 The attacker will be found guilty only if he was aware of all the circumstances of the attack and intended to commit a crime . In consequence, the attacker will not be guilty of any crime .
In Eastern Ukraine there is an armed conflict, it is much easier to avoid responsibility for the attack . Inasmuch as if the attack was performed in relation to the conflict it is sufficient to demonstrate that the perpetrator was convinced that he was targeting a military object (e.
 The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 2187 UNTS 90, is the world's most important international court .
 Classification of the Conflict: 59 committed with dolus directus ordolus eventualis . The Conflict is the most serious conflict in the world .
 The situation in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine can be qualified from the perspective of two separate branches of law, namely the LOAC and the law on the use of force .
 There is definitely an international armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine . The territory of the Crimean Autonomous Republic and city of Sevastopol is occupied .
 Crimean territory cannot become a part of Russian state as debellatio is not legally possible . At least some provisions of the GC IV will continue to be applied .
 The case of Eastern Ukraine should not be artificially separated from the Crimean one, says LOAC . It should be treated as a mere expansion of the geographic scope of the battlefield of an international armed conflict between two states, due to Russia on that territory .
 The AP II, inasmuch as insurgents control a part of Ukrainian territory, has proven that they are able to carry out sustained and concerted military operations . In addition, it can be assumed that because of the Ukrainian insurgents’ military actions, simultaneously with the international armed conflict there is
 Russia committed aggressions in light of the definitions contained in GA resolution 3314 . Crimea and Eastern Ukraine – Crimea and eastern Ukraine – both cases – are under the law on the use of force .
 The members of the UN SC are fully aware of this, as reflected in various statements made during SC meetings . The UNSC is aware of these statements, as well as other statements .
 There is no legal justification for Russia’s use of force in light of the UN Charter . Russia is using force in the wake of UN Charter.
 Russia’s acts of aggression constitute armed attacks and entitle Ukraine to self-defence . Russia's act of aggression constitutes armed attacks, according to the Russian media .
 Russia is responsible for the commission of an internationally wrongful act and inasmuch as it violated a peremptory norm . Russia is obliged to not recognize its unlawful annexation and undertake steps to bring to an end the serious breach of this norm .
 The vote in the GA (concerning only Crimea) gathered a majority of only 52% of states . It is significant that despite the blatant violation of the prohibition of the use of force, the vote was not unanimous .
 This is proof that even in a situation when the law is clear, policy still matters more . This is evidence that even when the laws are clear, policies still matter more .