 Crimea already had a history of separatism in Ukraine. Before its secession with direct Russian military support and its annexation by Russia in March 2014, Crimea had been in Crimea for more than a decade .
 This region avoided a violent conflict during the break-up of the Soviet Union . Transnistria in Moldova, Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia, Georgia, Nagorno Karabakh in Azerbaijan, and Chechnya in Russia .
 The Crimean Peninsula was historically populated by different people, and it was a place of many wars and conflicts .
 Its early inhabitants included the Cimmerians, the Scythians, and ancient Greeks, whose colonies were located on the Black Sea .
 The Goths, the Huns, Kievan Rus, Genoese and Venetian merchants, controlled various parts of the Crimean Peninsula over different historical periods in the first millennium and the beginning of the second millennium . The Mongol-led Golden Horde controlled various areas of Crimean Peninsula
 The Crimean Khanate emerged from the Golden Horde in the 15th century . It later became a vassal state of the Ottoman Turkey .
 Crimean Tatars often raided the Ukrainian, Polish, and Russian territories as a part of military campaigns and to capture slaves .
 Crimea was seized by the Russian Empire in 1783 . Crimea was part of the Crimean Tatar population resettled or was forced to move to the Ottoman Empire .
 control over Crimea was seized by the Ukrainian government, German military, the Russian White Armies, and then by the Bolshevik Red Army in 1920 . During and in the aftermath of World War I, the Bolshevik Revolution, the Civil War and Ukraine’s brief independence from
 In 1921, the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was established as a Crimean Tatar autonomy in Soviet Russia . It was then as part of the Russian republic in the Soviet Union .
 The artificial famine of 1932-1933 affected Crimea much less than neighbouring agricultural regions in Soviet Ukraine and Kuban in Russia .
Mass political terror in the mid-1930s claimed large numbers of Crimean residents, arrested and executed or exiled .
 Crimea became a major battlefield and a killing field during World War II and the German occupation in 1941-1944 . Crimea was a major battleground and a death field during the war .
 Stalin imposed a collective punishment on the Crimean Tatars, charging the entire ethnic group with collaboration with Nazi Germany . In 1944, Stalin imposed the collective punishment.
 The Soviet government deported all of the Crimean Tatar population and smaller ethnic minorities to Central Asia in 1944 . The formal Crimean autonomy was eliminated .
 A signiﬁcant proportion of the Crimean Tatars perished during this ethnic cleansing . In its aftermath, it was primarily as a result of lack of food and medical care .
 A large number of migrants from Russia and Ukraine were settled in the region . The migrants are from both countries. The region is home to more than 1 million migrants .
 Separatism in Crimea started to manifest itself during the liberalisation of perestroika and glasnost initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev .
 At the same time in 1991, 54 per cent of the voters in Crimea backed the independence of Ukraine, much less than the national average of 91 per cent . In 1991, in the Ukrainian referendum on 1 December 1991,54 per cent back the independence .
 The pro-Russian separatist movement grew popular during the first several years of independent Ukraine .
 The Russia Bloc favoured an independent Crimea or the region’s reuniﬁcation with Russia . It received 67 per cent of the votes in the 1994 parliamentary election .
 Yury Meshkov won 73 per cent of the votes in the second round of the 1994 presidential election in Crimea .
 Major differences along ethnic lines concerning support for separatism in Crimea became evident in the 1990s .
 Crimea is the only region of Ukraine with a majority ethnic Russian population . Crimea was the only area of the country with a Majority of ethnic Russians .
 The 2001 census recorded 58 per cent of the population of Crimea, including Sevastopol, as ethnic Russian, and 24 per cent as ethnic Ukrainians .
 The 1996 USIA/SOCIS-Gallup survey showed that 59 per cent of ethnic Russians in Crimea supported their region joining Russia .
 A significant percentage of ethnic Ukrainians, and a much lower percentage of Crimean Tatars, expressed the same preference . A significant number of ethnic Ukrainian and Crimean Ukrainians expressed a similar preference .
 The Mejlis are an ethnically-based political organisation . They established and overwhelmingly supported their own political organisations, such as the Melis .
 Internal divisions and policies of the Ukrainian government led to the disintegration of the Russia Bloc in the 1990s .
 In 1995, the Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma temporarily suspended the Crimean constitution and abolished its presidency . The Crimean constitution was suspended in 1995 .
 Crimea retained its status as an autonomous republic in Ukraine . influence of the central Ukrainian government in the region increased significantly . Both de jure and de facto.
 The 'Orange Revolution' in 2004 brought a pro-Western and nationalist president, Viktor Yushchenko, to power . The separatist preferences in Crimea increased significantly in 2004 .
 Viktor Yanukovych, a relatively pro-Russian presidential candidate, failed to gain power through falsification of the election results . He received overwhelming backing in the region .
 47 per cent of respondents in Crimea favoured the independence of Crimea . When asked separately in the same survey, 47% of respondents said the Crimean Tatars favoured independence .
 The 2008 Razumkov Center survey showed that 59 per cent of Crimean Tatars supported Crimea becoming a Crimean Tatar national autonomy in Ukraine .
 33 per cent of Crimean Tatars backed the unification of Crimea with Turkey . Separately, 33% of the Crimean Tatarars back the unification.
 38 per cent of respondents in the 2009 Razumkov Center poll said secessionist preferences in Crimea declined afterwards . However, the outright secessionist preference in Crimea dropped afterwards .
 The 2011 Razumkov Centre survey showed that combined support for joining Russia and independence of Crimea decreased among ethnic Ukrainians to 25 per cent, from 35 per cent.
 Attitudes of ethnic Russians demonstrated a similar decline of separatist preferences to 35 per cent from 43 per cent .
 Polls indicated that pro-Russian separatism in Crimea had significant but minority support during the Euromaidan .
 The Euromaidan started as a mass protest against backtracking by the Yanukovych government on the association and free trade agreement with the European Union . It then turned into the anti-government protest and a rebellion in western and a number of central regions .
 Yanukovych regarded Crimea as another source of enrichment for his personal network of family, politicians, and oligarchs . He appointed a number of associates from Donbas to senior positions in Crimea .
 Top Russian leaders, such as President Boris Yeltsin, did not support separatism in Crimea . President Vladimir Putin prior to the overthrow of the Yanukovych government in February 2014 .
 The Russian government declared that the NATO membership of Ukraine was an unacceptable threat to security of Russia . However, the Russian government said that the membership of the Ukraine was a threat to Russia .
 Some Russian leaders publicly refused to recognise Crimea or Sevastopol City as parts of Ukraine . They expressed their backing for reunification of entire Crimea or Crimean city with Russia .
 The Russian and Ukrainian governments managed peacefully to divide the Black Sea Fleet after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Russia was able to maintain its navy presence in Sevastopol .
 In 1997, the two countries signed an agreement granting the Russian Black Sea Fleet a 20-year lease of the Sevastopol navy base .
 In 2010, President Yanukovych signed another agreement with Russia that extended the lease of the Sevastopol navy base for 25 years . The original lease was supposed to expire in 2017, in return for a discount for natural gas imported by Ukraine from Russia .
 The overthrow of the Yanukovych government in February 2014 gave a significant boost to separatism in Crimea . The violent overthrow of Yanukovych government gave a major boost to separatistism .
 The Russian government used this overthrow to reverse its previous policy and to start backing both separatists and the annexation of Crimea .
 Yanukovych fled from eastern Ukraine to Crimea on 22 February, and the Russian military helped him to escape to Russia .
 The new government and media in Ukraine, and their counterparts in Western countries, presented the change of the government as a result of peaceful mass protests during the Euromaidan .
 Yanukovych abandoned his presidential position and fled from Ukraine because of his responsibility for the massacre of Maidan protesters on 20 February 2014 . They maintained that Yanukovych abandoned the presidential position.
 Russian military forces without insignia, along with separatist ‘self-defence’ formations, seized control over the Crimean parliament building .
 The Russian government initially denied its direct military intervention in Crimea . However, there was evidence that Russian military units were operating along with separatist armed units in Crimea beyond the Russian naval base .
 Crimean autonomy and the Sevastopol city council unilaterally declared their independence from Ukraine . The Crimean parliament of the Crimean autonomy has set up a referendum on this issue .
 The official results of the referendum held on 16 March 2014 reported that 97 per cent of the voters in Crimea supported joining Russia . The referendum was held in Crimea on March 16, 2014 .
 The Ukrainian government and the media characterised separatism in Crimea as having minority support and the referendum as illegal and falsified . The Ukraine government and media, and to a large extent their Western counterparts, characterise separatism as having minorities support .
 separatism in the region was attributed mostly to direct military intervention by Russia . The separatism was attributed mainly to Russia's military intervention .
Support for separatism in Crimea increased significantly after the Euromaidan that resulted in the overthrow of the relatively pro-Russian government .
There is no directly comparable and publicly available reliable survey data concerning popular support for separatism and joining Russia in Crimea after the Euromaidan . There is no immediately comparable and public data concerning support forseparism .
 Crimea avoided a violent conflict in eastern Ukraine . In contrast to Donbas, a separatist region in Ukraine, Crimea avoided an armed conflict .
 Large sections of Ukrainian military, security service, and police forces switched their allegiance to the separatists and then to Russia . Others were blockaded and disarmed by the Russian military and the Crimean self-defence .
 Major Crimean Tatar organisations were the most vocal opponents of the Crimea referendum . They boycotted the 16 March referendum .
 The former Crimean autonomous republic and the city of Sevastopol were formally incorporated into the Russian Federation over several days following this referendum .
 The Russian government justified its annexation of Crimea by humanitarian intervention and the precedent of Kosovo independence . Russian government said it justified the annexation by humanitarian intervention .
 The new Ukrainian government, the U.S. and other Western governments, rejected the unilateral secession and annexation of Crimea as illegal under the international law .
 The Ukrainian government's official stance, expressed by Petro Poroshenko, is to reunite Crimea with Ukraine . The Ukraine government’s official stance has been expressed, for example, by newly elected president Petro poroshenko .
 The use of military force to take back control over Crimea was raised as a possibility by some Ukrainian officials . Such an option is very unlikely because it would lead to a war with the much more powerful Russia .
 Ukrainian government moved to impose a limited blockade of Crimea by suspending train and bus links .
 The Western governments rejected the possibility of using their military forces in Crimea .
 The United States imposed economic and travel sanctions against separatist leaders of Crimea and Russian government officials for the annexation of the region . The U.S. government, and governments of the European Union members and other Western countries.
 The sanctions also prohibited or severely restricted work of U.S. and other Western businesses in Crimea . The sanctions are also prohibited.
 Visa and MasterCard blocked the use of their credit cards in this region in December 2014 . For example, following a new round of U.S. sanctions, Visa andMasterCard blocked their credit card use .
 Russian government refused to reverse its annexation of Crimea and to negotiate any deal that would change the status of this region . However, the Russian government refuses to reverse the annexation .
 The United Russia party of President Putin won 71 per cent of the votes in Crimea in September 2014 elections .
 Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar parties and organisations were generally limited or curtailed in their ability to continue functioning . Some of their local leaders and activists were subjected to violence, threats of violence, detention or expulsion from Crimea .
 The secession of Crimea from Ukraine with help of the direct Russian military intervention, and the subsequent annexation of the region by Russia, represented a major turning point in the region's political history .
 The Russian annexation of Crimea implies that a return of Crimea from Russia to Ukraine is virtually impossible . The significant rise in separatist orientations in Crimea after the Euromaidan has been seen .
 Crimea in its current status quo is likely in the foreseeable future to remain a point of conflict between Ukraine and Russia . The West and Russia are likely to continue to fight over Crimea .
 Dzerkalo tyzhnia ‘To shcho skazav Volodymyr Putin u Bukharesti,’ 19 April .