 Official Washington marches in propaganda lockstep about Crimea's decision to rejoin Russia two years ago . Former CIA analyst Ray McGovern says reality is different .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is visiting Crimea “to check on the construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge,’ the Kremlin announced . The bridge will link the Crimean peninsula and continental Russia .
 Russia annexed Crimea three weeks after the U.S.-sponsored coup in Kiev on Feb., 2014 . Crimean voters approved leaving Ukraine and rejoining Russia by a 96 percent majority .
 The 12-mile bridge is a concrete metaphor, so to speak, for the re-joining of Crimea and Russia . The bridge was built in the early 1990s .
 The Obama administration continues to decry the political reunion between Crimea and Russia . The relationship dates back to the Eighteenth Century .
 The West has accused Russia of violating its pledge in the 1994 Budapest agreement . It was signed by Ukraine, Russia, Great Britain and the U.S. in exchange for Ukraine surrendering its nuclear weapons .
Russia's only warm-water, naval base at Sevastopol in Crimea is in Crimea . Crimeans are concerned about what the unconstitutional ouster of Ukraine’s president might mean for them .
 The U.S. seems to have been guilty, too, in promoting a coup d’etat removing the democratically elected president and disenfranchising millions of ethnic Russian Ukrainians who had voted for Yanukovych .
 Russia has been accused of violating the Budapest agreement . It takes a markedly one-dimensional view to place blame solely on Russia .
 Washington can buy $5 billion in “democracy promotion’s” Washington. But if the putsch came as a total surprise, he sorely underestimated what $5billion can buy .
 The Feb., 2014 putsch in Kiev was YouTube-ized two-and-a-half weeks in advance . But the Feb. 2014 putch in Ukraine was YouTube.
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk was quickly named prime minister of the coup regime . The coup regime was immediately given diplomatic recognition by Washington .
 Ukraine is an economic basket case, and "Yats" barely survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence . He is widely believed to be on his way out of Ukraine .
 That Russia would not let Crimea become a NATO base should have been a no-brainer, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If Putin acted decisively, it would be all the easier to demonize him, he would be easier to denounce “Russian aggression’s” and put a halt to the kind of rapprochement between President Obama and Putin .
 If Putin accepts the dangers it posed to Russia, eventual membership for Ukraine in NATO might become more than a pipedream . However, if Putin acquiesced to the Ukrainian coup and accepted its dangers, it might become a pipingream .
 Russia has been repeatedly rebuffed – or diddled – when it has suggested bilateral talks on this key issue . The issue has been a key issue for Russia for years .
 Russia's then-President Dmitry Medvedev asked Obama when the U.S. would be prepared to address Russian concerns over European missile defense . Four years ago, at the March 2012 summit in Seoul, Russia’s then- President Dmitry Medvesev asked him when the United
 In remarks picked up by camera crews, Obama asked for some "space" until after the election .
 The Obama administration and its stenographers in the mainstream U.S. media would like the relevant Ukrainian history to start on Feb., 2014 with ‘Yats’ and his coup cronies deemed the “legitimate’ authorities .
Before the coup, the Kremlin had given much thought to the vulnerability of the peninsula and a possible need to annex it .
 According to the public record, Putin first focused on Crimea at a strategy meeting on Feb., the day after the coup .
 The U.S. mainstream media's propagandistic reporting on the Ukraine crisis is small wonder that the American people forgot about the putsch in Kiev .
 The word ‘coup’ was essentially banished from the U.S. media’s lexicon regarding Ukraine .
 In reaching its no-coup conclusion, the Times ignored any evidence that there was a coup, including the Nuland-Pyatt phone call .
 “coup’ became just another unutterable four-letter word. In regards to Ukraine, ‘coup' became just a unutterably four- letter word .
 John McCain was wrong to write that Russian President Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea without provocation . John McCain is wrong to say that Putin's annexation was not provocation .
 There were two mentions of how Russia “invaded’s Crimea, but not a word about the coup in Kiev, Goldberg says .
 In Catholic theology, the theory that some people can be “invincibly ignorant can lessen or even erase their guilt is true .
 Many Americans are so malnourished on accurate news that they would seem to qualify for this dispensation, with pardon for not knowing about things like the coup in Kiev .
 A meeting of progressives that I attended last year was keynoted by a professor from a local Washington university . The professor was a professor at the local university .
I told her that there were no reports of anyone having been killed . I told her there were, in fact, no reports that anyone was killed .
 A few weeks before the professor’s remarks, I had a chance to do a little souvenir shopping on the Arbat .
 The shopkeepers were usually taciturn, allergic to discussing politics, and not at all given to bragging about their leaders . It was decades since he had served as a CIA officer in the Soviet Union .
 Ray McGovern works for Tell the Word, a publishing arm of the ecumenical Church of the Saviour in inner-city Washington .
 During his 27-year career as a CIA analyst, he headed the Soviet Foreign Policy Branch .
 Bob Parry argues a decent case that Mr Obama’s transgressions may have been tepid compared to what the impliedly crazier and totally amoral neocons or Responsibility to Protect crowd pressured on him .
 That Hillary, the Donald, Ted and others may yet outdo Obama's abysmal performance should not be cause for praising him, even tepidly .
 Siberia is sacrificed to the Asia Group because it’s deemed too hard to hold against the Asians . European Empires always coveted Africa anyway .
 Ibero-America will be kept for The Commonwealth as somewhat of a resource bank, but mainly to deny access to PanEuropa/Africa, and the Asian Group .
TransPacifica will be “danced around’ by The Commonwealth and The Asian Group . TransPacifica to be ‘danced by the Commonwealth and the Asian Group.
 The Plan that would-be Emperors are working on, replete with endless Border Wars to keep the serfs pre-occupied. So that’s The Plan, The Plan.
 Russian Federation and USA to become stalwart allies and continue to pander to Chinese “Win-Win’s policies of Silk Road/World Land Bridge . It is of paramount importance to defeat The Plan of the Oligarchy and secure a peaceful developing World .
 Sun Yat Sen is no longer Fascist/Communist of the Chaing Kai Shek/Mao Tse Tung dichotomy . Sun Yats Sen is a former member of the Communist Party .
 FDR's vision will be realized, via the cooperation of the three Great Republics . Soon, we will be Dirigist too, when New Deal policies are re-instituted .
 The British plan B was to separate the U.S. and Russia via articles on Siberia, ignoring prison conditions in the western United States . Since the Civil War did not achieve their goals, this was the British Plan B .
 The empire that had survived so long. Amazing work, but not surprising, from an empire that has survived so far .
 The Russians have no use for opponents on their borders . It is no wonder that the Russian government does not use opponents on its borders .
 It's hard to stop watching an on-going train wreck. Yeah, it leaves me numb, almost willing to turn my back on these web sites . But it’s hard to watch a train wreck .
 The USA’s historic mission was to supplant Imperial Oligarchy with republican Democracy, and “unfettered” Capitalism with the American System of dirigist political economy . The USA's historic mission is to supplants ImperialOligarchy.
 The entire Trans-Atlantic System as built by The City and The Street. This Mission is completely defeated, and now comes the Collapse of epic proportions .
 Crimean people have left the country and can speak freely to straighten out this story . I just wish we’d get more actual Crimean people who have left to speak freely .
 The referendum to secede reflected the views of the people. I don’t believe either side. “asked Crimeans if the results in the March 16, 2014 referendum tosecee reflected their views,’s David Cameron says .
 A total of 82.8% of Crimeans said yes, while 68.4% of Ukrainians felt so . A total Of 82.7% said yes.
 MG you forgot to mention that it was done shortly after annexation and that source of news suddenly shifted from Ukrainian channels to all russian channels .
 The fallacy of tortured argumentation that won’t go away is a hoax, writes David Frum .
 Crimea reaffirmed its status as an Autonomous Region within the Soviet Union . Seven months before Ukraine declared independence, a referendum in Crimea reaffirm its status .
 It does give one a clear idea of the general will of the population of Crimea . It does not give one of the Crimea population's general will, it does .
 A 1992 Crimean constitution declaring Crimea an Autonomous Republic, the Ukrainian government unilaterally declaring the Crimean Constitution void, even an attempt at direct rule by decree by Ukrainian President .
 Crimea is a return to a historical stasis disrupted by Nikita Kruschev circa 1954 . The present status of Crimea has been a long time coming and reflects the post-1991 historical trend . The Maidan Episode, finally catalyzed by the Maidan episode, was
 Nuland with support of a few hundred right sector ultras with wooden shields and a few invisible CIA agents conceived and utilized within a month flawless coup with only evidence of a phone call and hundreds casualties from right sector and overthrown legitimate government .
 The president and government were totally cooperating with Russian FSB for years . Russian intelligence had Russian intelligence guiding them and troops on the boarder .
 Victoria Nuland says U.S. poured $5 billion into Ukraine to finance pro-Western opposition groups in the 10 years leading up to the coup . The U.N. has spent $5billion on Ukraine in the past 10 years, she says .
 The United States has channeled, and is channeling, U.S. taxpayers’ money to sow the seeds of unrest in a huge swath of former Soviet republics .
 The fact the corporate media doesn't report this is probably why you haven’t heard about it. The fact that you haven't heard about this is likely why it's not reported .
 Russia has been doing the same in Canada and Mexico . Russia has also been doing same in Mexico and Canada .
 The U.S. is already making a fine mess of things in Mexico, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: No need for Russia to undermine democracy in Mexico .
 Bryan you are mistaken and let me demonstrate you how budget of $500 million per year buys you almost nothing in Ukraine in terms of politics. Bryan you're mistaken and show you how much money you spend on politics . Bryan, Ukraine's president, has been accused of being
 A head of local district transport police in Kharkiv, Lviv, Odessa, Donetsk was collecting at least $100,000 per month in bribes .
 Police find conversion centers laundering at least $100,000. Look in their news almost every other day.
 Sons of Yanukovich and Pshonka were collecting in bribes millions per day . Sons were collecting millions of bribes every day .
 You add custom, IRS, medical, banks and you easy swallow Nulands $500 million in bribes and achieve nothing, money just disappear . You add Custom, IRS and medical, bank and IRS, and you easily swallow $500 millions in bribes .
 Look who is in parliament, the same faces that were there more then 10 years ago . Look who are in parliament.
After 10 years of investment in opposition groups there are no groups, no mass media that is totally biased pro-western. So after 10 years, no groups are totally biased.
 Dugin pure fascist is going time to time to the EU at those meetings and was consulting Putin sometime ago . Dugin has been consulting Putin at EU meetings .
 Efremov was holding Lugansk region in his packet or at least he thought so . He was holding it in his pocket or he was holding the region .
 A bunch of so called separatists at leading positions in Dontesk and Lugansk Districts sent their kids to Kyiv to live among the junta and right sector .
 RT and lifenews have asked you to chew the same old gum that was aired by RT and Lifenews since 2014 over and over .
 The Crimea was occupied by British troops for almost two decades, following the Crimean War . Britain and France flexed their military might together for the first time .
 In so doing they laid down the pattern for the terrible German wars to come in the next century. In so do they laid out the pattern.
 The statement, repeated several times, in this article, is absolutely false . The statement is repeated several time, in the article .
 Crimea was severed by the Russian SSR and attached to the Ukrainian SSR in the status of an Autonomous Region . Crimea is now an Aut autonomous region in the Ukraine .
 Under international law an Autonomous Region within a sovereign state may choose to secede and declare itself a Sovereign state . Under international Law an Aut autonomous Region within the sovereign state could choose to declare itself an autonomous state .
 IMO, if it can declare independence, it can also choose to join another sovereign state . But that is a question for an expert in international law, as I am not aware of any precedents .
 The Crimean Rada voted in 2008 to secede from Ukraine to the Ukraine . It should be noted that the Crimean RADA voted to secee from the Ukraine in 2008 .
Autonomous Region secede in 2014, but it must require a referendum, as this is what happened in 2014 .
Experts cannot find any objections by experts on international law regarding the Crimean Autonomous Region’s secession .
 David, you may be coherent, but your lack of basic jurisprudence leads you to a maze from which you cannot get out . David is the author of a new book, "David's Guide to the Book of the Year"
 When case is in court judge will consider all provided substantial evidence . Judge will be conducting multiple tests to characterize events, level of damage and responsibilities of involved parties .
 The subject of my comment was the status of an Autonomous Region under International Law . AJFA is an autonomous region under international law .
 Your comments are a mass of Fallacies of Informal Argument, and your incoherent statements fail, absurdly, to rise to the level of Unsound Propositions . The comments are the latest in a long line of "unsound" statements .
 Your statements are irrelevant and have mistakes in defining the status of Crimea . Your statements were irrelevant, your statements were wrong and have been wrong .
 On February 27 2014 Ukraine was recognized internationally within its borders including Crimea . They are irrelevant because of Ukraine's recognition of Crimea as Crimea .
 All these agreements superseded anything what happened in 1954, 1991 or invented by you in 2008 . The agreements supersede anything that occurred in 1954 or 1991 .
 Crimea's status was undisputably territory of Ukraine and covered by Ukrainian Constitution . So, status of Crimea was undisputable territory of Crimea .
 There was no trial in international courts regarding the status of Crimea . It was undisputable, because there was no on going trial in International courts .
 Russia has began conducting military operation on the territory of Ukraine on February 27 2014 . The annexation of Crimea on March 18 2014 resulted in Crimea being annexed by Russia .
 It was a military aggression as defined in the resolution 3314 of UN General Assembly, December 14 1974 . It was the first time the United Nations had been involved in the conflict .
 Conduct of russian troops included blocking Ukrainian military bases, airports and water line by military ships .
 Mr McGovern and God bless you for “telling it like it is for us’s for us. Thank you, Mr. McGovern, and God Bless you for telling it like we do .
I am not naive about the sneaky and underhanded ways our government goes about working its will in other nations . I am not naïve about how our government works in other countries . I'm not naive.
 I've read with a very cynical eye all the reportage concerning this affair. Hence, I’ve read with an extremely cynical eye, says author .
 Your report is for me the most transparent and believable narrative of events and description of the situation . Your report will be for me, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia did not violate its pledge in the 1994 Budapest agreement, in his opinion . Since it was not an initiative by Russia but a decision of the Crimean population, he says . The Crimean population is not really an annexation .
 The United States push to make trouble on the borders of Russia should motivate Russia to seek military alliances on the doorstep of the U.S. Russia's right wing provocations on their doorstep, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Unlike the savvy Russians, there is no society anywhere in the world more dumbed-down than the American culture .
 It's estimated that 90% of all Americans don't have a clue about what their government/corporatists/military institutions are doing .
 As a result, American military/financial hegemony can do whatever they please . American military and financial hegemony is a result .
 More people in the United States are fluent in 3+ languages than U.S. foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'd guess that more people in America are fluent with 3+ language"
 If the Ukrainian people had, in early elections as had been agreed upon, voted Yanukovych out of power – then all the power to them . If the Ukraine people had voted him out, they would have all power to the people .
 If Ukraine had a referendum to join the EU, again all the power to them. Then if all of Ukraine had to join it, all of the power would be given to them .
 The CIA paid off some protesters and opposition government officials and we ended up with a coup . I remember doing some quick reading on the coup that the CIA pulled off in Iran in 1953 .
 I just shake my head when I think of all of this underhandedness, that is not the world that I want to live in, he says . He says he just shake his head when he thinks of all the Underhandedness .
Crimeans were voting at gunpoint and the reported 82% voter turnout with 96% voting to rejoin Russia was completely dismissed .
 Gallup, GFK and Pew Research polls, all trusted western polling services, are in their information supporting initial numbers that were reported . Then a year later or more or more we have Gallup and GFK polls .
 This also shows, as people keep screaming about Russian propaganda, how much propaganda our own news agencies are spewing . It also shows how many people are screaming about Russia's propaganda .
I for one am tired of being lied to and tired of seeing what military might of the USA is inflicting on the world in our name . I agree totally with this response and wish that more Americans were watching our state department and the policies that are being driven by the neo-con think
 The remark on supposed Russian caused casualties in Crimea by a Washington professor were astonishingly and inexcusably ignorant .
 Americans are the most out of touch with reality nation in this world, says msm . The zionist msm says Americans are "out of touch"
 I remember watching the Olympic coverage in Sochi and being stunned by the negative on air commentary about Russia and wondering what it was about . I remember being stunned.
 Stephen Cohen was saying similar things as you have said in Russia . I found my go to guy on Russia, Stephen Cohen, who was said similar things. I found his go to him on Russia.
 At the time, I thought the Obama administration would allow such negative diplomatic talk, but I have since learned that it was simply more of the same .
 Hillary’s term at State becomes more apparent as she thinks as a neocon . The good ole United States is still up to its regime changing tricks, says Hillary .
 The Treaty of Paris, which ended the American Revolutionary War, was ratified . The year when the treaty was ratified was the year when it was signed .
 It would be another four years before the U.S. Constitution was ratified . The United States Constitution would have been ratified four years later .
 The Budapest agreement wasn’t a treaty, rather a political understanding, and politics change . It was a political agreement, not a treaty .
 Ukraine remains a total financial basket case with Right Sector and other fascist groups gaining power . Ukraine remains the total financial baskets case with right Sector gaining power.
 Ukraine's status-quo is a pro-european government . If western Ukrainians want a government then I applaud them for opposing it. With respect to Ukraine, I applaud the majority of western Ukrainians .
 Donesk has a proclivity toward Russia and dissatisfaction with the coup . With respect to DonesK, I understand their proclivities toward Russia .
 I don't think I would appreciate Ukrainian tanks and troops shooting in my direction . I don’t think I’d appreciate Ukraine tanks and soldiers shooting in the direction of the country .
Ukraine should grant Donesk full independence to include land stretching down to Crimea . Ukraine should grant full independence, including land stretching to Crimea.
 Ukraine would receive the western 50% of Crimea back from Russia . In return, Ukraine would get 50% back from the west .
 Ukraine and New Ukraine would establish treaties regarding trade, travel, and political recognition . Ukraine, New Ukraine could also establish treaties about trade and travel, travel .
 The pair would shake hands and become good friends again, then shake hands again . How about this? How would they get back together?
 Some neighbor mobsters get into your house and occupy say kitchen and drive way because they are scared that some other mobsters from other part of town will get your porch next to them .
 A bigger mobster shows up with a machete and pushes you to a living room . Then a larger mobster pushes you out of the living room. Then a bigger mobsters shows up in the house .
 Some time ago part of their property, but then was sold and added to your property . Then they tell you they want your backyard too, because it was some time ago parts of the property .
 You agree to give them living room instead in return of 50% of your driveway . You agree that they should live in the house instead of the driveway .
 Your daughter kind of liked one of mobsters and stays with them to party . Your son will be kind of hostage in their house just in case you go to other mobsters to talk .
 The mobsters will be telling everybody around that you planned to get their porch and they did not have a choice, but to intervene .
 If you want heat upstairs you have to pay them 5 times more than the real price . And if you want to heat upstairs, you need to pay more.
 Your verbose incoherance is equally obscure, I have to ask . But your succinct incoheration is also equally obscure .
 Crimea will never under any circumstance agree to allowing the western 50% of Crimea to go back to the Ukraine . The people of Crimea will not agree to allow the west to return to Ukraine .
 Your suggestion/solution simply doesn’t hold water and betrays a significant understanding of the region and of Crimea . Your suggestion doesn't hold water.
 Ukraine is run by U.S. funded NAZI thugs without Integrity or Honor . Ukraine run by United States funded NAzi thugs.
Turn the screws on Nuland’s little kingdom and starve it into submission. Turn the screw on the little kingdom, which set up the chain of events, we witness now .
 Some of these folks are really anxious for a new hot war, which they think can be fought without affecting the U.S. at all .
 Donbass is a small town in Donbass, where people are shooting at each other . It's not easy to tell each other that shooting is real as it only can be .
 Soviet missiles on Cuba precipitated Caribbean Crisis with nuclear weapons ready to fly . Soviet missiles were on Cuba.
 Ukraine will not be part of NATO for a while do not be scared for poor russians, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Kalinigrad can cover a good portion of Europe with Topol . They can also cover some of Europe's best parts of Europe .
Kennedy administration does not answer why Russia should behave differently than Kennedy administration . Still does not explain why Russia shouldn't behave differently.