 Presidents Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin discussed closer coordination in Syria in a phone call this week . President Obama and Putin also discussed closer cooperation in Syria .
 The leaders agreed to work on strengthening the ceasefire and improving bilateral coordination in Syria . They discussed the situation in Ukraine, among other issues .
 World Jewish Congress President Ronald Lauder led a small delegation to Moscow . He met with President Putin and met with him .
 Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu also met with President Putin this week during a visit to Moscow .
 Israel is seeking closer military cooperation with Russia in Syria . Israel wants to “prevent the transfer of sophisticated weapons from Iran and Syria to Hezbollah.
 The update includes several stories analyzing the composition of Ukraine’s new government, and the potential for speedy reforms in the country .
 John Herbst shares his optimism about the new cabinet’s ability to implement reforms . The new cabinet is expected to make changes in the next few months .
Foreign Policy op-ed by Josh Cohen urges West to increase pressure on Ukrainian government and President Petro Poroshenko to change status quo .
 Iran has showcased parts of S-300 air-defense missile systems ordered from Russia during its annual National Army Day parade in Tehran .
 S-300 missile tubes and the radar equipment were shown during the April 17 military parade . The military parade was held in Moscow .
 President Hassan Rohani insisted that Iran's military power was purely for defensive and deterrent purposes . President Rohani said the military power is purely for defense purposes .
 The Kremlin and its surrogates are spinning today's meeting of the NATO-Russia Council as the end of Moscow's isolation .
 In Brussels, it is viewed as a technical meeting to put safeguards in place to prevent an accidental conflict from breaking out .
 The Kremlin says reviving the NATO-Russia Council after nearly two years is proof that a chastened West has realized the error of its ways . Moscow is now ready to engage Moscow .
 The meeting is largely viewed as a necessary evil and an opportunity to call out Russia for its provocative actions of its warplanes in international airspace .
 A delegation of the World Jewish Congress and the Russian Jewish Congress, led by WJC President Ronald S Lauder, was received on Tuesday by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The two sides exchanged views on the situation of Jews in Russia and the Middle East . The 90-minute-long conversation took place in Moscow .
 Lauder praised the good relations between Israel and Russia . He called on the Russian leader to show more support for Israel in international bodies such as the United Nations .
 Ronald S Lauder told Vladimir Putin that the Jewish people are very grateful for the good relationship between Russia and the State of Israel . He called on him to translate this into more international support in organizations like the United Nations Human Rights Council .
 The main state ceremonies were held in front of a memorial to the Jewish fighters in the heart of the former Warsaw Ghetto in the north of the city-center .
 A wreath was also laid on Tuesday by visiting German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the location where former German chancellor Willy Brandt kneeled in 1970 . The wreath is also laid at the site where Brandt kneeling in 1970.
 The Kremlin has said Russian President Vladimir Putin and U.S. President Barack Obama have discussed the situation in Syria . The two countries have agreed to increase coordination between them .
 Putin emphasized the need to distance the moderate opposition from the Islamic State group and the Al-Nusra Front . He also emphasized the flow of fighters and arms into Syria from Turkey from Turkey .
 The U.S. has expressed concern about reports that Russia is moving more military materiel into Syria .
 Obama was speaking in Saudi Arabia, where he was attending a summit with Gulf Arab leaders to discuss regional security issues .
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said Russia has kept a "considerable" military presence in Syria in support of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime .
 Stoltenberg made the comments at a joint press conference with Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu .
 Ukrainian Defence Minister Stepan Poltorak says it could take years to resolve Russian-orchestrated conflict .
 Poltorak said that Russia still has thousands of its troops in Ukraine's Donbas . He spoke to foreign journalists in Kyiv on Wednesday .
Poltorak warned about more attacks by Russian-backed separatist forces . Poltorak: More attacks aimed to provoke Ukrainian servicemen to return fire .
 Militants use such cases to portrait Ukrainian side as one who violates Minsk peace agreements . Militant uses such cases as a portrait of Ukrainian side .
 The European Union’s executive on Wednesday formally backed visa-free access for Ukrainians to the bloc . Member states to debate the proposal .
 Ukraine's government has carried out all the necessary reforms to win Brussels' backing . The commission said that Ukraine’s government has made visa-free access a key political goal .
 These included a series of anticorruption measures and stepped-up efforts against organized crime and border security . The measures included a number of steps to combat organized crime .
 The past two months have not been favorable for Ukraine’s image in the West . Ukraine's image in West has not been good for Ukraine in recent months .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk's government has meant little progress on reform and lots of attention to politics . The unnecessary government crisis led to the ouster of Prime Minister Arseny Yatseniuk and his government .
 The strongest reform ministers are Natalie Jaresko, Aivaras Abromavicius, Oleksiy Pavlenko, and Andriy Pyvovarskiy . The replacements do not have the same reform credentials .
 The crisis prompted the IMF to hold back delivery of its $1.63 billion tranche of economic assistance due in February . Ukraine’s recovery from the sharp drops in GDP over the past two years has been slow .
 There are at least four reasons to think that the new team may enjoy some success with reform . But there are at at least three reasons to believe that the team may be successful with reform.
 The new Ukrainian cabinet is more interesting for the people it doesn't include than for those it does . The cabinet was confirmed by the parliament on Thursday .
 Ukraine's experiment with bringing foreign reformers and private sector professionals into the government is now officially over . The experiment has failed, and it has failed .
 Petro Poroshenko tapped his long-time protege and ally, former parliament speaker Volodymyr Hroisman to form government .
 The result, for the most part, is a cabinet of Poroshenko loyalists . The unpopular businessman-president is consolidating power .
 Poroshenko wants Hroisman to look independent, not least in the eyes of Washington politicians . Washington politicians are wary of Poroshenko monopolizing power .
 In February, leading reformers in the economic ministry and the Prosecutor General’s Office resigned in frustration . They accused President Poroshenko of blocking their efforts to rid Ukraine of corruption .
 Poroshenko finally sacked his widely hated prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, this was primarily thanks to growing pressure from Western officials .
 Shokin fired his only remaining reformist deputy and forbidding prosecutors from referring cases to new anti-corruption institutions . Even still, Shokin managed to do plenty of damage on his way out the door .
 Ukraine's old guard appears increasingly willing to subvert the country’s democratic development to silence critics .
 A deal appears to be in the works between Moscow and Kiev to exchange captured Ukrainian helicopter pilot Nadiya Savchenko . Savchenko was recently sentenced to 22 years in a Russian prison for two Russian servicemen convicted of ""terrorism"" in a Kiev court this week .
 The apparent agreement offers a rare point of light in the frayed relationship between the two countries . But it could reignite the question of just how involved Russia has been and continues to be in the restive Donbass region of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko announced that an ""algorithm"" had been agreed to facilitate the possible exchange of Ms. Ms. Poroshenko .
 Mr Poroshenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a reportedly constructive telephone conversation about the prospective swap . It was a marked return to diplomacy in bilateral relations.
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu traveled to Moscow seeking closer military cooperation in Syria . Israel's northern frontier is vulnerable to the Iranian-backed Hezbollah .
 Netanyahu says Israel must “do everything we can to prevent the transfer of sophisticated weapons from Iran and Syria to Hezbollah . The Lebanese Islamic movement warred with the Israeli military in 2006 and is now fighting alongside government forces in Syria .
 He repeated his April 17 declaration that Israel will never give up control of the southern section of the Golan Heights . Israel captured the area in the 1967 Middle East war .
Demonstrators protesting the allocation of land to the Jewish community in the Russian city of Perm demanded outlawing of the Chabad movement .
 They sang a song titled “Holy War,’ a patriotic tune widely identified with Russia’s fight against Nazi Germany .
 The Jewish community of Perm has been accused of unauthorized use of a local theater in 2013 . Unrest around the Jewish community has been brewing for years amid accusations .
 Unidentified individuals that year tried to set fire to the local synagogue . Unidentified people tried to burn the synagogue .
 Former Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin is to draw up a new economic program for the country . Russian President Vladimir Putin has decided that former Finance Minister and Deputy Prime PM AlexeiKudrin will draw up an economic program .
 Any sensible economic strategy should be based upon Russia's return to regular transfers of power in the Kremlin .
 No administration should serve for 16 years, and a considerable segment of the ruling elite understands this all too well, says John Sutter . Sutter: "No administration should serving for 16 Years"
 Alexei Kudrin has been called on to reject that idea and instead write a liberal economic program for Putin . The Russian president has said he wants to write an economic program.
 Putin will take a more progressive stance during his 19th year in power . It is designed to revive hope among the elite that Putin will be progressive .
 At the time, Putin was cultivating the image of a strongman-reformer, a man who effortlessly fulfilled the longing of the Russian people for a strong leader .
 Russian attack submarines are prowling the coastlines of Scandinavia and Scotland, the Mediterranean Sea and the North Atlantic . Western military officials say a significantly increased presence is aimed at contesting American and NATO undersea dominance .
 The intensity of Russian submarine patrols has risen by almost 50 percent over the past year, the U.S. Navy's top commander in Europe says .
 The patrols are the most visible sign of a renewed interest in submarine warfare by President Vladimir V Putin . Putin's government has spent billions of dollars for new classes of diesel and nuclear-powered submarines .
 The latest clampdown on a Crimea news site run by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty has drawn international condemnation . The United States denounce it as "the Russian government's growing crackdown on independent voices"