 President Donald Trump instructed Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to find a way to improve U.S. relations with Russia .
 Trump said in 2013 that “only haters and fools’ do not understand the value for U.S. and humankind of maintaining good relations between the two nuclear superpowers . Mr Tillerson keeps insisting that that will be impossible until Moscow returns Crimea to Ukraine and stops aiding the Don
 U.S.-Russia relations are doomed for the foreseeable future, says CNN's John Sutter . Since, short of a major war with the United States or NATO, Russia won't ever agree to these demands, he says .
 The Russian flag has flown over Crimea since 1783, as long as the U.S. has existed . The flag has been flown over the peninsula since that time .
 In 1850s, America sent arms and munitions as well as engineers and doctors to help the Russians . The Crimean War was during the British, French, and Turkish invasion .
Nikita Khrushchev transferred Crimea from the Russian to the Ukrainian Republic within the Soviet Union in 1954 . The transfer was reportedly on a drunken whim .
 No one asked the population of Crimea whether they wanted to be transferred to Ukraine or not . Crimea's population was not asked whether it wanted to move to Ukraine .
 The communist bosses did exactly what 19th century monarchs did when they transferred at their pleasure real estate together with its people . No questions were asked about the transfer .
 The overwhelming majority of Crimeans never had considered themselves to be a part of Ukraine . Those who know the situation on the ground can testify that the overwhelming majority had never considered themselves in Ukraine .
Russian forces legally posted in Crimea. They appealed for protection to Russian forces legally post in Crimea .
 On March 16, 2014, Crimeans overwhelmingly voted to leave Ukraine and join – or rather, rejoin – Russia . The decision was made by Crimeans in the Ukraine .
 The referendum was not conducted in strict accordance with the Ukrainian constitution, but during the unconstitutional coup one could hardly expect it to be . One could argue that this referendum wasn't conducted in accordance with Ukrainian constitution .
 New power in Kiev was dominated by extreme nationalist elements . First actions included cancelling Russian language rights in all Ukraine, including Crimea .
 Critics of Russia's action in Crimea also evidently forget NATO’s 2008 declaration that Ukraine ‘will become members’ of that alliance . NATO has never rescinded the promise to which the post-coup regime in Kiev is still committed and which NATO has not rescinded .
 Russia could no more accept an American fleet at Sevastopol than the United States could tolerate the prospect of a Russian naval base on the Great Lakes .
 Donald Trump has the right instincts about potential benefits for America to patch things up with Russia . But in view of U.S. foreign policy being hijacked by Congress, he is forced to go beyond the very policies he once denounced .
 How the possibility of reigniting large-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine benefits the U.S. is unclear . The possibility of the United States.
 Ukraine's economy and its people's standard of living keep crumbling while the incompetent, squabbling factions in control of Kiev are accused by the population of being more corrupt than the previous rulers .
 It has been on the table since 2014, in variations put forward by Henry Kissinger among others . It is on the list for the first time since 2014 .
 Crimea won't return to Ukraine but it could perhaps reintegrate the Donbass . Russia has pointedly declined to absorb, despite locals’ requests and Kiev’s refusal to implement self-rule under the moribund Minsk 2 agreement .
 In any event, the solution depends not on additional arms shipments but on goodwill and dialogue, which are in short supply .
 President Trump can rightfully claim huge success in his economic and other domestic policies . President Trump's economic and domestic policies can be seen as a success .
In the foreign policy arena vital to our national security, there is no progress in foreign policy . Even the most optimistic observers do not see the slightest glimpse of hope for the better .
 Trump and Putin will regret the tragic results of their actions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He was one of the founding members of the Science and Engineering Committee for a Secure World to support President Reagan’s SDI program . He was also a member of the committee for the Secure World .
 He is the author of the book Operation Elbe, which describes joint U.S.-Russia anti-terrorist efforts . He is also the founder of the group's anti-terror group, which has been working with Russia for years .