 For some, a profound federalization of the country is the only remedy for its current domestic troubles . For others, it's only remedy to the country's current troubles .
 For others, it is a poison disguised as a medicine that would only bring about the complete collapse of the country . For some, it would only be a poison that would bring about a complete collapse.
 The bitter irony of the situation is that both sides seem to hold truth . Both sides appear to hold the truth.
 Cyril and Methodius Brotherhood to the turn of the century historians . Mykhaylo Drahomanov to the late 20th century leader of the anti-communist opposition Vyacheslav Chornovil .
 All of them expressed their views in a fundamentally different context . All of the writers expressed their opinions in a different context.
 Ukraine was not a sovereign state at the time but rather an inseparable part of the empire . Ukraine is now a member of the Ukraine-based empire .
 Any federalization of, or within, the empire meant for them a right step toward national emancipation and greater sovereignty, says the author .
Supporters of federalization refer to significant cultural differences between regions that result from different political organisms .
 The Bolsheviks patched most of the ethnic Ukrainian lands together . It was only in the 20th-century when the Bolsheviks patch most of Ukraine's lands together.
 The Soviets failed to eradicate their different political, cultural, and religious traditions through forcible Sovietization . They failed, however, to eradicate the different political and cultural traditions .
 The two ensuing decades of national independence have also failed to bring Ukraine’s versatile territories closer .
 In a representative 2006 nationwide survey, respondents in all but western Ukrainian regions declared they felt themselves in cultural and psychological terms closer to Russians than western Ukrainians .
 Belarusians are perceived as closer to "us" than west Ukrainians or even in some cases, the inhabitants of Kyiv and central Ukraine . In the south and east, not only Russians but also Belarusians were perceived as being closer to 'us'
 With dysfunctional institutions, weak rule of law and low national cohesion, federalization may rather accelerate centrifugal tendencies than mitigate interregional tensions and dispel mutual biases . Federalization may not be a solution to the problems of dysfunctional institutions .
 Ukraine’s regionalism is heavily vested in substantial cultural differences on top of the socio-economic ones . These cleavages have had clear political manifestation in the series of consecutive national elections . Voters’ preferences persistently expressed to a larger extent along cultural divisions rather than along ideological
 Ukrainian governments have been very reluctant to change a hypercentralized Soviet system . This largely explains why all the Ukrainian governments are reluctant to do so .
 The national democrats that had been mostly in opposition did not press hard for the administrative reform . They felt that in absence of functional institutions and viable cultural bonds any devolution of central power may put their state in jeopardy .
 The ruling postcommunists have been more ambivalent about federalism in their rhetorics . The idea was not so alien to their electorate in the south east and even less so to their patrons in Moscow .
 On the eve of elections, they even flirted opportunistically with the idea . But they have never tried to implement it .
 It is not in the nature of authoritarian regimes to promote any devolution of power, says the author . It's not in any way that it would deprive them from uncontrolled appropriation of financial and administrative resources .
 The idea of federalization has remained a bargaining chip for more than two decades in Ukraine . Local elites in their negotiations with Kyiv to acquire some personal gains and concessions .
 The orange government offered a comprehensive administrative reform aimed at a more efficient use of public resources and a better quality of public services .
 A few months later, the government fell collateral of the suicidal internecine fighting within the orange camp . The government postponed all the much-needed reforms at least for another decade .
 Realpolitik provides a powerful argument to the supporters of federalization . The brick is a kind of the proverbial brick offered by a stranger to buy in a dark street .
 Federalization seems to be a major demand of the both pro-Russian militants who took over a good dozen of east Ukrainian cities . Moscow patrons who has openly intervened in Ukraine have openly intervened.
 In such a lose-lose situation, the Ukrainian government may be tempted to accept a bad peace instead of a good war .
 The notion of federalization is highly unpopular in Ukrainian society . It is seen as a betrayal of the Maidan revolution and of the national cause in general .
Ukrainian nationalists reject the idea, but the population at large. Remarkably, it is not only staunch Ukrainian nationalists who reject it . But opinion surveys, including a recent one, show that the population is at large .
 The idea of federalization draws support of only 26% of respondents in the east of Ukraine and 22% in the south . In the west and the center, it is supported by meager 3 and 7% respectively .
 The highest figures are recorded in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . But even here supporters of federalization make up a plurality but not a majority of population .
 19% of respondents in the south east support today’s status quo . 45% stay for a unitary state with some decentralization and giving more power to the regions .
Only 12% of respondents in the south east list federalization as an important step to secure the national unity . Despite Russian unprecedented military, economic and propagandistic pressure, only 12% say federalization should be done .
 Many more – 38% – prioritize the need for disarmament and dissolution of various paramilitaries . 22% suggest the government to offer the south-eastern region a clear economic perspective .
 The second reason that makes the idea of federalization of Ukraine unviable is a broad recognition that whatever the Ukrainian government does to appease the Kremlin and its regional clients, they would never be satisfied . The third reason is that whatever they do to appease them, they wouldn't be satisfied
 Russia, as Ivan Krastev aptly notes, “envisions Ukraine becoming something akin to Bosnia’s Bosnia,’ he says .
 Ukraine would have closer ties with Russia than with the rest of Ukraine . Similar to the relationship between Bosnia’s Republika Srpska and Serbia .
 Radical federalization could allow Ukraine to remain intact through the current crisis . But it would most likely doom the country to disintegration and failure in the longer term .
 Russian officials leave little doubt about the type of "federalization" they mastermind for Ukraine .
 What in January looked as a delirious fantasy of a radical nationalist, two months later has largely become the core of Putin's Realpolitik .
 The new government in Kyiv is forced to accept the dismemberment of the country “under the guise of federalization’ – as the expert has candidly put it . The early departure of Viktor Yanukovych has partly distorted the plan, the expert says .
 Kyiv is very unlikely to accept it, and would rather promote the idea of much-needed decentralization . It basically coincides with the EU-supported principle of subsidiarity. Kyiv has been in the midst of a political crisis .
 The only legitimate way to achieve this is to hold parliamentary and local elections, and then to negotiate the division of power and responsibility between the center and regions .
 Kyiv staunchly opposes any talks on the matter with Russia and pro-Russian militants in Donbas . Moscow wants to thrust its “federalization agenda upon Kyiv.
 Kremlin is aware that any normal electoral process in Ukraine would result in defeat of pro-Russian forces . Kremlin does its best to sabotage and derail any normalization .
 Only 12% of respondents support or “rather support a takeover of government buildings in their region by armed men . 77% oppose it .
 In the same survey, 15% support hypothetical secession of their region and joining Russia but 70% oppose it . 32% find Russian interference into Ukrainian affairs legitimate but 54% disagree with it . 12% support a possible Russian military invasion in Ukraine but 74% opposes it .
 Only 3-9% of respondents support takeover of government buildings by armed men . In Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts, only 3- 9% support takeover by armedmen . In Donetsk, approval reaches 24 and 18% respectively .
 Only 4-7% of respondents in four central-southern oblasts support hypothetical invasion of Russian troops in Ukraine . 19% in Donbas support hypothetical Russian troops invasion of Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin still enjoys a high rating of popularity in Donbas, Ukraine . His popularity nosedived in a year to minus 90% in west and center, and 70% in the south and east .
 Sociologically, the Kharkiv oblast and in some cases, the Odesa oblast are located between those two poles .
 One of them can be defined as basically pro-Ukrainian and to a various degree, pro-European . Another can be called pro-Ukraine and pro-Europe .
 The other one is largely Soviet, partly pro-Russian but first and foremost confused and ambivalent . The other is largely Russian, partly Russian and partly Russian .
 In either case, support for a Russian invasion and/or joining Russia is lukewarm and nowhere, including Donbas, draws on majority .
 Too long these regions have been presented in Russian media as genuinely Russian, and their population as dreaming primordially about reunification with mother-Russia .
 It appeared that a few dozen mercenaries with Russian instructors could mobilize a few hundred local enthusiasts of both ideological and criminal background . They could occupy the government buildings in some Donbas towns and cities .
 Most people in Donbas are sitting on the fence ready to accept whoever it would be, as long as he brings some stability and hope for a better life .
Without the regular Russian army no takeover of the south east by Russia-armed paramilitaries is possible . Even in the Donbas it is increasingly problematic as the local population gets tired with the mess .
 The Ukrainian government may win some support of the local elites if it offers them a comprehensive package of decentralization reforms and enhanced self-rule .
 Russian-Ukrainian border is an open gateway for both Russian mercenaries and heavy weapon . It may also contain the paramilitaries in their nests and eventually eliminate them .
 The reconciliation between ‘two Ukraines’ would not be easy. Still, even in the best-case scenario, the reconciliation between the two would be difficult .
 Vitaly Nakhmanovych, a Ukrainian historian and Jewish-Ukrainian activist, argues that the reconciliation is rather impossible because the underlying values for both groups are incompatible and cannot be quickly changed .
Ukrainian politicians should think about accommodation, he says . Instead, he contends, Ukrainian politicians should consider accommodation .
 It might be possible if one group manages to guarantee some autonomy for the other group, with due respect to its values . It might also be possible to guarantee autonomy for one group, but not for the others .
 It is very unlikely that authoritarian Ukraine can provide such autonomy for democratically minded, Europe-oriented citizens .
 It is possible that democratic Ukraine would find a way to accommodate its paternalistic, Sovietophile, and Russia-oriented fellow countrymen . But it is quite possible that the country would find an alternative to its paternalism .
 Both Latvia and Estonia have rather successfully done for their Sovietophile/Pan-Slavonic co-citizens . This is actually what both Estonia and Latvia have rather successful done .
 In any case, it is very unlikely that the Kremlin would ever stop its subversive activities . The Kremlin is not likely to stop its activities .
 Moscow can derail Ukrainian reforms and successful Europeanization even without direct military invasion . With a huge network of agents in all Ukrainian institutions and significant support of the Russiphile/Sovietophile part of the population, Moscow can derailed Ukrainian reforms .
 The invasion is unlikely to be excluded due to its very high internal and international costs and rather questionable benefits .
 Russia could have easily taken Donbas after a bogus ‘referendum’ carried out in May . The referendum was held in Donbas.
 Donbas has little symbolical value for Russia and even less practical sense – with all its outdated 19th-century industry . But Donbas is less practical than its 19th century industry .
 Putin's main problem is not independent Ukraine per se but a successfully modernized, democratic and European Ukraine . Millions of Russians and Russian-speaking Ukrainian enjoy much more freedom and civic liberties than their brethren in Russia .
 Putinism is a system built upon the megalomaniac claim of pan-Slavonic uniqueness and paranoid anti-Westernism . This might be a deadly blow for the Putinism, says David Cameron .
 The Kremlin would probably continue all sorts of pressure and provocations in order to keep Ukraine in a limbo of “neither peace nor war’s’.
 This is a powerful challenge for the Ukrainian elite and population at large . This is the last opportunity to finally come to terms with civic maturity, national consolidation, and much-needed institutional reforms .