 American politicians’ attempts to look ‘credible’ when talking about Russia are hypocritical, self-serving and self-defeating . U.S. politicians' attempts to be 'credible' when talking to Russia are self- defeating and hypocritical .
 Russia needs to act smarter, not tougher, if they really want Russia to change its policies . If they want to change their policies, they need to be smarter and tougher .
 The Russian media will be replaying it on a loop for at least a year, says a source on Twitter .
 The top stories of the day were posted on CNN.com's iReporters .
 John McCain's visit to Maidan hadn't already provided enough ammunition to Russian state media . Obama's ‘admission’ had now armed them as surely as Russia’s ‘humanitarian convoys’ armed separatists in the Donbas .
 The statement was most likely a reference to the so-called 21 February Agreement, it said . Yanukovych essentially repudiated when he elected to flee the country .
 Obama didn't just put his foot in his mouth; he did so by claiming credit for something the United States wasn't even responsible for .
 The counterproductive, utterly irrational idea of maintaining U.S. ‘credibility’ as some kind of world leader seems to make them incapable of changing these tactics, much less turning things around on the Kremlin .
 I figured I'd assume good faith and give them a few hints, if only to help them blunder a bit less often . I'm not one to advise Western leaders, but I figured it would be good faith .
 U.S. leaders have an annoying habit of bumbling right into the Kremlin's own game .
 Without delving into a deep analysis of Putin’s government, one particular aspect remains salient here .
From the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia's leaders have failed to produce a functioning, prosperous society .
 Yeltsin’s failures discredited the very word democracy in the mind of many Russians . Yeltsins' failures discredited democracy in many Russians.
 Putin couldn’t offer them democracy, of course, but what he could offer was some semblance of order, which seemed like a big improvement .
Anti-American rhetoric has long been associated with Putin’s regime . But when oil prices and foreign investment were high, most people simply rolled their eyes at such rhetoric .
 They were too busy enjoying vacations in Turkey, Egypt, and in some cases even Europe or the United States .
 When they weren’t abroad they were enjoying all the imported brand-name goods, which satisfied a consumerist culture .
 As much as the elite increasingly talked about ‘foreign agents’ and ‘colour revolutions’ Most Russians simply didn’t care.
 Russians were well aware that the privations and outrages they still suffered were not the conspiratorial workings of the West . But rather the fault of a corrupt and sclerotic state that insisted on monopolising power .
 Protests in 2011-2012 shocked the Kremlin, reminding the Russian elite that an educated, tech savvy, and increasingly prosperous society can be dangerous .
 Western leaders were happy to oblige him with ridiculously shortsighted policies in countries like Libya and Syria .
 Putin played the role of a peacekeeper in Syria in 2013. Tough talk but without the willingness to back it up allowed Putin to play the role .
 West's direct warnings, statements, and sanctions against Russia made a Russia-West confrontation – the wildest fantasy of geopolitical ‘experts’ – a reality for ordinary Russians . Even better for Putin, the West’s direct warnings.
 It would help if Western leaders were to understand something about the people who run Russia . It would also help if they knew something about Russia's people .
 Russia is unable to offer Russia’s citizens anything better than a corrupt and backward society . There is a crucial need for its leaders to distract the populace and make them blame their problems on the West .
 Russian press uses this as evidence that the West hates Russia, and so, by extension, Russia’s leaders must be doing something right because they’re confounding the West .
Reading the writings and statements of pro-Kremlin ideologues reveals a compendium of anxieties . Reading the writings of the pro- Kremlin ideologist's writings reveals an anxieties list .
 There's an obvious crisis of masculinity, which manifests in the swaggering photo-ops of Vladimir Putin . Putin has the tendency to put international relations in terms of sexual dominance .
 Pro-Kremlin trolls often construct pornographic memes portraying Ukraine as a prostitute, or more often a passive homosexual .
 Most of all there’s the constant claim that Russia is ‘resisting’ something without actually offering anything in return . Russia is 'resisting' something without offering anything.
 Russia plays the role of the rebel when Western nations issue threats they obviously can't or won't back up, Russia says . Russia plays a role of a rebel when it is threatened by Western nations .
 In reality, Putin's Russia is an authoritarian, corrupt state, which preaches morality while practising nothing of the sort .
 Western leaders don't seem to be interested in using military force to halt Russian aggression . They had better start learning how to deal with the anxieties of those in the Kremlin .
 Russia's leaders and their ideologues must be made aware of how ridiculous they look. First, Russia’s leader and ideologue must be aware of their looks .
 Westerners need to be made aware of how little, especially ordinary Americans, think of them . They need to know how little they think of themselves .
 The average Russian, regardless of where he or she lives, will probably think about or hear about the United States several times in one day .
 Most Americans go days at a time without thinking about Russia, unless they happen to catch the news . By stark contrast, most Americans don't think about Russia for days .
 Few could name any cities in Russia beyond Moscow and St Petersburg, if that was possible .
 Russians like to attribute this to American ignorance, they ought to be reminded that this ignorance is rooted in apathy .
 Americans don’t know about other Russian cities like Samara or Nizhny Novgorod for the same reason . They simply have no reason to care.
 Russia opted for crude xenophobia, ridiculously complex visa regulations, neglect for infrastructure, and dependence on exporting oil and natural resources . Instead of transforming Russia into a vibrant, open, prosperous society, they opted instead for crude Xenophobia and complex visa rules .
 Western leaders need to force the Kremlin to explain what it stands for, rather than letting it play the misunderstood rebel .
 Russians must learn all they can about daily reality on the Russian streets, which is anything but a model of traditional morality . They must also learn about daily life on the streets, they say .
 Russia’s rates of abortion, teenage pregnancy, alcohol and drug abuse, and homicide are alarmingly high .
 Russia's elite shows for its people, including those who give up their lives supposedly in defence of their homeland . They must highlight the utter contempt Russia’s elite shows. They must be shown for their contempt for their people, such as those who take their lives in
 The pensions of Great Patriotic War veterans are far lower than those of European pensioners, including veterans of the defeated Wehrmacht . For all its posturing and constant invocation of the victory over fascism, the pensioners' pensions are far less .
 It is regrettable, but it is a bitter truth, and it is the Putin government’s fault, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They believe their ideas and actions have the same meaning to the rest of the world . They believe that their ideas hold so much meaning to them .
 The rest of the world isn’t subject to their delusions. They must be reminded constantly that the rest of world isn't subject to its delusions .
 The West and its allies shouldn't be required to surrender to Putin’s demands, they need not be dragged into a shouting match, they say .
 Russia must make it clear that so long as it acts up, Russia will remain increasingly irrelevant . They must make the clear that they must act up. So long as they act up, they will remain irrelevant .
 Western leaders really ought to rethink some of their policies of the last decade or so and reflect on what lessons they were learning from them .
 Clinton, Bush, Obama and Obama all taught Putin that military interventions are fine as long as you come up with a tenuous justification, and are able to get away with it .
 Uncritical and unconditional support for Maidan appeared to Russians as an open coup right in front of their eyes . Russians appeared to be in support for the Maidan.
 Yanukovych’s corruption hurt everyone in Ukraine, there was no good reason for the movement to degenerate into nationalist rivalry . Insofar as Yanukovych's corruption hurteveryone, there is no good reasons for the country's political turmoil to degenerated into nationalist rival .
 Western leaders should have warned protesters and their leaders that alienating large parts of the country would play into the hands of Moscow . West would not bail them out in any scenario which led to civil war or Russian intervention .
 Clinton, Bush, Obama and Obama all taught Putin that military interventions are fine as long as you can get away with it . Putin's military intervention is fine, says Obama .
 Politicians need to think twice about what actions really preserve ‘credibility’ and which do not .
 Any time tough talk isn’t backed by action, credibility is reduced, not preserved . Any time hard talk isn't backed by actions, credibility isn”t backed, says David Cameron .
 Russia’s rulers seem to be claiming they’re prepared to go it alone without any partners or allies .