Barack Obamacollective securitydecision to send "lethal" arms to the Ukraine .
 "The long view with Russia," says Anne Applebaum . Applebaum: "We have a long view of Russia"
 Putin scheint bei den Gesprächen mit Westen darauf zu setzen, dass die Krise zum “eingefrorenen Konflikt” wird, Die Welt, 9.9.
 Angela Merkel, François Hollande, Petro Poroshenko and Vladimir Putin are to meet in Minsk on Wednesday, February 11, 2015 . They are to see if they can hammer out some kind of a "deal" that will include a ceasefire in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of the
 President Barack Obama will seek to forestall any decision by sending “lethal’s military weapons and other assistance to Kiev, or for European countries to even consider doing so . He will also seek to Forestall any decisions, much less action, by President Barack
 He will be trying to intimidate both the Europeans and the Americans and make them fear his reaction if they send weapons . He will try to make them have qualms about sending arms in a quantity and manner than could really make a difference on the ground .
 Today’s leaders, in Europe as in the United States, seem to have little grasp of history, international law, or the origins and history of the United Nations .
 Putin has been left free to move tanks, artillery, advanced air defense weapons systems, and other advanced electronic equipment, as well as thousands of Russian special operations forces, irregular forces, and regular Russian troops and equipment .
 The United Nations was established to provide international peace and security, above all else, to the nations of the world, based on the concept of collective security . U.S. leaders may remember that the U.N. was established in the 1930s to provide security to all nations .
 The U.N. Security Council was to be called upon to take action to restore international peace and security . The council was called on to use military force to secure that objective .
 The concept was not that some states would come to the collective self-defense only of other states in a military alliance to which they belonged . Instead that any and all willing states could come to defense of any state which was the victim of an attack .
 The alternative is a large number of overlapping military alliances established in the Americas under the auspices of the Organization of American States . This concept is worth preserving, since the alternative is an alternative .
 The original Charter scheme of collective security made sense in 1945, and it makes sense now . The original charter scheme made sense.
 Any state should feel free and legally authorized to take measures to aid the Ukraine in collective self-defense in repelling Russian aggression, as authorized by Article 51 of the United Nations Charter .
 The idea was and remains that any country that was victim of an “armed attack had the right to benefit from military assistance from any other states in order to repel and bring to an end the armed attack .
 The United Nations Charter created a system in which a country such as Ukraine would be entitled to receive military assistance from other states acting in collective self-defense under Article 51 of the UN Charter .
 The old “balance of power’ system from the 19th century was to be replaced by a system based on the basic principles of the Charter . It included the prohibition of the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state .
 U.N. Charter never encountered a frontal rejection by Russia's military aggression against the Ukraine during the last year . Russia’s “annexation’ of the Crimea, Russian-occupied territory of the Ukraine .
 News stories about the latest negotiations in Minsk hit the headlines . It will be useful for readers to bear in mind the broader context in which the negotiations are taking place .
 Russia has sent any troops and tanks, etc. into the Donbas, says Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov . They should bear in mind the monstrous lies Putin and his propaganda machine, says Lavrov .
 Putin has not honored a single agreement Russia has made on the Ukraine. They should bear in mind that Putin hasn't honored any of the agreement Russia made on Ukraine .
 The U.N. Charter and international law have to say about military aggression by one country invading another. They should bear in mind what the U. Nations Charter and International law say .
 U.N. General Assembly Resolution A/RES/25/2625 on Principles of International Law and Friendly Relations Among States .
 NATO and Russia should bear in mind the risks of inadvertent nuclear war in view of the present collision course . Putin's goals appear to include disabling NATO and Europe, and not just winning in Ukraine .
 It’s time to start thinking about the risks of nuclear war with Russia, and of appeasement, says The Trenchant Observer .
 The sobering facts of Russia’s assault on Europe and the West,’ The Trenchant Observer, December 1, 2014.
 The real issue is the prompt adoption of really biting sectoral sanctions against Russia so long as it keeps its troops and ongoing military operations underway in the Ukraine . They should bear in mind that the real issue.
 Russia's access to the SWIFT international payments system would be blocked . Vladimir Putin would be added to the sanctions list, including the freezing of all of his assets abroad .
 Putin has machines of war and soldiers in and near the Ukraine to continue his military aggression against that country . Putin has machine of war.
 The West has far more powerful economic weapons that it can use to defend the Ukraine . If necessary to bring Russia’s economy to a halt, the West can use them to stop the Ukraine crisis .
 The West should use those weapons now, decisively, with an active Russian military invasion of the eastern Ukraine in progress, says CNN's Peter Bergen .