Pro-European course for Ukraine developed into powerful civic protests against a criminal authoritarian regime . Russia annexed Crimea and continues to threaten the stability and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 The Institute or its partners are sharing their views on the current crisis . On this blog, curated by Tatiana Zhurzhenko, critical commentators connected to the Institute and its partners .
 The Ukrainian Revolution and the war in the east seen through the eyes of a Kharkiv intellectual . The Kharkov intellectual is a former member of the Ukrainian National Council of Ukraine .
 Global temperatures are rising, but the former Soviet Union's frozen conflicts show no sign of a thaw .
 Russia’s support for the election held by separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk . The Kremlin has decided to create another semi-permanent “mini-Cold War,’ this time in rebel-controlled areas of Russia's most important neighboring country .
 Since the armed conflict in Donbas between the Kyiv government and pro-Russian separatists, the common discourse about "two Ukraines" looks like a self-fulfilling prophecy .
 Scepticism about the viability of Ukraine as a nation-state now appears well-founded . The Ukraine government has been criticized by so many observers in the country .
 Europe's pivotal politician has led Europe's evolving policy towards Ukraine . In tribute to Merkel, we might call it the Merkel plan .
 If it succeeds, a characteristically European version of liberal order will have prevailed over the conservative, nationalist recipe for violent disorder represented by Vladimir Putin .
 Orthodox Christianity has become increasingly important to Western observers and journalists in their attempts to explain the Russian support for the Eastern Ukrainian separatists . The recent tragic events in Ukraine and the ongoing military conflict in the East of the country have become important .
 British parliamentary committee calls it 'ambiguous war' as it declares war between two sovereign states . But it says it is still war between Ukraine and Ukraine .
 The triumphal narrative of 1989 presents the revolutions in Poland, Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria, Bulgaria and Romania as a wave of civil resistance and broad opposition to the local communist regimes .
 The fall of these regimes was only possible because Moscow’s grasp on its satellites had weakened. This narrative often obscures the fact that the fall of this regimes is only possible .
 It is hard to judge, from today's perspective, what strategy the Patriarch of Moscow will pursue with regard to Putin’s politics towards Ukraine .
 The Russian Orthodox Church's approach to pluralism is at stake in Ukraine . But what can be said for sure is that in Ukraine, the Orthodox Church’s approach is at least at stake .
 This Sunday, millions of men and women will go to the urns in Ukraine to exercise their civil right to vote for new president .
 The vast majority of Ukrainians throughout the country wish to remain in Ukraine and want to take part in the election . Opinion polls show that the vast majority want to remain.
 Ukraine can hold a democratic election for its president next Sunday . If Ukraine can return to peaceful negotiations, there's a hope it could return to peace .
Putin's strategy in Ukraine betrays a nuanced understanding of 21st century geopolitics . Some deride Russia for backward thinking, but Putin's strategy is not backward .
 European, American and Russian intellectuals will meet their Ukrainian counterparts to discuss the meaning of Ukrainian pluralism for the future of Europe, Russia and the world . The conference will take place between 15 and 19 May .
 Voltaire says he would gladly move to Russia if its capital were Kiev, not icy St. Petersburg . Voltaire is a French teacher of tolerance and a great friend of Catherine the Great .
 Ukrainian presidential election scheduled on May 25 gets closer . Kremlin's window of opportunity for invading the country is gradually narrowing .
 The rhetoric of Russian President Vladimir Putin justifying the Anschluss of Crimea has been based on the premises that there is no legitimate government in Kiev, that it is being run by a gang of Nazis and anti-Semites .
 There is nothing we or the Ukrainian government can do to restore its control over Crimea, says Ukrainian official . There is no way to restore control of Crimea.
 The leaders of the Ukrainian far right receive the support of 2 percent to 3 percent of Ukrainian citizens . The presidential elections are scheduled for May 25 .
 Europeans dismantled the Soviet empire at the end of the 20th century . Europeans went back to finishing off the Austrian-Hungarian and Ottoman ones, including successor states such as Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia .
 In the course of the recent dramatic events in Ukraine, great emphasis has been put on the language question .
 Vladimir Putin’s allegations regarding the suppression of Russian speakers in Ukraine are part of a complex network of continuing propaganda, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says Putin's recent political moves are the result of an ideology that is dangerously close to that of Nazi Germany .
 Young Ukrainian activist Aleksandra Kovaleva posted an open letter to European politicians on Facebook .
 The letter evokes anger, hurt, and disappointment of thousands on the Maidan . The letter was a cri de coeur, evoking the anger and hurt of thousands .
 Sanctions on Russia are vital for the credibility of democracy, but politicians believe citizens will not tolerate economic sacrifice .
 Ukraine now has a government that has undertaken constitutional reforms to create a parliamentary democracy . The government has scheduled presidential elections in the country .
 Ukraine is home to a number of political parties with different views of the future of the country . Like other countries, Ukraine's political parties are different.
We believe that these differences should be resolved in peaceful discussion and free elections among Ukrainians themselves . We believe that this is a good way for Ukrainians to vote in free elections .
 Russia's willingness to violate Ukraine's territorial sovereignty is the gravest challenge to the European order in over half a century . Russia’s willingness toviolate Ukraine”s territorial sovereignty has been a major challenge to European order for over 50 years .
 The conflict pits a vast nuclear power against a state equal in size to France, an autocratic regime against a revolutionary government .
 Russia has likened the protests to pogroms, but Jews have joined the movement because what's at stake is an independent future .
 The day of violence in Ukraine began with the promise of peace. The tragedy about the crackdown in Ukraine is that the day of the crackdown began with peace .
 Tuesday was the day that the Ukrainian parliament was supposed to begin discussions on the basic constitutional change that is needed as a first step towards resolving the present political crisis and restoring normal governance .
 More tragic still is that a broad consensus exists, within and without Ukraine, as to how a political exit could be arranged .
 The European idea extends well beyond the formal frontiers of the European Union . Recent events in Ukraine show that the European idea is alive and alive .
 Dmytro Bulatov's face is bloodied, scarred face of the opposition activist . But the face of Ukraine today is the bloodied face of opposition activist DmyTro Bulatova .
 Think of this as a political Chernobyl. Comparisons with Bosnia are still far-fetched, but think of it as apolitical Chernobyl .
 Russian leaders, diplomats and commentators ponder the division of Ukraine .
 If the current crisis ends with the fragmentation of the Ukrainian state, the result will be disastrous for all concerned, including Russia . If the present crisis ends in Ukraine, it will be a disaster for Russia .
 The risk is that in conditions of chaos, Russia could follow the logic of its current commitments to a very dangerous conclusion . Russia is in the absence of a decisive Western stance, says the author .
 Diese Fragen stellt sich der Schriftsteller Martin Pollack, wenn er dieser Tage seinen Freund Juri Andruchowytsch auf Videos sieht . Wie er auf dem Maidan in Kiew
 We call our international colleagues not only to express their support for Ukrainian writers and journalists, and their solidarity with the Ukrainian people . We call on them to support Ukrainian writers, journalists.
We call on you to mobilize your democratic societies and increase pressure on your governments to take a tougher stance against a regime that is leading its country to further violence and bloodshed . We call on them to mobilize their democratic societies .
 Ukraine's Euromaidan is rather unlike the wave of mass protests in Russia that followed the rigged election to the State Duma in December 2011 .
 Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians in Kiev and throughout the country are spending nights in the cold and risking arrest and pain to show they care about Ukraine and its future .
 Russian leadership is promoting the creation of a Eurasian Union incorporating Russia, the states of Central Asia, and Ukraine . In recent years, one may have witnessed a widening gap between the Russian leadership and the Russian public .
Young Ukrainians are being beaten in Kiev for protesting their own government's decision not to enter an association agreement with the European Union . This is the question we might be asking ourselves these last few days, as we watch young Ukrainians being beaten .