 Russia’s ’Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the United States Marine 5b. The U.S. Marine 5 b. The Marine 5B.
 The U.S. Embassy in Arlington is located in Arlington, Virginia . The embassy is located on Washington Boulevard, Washington Boulevard . The city is home to the embassy of Washington, D.C. and the embassy in Arlington .
 It has been just over a year since “little green men’s’ surged into Crimea and drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority .
 Other nations and non-state actors who are potential U.S. adversaries are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare and will likely modify their own strategy and tactics .
 In the 21st century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between war and peace . As he explained, the rules of war have changed .
 In the second phase, Russia uses economic warfare and diplomatic/political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states as a 4 means of further weakening them . In the third phase, the Russian government is using economic warfare to intimidate and coerce
 One of Russia’s 7 major forces for political impact is the Spetsnaz, which one expert discussed in more detail . One expert discussed more detail.
No. 9 quickly to take control of key infrastructure across the peninsula . No. 9 fast to take over key infrastructure .
 Russians forced to take on visible roles to prevent defeat of self-proclaimed republics . At that point, the Russians were forced to 10 take on clearly visible roles .
 Russian-sponsored operations have been more successful where they have had support from large ethnic Russian populations . But they have fallen short where these conditions do not exist .
 The national armed forces of Lithuania currently have no mandate to intervene in internal affairs . That is the responsibility of the police and the Ministry 13 of Interior .
 Bulgaria is heavily dependent on Russia for energy supplies and maintenance of its military equipment . Washington and Brussels prevailed. Bulgaria was subject to intense pressure to go forward with its long-planned role.
 Participants saw Russia’s use of population shaping measures in the pre-hostilities phase (to include leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries) Participants also saw Russia's use of a mélange of ambiguous actors, including special forces, militias, and criminal elements .