 The cultural and political differences besetting Ukraine are the product of very different patterns of regional settlement . Ukraine is a country that has a very different pattern of regional settlements .
Political conflict has arisen whenever the legitimacy of Russian culture in Ukraine has been challenged . Among these, the settlement of eastern and southern Ukraine stands out .
After the destruction of Kiev by Batu Khan in 1240, the land ‘beyond the rapids’ of the Dnieper River became a no man’s land disputed by the Kingdom of Muscovy, the Tatar Khanate, and the Polish-
 Cossacks sought to preserve their independence, while defending their traditional Orthodox Christian faith . It is in this region that the political life of the Ukrainian people begins .
 One of the earliest distinctions that arose among them is the geographic distinction between those who settled west of the Dnieper River, known as the Right Bank as the river flows . Those who settled east of the river are called the Left Bank .
 The Left Bank includes the current regions of Crimea, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Kharkov, Kherson, Lugansk, Odessa, Nikolayevsk, and Zaporozhye .
 Percentage of Russians and Russian speakers in regions that supported V Yanukovych supported Yanukovych. Percentage of Russian speakers supported Yanukovych .
 Slobodskaya Ukraina or slobozhanshchina includes Ukrainian regions of Kharkov and Sumy . Voronezh, Kursk and Belgorod, which are currently part of the Russian Federation .
 The name derives from the sloboda, or fort settlements, that the Cossacks established on the left bank of the Dnieper .
Local autonomy granted in exchange for service defending the borders of the Russian Empire .
 They also benefited from certain tax exemptions and trading privileges . They also received some tax exemptions, trading privileges.
 Many of these sloboda prospered and later developed into major Ukrainian cities . Their ‘free’ status ended in 1765, when Catherine the Great made the Cossacks into regular soldiers .
 Kharkov, Ukraine’s second largest city and the capital of the Ukrainian SSR from 1919 to 1934, was the administrative and cultural capital of slobozhanshchina .
 Its university, the second oldest in the Russian Empire, made it a major Russian cultural centre . It is also a prominent centre for the study of the Ukrainian language .
 Novorossiya, a name that gained notoriety after it was used by Russian president Putin in April 2014, is actually the name of one of the youngest and most ethnically diverse regions of Ukraine .
 The Russian Empire was incorporated into the Russian Empire as a result of the Russo-Turkish wars of the 18th century . The settlement of this region followed a similar pattern of establishing military forts that eventually became cities .
 Since the conquest of Novorossiya, Russia added a new coastline to the Russian Empire . Specific incentives were added to establish new ports and promote trade there .
 Odessa, Ukraine's third largest city, became the region's cultural and commercial centre . Odessa is now Ukraine’s third biggest city, and is now the country's thirdlargest city .
 Its early status as a free port contributed to an aura of cosmopolitanism that attracted large numbers of Jews, Greeks, Armenians, and Italians .
Russian rulers encouraged the settlement of Serbians, Bulgarians and Hungarians . Further inland from the coast, Russian rulers encouraged settlement of Serbia, Bulgaria and Bulgaria .
 The use of the term Novorossiya was suppressed in Soviet times . It was perceived as a region sympathetic to the Whites during the Russian Civil War .
 Crimea, or Tauridia, is among the oldest recorded settlements along the Black Sea coast . Crimea is one of the most popular settlements in the region .
 The peninsula fell under Scythian, Gothic, and even Genovese control, until it was captured by Ottoman forces in 1475 . Later, the peninsula fellunder Scythians, Gothic. Later, it was taken by Ottoman troops .
 Crimea was transferred administratively from the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic only in 1954 . Crimea is the only region of Ukraine whose population identifies itself as predominantly ethnic Russian .
 Along with the status of the indigenous Crimean Tatars, this has been a sore spot throughout the post-Soviet era .
 Crimea's tense history in independent Ukraine is worth summarising Crimea’s tense history .
 Crimea recognised as an independent participant of the new Union Treaty being proposed by Mikhail Gorbachev . In January 1991, Crimean regional government decided to hold a referendum to ‘restore’ Crimean autonomy .
 This opened the door to separating Crimea from the USSR . Ukraine was then still a part of the USSR, which Ukraine was still part of .
 On 4 September 1991, the Supreme Soviet of the Autonomous Crimean Republic proclaimed its sovereignty . It declared its intent to create its own democratic state within Ukraine .
 Crimean residents took part in the Ukrainian independence referendum in 1991 . 54% voted for Ukraine’s independence from the USSR – the lowest percentage of any region in Ukraine .
 Crimean constitution conflicted with acting Ukrainian constitution in several key points . Under pressure from Kiev, it was revoked the next day, but the region nevertheless adopted a Crimean constitution .
 relations between the Crimean and Ukrainian governments remained tense over the next several years . Over the course of the next few years, relations remained tense .
 The situation seemed to be resolved when Russia did not respond to Ukraine’s decision in March 1995 to revoke the 1992 Crimean constitution . The situation, however, seemed to have been resolved by Russia .
 Three thousand regional officials from eastern and southern Ukraine gathered in Kharkov . They voted to assume political control in their regions until ‘constitutional order’ was restored in Kiev .
 In Crimea, the regional parliament, one of the instigators of this meeting, went even further . The meeting took place in Crimea .
 Kiev responded by putting the Ukrainian military under the direct command of then acting speaker/president Oleksandr Turchynov . The Ukrainian military tried to replace local military commanders and security forces in Crimea .
 Russian president Putin asked for and received authority to use Russian troops in Ukraine . On 1 March, Putin cited threat to Russian citizens, military personnel and compatriots in Crimea .
 Crimean referendum was moved up and the question changed from autonomy within Ukraine to secession with the intent of joining Russia . A week later the Crimean referendum had been moved up . The question was then moved up to secession .
 On 16 March, secession was approved by more than 80% of the population . The vote was held in a referendum on secession .
 Crimean leadership took advantage of turmoil in Kiev to redress an old grievance – the abrogation of its 1992 Constitution . The Crimean leadership thus took advantage.
 Russian intervention directly facilitated its ability to hold such a referendum, which most international legal experts consider illegal . Russian intervention indirectly facilitated the referendum, according to legal experts .
 Donbass is Ukraine's largest coal basin, and the rise of local industry . The discovery in 1720 of Europe’s biggest coal basin is linked to the discovery .
 Half million Old Believers settled in this region during the latter half of the 17th century . The region has its periodic uprisings, fed in part by the half million who settled in the region .
 Donbass is one of the most ‘Soviet’ and therefore ‘alien’ regions of Ukraine . For Ukrainian nationalists, it is also a ‘ Soviet’ region, however, and is also ‘Russian’
 The Russian Empire has had a lasting impact on their identity . These regions all rose to prominence as a direct result of the growth and expansion of the Russian Empire .
First, the historical-cultural pattern of eastern Ukraine is bicultural . First, the history of Ukraine's history is b multicultural .
 This Other Ukraine has developed a self-sustaining regional identity . Both Russian and Ukrainian interact freely, and are interchangeable .
 This territory is a border region, distinct from both Moscow and Kiev . Second, this territory is the border region of Russia and Ukraine .
 There is a remarkably stable voting pattern displayed by the Other Ukraine since 1994 . The Other Ukraine has been in a stable position since 1994.
 Critics often attribute it to Soviet-era nostalgia, but it is better understood as a yearning for cosmopolitanism, which is more reflective of their identity .
 Ukrainian identity is inextricably linked to Russian culture, if not to Russian politics . It manifests itself in the visceral rejection of the ethnic nationalism that is popular in regions of western Ukraine .
 The country's political divisions have followed these historical patterns . It is therefore no surprise that the country’s political division has followed these patterns .
 Participants in Orange Revolution of 2004 were eight times more likely to be from western Ukraine . 92 percent claimed Ukrainian as their native language .
 By contrast, their opponents were overwhelmingly from the East, primarily from Donetsk . Three times more likely to speak Russian at home than their opponents .
 Only 25 percent wanted to join the EU in April, while 47 percent preferred the Russia-led Customs Union . 70 percent did not support secession, in April .
 The percentage favouring separation from Ukraine has jumped dramatically, from 27.5% to 42.1%, mainly at the expense of the undecided . It is the first time that the percentage of people favour separation has jumped .
 Western Ukrainians are now more convinced than ever that there is a Russian invasion . Ukraine ought to remain a unitary state, with Ukrainian as the only one official language .
 Eastern Ukrainians are now more receptive to the idea of separating from Ukraine . Eastern Ukrainians, by contrast, are more convinced that the fault for this crisis lies in Kiev .
 A follow-up survey by the Kiev International Institute of Sociology, conducted 6-17 December 2014, confirms the pattern .
 EU membership continues to be seen very differently, with only a quarter of residents of Donbass under Kievan control favouring EU membership .
 In the Western regions of Ukraine, 89.3% are in favour of EU membership and only 5.7% against . In the West, only 5% are against EU membership in the West .
 In the Western regions of Ukraine, half have a positive view of the Ukrainian army’s volunteer combatants .
 This figure falls to 24.1% in the South, 19.1%. In the East, 8.2% in Donbass now under Kievan control .
 The following table shows the percentage within each district that named a given event the “most important of the passing year” followed by its rank within that district, and the percentage divergence between the two .
 There is much less consensus about the significance of Russian troops in Donbass, says CNN . We see that, while there is broad agreement that casualties are key events .
Donbass is a Russian-controlled region in Donbass . It is unclear as to the precise nature of Russian involvement there . This is no doubt due to the considerable uncertainty inside Donbass.
 Donetsk and Lugansk Peoples’ Republics are already being mythologised very differently in the different parts of Ukraine . The deaths of the Heavenly Hundred, the signing of the EU association agreement, and the proclamation of the Donetsk Republics.
President Yanukovych's removal of president Yanukovych violated the delicate balance of interests forged between Galicia and Donbass .
 It was seen as a direct threat to the core interest of Russophone Ukrainians . It was thus seen as an issue of concern for the Russian people .
 Only after Yanukovych's ouster do we begin to see a popular shift in the Other Ukraine from passive rejection of the Maidan to outright rebellion in Crimea and Donbass .
 Thousands of combat and civilian casualties have now been hardened by thousands of combat casualties . Such sentiments have now become hardened by hundreds of casualties .
 The previous balance of power among regions has thus been radically altered . The previous Balance of power in the region has been drastically altered .
 Ukraine has a chance to be replaced by the triumph of western Ukrainian nationalism . This has encouraged some to argue that the centuries old cultural mixture that has characterised Ukraine now has been replaced by western nationalism .
 Most proposals for ending the current crisis have proved to be of limited value because they tend to overlook the deep historical and cultural roots of the conflict . Most proposals are of limitedvalue because of the historical roots of conflict .
 Both the government in Kiev and opposition leaders in Donbass are pursuing a zero-sum game . What is needed is a mutually respectful solution, they say .
 Copenhagen School of Security Studies suggests that Ukraine's security can be enhanced by treating national identity as a shared security concern .
 The most profound security challenge that nations face today involves not sovereignty, but identity – specifically, the identity of the cultural subgroups that make up a society .
 The fact that the Russian-speaking minority within Ukraine has a powerful external patron only makes this solution more attractive . The Russian-language minority in Ukraine has an external patron .
 By embracing the Russian language and culture as legitimate aspects of Ukrainian identity, Ukraine could allay Russia’s concerns, while neutralising its popular support within the Other Ukraine .
 Ukrainian patriotism is more common in western Europe and the United States . This would also have the salutary effect of shifting the discourse of Ukrainian patriotism away from its current obsession with “our language” and ‘our identity,’
 Ukraine may finally allow Ukrainians to deal with domestic issues in ways that build loyalty to the state . Acknowledging the obvious reality that Ukraine is, at its heart, bilingual and bicultural, might finally let Ukrainians deal with their own issues .