 Russia's government defines the term compatriots broadly to incorporate not only ethnic Russians and Russian speakers but also their families as well as others who may have cultural or other connections to Russia .
 Compatriots may have descended from former subjects of the tsarist empire or Soviet-era migrants or may have migrated more recently . Compatriot may have moved to Russia more recently.
 Moscow has identified protection of and support for compatriot populations as a foreign policy priority since shortly after Russia's independence . Official Russian foreign policy and national security documents routinely cite it as such .
Russian compatriots have often been more visible as instruments of broader Russian foreign aims than as objects of Russian policy themselves . Nevertheless, in practical terms, Russian compatriots are often more visible than they are .
 Russia's compatriot policy is best analyzed in the context of the Russian government’s overall foreign policy goals as well as its objectives within its immediate neighborhood .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin sees Russia as a conservative power acting in defense of its own vital interests in the region and elsewhere . Russia's foreign policy conduct is increasingly assertive, in our judgment .
 Moscow sees a serious threat in the potential return of Russian 1 CNA Federation citizens and citizens of other former Soviet states to their home countries to promote violent extremist ideologies .
 Russia needs stability and a generally secure environment in its neighborhood to exercise its appropriate role on the global stage . Russia's foreign policy elite and public are increasingly closer to Russia .
This in turn calls for significant influence in the former Soviet region . This in turn also calls forsignificant influence in former Soviet regions .
 Putin's decision-making often appears tactical rather than strategic and few if any within his inner circle seem to challenge his perspectives, goals, or approaches in defining Russia's foreign and national security policy .
 Russia's seizure of Crimea and support for eastern Ukraine’s separatist forces fit this pattern, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia has seized Crimea and supported eastern Ukraine's separatist forces .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has made a number of moves in the Donbas . The former move was immediately successful, but it has created a variety of predictable challenges .
 In seeking to influence the former Soviet region, Russian compatriots can be useful to Moscow in many ways .
 Russia's existence strengthens Russia's argument that there is a “Russian world’s larger than Russia itself” that lends legitimacy to both Russia's great power status and its regional aspirations .
 Russian compatriots can amplify Russia’s political influence in the former USSR . They can also provide political, economic, and military intelligence .
 Moscow's ahenation from their own governments creates latent potential for unrest and another possible lever . Where they are alienated from governments in their countries of residence is a condition to which Moscow can contribute .
 Protecting compatriots is also politically useful both at home, and internationally, to rally support . Russia's public diplomacy can benefit Russia’s public diplomacy .
 Russia’s influence operations Operationally, Russia attempts to influence compatriots and their governments through several channels . Russia's influence operations are Operationally .
 The Russian government works directly with compatriots through Rossotrudnichestvo, a government agency analogous to the U.S. Agency for International Development . The semi-governmental Russky Mir Foundation promotes Russian language and culture .
 Other tools include an extensive information operations campaign that aims to spread dezinformatsiya, or disinformation . Other tools are an extensive Information Operations campaign.
 This includes Russian state media, such as Russia Today and Sputnik; private media in Russia and other countries . This includes private media, social media, and cyber-attacks. This includes state media and social media .
 The Russian Orthodox Church is critical tools for influencing compatriots in the former Soviet region . Business and economic relationships, corruption, and corruption are critical tools .
 The following table briefly lists implications for Russia, and strategic and operational implications for the U.S. policy . The table also lists implications of Russia and its military operations .
 The U.S. and Russia's policies require cultural and political identification with Russia . Using compatriots requires not only cultural but political identification.
 Using compatriots may produce diminishing returns if they produce backlash in home countries . Using compatriot may produce fewer returns if it produces backlash.
 Compatriots are a blunt instrument not fully subject to Moscow’s control . Compatriot are not subject to Russian control .
 Provoking violent conflict is dangerous for compatriots and for Russia . Provoking violence is dangerous to compatriots, for Russia and for its citizens .
 Reintegrating compatriots into Russia weakens their role as instruments of influence elsewhere . Reintegration of compatriots weakens role as instrument of influence in Russia .
Existing Western and Russian definitions of regional security are incompatible and will remain a source of tension . U.S. Strategic Implications: Existing Western, Russian definitions are incompatible .
 Russia’s leadership is prepared to take significant steps to defend vital interests . Russia's leadership is preparing to take a significant step .
 Moscow may be open to mutually satisfactory understandings to promote regional stability . Moscow may also offer a mutually satisfactory understanding.
 Better understanding Russia’s policy and actions toward compatriots is critical for U.S. policy . Effective host government management of compatriot populations’ grievances reduces vulnerability to Russian pressure .
 United States messaging to compatriot populations is no less important than wider messaging in the region . U.S. messaging to fellow Americans is no more important than broader messaging in region .
 Corruption creates additional pathways for Russian influence in compatriot co mm unities and beyond . Corruption creates extra pathways for Russia to influence in fellow Russians .
 Russia is likely to continue cyber-attacks, especially in states with significant and dissatisfied compatriot populations . Russia is most likely to be targeted by Russia in the future .
 The Russian government's direct engagement with compatriot communities . The government has been in touch with the Russian community for years .
 Percentage of ethnic Russians residing outside of Russia in former Soviet Union states . Percentage of Russians living in former Russian states .
 Implications for U.S. and Russia's policies i IX CNA. This page intentionally left blank .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and its hybrid warfare campaign in eastern Ukraine have been closely monitoring Russia’s efforts to influence and potentially reintegrate the Baltic States, Ukraine, Moldova and Kazakhstan into a Russia-centric political and economic space .
 These countries are all states of the former Soviet Union that have sizable ethnic Russian populations and Russian-speaking communities . They are all of the countries that have sizeable ethnic Russian population .
 Putin and the Russian government present Vladimir Putin and Russian government with an opportunity to exert influence over ethnic Russian populations . The Russian Orthodox Church is hosting Russian cultural events .
 Vladimir Putin is using Russia’s strategic influence over Russian ethnic populations in the neighboring states . Russia's strategic influence has become more eye opening for compatriots .
 The actions have profound implications for U.S. and Western policy toward Russia, Europe, and Central Asia . The United States explores options for engagement and containment in the region in the future .
 CNA study examines Russia’s objectives, policy, and strategic and operational calculus with respect to ethnic Russian, Russian-speaking, and other potentially sympathetic populations .
 Three-month effort designed to stimulate public discourse around Russia’s efforts to use these communities to further its policy goals . This is a quick-response, three-month efforts designed to encourage public discourse .
 The study highlights several important implications that U.S. policy-makers may consider in formulating policy toward Russia and the countries in which these compatriot populations reside .
 The study team plans to organize an event to discuss these topics at CNA headquarters in fall 2015 .
 The report is unclassified and cleared for public release . The study team's aim is to encourage public discussion .
 Our analysis relied on data from primary open sources, in Russian and in English .
 This is a rapid-response assessment, we did not conduct interviews in the U.S. or the former Soviet Union .
 Russia’s increasing assertiveness as a great power warrants further research in this area, particularly in the wake of the seizure of Crimea and its assistance to separatist forces in eastern Ukraine .
 First, we define Russian compatriots and provide an overview of Russian compatriot populations in the former Soviet Union and their host governments’ relations with them .
 We discuss Russia's foreign policy objectives toward its compatriots abroad . We also discuss Russia’s foreign policy goals toward its citizens abroad .
 Third, we examine the compatriots’ role in Russia’s strategic calculus and decision-making . We also examine the varied perspectives of Russia's foreign policy elites .
 Fourth, we discuss Russia’s operational calculus toward its compatriots and the Russian Orthodox Church . We discuss the channels through which it seeks to influence compatriots in their countries of residence .
 The United States formulates its policies toward Russia and other former Soviet countries . We conclude by highlighting implications for the U.S. to consider as it formulates policies .
 There was no difference between Ukraine, Belarus, Russia, and Kazakhstan . "People lived within the borders of one country, where there was no different between them," says author .
 The state was a tremendous advantage of such a community, says the author .
 One-day people woke up, and no one had asked them, and the country was gone . No one had been asked to ask them .
 We provide an overview of various states’ successes and failures integrating their Russian compatriot populations . We then provide a overview of several states' successes and successes in integration .
 The ability to speak Russian does not inherently produce loyalty to Russia . However, it does not necessarily produce loyalty .
 It is important to recall that the Soviet political and social system created strong pressures for members of non-Russian ethnic groups to speak Russian . It is also important to remember that the Soviets created strong pressure on non- Russian ethnic groups .
 Over two decades after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the pressure to speak Russian no longer exists (outside Russia)
 Many in older generations learned and used Russian to advance their careers . But they may not have learned to speak national languages well, they say .
 Since the annexation of Crimea, he has spoken increasingly of ethnic Russians abroad . He has spoken more of ethnic Russian abroad .
 This shift appears to reflect an effort to satisfy and promote Russian nationalism and cultural unity beyond the political borders of the Russian Federation .
 Percentage of ethnic Russians residing outside of Russia in former Soviet Union states ESTONIA* 24.8%’ LATVIA 26.8%. Percentage ofethnic Russians living outside of Russian in former USSR states ESTonia* 24%.
 The Russian Academy of Sciences estimates these populations to number approximately 30 million . The population is estimated to number about 30 million.
 census data in former Soviet states do not use Russian government classifications . It is complex and somewhat contentious to estimate Russian compatriots' numbers .
 Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, over 25 mi llion ethnic Russians lived in Soviet republics outside the Russian federation .
 Many migrated to Russia during the 1990s, but sizeable populations remain in several countries . Many migrated from Russia to Russia, though many migrated to other countries .
 Estonia, Latvia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan each have ethnic Russian populations exceeding 15%, and thus likely have the largest Russian communities in proportional terms . Estonia and Ukraine each have an ethnic Russian population exceeding 15% .
 Ethnic Russians make up smaller shares of the population in the other post-Soviet states .
 Significant numbers of non-Russians consider Russian to be their primary language of communication . In addition, significant numbers ofnon-Russian consider Russian as their language .
 This includes 15% of the population in Kazakhstan, 12% in (preconflict) Ukraine, 10% in Latvia, and 4% in Estonia . The population in Ukraine, Latvia, Latvia and Estonia are among the most populous countries .
PoccHHCKaa AicaaeMHJi Hayfc: ItHCTHTyT Copiiaubho-noJiHTHqecKHx HccJieaoBaHnii, MocKBa, 2014 .
 The constitution of Estonia designates Estonian as the official state language . But it provides protections for minority languages, devolving some authority to local government .
 The constitution of Latvia designates Latvian as the official language . Latvia's constitution also designates Latvia as the country's official language.
 Ukraine's ethnic makeup generally correlates with the country's geography . Ukraine’s ethnic makeup typically correlates with its geography .
 Most ethnic Russians are located in the eastern and southern oblasts of the country, where Russian is the predominant language .
 Stalin’s mass deportation of Crimean Tatars and the Russian naval presence led to the near-complete Russification of the local population . The Ukrainian government was not able to reverse after independence .
 Odessa, a Black Sea port and major trade hub, is also predominantly Russian speaking . Odessa is also a major port and trade hub in eastern Ukraine .
 Ethnic Russians account for 6% of Moldova’s population of 3. million . An additional 10% of the population consider Russian their primary language .
 The majority of the Russian population is in Moldova’s east, in the breakaway region of Transnistria . The region borders on southern Ukraine .
 Russia’s 14 th Army remains there as peacekeepers and to prevent Transnistria's integration into Moldova . Russia's 14th Army has 1,200 soldiers, including peacekeepers, to prevent Moldova's integration .
 Between 1989 and 2009, the ethnic Russian population of Kazakhstan declined by 2. mi llion people, dropping from 37% to 24% of the total population . The population dropped from 37%, to 24%, according to the census .
 Of the Russians remaining in Kazakhstan, approximately 3% speak Kazakh fluently . About 3% of the Russians remain in Kazakhstan .
 Russian serves as the language of interethnic communication in Kazakhstan . Many urban Kazakhs still use Russian as their primary language .
Today, pragmatic education policies promote the Russian language in order to encourage economic engagement with Kazakhstan’s northern neighbor .
 The Baltic States, Ukraine, Moldova, and Kazakhstan each protect and guarantee the rights of ethnic minorities living within their territories . The constitutions of the Baltic States and Ukraine, Ukraine and Moldova each protect.
 The degree to which these legal provisions are implemented and enforced varies from country to country . However, the degree of which these laws are implemented is not known .
 In each of the post-Soviet states, responsibility for integrating minority populations is shared by a number of ministries .
 Estonia's citizenship law requires applicants to demonstrate proficiency in the notoriously complex national language . In Estonia, the citizenship law is a complex language .
 The Estonian government has passed initiatives to increase minority access to Estonian language instruction . The Estonians have also passed initiatives.
 Latvia's National Integration Centre is a project of Latvia’s Society Integration Foundation . It works to ensure and improve the availability of various aid services to third-country nationals .
 Ukrainian governments deemed it unnecessary to create a robust framework for integrating ethnic Russians and Russian speakers . Russia and Ukraine share many linguistic and cultural commonalities .
 ethnic Russians are able to live and operate effectively using the Russian language . In those regions of Ukraine where they reside in significant numbers, ethnic Russians live insignificant numbers .
 They employ passive knowledge of Ukrainian when necessary but are generally resistant to using that language . They are resistant to use that language when necessary .
 In Kazakhstan, several government-affiliated organizations support the rights of the ethnic Russian minority . These organizations have little political leverage, though they have little power .
 Ethnic Russians’ clout was significantly diminished by the emigration of almost 40% of the group’s population to Russia .
 The remaining Russian diaspora there tends to organize through shared business and economic ventures . The remaining Russians tend to organize their own business and business ventures .
 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe is the most prominent international organization monitoring human rights and minority rights in the region . It is the world's most prominent organization.
 The OSCE maintains a program office in Astana and monitoring missions in both Ukraine and Moldova . The program office is in the city of Astana .
 Language policies in Baltic States have been a particular point of controversy . It has conducted investigations and analysis in the Baltic States .
Russia's post-Soviet states use a framework based on two metrics to assess success . The framework is based on the success of Russian compatriots .
 Upon gaining its independence, Lithuania passed generous legislation that afforded full citizenship rights to any ethnic Russians previously resident on its territory . Approximately 90% of the Russian population in Lithuania is Russian .
 Lithuania has not pursued a nationalist political agenda to the exclusion of its Russian or other minorities . Lithuanian is the national language, but the country has not sought a nationalist agenda .
 In Lithuania, the per capita gross domestic product is slightly higher than Russia’s . Lithuania's per capita GDP is slightly lower than Russia's .
 Estonia and Latvia initially adopted policies toward their ethnic Russian minorities that ranged from unaccommodating to provocative to provocative . Estonian and Latvian policies toward ethnic Russian minority groups initially included unaccomModating to provocative .
 The situation was partially rectified in the late 1990s and early 2000s as part of the process of accession to the European Union . The situation in the 1990s was partly rectified by the EU .
 The social situation for ethnic Russians is disadvantageous, but the economic conditions in both countries are favorable . While the social situation is disadvantages, the economic situation is favorable .
 In Latvia, the per capita GDP is on par with Russia's; in Estonia, it exceeds Russia’s by nearly 10 percent . In Estonia, the GDP is more than 10 percent.
 We do not assume that the economic situation in either country is so attractive as to wholly outweigh the social exclusion that Russians experience there .
 Ukraine stands out among the 14 former Soviet states other than Russia in having ongoing tensions over Russian compatriots’ language and other cultural rights . Ukraine has a very low per capita income relative to Russia’s .
 Lithuania, State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor . State Department: Lithuania, state department, bureau of democracy, human rights and labor .
 Ukraine’s failure was not in its treatment of the Russian minority upon independence, but in its subsequent failure to generate and support a consolidated Ukrainian national identity throughout its territory .
 The population is prone to nationalist tendencies associated with geography and demographics . The population was therefore prone to nationalism .
 Crimea's autonomy from Kiev has been a source of constant tension since the early 1990s . Ukraine's language and foreign policies have been a subject of protests for years .
 Ukraine’s per capita income was approximately 35% of Russia's in 2014 . Its eastern regions are relatively wealthy compared to the rest of the country . Ukraine's per capita incomes were approximately 35%.
 Ukraine had the highest risk of Russia exploiting its compatriot population, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia had a high risk of exploiting Ukraine's population, he says .
 Moldova's government initially granted citizenship only to people residing on the territory of the country in 1940 . Moldova’s government initially instituted citizenship legislation that granted citizenship to people living in the territory in 1940 and their descendants .
 Since the majority of ethnic Russians had arrived in Moldova after World War II, this made them stateless . The majority of the ethnic Russians arrived in the country after the war .
Nationalistic language policies enacted in the late 1980s caused both ethnic Russians and ethnic Ukrainians to feel discriminated against .
 Moldova’s per capita income amounts to just one-fifth of per capita incomes in Russia . Moldova is one- fifth of the world's population.
 In Kazakhstan, the government has nearly excluded Russians from politics, though not by design .
 The Russian government has largely not asserted itself on behalf of the Russian minority living in this region .
 Russian cultural identity does not automatically produce Russian political identity . Cultural and political identity are not equal, shared language, history, and culture do not guarantee that an ethnic Russian or broader Russian compatriot population will support Kremlin foreign policy .
 Russia's policies require something more. Affinity for not only Russia but also its policies requires something more . Russia is a country that has been criticized for its policies .
Economic disappointments or dissatisfaction do not necessarily lead to political support for another government over one’s own . Where they do, they may encourage migration rather than political protest .
 Russian compatriots likely must be both socially alienated and determined to remain within those societies rather than return to Russia . To support Russian political and foreign policy objectives over those of the government of the country in which they reside, Russian citizens must be socially alienated .
Economic satisfaction may have combined with a continuing cultural gulf to create a pool of compatriots who support Russian objectives without desiring to leave their country .
 A similar pool of Russia supporters has emerged in eastern Ukraine, as a result of cultural affinity with Russia and dissatisfaction with Ukrainian government policies .
 Russian compatriots appear determined to remain in territory with deep historical connection to Russia . In this case, Russian compatriot appears determined to stay in territory.
 It may be the case that individuals simultaneously adopt multiple overlapping identities . It could be state-centric, ethno-centric and linguistic, linguistic, political, or otherwise .
 Or they may adopt particular identities in particular circumstances, when at home, traveling, or visiting a government office . Or they might adopt specific identities when at least at home.
 Russia’s policy toward the former Soviet Union and its overall foreign policy is essential context for Moscow's approach to compatriots . Since Russian compatriots abroad reside predominantly in this region, Russia's policy towards the ex-Soviet Union is crucial .
 Russia's foreign policy Chief among Vladimir Putin's goals for Russia is to establish Russia as an acknowledged global great power . Russia's aim is to become an acknowledgedglobal great power, an aim with direct implications for Russia's attitude toward the Eurasian region .
 A senior Kremlin official described this status as being “a member of the world’s board of governors’” One of the small number of countries that are sufficiently powerful to pursue what Russians call an “independent” or “sovereign” foreign
 In essence, these terms refer to a foreign policy that is not subordinate to a senior ally or partner or, alternatively, dictated by military and economic weakness .
 This attitude is in no small part a reaction against Russia’s political weakness and economic dependence on the U.S. and the West in the 1990s . It is a reaction to Russia's political weakness.
National leaders can devote neither the time nor the attention necessary to establish and sustain a global role . Obtaining global great power status requires security, stability, and significant influence along the aspiring power's periphery .
 Moscow's quest for such a role inherently requires a considerable if not preeminent capability to shape Russia’s immediate neighborhood . Russia's search for a role in Russia's immediate neighborhood requires considerable capability, according to the Kremlin .
 Russia's recent intervention in Syria notably occurred during a period of relative calm in eastern Ukraine . Whether Moscow could have moved so assertively in Syria while intense fighting was underway in Ukraine is an open question .
 Moscow has intervened in Syria's civil war not simply to support President Bashar al-Assad’s government, but to prevent a victory by the Islamic State or other extremist forces .
 Russian officials see particular danger in their country’s North Caucasus region, including Chechnya .
 The Russian government defines security along its borders as a top priority . Security and stability is a key priority for the Russian government .
 Russian officials generally define security and stability differently from their Western counterparts . However, Russian officials define security differently from Western counterparts.
Security in the former Soviet region rests heavily on friendly governments that will not challenge its leadership or align themselves with outside powers . For Moscow, security in the ex-Soviet region rests heavy on friendly government .
 Russian officials have typically had a very skeptical view of Western assurances that NATO enlargement would increase Russia’s security . This is why Russian officials are skeptical of NATO assurances .
 Russian officials see strong governments as essential in stemming the spread of extremism and terrorism . At the same time, Russian officials say strong governments are essential to stemming spread of terrorism .
Top officials see transitions to democracy as dangerous instability that is often best avoided . However, top officials see abrupt transitions as producing dangerous instability .
 In recent years, we have seen how attempts to push supposedly more progressive development models onto other nations actually resulted in regression, barbarity and bloodshed .
 Putin’s reference to “supposedly more progressive development models’ is a clear jab at U.S. democracy promotion efforts throughout the region . He makes clear that it has produced instability rather than stability .
Top Russian officials have consistently described protecting Russian compatriots as a foreign policy objective for over two decades . Russia’s entire postindependence history has been described as the country's entire post independence history .
 Former president Boris Yeltsin issued what appeared to be his first government-wide instructions on the matter in an August 1994 decree .
 The Russian government’s foundational foreign policy documents have reflected its attention to compatriots .
 Russia’s Foreign Policy Concept is a document prepared periodically by the Foreign Ministry for approval by the president . It highlighted the rights of Russian compatriots in its 2000, 2008 and 2013 editions .
 Neither Russia’s National Security Strategy nor its earlier National Security Concept refer to ‘compatriots’ Neither call strictly for protecting the ‘rights and lawful interests of Russian citizens abroad’
 The migration of Russian compatriots to Russia has been important to Russia’s demographics, especially during the 1990s . Immigration into Russia from other CIS countries was at its highest levels .
 Russia’s total population declined by about 2 million during this period, even with these 5 million immigrants . The return prevented what could have been a 5% decline in Russia's population .
 Moscow has supported the resettlement of Russian compatriots in the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation has also supported the relocation of compatriots .
 Russia's population would have declined in the first half of 2015 if not for migration into the country . This remains important to Russia's demographics today, according to a recent report .
 Russia's formal policy toward Russian compatriots is aimed at helping them improve living conditions . Russia’s use of Russian compatriot is aimed toward improving living conditions where they reside or resettle to Russia .
 Russian government pursues policies intended to affect them in various ways . From this perspective, compatriots are objects of Russian policy .
 Russia's practical policy toward its compatriots abroad also appears to approach them as instruments . Yet, Russia's policies may affect compatriots but are not primarily for their benefit .
 Russian compatriots who remain in neighboring countries can serve as instruments of Russia’s foreign policy in several ways .
 Russia is a great power with social and cultural influence beyond its borders . This maintains pride in the country’s imperial and Soviet past while simultaneously demonstrating that Russia is great power .
 Russians, Russian speakers, non-Russian ethnic groups of the Russian Federation, and compatriots in other countries, their integration there, and their return migration to Russia . It is a major assessment of Russian speakers and non-Russians .
 Russian officials can use this alienation immediately or allow it to remain latent, as a resource for the future .
 In practice, alienation can take place at multiple levels, including particular individuals, non-governmental organizations representing compatriots, and even regional governments within states .
 This has been most obvious in Ukraine, including in Ukraine’s military and security services . This is the most obvious issue in the country.
 President Petro Poroshenko personally claimed that about 80% of the security services had been suborned by Moscow .
 Many media reports describe compromised SBU operations . While perhaps an exaggeration, many media reports say SBU operation is compromised .
 Nils Usakovs has served as mayor of Riga since 2009 . His party won approximately 22% of the vote during 2014 elections . Russia's actions in Ukraine boosted turnout among parties taking a harder line toward Moscow .
A victory would have made Usakovs the leading candidate for prime mi nister . A victory would've made us the top candidate for the post .
 The name of Usakovs’ party is Harmony or Concord in English; it is VIENOTIBA in Latvian . The name is Harmony in English and the name of the party is Harmony or Concord .
 Russia’s Foreign Ministry commenting on UN Human Rights Committee recommendations to the Latvian government .
 The presence of Russian compatriots can also serve to camouflage Moscow’s involvement in Crimea .
Russian political leaders are politically advantageous for Russian political leaders . Compatriots and political legitimacy are key to Russia's political legitimacy .
 Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin launched his political career in the i990s as a leader of the Congress of Russian Communities, a party explicitly dedicated to this cause . He is now the Deputy PM of Russia .
 Former Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov was similarly known for his long public campaign to return Crimea to Russia . He was also known for visits to Crimea and his frequent visits there .
 The Russian public sees Russia's neighborhood as an area important to the country’s national interests and national identity . Russia's neighbors are important to its national interests.
 Russians expect leaders to manage relationships successfully, meaning primarily on Moscow’s terms . As a result, Russian leaders expect to manage their relationships successfully .
 Apparent defeats or concessions can be politically damaging, while victories such as Mr Putin’s seizure of Crimea provide political legitimacy .
Developments in surrounding nations can also strengthen or weaken the Russian leadership’s political legitimacy . Developments in neighboring countries can also weaken the leadership's political legitimacy.
 Russians see their country as much more stable and prosperous than many if not most other CIS countries . Russia's leaders look successful and deserving of support.
 Ukraine is the largest and most si mi lar country in the region and therefore the most directly comparable to Russia . This is especially consequential with respect to Ukraine, which is the most comparable to Ukraine .
 A democratic Ukraine with a stable political system and a growing economy would raise questions about why Russia was not more successful itself . The Ukraine is a democratic country.
 Ukraine's large compatriot population could be transformed into an instrument of Western/Ukrainian influence in Russia .
Domestic political impacts are a key consideration for Russia’s leadership . Such domestic political impact is a key factor for Russia's leadership .
 The critical challenge for U.S. and Western policy-makers is to understand how and when Moscow may seek either to act on behalf of Russian compatriots or to employ them .
This requires an assessment of Russia’s strategic calculus, to which we now turn . This requires an Assessment of Russia's strategic calculus. This requires a review of the Russian military strategy .
 Putin's approval for Putin remains at 83% in August 2015, but only 55% of Russians responded that their country “is on the right track’s right track, according to Russian media .
 Strategic calculus incorporates drivers, which motivate action, boundaries, and the decision-making processes through which leaders assess options .
Strategic calculus incorporates identifying goals and steps to achieve them . It also assesses policies that other actors might pursue in response .
 This inherently requires political judgments both internally and externally . This inherently needs political judgments. This requires political decisions both internally or externally .
 Strategic calculus is the foundation of realistic and rational policy-making . It is the basis of realistic, rational policy making .
 Russia’s decision-making processes are personalized and non-transparent . The Russian leadership's strategic calculus can be challenging to understand because Russia's decisions are personalized .
 Vladimir Putin’s rhetoric, choices, and actions as well as with broader patterns inside the Russian government under his leadership. Nevertheless, observers have amassed over 15 years' empirical experience with Vladimir Putin.
 Moscow can make a meaningful if cautious assessment of Moscow's foreign and national security policy . It can also make a serious assessment of its policy toward compatriots .
 Russian leadership's strategic calculus in formulating policy toward its compatriots abroad . We are confident in our assessment of the Russian leadership’s strategic calculus .
 Moscow’s foreign policy toward Russian compatriots is largely a function of its overall regional objectives . Drivers are key drivers in Russia's strategic calculus relating to its compatriots .
 Russia’s desire for influence in the former Soviet region is a function of its quest for acknowledged global great power status .
 Moscow prefers that governments in this region are both relatively friendly and relatively deferential . Moscow thus prefers that countries in the region are relatively friendly .
 Russian compatriots can influence and pressure governments to pursue friendly policies . Russian compatriot can both influence and Pressure governments to follow friendly policies.
 Russia’s seeks to maintain its modest network of regional military bases . Russia wants to exclude other extra-regional states from establishing 22 CNA bases in the region .
 In Crimea, securing the Sevastopol naval base was a key Russian objective . The relatively large military presence permitted at the base was decisive in doing so .
 The 14 th Army has been the facilitator and guarantor of Transnistria’s de facto independence from Moldova .
 Russia's peacekeeping forces in South Ossetia were of course central in the 2008 Russia-Georgia war . Russia’s peacekeeping force in the region was in charge of the 2008 war .
 The U.S. military bases in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan were initially accepted . Moscow later encouraged their governments to discontinue those arrangements and offered financial incentives .
 Russia has important interests at stake in its economic ties with other successor states of the former USSR . Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan amounted to nearly 15% of Russia’s exports in 2012 .
 Russian compatriots can play central roles in sustaining these economic relationships . Russian compatriot can play a central role in sustaining those relationships .
 In addition to its broad geopolitical aims, Russia has narrower political goals in regional states . Russia has broader geopolitical aims in the region .
 Russian compatriots can play political roles and help reach those goals . Russian compatriot can play a political role to help reach their goals .
 Russian compatriot communities can influence the success of specific legislative initiatives, such as constitutional or legal reforms in Ukraine . For example, they can influence legislative initiatives that could affect either Russian communities or Russian government's interests .
 Russia's government conducts a variety of programs to assist Russian compatriots, including promoting language and culture, human rights, and resettlement .
 Belarus president Alexander Lukashenko is seeking to re-orient his country toward the West . Moscow would likely perceive a threat to its vital interests .
 Of the former Soviet republics, Russia also shares land borders with the three Baltic States . Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Kazakhstan also share land borders .
 U.S. and other Western analysis has generally focused on the proportional size of Russian and compatriot communities relative to a country’s overall population .
 larger communities give Russia a greater stake in any conflict or instability that could threaten these groups . However, it is also useful to consider the absolute size of these communities .
 Ukraine’s total is comparable to that of the 13 other former Soviet states, excluding Russia, combined . For that matter, Ukraine's total is similar to the total of 13 other Soviet states .
 Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan have maintained generally positive relations with Moscow . Neither Kazakhstan nor Azerbaijan has sought to challenge Russian interests .
 At the same time, each leader has a strong leader prepared to contain domestic threats, including radical Islamists . The U.S. government has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful leaders .
 Russia could see a very significant threat to its interests and to its compatriots, particularly in Kazakhstan . Should either condition change, however, Russia may see a significant threat.
 Azerbaijan’s president Ilham Aliyev successfully inherited political power from his father . Nursultan Nazarbayev won re-election at age 75, having just won reelection .
 Since 57 Authors’ calculations from CIA World Factbook population data. Since 2009, 57 Authors have calculated population numbers .
 Numbers of Russian compatriots are larger, to varying degrees, as this incorporates Russian-speakers and other Russian Federation nationalities . Numbers of Russians are larger than those of their compatriots .
 NATO members are in a different category from other post-Soviet states . Moscow no longer contests their strategic alignment .
 Russian military intervention in the Baltic States could carry substantially higher costs for Moscow than elsewhere . Due to their NATO membership, Russia's military intervention could carry more unpredictable costs than elsewhere.
 Russia has exercised sustained military, economic, and diplomatic pressure on the Baltic States . Russia has used unconventional tactics such as cyber-attacks .
 Moscow could see large-scale NATO deployments there as a significant threat to bases in its Western Military District . The concern that it might do so has already constrained NATO responses to Russia's actions in Ukraine .
 Russia seems unlikely to risk a serious conflict in the current environment . In view of the high stakes, Russia seems to be unlikely to be at risk .
 Moscow's own responses would not materially alter the threats facing Russia, or if Russian leaders believed that dramatic action could force the West to back down . Still, this calculation could change if Moscow were to assess that the existing danger is already so great that its own responses wouldn't change the situation
Russian compatriots could serve as an instrument of action or as justification for action . Again, Russian compatriots may serve as a tool of action, as well as a justification.
 Armenia is an important strategic partner for Moscow, but is unlikely to generate threats to Russian interests in the near term . Armenia is a key ally for Russia, but it is not likely to be a threat to Russia .
 Russia's leaders see similar reasons to align with Russia today . It was a largely willing addition to the tsarist empire as it was seeking protection .
 Russia accepts the status quo in Transnistria, but could react strongly to any effort to change it . The separatist region's Russian compatriots have long been a highly visible political issue in Russia .
 Russian compatriot populations there are relatively small, as are Russia’s enduring economic interests .
 Moscow declined to become involved in Kyrgyzstan's more recent Tulip Revolution despite some calls to do so . Russian troops played a significant part in the Tajik civil war over 20 years ago .
 Afghanistan is important to Russia in large part because of its impact on Tajikistan and Uzbekistan . Russia is also important to Uzbekistan and Tajikistani .
 Moscow's support for strong governments that contain extremism helps Moscow avoid pressure to intervene militarily if a weaker government should fall . Russia's support of strong governments is a cost-benefit perspective, says the author .
 Russia’s overall foreign policy has been conservative and strategically defensive . Russia's overall foreign policies have been conservative, strategically defensive and conservative .
 His 2013 Address to the Federal Assembly was one of his most specific efforts to define himself and Russia as leaders of the world's political and social conservatives . He quoted Orthodox-conservative philosopher Nikolai Berdyaev .
 Russia’s first president, Boris Yeltsin, ordered two wars in Chechnya, the first to prevent its secession . Many in Russia saw as the do mi no that could collapse the country. The second to contain quasi-independent Chechnyya's dangerous impacts on
 Medvedev and Putin intervened in Abkhazia and South Ossetia to prevent Mikheil Saakashvili, then president of Georgia, from forcibly reintegrating the autonomous regions . Georgia’s possible NATO membership for the foreseeable future.
 Putin's seizure of Crimea and intervention in eastern Ukraine were in defense of Russia’s national interests, he says .
 The moves blocked Ukraine's membership in NATO and ended continuous risks to Russia’s control over its naval base at Sevastopol . The moves also ended continuous risk to Russia's control over the base .
 Putin also protected Putin from the domestic consequences of Viktor Yanukovych's ouster, which otherwise could have looked like a major foreign policy defeat .
 Crimea's reintegration into Russia had been a central goal of Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy without regard to conditions in Ukraine . Russia could have acted at almost any time over the last decade.
 Crimean parliament had voted more than once for greater autonomy and even independence from Ukraine well before March 2014 . The Crimean parliament has voted for more than one time for more autonomy .
 Russia's parliament has also voted to declare Sevastopol a Russian city . Russia’s parliament also voted, among other things, to declare the city a city .
 Russian politicians had been campaigning for years to take back Crimea, and had been attempting to mobilize Russian compatriots there . Leading Russian politicians have been campaigning to encourage the Russian government to return Crimea .
 Russia’s strategically defensive foreign policy suggests that Moscow is unlikely to pursue a Crimea-style policy . Russia's leaders, especially Vladimir Putin, may see significant new threats to Russia's regional role and influence .
 It is especially unlikely to pursue such policies if the potential costs seem high . It's especially unlikely if the costs are high .
 Russia's financial constraints are also significant in Russia’s strategic calculus, particularly as its economy and its federal budget groan under the strain of continuing low oil prices . Russia's budget cuts in non-defense spending have forced across-the-board cuts in the
 Moscow already appears to have blanched at the cost of sustaining and rebuilding rebel-held territories in Ukraine .
 Putin insists that Crimea's tourist destinations would not threaten Sochi's future as a high-priced resort . Putin likewise insisted that Crimea’s tourist destinations wouldn't threaten the Sochi resort's future .
 Russia's president and his advisors chose to address these two questions in a live national television program . The fact that Russia’s president and advisors decided to address the two questions suggests that they considered it important to do so .
 Russian federal budget outlays to integrate Crimea and develop its infrastructure have only increased . Since that time, Russian federal spending has increased .
 Russia will spend $2. billion in 2015 and a total of $13. billion by 2020 to do so, says Deputy Crimean Affairs Mi ni ster Andrey Sokolov .
 Neither Vladimir Putin nor other Russian leaders are likely eager to assume financial responsibility for devastated rebel-held territory in eastern Ukraine, which would far exceed the costs of absorbing Crimea .
 The Afghan syndrome is a third significant boundary on Moscow's strategic calculus . The public's reluctance to support military operations after the Soviet Union’s long and troubled efforts to occupy and stabilize Afghanistan.
 The reluctance to support military action was evident during Russia’s first war in Chechnya, when the country's freer political and media environments under President Boris Yeltsin permitted open opposition .
 The war in Chechnya was not an optional foreign venture but a effort to preserve Russia’s territorial integrity . This was especially important in that the war was not a foreign venture, it was a effort.
 A spring 1996 poll by Russia's independent Levada polling agency found 59% of Russians expected the candidate for whom they planned to vote in forthcoming presidential elections .
24% of Russians expressed support for Chechnya’s independence in 2013 . As late as 2013, after the second war in Chechenya, some 24% of Russian expressed support .
 During the second war in Chechnya, new president Vladimir Putin expended significant effort in controlling media access to and reporting about the conflict and in suppressing public criticism of the war .
Public pressure forced Yeltsin to accept Chechnya’s de facto independence to end the first war . Putin was unwilling to accept. This was likely a direct consequence of the fact that public pressure was forced to accept the independence .
 Russian government's ability to manage information has improved since that time . The prospect of significant casualties does shape Russia’s strategic choices .
Public tolerance of casualties is proportionate to public perceptions of the stakes in Ukraine . Ukraine has been trying to magnify perceived threats in Ukraine. At the same time, like in Western democracies, public tolerance is proportionated to public perception .
 Russia's president operates within the context of Russia’s elite-level policy debates and within a broader political-bureaucratic system . Putin's personal style and approaches onto Russian and Soviet historical patterns.
 Russia's foreign policy debate has implications for Russia's approach to its neighborhood and to its compatriots . Russian officials typically do not differ publicly with their president, they do express opinions .
 Russia’s Foreign Ministry and some other voices describe a “multi-vector” foreign policy approach that emphasizes relations with China, India, and multilateral organizations . The BRICS group includes Brazil, China, Russia, India and South Africa as well as Russia, and the
 Russia's foreign policy requires reorienting toward China while preventing a fundamental break with the West that would entirely redirect Moscow’s foreign policy . Russia's role as a great power and a stable international enviro nm ent for domestic economic growth.
 Some advocate cooperating with Washington in some areas, such as Afghanistan and Iran nuclear agreement . Others advocate cooperating in other areas, including Ukraine and Syria .
 Russian-Western differences over Ukraine have limited objectives in Ukraine, they say . They argue for continued efforts to find a diplomatic resolution to Russian- Western differences . They say they want to prevent Ukraine's NATO membership and encourage decentralization .
 Russia is determined to play a leading role in the former Soviet region . But they generally eschew tactics that could seriously damage Moscow's relations with other major powers .
 Harder-line officials, including some in Putin's inner circle, are deeply skeptical of American intentions . They focus on building a closer relationship with China in order to challenge U.S.-led international order .
 Washington and Brussels appear to support a confrontational policy toward the U.S. They argue that Russian escalation in Ukraine will demonstrate Western weakness and secure a favorable resolution for Moscow . Continued cooperation in other areas will encourage Washington to believe that Russia is weak .
Russia is applying significant pressure on other former Soviet states in order to achieve Russian foreign policy objectives . They are quite comfortable applying significantpressure on other ex-Soviet states .
 First deputy prime minister Sergey Ivanov’s reported support for economic sanctions against Estonia in 2007 dispute over Soviet-era monuments . One example is then first deputy prime prime minister Sergei Ivanov.
 Some, such as Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, have long records of activism on behalf of Russian compatriots in the former Soviet Union .
 Vladi mi r Putin has set Russian policy on the course advocated by the Foreign Ministry . The Foreign Ministry is expanding Russia's ties with China and other non-Western powers .
 This constrains further provocative actions toward Russian compatriots in the former Soviet region, at least in the near term . This is the latest in a series of provocative actions by Russian compatriot in the past .
 Moscow has increased its military presence in Syria and pursued military-to-military contacts with the United States . Russia has also ousted harder-line officials in the Donetsk People’s Republic who call for independence rather than greater autonomy within Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin’s ‘inner circle’ is mostly current and former siloviki, or veterans of Russia's military and security services . He prefers a more confrontational approach to the United States and the West than Mr Putin is currently pursuing .
 Government officials in most political systems rarely express open differences with sitting head-of-state . This is not easy to assess, since government officials rarely express differences with a sitting head of state .
 Russian president's close associates publicly express their personal views . This also limits the degree to which the president's friends publicly express his personal views. This also limit the degree of which the President's associates express their views .
 Neither Putin nor key individuals in his inner circle appear to be nationalist ideologues . Neither Putin or key individuals are seen to be nationalists or nationalists .
 The Russian president certainly employs nationalist rhetoric, such as in his March 18, 2014, speech to a joint session of the Russian parliament on Crimea’s annexation, 76 . He does so intermittently, for practical political purposes.
 He is a statist and a patriot who asserts that Russia has its own path . But he is also extremely pragmatic, he says . He says Russia is not Western nor Eastern.
 Putin’s inner circle seems to share a common perspective among other siloviki 77 that Putin's inner circle appears to share .
 Russian president's close associates appear to be focused more on the pragmatic use of Russian compatriots as operational policy instruments in pursuing wider policy objectives than addressing the concerns of Russians themselves .
 Russia’s government does not have a structured and formalized policy process . Vladimir Putin's very broad authority in foreign policy limits the impact of formal processes in making specific decisions . Russia's decision-making can appear opaque .
 Available accounts suggest that Russia’s president seeks information and receives recommendations from his inner circle, but does not solicit feedback . That said, available accounts suggest he seeks information from other senior subordinates .
 There is little evidence that these individuals openly question his decisions or challenge his thinking, particularly on foreign policy matters . As a result, there is no evidence that they openly question him .
 President Putin’s status as the sole decider on any particular issue does not give him the ability to be the soledecider on every issue . President Putin's status as a decider doesn't give him ability to take a stand on any issue .
 He must delegate broad power to subordinates on a de facto basis if not a formal one . He can closely manage his personal priorities.
 Russia's government is not immune to internal bureaucratic differences or even disputes . This can lead to simultaneous and contradictory policies that Putin eventually arbitrates .
 Mr Putin appears personally involved in Russia’s Ukraine policy. From this perspective, it is important that Mr Putin seems personally involved.
 Ukraine has captured the Russian president’s attention, but his inner circle may have greater autonomy on some other issues .
 Vladimir Putin’s defensive and reactive approach is partially a consequence of the fact that he is more effective as a tactician than a strategist . Like Boris Yeltsin, Vladimir Putin is more successful as aTactician than as a strategist, says Vladimir Putin .
 Many of the Russian president's tactical moves have uncertain strategic consequences for Russia . This is most evident in that many of the president’s tactical moves are not immediately successful .
 Moscow's response to a crisis can evolve significantly over the course of a crisis. This has a variety of important consequences, including the fact that reactive policies can evolve much more quickly .
 The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine is a powerful reflection of Russia's nonstrategic approach to foreign policy in many respects . The conflict is a strong reflection of the Russian foreign policy.
 Russia's initial seizure of Crimea appears to have been an abrupt response to the collapse of the Viktor Yanukovych presidency and Ukraine’s government .
 populations in the two eastern provinces were more divided and less geographically isolated than Crimea’s . The populations of the eastern provinces are more divided than Crimea's . The conflicts quickly became more complex .
 Moscow’s active and visible support for Donetsk and Luhansk has encouraged expectations among Russian compatriots in those regions . The Kremlin has thus far demonstrated no willingness to make military and financial commitments that it has so far demonstrated .
 Moscow has to deliver in order to maintain credibility at home and in other Russian communities . At the same time, the more damaging the conflict becomes to the Donbas and its residents .
 This may ultimately drive the very changes in Ukraine’s orientation that Putin intended to avoid. This may also drive the change in Ukraine's orientation, says Peter Bergen .
 Crimea's compatriot voters from Ukraine's previously closely divided electorate will likely contribute to these dynamics . Removing Crimea’s compatriots from Ukraine’'s previously close divided electorate is likely to contribute to this dynamics .
 Moscow is perhaps not unique in confronting this challenge. Today, it is unclear how Russia’s government can accomplish its stated aims without escalating .
 Vladimir Putin's response has been to prevent the compatriot-separatists’ defeat through gradual and calibrated escalation . Putin’s response to the situation is to prevent it from becoming worse .
In the absence of clearly defined objectives, the policy resembles the early stages of former president Lyndon Johnson’s escalation in Vietnam .
 Strategic thinking about Ukraine could have foreseen the possible dynamics of this conflict and the dilemmas as they could create .
 Russia's military presence does not seem sufficient to produce a decisive victory for Syrian government forces on the battlefield . On one hand, Russia’s military presence doesn't seem sufficient.
 Moscow's participation in the conflict subjects both its forces in Syria and civilians in Russia to the risk of retaliatory attacks . Moscow’s participation in Syria is also subject to a risk of retaliation, according to the Russian government .
Only 14% of Russians strongly or somewhat supported a direct military role in Syria in a mid-September 2015 survey . A prolonged, costly and inconclusive mission could also pose a political problem, the survey says .
 Putin's centralized and personalized governance style inherently weakens efforts to establish a system that could develop and execute long-term strategies without his continuous intervention . Putin’s centralized and personal governance style is inherently weakening efforts to develop a system.
 Manual control allows the Russian president to do almost anything, but only as long as he personally supervises the effort . The Russian president has the power to do nearly anything .
 Mr Putin himself recently used the term 79 . This is not to imply that Russia might escalate to a similar extent without significant changes in conditions on the ground .
 In Russia, the broad autonomy that leaders enjoy at every level of autonomy has this impact . Russia's leaders enjoy autonomy at every levels, including federal, regional and local .
 Vladimir Putin has been willing to take considerable risks when he has perceived Russia's fundamental national interests to be at stake . Putin has a broadly conservative approach.
 Putin in his earlier career “was seen in the system as a risk-taker who had little understanding of the consequences of failure” 84 — another indicator suggesting tactical rather than strategic thinking .
 Putin reacted to an imminent threat when Viktor Yanukovych fell from power in Ukraine . He seized Crimea, though seizing Crimea was quite bold, he said .
 Ukraine’s full membership in the West and its institutions would have prevented Russia from exercising the role it seeks as a global great power .
 Russian compatriots served as a justification 85 and as an instrument for Moscow’s action . But do not appear to have been the primary motive .
 Mr Putin seems to have accurately assessed that the Western reaction to a fait accompli in Crimea would be limited . The downing of Malaysian Airlines flight 17 over eastern Ukraine led to considerably tougher Western sanctions .
 Politburo members excluded staff from the meeting, and a Polit buro member prepared handwritten minutes . The meeting was held in London, London, on Tuesday night .
 Moldova’s president Vladimir Voro ni n rejected the deal due to last-minute Western pressure . Moscow did not appear to see immediate risks to its vital interests so long as Transnistria maintained its de facto autonomy .
 Russia would retain its role in Moldova and that Moldova would remain stable . These two conditions ensured that Russia would remain in the Moldova .
 Russia’s reaction in its relations with Transnistria was mild by comparison with its recent policy toward Ukraine . Russia's reaction to the country was mild.
 The episode had a considerable impact on Putin's longer-term evaluation of U.S. and Western objectives in Russia’s neighborhood . Still, according to a former senior career diplomat, the episode had an impact.
 Russia's leaders draw from U.S. policy choices is valuable in understanding Russia’s strategic calculus . Understanding this and other lessons that Russia's leader draw from the United States is also valuable .
 Paul J Saunders, editor, Center for the National Interest, 2011, 43, is editor of Enduring Rivalry and Russian Perspectives on the PostSoviet Space .
 Alexey Pushkov, now chairman of the State Duma Committee on International Affairs, also highlighted the impact of U.S. efforts to kill the Kozak plan on Putin’s thinking .
Lead Russian politician told one of the authors of this paper that Voronin called Putin at midnight the night before Putin’s trip to withdraw from the agreement .
 Russia's influence operations through formal government institutions, social and religious movements, media, cyber-attacks, and economic and business ties to Russia .
 A calculated decision further stipulates that decisionmakers consider the impact that their actions will have on operations and policy . The decision is made by a calculated decision .
 Operational calculus is country-level decision-making in selecting among available tools to achieve desired strategic objectives, says author .
 The paper will examine Russia's operational calculus by evaluating how the Russian government exerts influence on Russian compatriots in neighboring states .
 Geography is a significant general consideration in Russia’s operational calculus in influencing Russian compatriots . Geography was a significant factor in Russia's operational calculus.
 Azerbaijan, the Baltic States, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine share borders with Russia, while Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan do not .
 Russia's government interacts directly with compatriots through government institutions . The Russian government’s direct engagement with compatriot communities is a key part of the relationship .
 The Russian government has expanded its bureaucratic machinery focused on Russian compatriots . Russia's resources and capabilities have increased over time .
 The com mi ssion was established through Boris Yeltsin’s 1994 decree . 89 Russia has a government-wide commission to help compatriots return to live in Russia .
 Rossotrudnichestvo, the Federal Agency for Commonwealth of Independent States Affairs, Compatriots Living Abroad, and International Humanitarian Cooperation were established by decree in September 2008 .
 Russian officials consider Rossotrudnichestvo’s s closest American counterpart to the Department of State . Its director is equivalent in rank to a deputy minister .
 Rossotrudnichestvo received a separate budget allocation to support Russian compatriots for the first time in 2014 . The Russian government received 111. million rubles in the budget for 2014 .
 The sum of 57. mi llion rubles was directed to programs outside Russia and the sum of 47 . Of this, the total of 57 went to programs in the country .
 The commission’s very limited web site is at www.government.ru/department/156/events . This followed President Putin's call for ‘strengthening’ the agency's ‘human and resource potential’
 The mission includes assisting compatriots, promoting Russian language and culture, and protecting historic monuments and burial sites in other countries .
 Lyubov Glebova previously directed an independent agency supervising education and science . He was earlier a deputy mi nister of health and social development .
 Rossotrudnichestvo has dozens of representative offices co-located with Russian embassies and consulates . In Ukraine, it has offices in Kiev and in Odessa .
 The government-supported Russkiy Mir Foundation also supports Russian language and culture globally and among Russian compatriots .
 Information operations Russia’s extensive information operations are among its most effective instruments of influence over Russian compatriots and the governments of neighboring countries .
 Russia’s 10 dramatically increased in scope in recent years with the founding of Russia Today . Russia's state-sponsored news channel for foreign audiences, and the consolidation of government-sponsored media entities .
 Russia's 10 aims to project the image of a strong and powerful nation-state capable of interfering in its neighbors’ affairs with ease and at a moment’s notice . The 10 aims not only to influence Russian compatriots in neighboring countries.
 Russia has used some of its tactics to influence Russian compatriots in the information domain . In this section, we discuss some of the operational tactics that Russia uses to influence its compatriots .
 One of the latest wave of 10 efforts is to spread dezinformatsiya, or disinformation, to confuse audiences and present alternative perspectives favorable toward Russian foreign policy . Another is to present alternative views favorable to Russia's foreign policy.
 One tactic to distribute dezinformatsiya is to use on lin e trolls, whether automated or human, to post pro-Moscow comments and information on the internet .
 These commentators often obscure information, falsify facts, and edit or fabricate images to generate suspicion, confusion, and fear in the audience .
 In some instances, “troll armies,” groups of online pro-Kremlin, pro-Putin regime bloggers, spread dezinformatsiya .
 Petersburg employees receive over S500 a month to pose as internet users defending the pro-Putin regime . They also spread conspiracy theories of Western leaders and Central and Eastern Europe .
Russian state media also spread dezinformatsiya to influence Russian compatriots in neighboring countries . Russian state media is also spread by state media to influence compatriots .
 RT has significant operations throughout Central Europe and the former Soviet Union, including the Baltic States, the Balkans, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia . For example, RT has a significant operations in Central Europe.
 RT provides programming in Russian, English, and the native language of each country . RT provides programs in Lithuanian, Latvian, Estonian, and Lithuanian .
 In eastern and southern Ukraine, and Russian-occupied Crimea, half of the population accesses Russian TV for news .
Up to 80% of RT’s broadcast time is non-Ukrainian content, primarily from Russia .
 Russia’s domestic media can also be influential among Russian compatriots, particularly in neighboring countries where broadcast media are available over the air .
 Ukrainianlanguage television is higher in quality and cheaper for Ukrainian broadcasters to purchase . Even those segments of the population who may prefer to watch Ukrainianlanguage TV often end up watching significant programming in Russian .
’ Problems of Post-Communism. Impact on Media Independence and Pluralism,’s ‘Problems of Post’
 Russia's domestic online censorship affects the Russian media that the compatriots consume in neighboring countries . Most Russian-language content online originates within Russia’s borders .
 Putin has consolidated the control of the internet, a virtual space that in the past was not under strict regulation . In recent years, Putin has consolidated the control.
 The Russian parliament passed legislation requiring that any blogger with over 3,000 followers must register his/her personal information with the Russian government . It will be held to the same “journalistic standards as any major news source .
 All internet companies operating webpages within Russia must house their user data so that those data is available to Russian security services . The law also requires that all internet companies in Russia house their data .
 Many in Western media have expressed concerns that the law's aim is to silence bloggers and social media outlets that oppose the Putin regime and Putin’s policies .
 President Putin: "You do know that it all began initially, when the Internet first appeared, as a special CIA project" President Putin said the Internet began as a CIA project .
 Pavel Durov, the CEO of VKontakte, was “elbowed’ out of the company and fled to the Caribbean . The company is a Russian version of Facebook .
 VKontakte is now under the control of Alisher Usmanov, a strong ally of the Putin regime .
 Some of the funding was reportedly to compensate for the decline in the Russian mble .
 Cyber-attacks that appear politically motivated can also have important symbolic impact among compatriots and contribute to mobilizing their communities . Cyber- attacks that appear political motivated can have symbolic impact on compatriots .
 Russian cyber-attacks are often planned and orchestrated by independent hackers supported by the Russian government .
 Estonia was the victim of one of Russia’s largest cyber-attacks in 2007 . In 2007, Estonian parliament voted to remove the Bronze Soldier statue from Tallinn's city center .
 Many in Estonia's government, business establishment, and media outlets woke up one April morning to find that their computer systems had been attacked .
 Many in Estonia and the West suspect that Moscow was behind this attack . It was the largest cyber-attack that Estonia had ever seen .
 Russia has expanded cyber-attacks to influence other neighboring countries, particularly those with significant Russian compatriot populations . Since then, Russia has expand cyber- attacks to influence neighboring countries .
 Cyberattacks in Ukraine have increased significantly since the annexation of Crimea . Cyberattacks have increased since Crimea was annexed .
 Western media focused on military operations in eastern Ukraine . There have been over fOO low-tech cyber-attacks on Ukraine’s government and non-government organizations .
 Many of these attacks have featured “black energy,” malware designed to remotely take over computer networks . Many of the attacks have been carried out by hackers .
 Analysts estimate that $900 mi llion was collectively stolen from these institutions . The stolen money was taken from the institutions .
 Business relationships are another element of Russia’s influence in neighboring countries . Economic influence and corruption are also part of Russia's influence in other countries .
 Russian compatriots provide an economic point-of-entry by virtue of their contacts and local knowledge .
 Russia's economic goals in the region can be a significant advantage for Russia, given its economic goals . This can be an advantage for the country, given it has economic goals.
 Russia’s overall objective is to sustain and expand market access and trade flows with other successor states of the former USSR . Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan together amounted to nearly 15% of Russia's exports in 2012 .
 Russia’s considerable energy exports can provide leverage in dealing with its customers . But only so long as Moscow has sufficient control of its energy exports, Moscow has enough control .
 Absent that control, pipelines make Russia vulnerable in relations with transit countries . Russia's lack of pipelines makes Russia vulnerable to transit countries.
 Ownership of pipelines has been a high priority for major companies such as Gazprom . Gazprom is a consistent goal for major firms such as the company .
 Russian compatriots play important roles in linking Russia’s economy with neighboring states . Russia's economy is linked to neighboring states.
 DTEK energy firm incorporates six Ukrainian and three Russian coal companies . One prominent example is Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov, whose company includes six Ukrainian companies .
 Russian compatriots need not be ethnic Russians, as compatriots are defined by Moscow . Akhmetov is also a useful example in that he highlights the fact that Russians are not ethnic Russians .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has had an intimate relationship with the Russian state . From the tsarist era, through the Soviet period, into the present day, the church has had a close relationship .
 Tsar Nicholas I played a key role in binding the church to the state when he formulated his ideology of “Orthodoxy, Autocracy and Nationality’s guiding philosophy’.
 Officially atheist Soviet leaders later suborned the Orthodox Church’s leadership in order to ensure control over its remaining followers .
 Vladimir Putin appears increasingly to be linking Orthodoxy with Russian identity . He is also careful to craft a national identity that incorporates Russia’s Muslims and Jews .
 Patriarch Kirill reiterates the spiritual unity of all living on the territory of Ancient Rus .
 Ancient Rus' people desire to be united spiritually, says author . He believes there are different independent states on the territory of Ancient Rus’ today .
For our lives are based on one faith, selected by the holy Prince Vladimir, the person who formed the contours of the great Eurasian state on whose territory these independent countries exist today .
 Russian officials often praise the Russian Orthodox Church and its affiliates for building close ties with the Russian compatriots in neighboring states .
 President Putin emphasized that millions of ethnic Russians communicate with Russia through the church in neighboring countries .
 The Russian Orthodox Church provides an outlet to strategically influence Russian compatriots in neighboring states in all spheres of public life, including social institutions, charity, science, and the military . This is particularly significant as the Russian Orthodox church provides a outlet for strategically influence .
 Konstantin Malofeyev is the founder and director of the Fund of St. St. John's Fund . He is also the founder of the St.John's Fund, the Fund for St. johns, a charity that helps people with disabilities .
 Basil the Great funds programs abroad that are affiliated with the Russian Orthodox Church and the government . The program is aimed at countries with compatriot populations .
 Basil the Great, Malofeyev promotes and supports the Orthodox Church, education and religious activities, national programs and charity and aid for children .
 Russian government and its supporters use social and religious institutions as a means to indirectly influence the targeted ethnic Russian population . This not only provides a sense of unity and commonality, but also allows the government and supporters to use social institutions to influence the Russian population.
 Russia is able to drive a wedge between Russian compatriots and the countries they reside in . Russia is also able to align its citizens more closely with the Russian state .
 Russia has a strategic tool to influence the socio-cultural and political affairs of neighboring countries of the former Soviet Union . In effect, through social and religious influence, Russia has an influence on neighboring countries .
 The U.S. and its allies have assessed Russia's strategic and operational calculus to achieve its objectives . The United States and allies are divided into implications for Russia and its neighbors .
 Russia's strategic and operational implications for the U.S. and its allies, we believe it is useful to assess the implications of Russia’s approaches for its own longer-term interests and objectives . These implications create certain dilemmas and constraints for Moscow.
 Russia’s use of compatriots in the region requires not only their cultural and political identification with Moscow and its aims . Russia's use of its compatriots is also a key part of its political strategy .
 Gaps between Russian compatriots’ cultural identification and their political identification complicate efforts to mobilize these groups for broader political purposes .
Relatively satisfied compatriot populations will be less amenable to mobilization . Relatively satisfied citizens will be more amable to mobilize .
 Large-scale mobilization requires that Russian compatriots see an existential or near-existential threat to their way of life . It is not presently visible outside Ukraine .
 Continuous efforts to employ Russian compatriots as an instrument of Russian foreign policy are likely to produce diminishing returns .
 Russian compatriots are likely to face growing skepticism and even hostility as they pursue their political or other objectives .
 This could generate political, or violent, backlash against them . This could even lead to conflict .
 Russia's government appears to use Russian compatriots without producing tangible benefits . Moscow risks alienating those with which it is directly engaged, but also Russian compatriot in other countries .
 Some Russian compatriots might welcome peaceful Crimea-style nn exation to Russia . But few likely aspire to the grinding and destructive civil war underway in eastern Ukraine .
 The Kremlin’s manifest unwillingness to absorb those territories or to provide significant assistance beyond arms, food, and emergency supplies could deter Russian compatriots elsewhere from pursuing their aims through violence .
 Russia generally does not exert operational control over compatriots or the institutions they create . Russia generally doesn't exert control over the Donetsk and Lunhansk Republics .
 Russian policy aims on local actors with their own objectives, tactics, and timelines . Even in those cases, Russian policy depends on the local actors .
 Russian compatriots can be useful to Moscow in trying to enforce boundaries on policy choices by the government of their country of residence . Moscow can also be useful in creating or threatening political crises to justify direct political, economic, or military pressure from Moscow .
National governments have limited capacity to force specific actions by national governments . They have limited power to force action by national government .
 The Russian government has committed to protect and potentially for Russia itself . Deliberately provoking large-scale violent conflict is a “nuclear option, with unpredictable and possibly very dangerous consequences,’s Russian government says .
 If the Russian compatriots of the Donbas remain inside Ukraine, their lives will be far more difficult in the coming years than they have been in the past .
 Large-scale fighting, like what is underway in eastern Ukraine, also risks escalation in Russia's broader confrontation with West .
 Russia’s leaders expect Washington to back down if faced with direct conflict between nuclear-armed states, as some likely do . That said, if Russia's leaders expects Washington toback down, they may consider this an acceptable risk .
 Reintegrating Russian compatriots into Russia through immigration or through territorial acquisitions inherently weakens their role as instruments of influence . Reintegration of Russian compatriot into Russia is a key factor in Russia's success .
 Kazakhstan's Russian compatriot community is significantly smaller than it was when the Soviet Union collapsed . Kazakhstan’s Russian compatriots are significantly smaller.
 Ukraine has perhaps 2 million fewer Russian compatriots following Moscow’s annexation of Crimea .
 Ukraine's future presidential elections are unlikely to be held in eastern Ukraine . Viktor Yanukovych was elected president of Ukraine in 2012 . Ukraine's current president was Viktor Yanukovych .
 This alone will diminish Russia’s political influence in Ukraine in the future . Even dealing with Yanukovych, the Kremlin experienced many disappointments .
 Washington and Moscow harbor considerable mistrust of one another’s intent that will shape bilateral relations .
 At the same time, Russia retains the capability to threaten vital U.S. national interests or to assist the United States .
 Russia's policy toward compatriots in the former Soviet region. This context necessitates consideration of key strategic implications of Russia’s policy toward its compatriots . This context requires consideration of the Russian policy towards compatriots.
 Existing Western and Russian definitions of regional security in Eurasia are incompatible and will remain a source of tension . Existing West and Russia definitions of Regional Security are incompatible .
 Russia’s determination to be an acknowledged great power requires a level of influence in its immediate neighborhood . The U.S. and its allies have been unwilling to accept it .
Until the West and Russia find a mutually acceptable European security architecture, policy-makers should expect new conflicts to erupt .
 Russia’s leadership is prepared to take significant risks to defend vital interests . Russia's leadership is preparing to take a significant step to defend its interests .
 Russia's leaders define vital national interests as well as their narrower vital personal interests . It is essential for U.S. and Western decision-makers to understand how Russia’s leaders define national interests, rather than projecting United States or Western perspectives .
 Only through this approach can U.S. and Western decision-makers anticipate Moscow’s responses to their own policy choices .
 Russia's definition of security for its citizens and compatriots in its immediate neighborhood requires stability . Moscow may be open to mutually satisfactory understandings to maintain stability .
 Instability that creates ungoverned or weakly governed zones along Russia's borders facilitates terrorism, drug trafficking, and other security threats. Instability creates unGoverned orweakly governed areas along Russia’s borders .
 Moscow accepts stable frozen conflicts, such as those in Nagorno-Karabakh and Transnistria . But prefers strong central governments that respect Russian government perspectives and Russian citizens .
 Russian compatriot populations are significant and—notwithstanding migration to Russia—enduring . Tensions surrounding their rights, treatment, and grievances are likely to endure too .
High levels of Russian public support for Vladimir Putin's annexation of Crimea . Many in Russia's opposition identify with Moscow's former imperial/Soviet territories and the Russian compatriots who live there .
 A more Western-oriented 50 CNA Russia could retain existing objectives and policies . This raises the possibility that a more West-orientated 50 Cna Russia could keep existing objectives, policies .
More focused consideration of these populations and Western policy toward them seems appropriate . More focused consideration seems appropriate for these populations .
 Effective management by host governments limits Russia’s opportunities to exploit Russian compatriots . effective management by hosts limits Russia's opportunity to exploit its compatriots.
 Moscow is most successful in mobilizing compatriot populations with significant economic and/or social grievances . Moscow is also most successful at mobilizing its compatriot population .
 Governments that address these grievances and build mutual trust with their Russian compatriot populations will be less vulnerable . Governments thataddress these grievances will be more vulnerable to Russian citizens .
 Integration of Russian compatriots in a way that facilitates their political identification with their countries of residence is a powerful tool for governments in the region in blunting Moscow.
 Steps to constrain Russian compatriots’ political activity or cultural rights are likely to alienate those populations . Moscow is likely to provide Moscow with fodder for its public diplomacy messaging .
 Russia’s policy toward Russian compatriots also has more i mm ediate repercussions for America and for allies as they make near-term decisions .
 We consider the following to be among the significant operational implications . The following is one of the significant implications for the company .
 A better understanding of Russia's policy and actions toward Russian compatriots in neighboring countries is critical to U.S. policy toward Russia and its neighborhood .
 U.S. and Western governments have not thoroughly exa mi ned the many potential axes along . Russia can exercise influence, ranging from political parties to Russian and local Russian-language media to formal and informal relationships .
 United States messaging to compatriot communities is at least as important as messaging to wider populations in Russia’s neighborhood .
 Improving Russian compatriots’ understanding of U.S. and Western objectives in relation to the former Soviet Union could mitigate existing perceived threats . Improving Russians' understanding of United States and West objectives could mitigate perceived threats.
 Russia's information operations will continue to be vital in the battle of ideas . Developing counter-messaging and counter-narratives to balance Russia’s information operations is vital .
 Equally important is the continuous effort to strengthen new media outlets and freedom of expression, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the effort is needed to strengthen media outlets.
 Corruption creates additional pathways for Russian influence in compatriot communities and beyond . Corruption can constitute a threat to national security, experts say .
 Corruption that establishes relationships of dependence can enable Russian influence directly and indirectly . Corruption can enable Russia to influence both directly and indirect .
Corruption in military and security services can be dangerous if it compromises these institutions . Corruption in military, security services could be dangerous, say experts .
 Russia is likely to continue sponsoring cyber-attacks on governments and nongovernmental organizations that work against its interests in the former Soviet 51 CNA region . Russia is expected to continue to sponsor cyber- attacks on governments, nongo government organizations .
 Stronger security measures, and improved attribution capabilities, will be important. StrongerSecurity measures will be key to improving attribution capabilities .
 Under such circumstances, examining and responding to Russia’s policies will take on even greater importance for U.S. policy-makers .
 Russia's influence in political, economic, security, and information domains will be paramount, says the U.S. State Department . Russia's ability to counter Russian influence in economic, economic and security, will be key, the agency says . The U.N.
 Russia’s use of compatriots as an influence tactic in neighboring countries is being studied . The study is to have an initial open dialogue about Russia's use of the compatriots .
 To pursue this task effectively, further robust analysis must be undertaken in order to assess Russia’s objectives, its strategic calculus, and its operational decision-making and tactics .
 Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs commented on Latvia's reaction to the recommendation of the UN Human Rights Committee, April 5, 2014 . Latvia has been criticized for its human rights record .
 Ethnic Composition and the Protection and Promotion of National Minorities’ Cultural Identity. Ethnic Compositions and the protection and promotion of NationalMinorities” Cultural Identity .
 The Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit is held in Ufa, China, in July 2015 . The summit is the first of its kind in China .
 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation . CTPATETHLI HaanoHanbHOH 6e3onacHocTH Pocchhckoh Oeflepaunn ao 2020 roaa .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin on Russian television, Poccua 24, 19 December 2013 .
 Russia’s Military Doctrine, BoeHHaa aoKTpHHa Pocchhckoh OeaepaHHii, December 25, 2014, is Russia's Military Doctrine .
 Managing Rivalry or Business-as-Usual: American and Russian Perspectives on the Post-Soviet Space .
PocciriicKaa AxafleMna HayK: IlHCTHTyr ConiiajibHO-rioJiHTHnecKHX HccjieHOBaHHH: HHTerpanna n Bo3BpaTHaa
 CTPATErilR HapiioHajibhoh 6e3onacHocrn Pocchhckoh ct>enepaijHH ho 2020 rona, May 12, 2009 .
 OEAEPAJlbHblH 3AKOH “o rocynapcTBeHHofi’s’ “O EOCYAAPCTBEHHOH’S’HBLH’. Oenepaipni
 Bhktop XaMpaeB, “MnHo6pHayKH HyacHbi neHbrH Ha «PyccKHii Miip’’s’. ‘Mn Ho6p HayKhbi nehbr