 Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron call on Russian government to do something about rebel fighting in Donbass region of east Ukraine on Friday .
 The two requested both Russian backed separatists and the Ukrainian government get active on a prisoner exchange program . Merkel believes the move might ease tensions and help move the beleaguered Minsk peace agreement forward .
 The Russian government has to stop supplying arms and logistical support to ethnic Russians and other rebels joining a fight for autonomy from Kiev . For their part, the Russian government is to stop supporting ethnic Russians, other rebels .
 Ukraine's government has also had to honor a regional vote in Donbass and Luhansk, but they have yet to do that . Ukraine has yet to honor the regional vote, but it is not yet known if it will happen .
 If a vote were to be held, both would likely vote for full autonomy . If such a vote would be held both would probably vote for autonomy .
 At least one state in East Ukraine is now using the ruble instead of the Ukrainian hryvnia .
 Chancellor Merkel and President Macron reaffirm need for full implementation of the Minsk agreements . As an expression of their respect for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, Merkel and Macron say .
 There is no alternative to an exclusively peaceful solution to the conflict, says the U.S. State Department .
 The U.S. government is looking to provide lethal military support to those fighting against separatists in Donbass . The United States government is set up for another defacto proxy war with the Russians .
 The most famous U.S. vs. Russia proxy war was the war in Afghanistan in the late 1970s and early 1980s . The war was in the 1970s, 1980s and 1970s .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski has stated that supporting anti-Soviet rebels there would draw the Soviet Army in for a fight . The war is largely seen as the brainchild of foreign policy chessboarder Z bigniewBrzezinski .
 Previously, President Barack Obama was adamant on staying out of a firefight with Russians in Ukraine .
 Senator John McCain is the most vehemently anti-Russian figure in the Senate . McCain is a frequent voter of anti-Russia bills and a frequent supporter of lethal military support .
 Merkel and Macron also "demanded" further opening of infrastructure between Donbass and Luhansk . Another region sucked into the Russia-Ukraine imbroglio .
 The civil unrest in Syria has led to sectoral sanctions against Russia . The latest round of sanctions has more to do with Putin's supposed election meddling in 2016 .
 Russia's official state media reported that Putin and Merkel discussed the situation in Donbass on Thursday . Russia's withdrawal from ceasefire coordination committee between Moscow and Kiev has been announced .
 Putin told Merkel that Ukrainian authorities for a long time through various restrictions and provocations purposefully hampered the conditions of the Russian government in the Donbass .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe said that Russian diplomatic observers have vacated the war zone . Last week, the group said that Russia's diplomatic observers had vacated the area .
 The only large former Soviet state that shares the same religion, Orthodox Christianity . It is the only large ex-Soviet state with the same faith .
 Other larger Soviet republics, namely Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, are majority Muslim . Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan are also majority Muslim.
 All hell broke loose between Russia and Ukraine after the 2014 so-called "Euromaidan" protest against president Viktor Yanukovych .
 The Russians discovered that U.S. officials were discussing who should lead Ukraine after Yanukovych . The Russians found that the United States officials were talking about Ukraine .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk, who ultimately became the prime minister, ushered in an austerity program so unpopular that he was eventually -and somewhat literally -lifted out of parliament . He was eventually removed from parliament .
 Yatsenyuk is believed to have convinced the autonomous republic of Crimea, a southeastern peninsula in the Black Sea, to hold a referendum on secession . It is believed that the Russians convinced the republic to hold the referendum .
 Europeans have been brought on board to mediate the ongoing, bitter divorce between Russia and Ukraine . It is now heading into its fourth year .