 The producers at least have some legal basis to put a stop to viewing this video online . The producers say they have no legal reason to put the video down .
 Ukraine trying to impose censorship on France has zero validity, says Ukraine . On the other hand, Ukraine has no validity.
 Failed state authoritarianism may work for it in Ukraine, but did they honestly think a French TV station would listen to this?
 This documentary lifts the veil on the deception of the US/Europe/NATO elites and their ever faithful media bullhorns .
 The head of Stratfor describes a planned coup as the most blatant ever . Stratfor is described by Stratfor as the head of the Stratfor .
 I have heard the legal and geo-political arguments for and against the annexation or return of Crimea to Russia . I have also heard the political arguments for the annexation of Crimea.
If you understand the rabid ultra-nationalism, the fever pitch blood lust and the climate of fear emanating out of the overthrow of Yanukovych and the aftermath, you will understand there was no real alternative .
 The rapid rise to prominence and infamy of the neo-Nazi militias recast as such from their street thug roots . The added element which struck such fear and dread in the Russian speaking Ukrainians of the east and south east was the rapid rise of the Neo-Nazi militia .
 Crimean's travelled to Maidan to express their democratic views . A group of Crimean’s travelled to the city to express the democratic views.
 The convoy was ambushed near Korsun in Cherkasy oblast . The armed thugs from the Right Sector attacked the convoy .
 As became known later, the Nazis were aware of the movement of the column and were expecting the Crimeans . The Nazis were expecting Crimeans.
 The captured buses were burned, their passengers were brutally tortured, beaten and humiliated . The captured bus was burned and the passengers were humiliated .
 Journalists and politicians were murdered, others bashed, including 2 presidential candidates .
 They shouted “Russians on knives’ and vowed to rampage in the east and wipe out anyone who dared to oppose their violent ultra-nationalism .
 Even the police were too scared to stop them as they smashed up Russian banks, bashed defenceless people on the street .
 The survivor of the bus convoy said they were “glad that someone will protect us’ The survivor was referring to Vladimir Putin .
 Failure to act to protect would likely have seen the people of Crimea suffer the fate of many other Ukrainians .
 Faced with this prospect, it would have been immoral not to act to ensure protection of Crimean’s .
 Russia/Ukraine 1997 agreement would have allowed attacks on civilians or infrastructure . It is very unlikely the Russian troops based legally in Sevastapol, Crimea, as part of the Black Sea Fleet.
 Vladimir Putin would have acted swiftly and decisively if any such attempts were made . Putin would've acted swiftly, decisively if such attempts had been made .
 The referendum ensured the safety of Crimean's and defused a potential military conflict between Russian and Ukrainian forces .
 The indignant, self-righteous, hypocritical squawking among U.S. and European political elites and their protectors in the mainstream media, ring hollow. Placing this in context, the indignant and self- righteous squawker among U.-U.S., European
 Appeals to lofty idealism of Helsinki Accords and the UN Charter regarding Crimea “annexation were disingenuous and cynical .
 The video doesn't extend to the crimes of the Ukrainian regime against the people of the Donbass . There are plenty of videos that do .
 Shelling of homes, schools, hospitals and factories was deliberate strategy . Shelling was a deliberate strategy, says the author .
 The idea was to terrorise the population into submission or to flee, thus being a crime against humanity and ethnic cleansing . The idea of terrorising the population would be a crime.
 There is an abundance of footage of civilians sifting through their destroyed houses, asking why has Poroshenko done this to them .
They said they just wanted to live in peace and were terrified at being bombed . They said they were terrified of being bombed and wanted to be safe .
 Poroshenko and Yatsenyuk engaged in inflammatory language of claiming the people were terrorists and they would not stop until all the terrorists were wiped out . They didn’t accept the legitimacy of the coup in Kiev, but rather than engage in dialog, they engaged in
 Such aggression sent shivers up the spines of the people in Lugansk and Donetsk . Such aggression understandably sent shiver up the people.
 The sense of foreboding is unmistakable in videos between February and May 2014 . The “anti-terror operation” swung into action in the period .
 Under impartial justice, the regime in Kiev would be held accountable for their crimes . The regime would be under impartial justice .
 The victors sneer when valid accusations are made against them, while at the same time they triumphantly pursue the losers, adding insult to injury .
 Kiev regime pandering to a militarised and powerful ultra-nationalist movement . Clearly the Kiev regime was pandered to the ultra-Nationalist movement.
 This was a movement who weren’t satisfied with the ouster of Yanukovych . It wouldn't have happened if not for their brutal violence, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The military and security ministries are among the most important ministries in the country .
 These forces, namely thugs from the Right sector, Azov, Aidar, Odessa and Dnepr battalions, were unleashed on the people of Ukraine .
 The people of the east heard about the atrocities proudly carried out by these Nazis . The Nazis were responsible for many of the atrocities carried out.
 The Odessa massacre, the Mauriopol massacre, and the disappearance of the bus convoy bound for Crimea. The killings and disappearance of a bus convoy, the killing and public bashings of journalists, the killings of politicians and the killing of journalists .
 If anything, Russia has not taken enough action in protecting Russians in Ukraine, if anything, it has not done enough .
 It is likely, but not proven, that equipment was supplied to separatists . It is not proven that the separatists were supplied to the separatists .
Members of the interim government were hand picked by the CIA/State Department .
 Washington is more than happy for extremists to give regime change a bit of biffo . Washington is not happy with extremists to change the regime .
 Some of the Nazi ultra-nationalists were just itching to fight some Russians . As an aside, some of the delusionalists among the NaziUltra-Nationalists were also just itching for a fight .
 A report from the Rand Corporation shows Russia would conquer Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania in a war within 60 hours . The Rand Corporation says Russia would win the war in 60 hours.
You are not going to get much chance at fighting when the adversary is at the doorstep of the Verkhovna Rada within hours . You are not likely to be able to fight within hours.
 The desire of others was to be granted special status in decentralised Ukraine . It was incorporated into the Minsk 2 agreement of February 2015 . The desire for others to be given special status was also granted .
 Kiev regime failing to introduce the necessary constitutional reform for this to be realised . This is being delayed by a reluctant Kiev regime .
 The Poroshenko regime is all too aware that the ultra-nationalists are livid at this prospect . They will do what they can to sabotage constitutional change, they say .
 Ultra-nationalists such as Right Sector and Svoboda have called for the impeachment of Poroshenko . Poroshenko's honeymoon is well and truly over, according to the group .
Training, arming and incorporating neo-Nazis into the national security establishment may be the biggest mistake the Kiev junta ever made .
 Poroshenko may be the next President to flee, dodging bullets in the middle of the night .
 The people of the Donbass may be relatively safe due to de-escalation, though not total cessation of hostilities . The people are relatively physically safe .
 Russia's ruined cities rely on Russia for humanitarian aid and support . This has not made life easier in their ruined cities as they rely on the Russian government .
 They are seeking to be selfreliant and using the industrial capacity of the region to work towards this self-sufficiency . They are also seeking to use the industrial power of the area to help them become self-sufficient .
 Given the horrendous events since early 2014, it is hard to see a unified Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has been blamed for the Ukraine crisis .
Autonomy or incorporation into Russia is the inevitable desire of people traumatised by the loss of their loved ones . Autonomy or incorporated in Russia is an inevitable desire for people traumatising by loss of loved ones.
 Anger at the U.S. sponsored Kiev war criminals on the other hand may be eternal .