 Since declaring independence in 1991, government corruption and economic turbulence have contributed to political unrest in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians have grown frustrated with the lack of action on promised reforms . Many Ukrainians are increasingly looking to EU integration as a way to move forward .
 In November 2013, deep political unrest erupted in the Euromaidan protests after former President Viktor Yanukovych abandoned an agreement that would have brought Ukraine economically closer to the EU .
 The 2014 Ukrainian Revolution resulted in the ousting of Yanukovych and progress towards increased EU integration . These protests erupted into the 2014 Ukraine Revolution, which led to the ouster of Yanukovych .
 These new EU-friendly policies kindled tensions with pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine . The separatists rebelled against the central Kyiv government by declaring autonomy through internationally-disputed referendums .
 Tensions quickly escalated into armed conflict in March 2014 following Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the pro-Russian takeover of the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts in the Donbass region .
 Crimea’s disputed referendum, forced by pro-Russian separatists, declares its intention to join the Russian Federation .
 Following the Euromaidan protests of 2013-2014, freedom of peaceful assembly was generally respected in government-controlled areas of Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has passed legislation to defend freedom of expression .
 The Ukrainian government has Instability repealed previous anti-Russian language laws . But distrust remains .
 In Crimea, Ukrainian and Tatar people report that authorities discourage the use of minority languages . Government corruption is a serious problem in Ukraine.
 The separatists are armed by Russia with Soviet-era, and more recent, military hardware .xxi Russia’s annexation of Crimea and clashes between the Ukrainian Armed Forces and Russian-backed separatists have resulted in many casualties .
 Risk skirmishes continue as both sides intensify militarization . The conflict has since settled into a stalemate, though the conflict has now settled into an agreement .
 Russia has increased its military budget and Assessment continues supporting the separatists in Eastern Ukraine . Russia's military budget has been increased in recent years .
 Ukraine has expanded its military budget, but at great economic cost . Ukraine has also expanded its own military budget .
 Continued conscription and economic woes may escalate political unrest . Continued conscriptions and economic problems may escalate the unrest .
 Given the unresolved tensions and growing militarization, a resurgence in violence is likely before the 1 conflict is resolved .
Political instability initiated the current conflict and Ukrainians still have little trust in their government . Political instability started the conflict and Ukraine still has little trust.
 The current conflict has also exacerbated animosity between ethnic groups . The conflict is also exacerbated by the current tensions between the two groups .
 Domestic political stability is contingent on the Ukrainian government’s ability to fight corruption and enact reforms .
 Failure to do so may result in renewed protests and possibly another regime change . Failure to stop the regime change may lead to renewed protests .
 Kyiv must also find a way to resettle the millions displaced by the fighting in Ukraine . Kyiv needs to find a new way to re-enter the Ukraine conflict.
 Ethnic minorities in Eastern Ukraine, specifically ethnic Russians, must also be adequately represented within the Kyiv government if reunification with contested areas is to occur . Ethnic Russians must also have representation in the government, including ethnic Russians .
 The hryvnia’s sharp devaluation since 2013, along with the rise in inflation, reflect Ukraine's unstable economy . The country's economy has been unstable since 2013 .
 IMF financial assistance package, DCFTA Agreement Risk with EU, may help Ukraine recover their import/export losses .
 President Poroshenko faces numerous Assessment challenges in the wake of the 2013-2014 Euromaidan protests to gain public confidence . The president faces numerous assessment challenges.
 Kyiv must tackle widespread corruption, restriction of civil liberties, and an unstable economy . Kyiv will also face widespread corruption and a weak economy .
 The Ukrainian government may also face difficulties ensuring that the upcoming local Donbass elections in early 2016 are legitimate, impartial, and transparent . The Ukraine government may face difficulties.
 Implementation of the 2014-2017 Action Plan, outlined in the 2014 Ukraine-EU Association Agreement, establishes conditions of EU International membership alongside ratification by EU members .
 The EU does not recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea . Ukraine is also actively working towards NATO membership .
 NATO has denounced Russia’s military action in Crimea as a breach of international law . The Trust Fund Project assists with military and humanitarian logistics, communication, medical rehabilitation, and diplomatic support .
 Ukraine’s increased ties with the West may offer Risk sociopolitical and economic stability, but further risk deteriorating relations with Russia . Ukraine's increased ties to the West could offer risk sociopolitical.
 Assessment droughts and high temperatures have had a negative short-term effect on Ukraine’s wheat production and exports which threatens its already turbulent economy . High temperatures have also had an impact on Ukrainian wheat production .
 The length and Assessment intensity of conflicts and mass displacement may result in long-term effects that warrant monitoring .
 Crimea has become an autonomous state Republic of Crimea . Pro-Russian Prime Minister Sergey Aksyonov is the leader of the state .
 Russian-armed militants continue to repress individuals, especially the Crimean Tartars . The pro-Russian and anti-Kyiv Donetsk People's Republic led by Alexander Donetsk People’s Republic Zakharchenko are both & fragile and politically unstable .
 North American Treaty Alliance NATO has condemned Russia’s actions . NATO has publicly supported Ukraine throughout the current crisis in an advisory and financial role .
 NATO is evaluating 3 Ukraine’s membership and has signed multiple partnership agreements with Ukraine .lvi NATO is also considering expanding its presence in Europe .lvii The USA has coordinated sanctions against Russia and accused it of destabilizing the United States of America .
 The ceasefire outlined in the Minsk II Protocol holds as continued mediation brings the conflict closer to a peaceful solution . The ceasefire outlines in the Protocol holds.
 Ukraine's economy stabilizes and experiences positive GDP growth with the IMF and EU's financial assistance . Russia scales back Best Case Scenario gas price hikes. Ukraine’s economy stabilized and experienced positive GDP Growth .
 Political unrest subsides as the Ukrainian government makes progress on its promised reforms to address police and government corruption . The Ukrainian government is making progress on promised reforms.
 The return of Ukrainian refugees and internally displaced persons from the armed conflict begins . The return and resettlement of refugees begins .
 Government protection of minority rights and political participation facilitates a promising reconciliation process between ethnic Ukrainians and Russians in Eastern Ukraine .
 A punctuated ceasefire continues between Ukraine, Russia, and pro-Russian separatist groups in the Donbass region .
 Ongoing efforts are made to fulfill the Minsk Protocols’ provisions to withdraw heavy weapons and recognize local selfgovernance in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts .
 The legitimacy of the local Donbass elections in early 2016 will be questioned by Ukraine and the Most Likely Scenario international community . Despite this, the legitimacy of these elections will be question by Ukraine .
 Popular challenges of the elections will result in further suppression of human rights and civil liberties in the Donbass region .
 Kyiv faces challenges addressing widespread corruption and the restriction of civil liberties . Public trust continues to decrease in Kyiv as the country faces challenges .
 The status of Crimea remains legally ambiguous, but effectively under Russian control . The status is legally ambiguous.
 Tensions continue to rise in the region as actors engage in provocative tit-for-tat signalling tactics .
 The increased porosity between the Eastern Ukrainian and Russian borders increases arms trafficking . The increase is escalating the intensity of violent outbreaks .
 The IMF's financial assistance fails to stabilize the war-torn economy, exacerbating Ukraine's socio-economic problems and political instability . The IMF’s financial assistance is not enough to stabilize Ukraine's economy, the IMF says .
 Separatists capitalize on weaknesses, allowing them to further challenge Kyiv’s legitimacy and effective control .
 The status of Crimea remains legally ambiguous, but effectively under Russian control . The status is legally ambiguous. But it remains under Russia's control .
 The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights was released on January 29, 2016 .
 The State Statistics Committee of Ukraine released the report on January 29, 2016 . The report was published by the State Statistics committee of Ukraine .
 The mission of Ukraine to the European Union is based in Ukraine . The mission is part of the Ukraine-EU mission .
 Economic instruments for managing environmentally harmful products in Ukraine . Ukraine is a country that has a history of environmental problems .
 The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations is based in the United States .
 The Central Intelligence Agency has released a new report on the CIA .
 The Freedom House. 15.15.15 is the latest edition of the Freedom House .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is based in the United States . It is the first time the treaty has been established .
Lvii Baczynska, Gabriela, and Wiktor Szary. 16.16.16 .
16.16. 2016 . lxiii Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe .