 In response to the growing unrest in Ukraine, many governments launched sanctions against individuals and companies that are viewed as having direct involvement in destabilizing the situation .
 The 2014 Crimean crisis led some governments in Europe, North America and elsewhere to target Russian and pro-Russian Ukrainian politicians .
As the unrest expanded into parts of eastern and southern Ukraine, the scope of the sanctions increased . As the unrest increased, the number of sanctions increased.
 The Russian government responded in kind, with sanctions against some Canadian, American, and EU individuals .
 As of 13 April, following Canadian, European Union and U.S. sanctions, two companies were also listed . Two companies were listed as part of the sanctions .
 Albania, Iceland and Montenegro announced that they would align themselves to the EU sanctions adopted by the EU on 17 March . Albania and Iceland will align themselves with the sanctions on 11 April .
 On 28 April, the U.S. expanded its sanctions to include 17 Russian companies, mostly affiliated with the aforementioned individuals . The United States expanded the sanctions on 28 April .
 The EU has instructed the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia . The EU also instructed the EU to suspend new financing activities in Russia.
 On 25 July, EU expanded its sanctions to an additional 15 individuals and 18 entities . On 30 July, the EU again expanded the sanctions to 15 individuals, 18 entities, followed by 8 individuals and 3 entities .
 Australia places Russia, Crimea, and Sebastopol on the Australian autonomous sanctions list in response to the Russian threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . The list was created in a response to Russia's threat to Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The European Union sanctioned three major Russian oil companies, three major defense firms, and dual-use technology from nine other Russian defense firms .
 On 29 November, an additional 13 individuals were added to the EU sanctions list . An additional 13 people were added on 29 November .
 In November 2014, Shearman & Sterling published a list of individuals and entities under sanctions by the United States, the European Union, and Japan .
 In December 2014, Bryan Cave published a list of individuals and entities sanctioned by the United States, the European Union, Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Japan, and Liechtenstein .
 The United States sanctions six individuals, and numerous individuals associated with Viktor Yanukovych, Gennady Timchenko, Arkady Rotenberg, Boris Rotenberg and Kalashnikov Concern .
 Stewart and Stewart published a list of individuals and entities under sanctions by the United States, European Union, Canada, Australia, and Japan . The list was published in August 2016 .
 Maclean's published a list of Russians under sanctions by the United States, European Union, and Canada . The list was published in April 2017 .
 EU added three individuals and three entities to its list of sanctioned individuals for support of a power supply in Crimea and Sevastopol independent from Ukraine .
 On 20 November 2017, EU added an individual to its list of sanctioned individuals . The EU added the individual to the list of sanctions on 20 November.
 On 29 January 2018, the United States releases a list of senior foreign political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation and Russian parastatal entities from which future sanctions will be applied .
 Canada updated its consolidated list of sanctioned individuals and entities in April 2018 . Canada updated the list of sanctioning individuals and entity in April .
 On 6 April 2018, the United States added 17 individuals, 12 companies, an armament firm and its banking subsidiary . The U.S. added a total of 17 individuals and 12 companies .
 May 2018, the European Union and Switzerland add five individuals to their sanctions lists for organising the March 2018 Russia presidential elections in Crimea and Sevastopol . The EU and Switzerland also add five people to the sanctions list .
 Former head of the Ministry of State Security of unrecognized Transnistria is wanted by law enforcement agencies of Latvia and Moldova .
 One of the leaders of the "Army of the South-East" is Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of Russia .
 Deputy Head of the People's Council of the unrecognized Luhansk People's Republic . Deputy head of people's council of unrecognized People's republic .
 Former Supreme Council Chair of the Luhansk People's Republic asked the Russian Federation to recognize the independence of the Luhansk People's Republic . Commander of the ""First Cossack Regiment" is an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 Former President of the effectively defunct Federal State of Novorossiya asked Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine . Russia asked Russia for troops to be deployed to Ukraine.
 Responsible for or complicit in, or has engaged in, actions or policies that threaten peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Head of administration for governmental affairs of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic . Head of the administration for government affairs of unrecognized republic .
 Commander of 'Rusich' unit, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine . Commander of the 'Rusch' unit.
 Crimea's Permanent Representative of the Republic of Crimea to the Russian Federation is a Russian Federation official .
Member of the National Council of the unrecognized Donetsk's People's Republic . Member of the  unrecognized people's Republic is a member of the NCC .
 Commander of 'Sparta Battalion', an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine . Commander of the 'S Parta Battalion' is a commander of a separatist group .
 Former Defence Minister and currently Head of the Lugansk People's Republic . Former defence minister and current head of Lugansk Republic .
 Materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, senior officials of the Russian Federation . The company with significant ties to him holds a contract to build a military base near the Russia Federation border with Ukraine .
 Russia has been building additional military bases near the Ukrainian border . Russia has used these bases as staging points for deploying soldiers into Ukraine .
 Active leader of the ""Lugansk Guard" Commanded Russian airborne troops during annexation of Crimea .
 Member of the Parliament of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic . Worked in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut .
 Bank that provided "material support" to Russian officials and its biggest shareholder is the also-sanctioned Yury Kovalchuk . Bank provided ""material support"" to Russia's officials .
 State-owned agricultural bank that provided "material support" to Russian officials . State- owned agricultural bank provided ""material support.""