 Ukraine and Georgia have experienced reform movements aimed at rooting out corruption and integrating with Western institutions . Since the turn of the millennium, the two countries have experienced reforms .
 Both countries suffered wars with Russia intended to stifle their democratic aspirations . Unfortunately, both suffered wars. Both suffered wars against Russia .
 Both conflicts were precipitated under different conditions . There may be some useful conclusions to be drawn from a comparison of the two .
Both the Georgian and Ukrainian conflicts provide a critical window into the Russian approach . If the U.S. is to continue to support security in Europe, we must understand Russia’s strategy, says John Avlon .
 Following graduation, he accepted a Fulbright Fellowship to study abroad in Ukraine for one year . He will study abroad for a year in Ukraine .
 He received an MA in economics and saw firsthand the application of security policy in Eastern Europe .
 Auten graduated from The Basic School, Marine Corps Base Quantico, VA, and was designated a communications strategy and operations officer . After his return, Auten was designated an operations officer.
Due to his experience in Ukraine, he was chosen as an experience-track foreign area officer for Eurasia in May 2018 .
 It resulted in the overthrow of its authoritarian president and the installation of a reform-minded, Western-looking regime . The overthrow of the authoritarian president led to the appointment of a new regime .
 Amid chaos in Kyiv’s central square, Russian proxy forces appear in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine-Russia war has claimed more than 10,000 lives and that continues today . Taking advantage of preformed misconceptions about the Ukrainian government and appealing to a pan-Slavic, anti-Western, Russo-centric cultural identity .
 Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland have requested an increased presence from NATO allies . Outright conflict on the doorstep of NATO has increased tensions in the region .
 The Russian Federation is the nation closest to us in nuclear parity, says CNN . We see the Russian Federation as the nation close to us, and proven willing to use conventional and irregular power in violation of international norms .
For the first time since World War II, Russia has redrawn international borders by force of arms in Georgia and Ukraine . Russia is pursuing veto authority over their neighbors’ diplomatic, economic, and security decisions .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine were a surprising breach of international law . Secretary Mattis notes Ukraine is not the only recent victim of Russian ambitions .
 Russia instigated a similar conflict in Georgia in 2008, and it has pursued a strategy of expansion since at least 2004 . It has pursued an expansion of its territory since 2004 .
 The tactics employed by the Russians in Georgia were then refined and reapplied, to much greater effect, in Ukraine . In Ukraine, the tactics used by the Russian in Georgia are now used more often .
 To obtain a more holistic view of Russia’s strategic direction, we must thoroughly examine the conflicts that have defined its path in recent history .
Both NATO's member states and Eastern Europe as a whole. Comparing both conflicts may provide valuable insights and allow us to come to accurate and useful conclusions .
 This article provides a brief history of the Georgian and Ukrainian conflicts . This article is part of a series of articles on the Georgian, Ukrainian conflicts.
 It will explore the ways in which conflicts differ and the implications of those differences . Then, it will explore how the conflicts differ .
 The article will offer a broader analysis of Russian strategy in its near abroad . It will also offer a projection of its future strategies .
 The Ukrainian Conflict Ukraine is a diverse country with a tumultuous history . The Ukrainian conflict has been known as the Ukrainian Conflict .
 The landmass of modern-day Ukraine has been part of several different empires . Ukraine has not been independent for more than 40 years in its entire hisAuten 77 MCU Journal Map .
 The modern conflict in Ukraine is both a consequence and a casualty of the turbulent history that brought it to its current station . The conflict is a result of a turbulent history.
 Slavic peoples of the Dnieper River lived in small, fragmented communities for many years . The arrival of the Vikings in the eighth century brought a governing structure to the land for the first time .
 Modern-day Ukrainian activists often refer to Kyivan Rus’ to underline the historical importance of Ukraine .
Following the dissolution of Rus’ in the twelfth century, Ukraine’s lands shuffled hands between the Golden Horde, Lithuania, Poland, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Crimean Khanate .
 The 1654 Pereyaslav Agreement sealed Ukraine’s fate as a country divided between Russia in the east and Poland in the west . The agreement was signed in 1654 .
 The modern history of Ukrainian independence begins with the fall of the Russian monarchy in 1917 .
 As Bolsheviks and Mensheviks fought for control of Moscow, Ukraine gained its independence for a brief period .
 The Ukrainian state merged with the Soviet Union, becoming one of its founding members . As a result, the Ukrainian state became one of the USSR's first members .
 Soviet promises to uphold Ukrainian culture were quickly forgotten as Russification became policy in the 1930s . Russian promise to uphold Ukraine was quickly forgotten .
 Holodomor, a man-made famine caused by Soviet policy during the shift to Russification, claimed the lives of between 2 and 7. million Ukrainians .
Ukrainian nationhood continued to be subjugated throughout Soviet rule . Ukrainian nationhood was subjugated during Soviet rule.
 After the dissolution of the union in 1991, Ukraine finally received its independence .
 In 1991 referendums for independence, there was broad support for separation from the Soviet Union .
 Crimean authorities initially declared their independence from Ukraine then amended the constitution to declare the peninsula a largely autonomous region of Ukraine . The situation in Crimea was more complicated, as Crimean authorities first declared independence .
 Crimea's legal status was finally settled in 1998 as the Ukrainian parliament ratified a version of the Crimean constitution that surrendered more control to Kyiv . Crimea’s legal status has been settled in the Ukraine .
 The current conflict is the second of two major political movements that swept Ukraine in the period following Soviet rule . The conflict is second of the two major parties that have been involved in the conflict .
 In 2004, hundreds of thousands of protesters came to Kyiv’s central square, Maidan Nezalezhnosti . They came to protest the fraudulent election of the prime minister and heir apparent to the Kuchma regime .
 The Orange Revolution, as it came to be known, was successful, and a second round of elections found Viktor Yushchenko victorious . The nonviolent Orange Revolution was successful .
Political infighting between Yushchenko and Yuliya Tymoshenko destroyed the political alliance that rose to power in the revolution . However, political infighting also destroyed the alliance.
 A small student-led protest arose in Kyiv’s central square, but when the protesters were beaten by the police, the movement grew exponentially . Hundreds of thousands of protesters marched on the streets in late November .
 The protests started as a response to the decision not to sign the association agreement . They became more generally focused on Yanukovych and his corrupt practices .
 Ukrainian security forces continue employing heavy-handed tactics, shocking many in both Ukraine and the Western world .
 The streets of Kyiv became the site of daily clashes between police and protesters . This eventually gave way to outright revolution, as the streets of the city became the scene of clashes .
 The situation came to its conclusion on a cold night in February . The disgraced president fled the country after his security forces unleashed a murderous force of snipers on unarmed protesters .
 Russian disinformation began to stoke anti-Ukrainian sentiment in the eastern portion of the country . Soldiers in Russian military camouflage began to infiltrate government structures in Crimea .
Before the end of the crisis, Russia would illegally annex Crimea with the help of irregular military forces supported by the Russian naval base in Sevastopol . The situation in eastern Ukraine would devolve into war .
 The front line of the war in eastern Ukraine went as far west as Mariupol, a prominent Ukrainian port city, but eventually stalemated at a line roughly coincident with the capital cities of Donetsk and Luhansk late in 2014 .
 An independent monitoring mission commissioned by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe has estimated that there have been more than 35,000 casualties, including more than 10,000 deaths, both civilian and military .
 Russia has been a vacation destination of Russia’s most influential businessmen and politicians throughout much of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries . Nestled into a beautiful mountain range well-known for skiing.
 Joseph Stalin himself was Georgian, and international condemnation of his actions has not completely penetrated his native land . Joseph Stalin was Georgian .
 Even today, there is a museum to Stalin in his mountainous hometown, Gori .
 The Georgian National Defense Academy is one of the Georgian military's intellectual centers . It lies only a few miles from the military's military academy .
Georgian Orthodox Church is one of the oldest churches in the world . At its height during the early Middle Ages, its territory encompassed a large percentage of the Black Sea’s shoreline .
Nearly 5 million people in Georgia participate in a vibrant democracy with overwhelming aspirations to join the EU and, to a lesser extent, NATO . Throughout its history, independent Georgia has struggled with a number of ethnically charged conflicts .
 Adjara is home to a popular beach city, Auten 81 MCU Journal Batumi . After a 2004 crisis there in which an authoritarian regional leader was pressured to resign, it has been firmly under Georgian control .
 There is a long history of ethnic tension, fueled by Russian incitement, in Abkhazia and South Ossetia . However, there is also a history of tension in the breakaway regions of the two regions .
 Throughout a series of wars there in the 1990s, it became clear that a special solution was needed for these regions . It became clear in the 90s that the special solution needed for the region .
 The situation in Abkhazia and South Ossetia was never resolved . The path toward war with Russia began with Georgia’s Rose Revolution in 2004 .
 The 2004 presidential election in Georgia was considered fraudulent to many . In a series of events like those in Ukraine, the 2004 presidential elections were considered fraudulent .
 The incumbent regime clung to power despite evidence that Mikheil Saakashvili had been victorious . The current regime has been in power since 2007 .
 The general populace, exhausted by years of perceived corruption, came to the streets to protest Eduard Shevardnadze's continued grip on power .
 Shevardnadze tried to consolidate his hold on the Georgian presidency, but much of the military refused to support him .
 Saakashvili was decidedly in favor of greater Georgian integration with NATO and the EU . His party was openly anti-Russian .
 Russian opposition to Georgia's new political direction crystallized . Georgia's government took a number of steps to increase their cooperation with the EU and participation in NATO's primary conflicts .
Saakashvili assumed the presidency in 2008 . The Georgian military began a period of heavy cooperation with NATO that continues .
 Defense cooperation with Georgia includes both training and operational support . Georgia has fought alongside the United States and its allies in Afghanistan and Iraq since 2003 .
 Georgia has lost more soldiers killed in action per capita than any other country in the world .
 The strong NATO-Georgia relationship was, and continues to be, unacceptable to Russia . Russia has a strong relationship with NATO, but the relationship is still unacceptable .
 In the years following Saakashvili's election to the presidency, tensions escalated in Georgia’s breakaway regions .
 Russia and Georgia agreed to establish a joint peacekeeping force under Russian command . The international community was not invited, and UN and OSCE monitoring efforts were limited .
 Russia is preparing to quickly shuttle troops and supplies to the Caucasus if necessary . Russia is also improving its military infrastructure in the region .
 The situation remained relatively stable until NATO’s 2008 summit in Bucharest, Romania . The situation remains relatively stable, however, until the 2008 summit .
 He argued NATO could provide a direct threat to Russian political sovereignty if it continued to expand eastward . He argued that NATO could also provide a threat to Russia's sovereignty .
 Russia had begun to surreptitiously build up troop concentrations in both Abkhazia and South Ossetia . A couple of weeks later, a Georgian drone was shot down by a Russian fighter jet .
 In early August, a Russian military column advanced through the Roki Tunnel . The tunnel is one of the major thoroughfares through the Georgian Caucasus .
 President Saakashvili ordered an artillery strike after receiving the call from his commanders . The Russian military was making a hostile advance into Georgian territory .
After hanging up the phone, he turned to look at his senior advisors and said, “It has started. It has started,’ he said .
 At the southern limit of the Russian advance, it covered the main highway connecting eastern and western Georgia, as well as the primary oil pipeline between the Caspian and the Black seas .
 The government evacuated Tbilisi and prepared to defend the capital . While the Russians split the country in half, the government evacuated the city .
 Despite rumors that the Russian army would take the capital, Putin opted to limit his troops’ advance to the Georgian administrative boundaries of South Ossetia . Georgia gave the highway and pipeline back to Georgia .
 Russian forces withdraw to the borders of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . The Russian forces withdrew to the border of the region .
 Russia’s government adopted a measure to recognize the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . President George W Bush issued a formal denunciation of the move .
 In the years following the end of the conflict, the Russian military frequently encroaches farther into Georgian territory .
 Georgia, Ukraine, and the Competition between NATO and Russia Georgia and Ukraine share several important characteristics . Georgia, Russia and Ukraine are the two countries in the European Union .
 There is a developing sense of shared understanding between Ukraine and Georgia . There is also a developed sense of common understanding between the two countries .
Auten 83 MCU Journal ization and integration with the Western world, particularly with NATO, has been regarded with the same suspicion by the Kremlin . They have taken a similar path toward modernAuten83 MCUJournalization and Integration with the West .
 Ukraine's newly reformed police force is the brainchild of Georgia’s former internal minister, Ekaterine Zguladze . Ukraine's new police force was created by the former interior minister of Georgia . Georgia's police force has been reformed in recent years.
 Georgia and Ukraine share parts of their borders with both Russia and at least one significant NATO ally . Neither are currently a member of any security agreement .
 Without an alliance, countries are vulnerable to the vagaries of larger neighbors . Georgia and Ukraine are no exception, and Georgia is no exception .
 Ukraine and Georgia found themselves in increasingly precarious standing with Russia . Because of this vulnerability, the two countries are in increasingly jeopardy .
Given their stated objectives of Euro-Atlantic integration and Russia’s interest to prevent the growth of the pan-Atlantic alliance and European Union, conflict may have been inevitable .
 There are some interesting similarities in Russia’s battle plan leading up to conflict in both Ukraine and Georgia .
During peacekeeping phase in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Russia would issue its passports to any citizen of a breakaway region who could claim to be ethnically Russian . Russia would also issue passports to anyone who claims to be ethnic Russian .
 The government could claim that it was invading the regions to protect the Russian people living there . In this way, when hostilities intensified, the government could say it was protecting the people .
 Russia’s powerful information warfare capability was first put on display during the run-up to hostilities in Georgia .
Images of Saakashvili and Adolf Hitler superimposed onto one another. For example, on the home page of the Georgian foreign ministry, the contents were replaced by images of the dictator .
 Russia’s foreign influence campaigns have evolved considerably since the turn of the millennium, observers say .
During the 2004 presidential election in Ukraine, masked men came to polling booths to intimidate voters, and voter rolls were modified to support the pro-Kremlin candidate . For example, during the 2004 election, maskedMen came to polls to intimidate people .
 In 2014, during another presidential election, pro-Russian hackers infiltrated the computer systems of the voting commission . In 2013, masked men and overt voting fraud were found in the commission's computer systems .
 The hackers installed malware and reported fake results intending to show that an ultranationalist, far-right group had won the presidency . They were trying to discredit the pro-EU factions of Ukraine's government .
 The breach was only discovered one hour before the official results were announced . Russian state media continued to report the fake results .
 The Georgian conflict provides an interesting case study in the development of Russia’s foreign influence strategy . The conflict provides a case study.
 Russia succeeded in convincing many residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia that Russia was their protector against a rapacious, untrustworthy Georgian government . Russia used the development of new military infrastructure to widespread propaganda proliferation .
 The Georgian conflict was a turning point in the development of Russia’s information warfare strategy, according to Margarita Simonyan, the editor-in-chief of Russian propaganda outlet, RT .
 The Defense Ministry can’t start training soldiers, she said, in a 2013 interview .
 This undermines the credibility of RT and highlights the whole-of-government approach that Russia takes to foreign influence operations . This undermines RT's credibility and highlights Russia's foreign influence operation, says CNN .
 pro-Kremlin propaganda focused heavily on claims of Georgian “genocide’ against the indigenous population to justify the appearance of more Russian peacekeeping troops .
Independent investigations conducted after the conclusion of hostilities in 2008. Claims of genocide or ethnic oppression were disproven .
 Georgian actions in the area amounted to systematic oppression or genocide. There were acts of criminal significance conducted by the Georgians, to be sure .
 Georgia's war with Russia began in 2008 after decades of ethnically charged conflict . Georgia has been in conflict with Russia for decades . Georgia and Russia have been at odds for decades over the past .
 There is little indication in Ukraine’s history of government-sponsored oppression against the Russian-speaking minority .
Claims from Russian government that Ukrainian government had systematically oppressed them are simply false . There is a significant Russian-speaking population in eastern Ukraine and Crimea .
 Under Ukrainian law, a region is permitted to establish its own official language through an open democratic process . The region is allowed to set its own language through a democratic process.
 In practice, many Ukrainians use the Russian language daily, and there is little to no animosity between speakers of the different languages .
 Sluga Naroda is one of Ukraine's most popular television shows . It features a Russian-speaking president of Ukraine who wins the hearts of the citizenry through his efforts to eliminate corruption .
 The inAuten 85 MCU Journal is a point of contention between most Ukrainians . Its widespread popularity demonstrates the in auten 85MCU Journal significance of language . It is the most popular language in Ukraine .
 There was a large disparity in the degree of international exposure and response to the two conflicts . There was also a large difference in the level of international coverage of both conflicts .
 The Russian armored column advanced through the Roki Tunnel and the Georgians fired upon them . Most Western organizations offered no significant response .
 Crimea was illegally annexed and the war kicked off in the Donbass region . Ukraine was suddenly under the international spotlight to a degree not enjoyed.
 The threat of a disruption in the supply of gas to Western Europe, much of which is delivered from Russia via Ukrainian pipelines, provided an immediate, concrete incentive for governments to become involved .
 The shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine's conflict zones with Russia also contributed immensely to the West’s interest in this conflict as opposed to Georgian conflict with Russia .
 There are critical differences in the Russian perception of both countries. It is important to note that there are critical Differences in the Russians' perception of each other .
 Georgia held a position of prominence during the Soviet Union as the birthplace of its greatest leader, Joseph Stalin, and as a mountain getaway for the governing elite .
Georgians are Caucasians, not Slavs, and Ukraine holds a very different place in the Russian national memory . However, Georgians are Caucasianians, and Ukrainians are not Russians .
 Kyiv is the historical home of Kyivan Rus’, a state that both Ukrainians and Russians consider to be their historical predecessor . Kyiv has a history of thousands of years and is the home of the Russian state .
 Saakashvili was regarded by Western powers as a hothead who could not be trusted . He was considered by Germany, most notably Germany, as a 'hothead who couldn't be trusted'
Georgia's president acted rashly and shared responsibility with Russia for the onset of war . An independent investigation conducted after the conflict concluded that Georgia’s president acting rashly .
 There is little doubt that the conflict in Ukraine was instigated by powers outside of its boundaries . It would be difficult to place the blame for the conflict on the shoulders of any pro-Ukrainian politician .
 The Ukrainian military suffered from desperately low levels of readiness and was largely unprepared for the war . The Ukrainian army suffered from a lack of readiness .
Much of the early fighting was done not by government forces but volunteer battalions composed of armed civilians and funded by Ukrainian oligarchs .
 This lack of an organized response is, ironically, one of Ukraine’s biggest advantages in its struggle for territorial integrity .
 The Way Forward In Ukraine and Georgia, Russia experienced both strategic gains and setbacks . The Way forward in Russia and Ukraine is a two-year partnership between Russia and Georgia .
 Neither conflict could extinguish the liberal, pro-European political movements that had been the genesis of Russian grievances from the start .
 Russia was spurred to action in both Georgia and Ukraine by the establishment of regimes that hoped to increase their countries’ integration with Western institutions .
 As a result of the conflicts, Russia increased its geographical influence and likely assured its ability to project power from the Black Sea region for decades to come .
Both Georgia and Ukraine have continued the path of reform and integration, albeit slowly and imperfectly . In response, NATO has become much more focused on the Russian threat, and both Georgia andUkraine have continued to reform .
 Russia's actions have laid bare the brutality of Russia’s intentions in Ukraine, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Many were shocked to witness the rapidity with which Russia was able to incite neighbor-on-neighbor violence in the Donbass . Many were surprised to see how fast Russia was allowed to incite violence .
 Many Ukrainians accepted an ethnic and historical linkage between the two countries before the conflict . This has led to the entrenchment of a severe sense of betrayal among moderate Ukrainians, many of whom accepted the link .
 The United States exhibits for its key allies in the region like Romania, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia . The continued high level of support for the United States must remain a priority .
 If Russian military activity in Eastern Europe continues to escalate, it will be critical to stand firm with NATO allies in support of stability in region .
 The U.S. European Command’s many ongoing security cooperation initiatives should remain a cornerstone of this strategy . Atlantic Resolve, Saber Strike, and Marine Rotational Force–Europe should remain an important part of the strategy .
 The United States should continue its support of the Ukrainian military, the U.S. should continue to support the country's military, according to a report .
 The Ukrainian Ministry of Defence has come under heavy scrutiny for its low level of readiness . The ministry has been criticised for its lack of preparedness .
 The U.S. should spearhead the effort to develop the Ukrainian military into a modern, responsible security force . NATO integration is not an immediate objective, but it is a bulwark against destabilization in Europe .
 The Ukrainian conflict is larger, more deadly, and more shocking than the Auten 87 MCU Journal war in Georgia . The Ukraine conflict is more deadly than the Ukraine conflict in the past .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine stepped beyond its strategic intent as we knew it at the time . Russia’s actions in the Ukraine step beyond its Strategic intent, says CNN .
 Few observers of Eurasian geopolitics were able to predict the speed and coordination with which Russia would annex Crimea and instigate insurgency in Donbass .
 It was a precise and well-executed operation, and its boldness and audacity went beyond most estimates of Russian intention . The operation was precise, well- Executed, and it was a well-Executed operation .
 Central and Eastern Europe is becoming one of the most rapidly militarizing regions on the planet . The future is uncertain and potentially dangerous .
 A significant challenge that Western institutions will face as the Ukraine conflict continues is that of strategic patience .
 Putin was recently reelected, ensuring an approximate continuation of Russian policy for the next six years . Putin was reelected.
 Ukraine faces a presidential election in 2019 and the EU suffers a high rate of turnover and political inertia . The EU suffers high rates of turnover, political inertia and a high level of turnover .
 Russia's influence may become more appealing as the conflict drags on without resolution . From the point of view of the ordinary Ukrainian who only desires peace and stability, Russia’s influence may be more appealing .
 Russia is sure to use the full force of its information capabilities to try to sway the Ukrainian populace to its side and discredit the Western narrative .
 Russia will likely benefit from conflict fatigue in Ukraine. Employing a whole-of-government approach and relying on its strategic patience, Russia is likely to benefit from the conflict .
 Many authors have claimed that the West's unwillingness to unambiguously sanction Moscow for the Georgian war may have emboldened the Kremlin to extend its destabilization operations to Ukraine .
 In truth, the United States and its allies offered no concrete challenge to Russia’s actions in Georgia .
 Saakashvili’s reputation as a demagogue led many Western governments to come to his aid only slowly . Many policy makers believed that a reset in relations with Russia was more important than punishment .
 NATO and its allies should be ready to quickly update force posture if hostilities were to arise in another buffer state such as Moldova .
 Russia can rapidly degrade the security situation before we can react, says Ukraine . Georgia and Ukraine have been warned that Russia can quickly degrade security situation .
 In both conflicts, Russia had achieved most of its tactical objectives before many Western governments could come to a consensus on what was happening on the ground .
 Slow response is unacceptable in irregular warfare, says U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry . "The synchronization of efforts within and across national governments is a critical step"
 The conflict in Ukraine will likely persist until there is regime change in Moscow or Kyiv. Ultimately, the conflict will likely continue until there's regime change.
 The U.S. and its allies should continue to display a unified front and promote stability in Europe as a whole .
 NATO's nuclear and conventional deterrent has so far been successful in containing Russian military activity to buffer states .
 If the U.S. and its European allies want a peaceful future for Europe, it must be enforced through a strong stance at its eastern doorstep . It must be expressed through diplomatic and military means .
 The war of ideas provides the first line of defense, according to the author . In closing, it is critical to note that the war of idea provides a first line.
 In an increasingly connected world, the battlefield can be shaped through information operations well before a conflict goes kinetic . The battlefield can also be shaped by information operations .
 As we prepare for a more uncertain future, we must continue to emphasize democratic values and international integration in the region, says the author .
 He aims to diminish the appeal of the Western democratic model and attempts to undermine America’s moral authority .
 His actions are designed not to challenge our arms, at this point, but to undercut and compromise our belief in our ideals . The actions are not designed to challenge the arms, and to undercut our beliefs .
 The secretary of defense is not a weapons system, or a command and control network, he says . He says he believes in the defining principles of our democracy .
Security policy should continue to serve as the defining characteristic of our security policy in Eastern Europe and throughout the world, according to the European Union .
 Kyiv is the official Ukranian transliteration of the name and is used most frequently within Ukraine . Kiev is an outdated Russian transliterations from Soviet times .
 The U.N. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2017, and Pavel Polityuk and Anton Zverev, “Why Ukrainian Forces Gave up Crimea Without a Fight—and NATO Is Alert,’
 Secretary of Defense James N. Mattis made his remarks at the U.S. Naval War College Commencement in Rhode Island .
 The term near abroad encompasses the former countries of the Soviet Union . The term close to abroad is called near abroad .
 LtCol Donald Thieme, USMC, “A Brief History of Conflict in Ukraine’s Ukraine,” USNI News, 11 March 2014 .
 A Reporter Crossed the Kremlin's Borderline. Novaya Gazeta, trans. Coda Story, ‘Polite People’ in Crimea: How It All Happened.
 Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine 16 August to 15 November 2017 . Report on Human Rights situation in Ukraine. Report on human rights in Ukraine between 16 August and 15 November.
Georgians increasingly support EU and Euro-Atlantic Aspirations, National Democratic Institute says .
 Having Secured Adjara, Tbilisi turns to Abkhazia with an Eye on Russia,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
 Maurice Weeks, “Georgians Overthrow a Dictator, 2003,’s ‘Georgians overthrow aDictator.’
 In the United States and European Interest (Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation, 2018), 1. In the U.S. and European interest, 1. The Heritage Foundation is based in Washington, DC .
 David J Kramer, “Renewed Confrontation in Georgia,’s Council on Foreign Relations, 17 March 2016 . Kramer: ‘Renewing Confrontations in Georgia.’
 Adrian Blomfield and James Kirkup, “Stay Away, Vladimir Putin Tells NATO,’s NATO .
 Aleksey Nikolsky, “Recognition of the Independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia’s,” RIA Novosti, trans. Aleksy Nikolski, ‘Recognitions of the independence of Ab Kh
President George W Bush, President George W. Bush, and President Barack Obama have appeared on YouTube .
 A Young Georgian Technocrat Tries to Clean up Ukraine’s Police,” Politico, 3 September 2015 .
 The Idea of an Intermarium Coalition in East-Central Europe,’s War on the Rocks, 30 August 2017 . The Idea. of an intermarium coalition in East Central Europe, ‘War on the rocks’
 Asher Moses, “Georgian Websites Forced Offline in ‘Cyber War’’ ‘Georgian websites forced offline’
 Gerard Toal and John O’Loughlin, “How People in South Ossetia, Abkhazia and Transnistria Feel about Annexation by Russia’s Russia,’ they say .
 A Tribute to the Russian Journalists Who Exposed the ‘Troll Factory’
 Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia Report, 17.17, is based in Georgia .
 Merkel’s Most Serious Foreign Policy Crisis, Spiegel Online, 18 August 2008, is Spiegel Online .
 The West Begins to Doubt Georgian Leader,” Spiegel Online, 15 September 2008, .
 Vasil Jaiani, “6 Unintended Consequences from the West’s Passive Response to the Ukraine Invasion,” Forbes, 5 March 2014 . Jaiani: “The West's Passive Response is a response to the Ukrainian invasion.