 The paper examines the downing of a Malaysia Airlines passenger jet over eastern Ukraine in July 2014 . It examines the divergent blame storylines produced on Russian and Ukrainian television about the event .
 Survey conducted in Southeastern Ukraine, Crimea, and de facto states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria . It then examines results of a question asking why MH17 crashed in December 2014 .
 An analysis of the surveys shows that blame attribution was driven more by television viewing habits than by any other factor . The surveys show that blame is driven by TV viewing habits rather than other factors .
 Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was en route from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur when it was shot from the skies over eastern Ukraine .
 Two hundred and eighty three passengers and a crew of fifteen were killed . The crew of 15 were also killed .
Travelers from ten countries died, including one hundred and ninetythree from the Netherlands . Travelers from 10 countries died.
 A war between Russian-backed rebels and Ukrainian government forces was in its fourth month . The plane's flight path is below the flight path .
 Rebel forces challenging Kiev’s control over its territory, including its skies, were losing ground .
 MH17 was downed by a 9N314M warhead on a 9M38 missile launched by a Buk surface-to-air system . The Dutch Safety Board is leading a technical investigation of the crash .
 Colour versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/fgeo .
 In late September 2016, they released a preliminary report based on forensic analysis, audio interceptions and over a hundred interviews with eyewitnesses and other informants .
 This concluded that flight MH17 was shot down by a 9M38 missile, launched by a Buk from farmland in the vicinity of Pervomaiskiy .
 At that time, the area was controlled by pro-Russian separatist fighters .
 The JIC investigation demonstrated that the Buk had been transported from the Russian Federation and subsequently, having destroyed MH17, was taken back to Russian Federation . The Buk was transported from Russia and then taken back back to Russia .
 The Russian government maintains that no Buk ever crossed into Ukraine from Russia from Russia .
 MH17 became the object of an intense struggle over blame attribution – the projection of blame causality onto certain actors and not others – between the warring parties in Ukraine, their regional allies and the international community .
 The violent death of so many civilians from different countries over a war zone rendered what was supposed to be a violent act in a local military struggle into a worldwide media spectacle .
 Pictures and stories of the tragedy filled news programmes and newspapers for the following week . The Dutch investigations got under way .
 Western-based free-lance social media investigators like Bellingcat drove parts of the initial forensic investigation of the event .
 MH17 was the organisation and framing of MH17 within ready-made blame attribution and victimisation narratives . MH17 gave meaning to the broader struggles over Ukraine, says the author .
 Narrative is the social practice of producing relatively coherent accounts of events, actors and motivations . The social practice is to produce a coherent account of events.
 Framing is the culturally shaped cognitive practice of classifying and particularising that is vital to the creation of narratives . Framing can be used as a tool to create narratives.
 The emergence of clearly divergent blame storylines allows us to examine the degree to which television viewing habits, interacting with other socio-demographic, locational and political factors, account for variations in people’s beliefs about MH17 .
 Shocking and horrific events occur regularly in the course of violent conflicts . Shocking events occur often in the courses of violent conflict .
 The MH17 tragedy is an instance of how conflicting parties and their state sponsors produce self-protective bubbles of belief about shock events that reproduces geopolitical antagonism, regardless of forensic facts . Like the genocidal killings around Srebrenica in 1995, the
 In the era of digital media ascendancy, truth is still a casualty of war, but its death in controlled info-spheres is now more closely observed . The era of geo-locational data is more abundant than ever .
 The paper documents how the downing of MH17 was initially presented to the public in both countries and to allied territories abroad . The paper was published by the most watched television stations in Russia and Ukraine .
 The paper examines the relative support that different blame options received from respondents . The paper was organised by the authors .
Politics has always been marked by shock events that have distinctive geographies and materialities . Making Sense of Shock Events is a new series on the world's top events .
 The meaning of these events is never manifestly clear and often fiercely contested . The meaning is often not clear, but it is often contested .
Shocking events have historically created windows of opportunity for transformational political action and change . Nevertheless, shocking events have traditionally created opportunity for change .
 This contest is a multimedia struggle of conjoined sounds, images and narratives . With the advent of television as the predominant source of international news for most publics, this contest is an international news contest .
 Terrorist attacks are a distinctive genre of shock events, distinct from catastrophic natural events and accidents, in that they are planned and purposeful .
 They create opportunities for consolidation of power by those in positions of authority . They also create well-known opportunities for those in position of authority.
 Affective Images Shock events are, by definition, affective spectacles where images play a key role in triggering and inducing affective contagion . Affective images are a key part of affective events where images are seen to trigger and induce affective contagious events .
 Affective contagion has the capacity to widen existing political cleavages, deepen political polarisation and accelerate the eclipse of politics by war . Affective contagion has the capacity to widen existing political cleavages and deepen political polarisation .
 Television news programmes face choices about what to show and what not to show of the event .
 Protocols and editorial decisions, for example, about whether to show bodies of victims vary .
 Shocking images can so radicalise viewers that evidence based discussion of events is next to impossible . Shocking pictures can soradicalise viewers.
 TV production can link different events across time and space through multimedia montage . As visual storytelling, television production can connect different events through multimedia .
 It can produce animated and virtual reality visual reconstructions of events, thus powerfully shaping interpretation and blame attribution . It can also produce animated or virtual reality images of events .
 Availability, Analogy and Assimilation Shock events are dislocations in the routine reproduction of discourse in geopolitical cultures .
 But they can also stimulate a renewed commitment to dominant discourses and strengthen epistemic closure to inconvenient facts . They can also be used to strengthen the truth about the facts, says author .
 psychologists term ‘availability bias,’ the presence and supply of similar instances from the past and the operation of familiar modes of representation and narration . The selective collection of evidence to bolster pre-existing beliefs.
 In authoritarian societies and many democracies, the leader of a country is the preeminent storyline setter and first explainer .
 Statefunded media tend to follow the lead of the country’s power center .
 If power centres are plural and media less beholden to state or private actors, there is likely to be greater scope for divergence between the official government narrative on shock events and media representations .
 Experts have a different type of authority, one grounded in technical knowledge, subject-matter mastery, cultural capital and a presumption of objectivity .
Comportment, dress, titles and background imagery convey this to television viewers. Comportment and dress, dress and titles convey this.
 Russian television production requires adekvatnost, what critics see as self-censorship, to be successful .
 Who are deemed expert and who are enabled to speak authoritatively in public is a process that is conditioned not only by cultural and social factors but also by editorial decision making .
Who is entrusted to decide and direct what the public sees is shaped by power structure and cultural habitus. Who is entrusted with the public's view of the world is also entrusted with power structure .
 Blame attribution can take many forms, including attribution . Blame Attribution and Agnotology Blame can be used in many ways .
 It can be a direct and concentrated attribution of an event to a singular actor . It can also be a directed attribution of the event to an actor .
 attribution is not concentrated on a singular target but diffused among a series of alternatives . But it can also be a much more indirect process where attribution can be more indirect .
 The first form generates a clear story, or counter-story, about the event . The first forms generate a clear stories, orcounter-story , about the events .
 In the second process, the effect is to generate a counter-story that muddies attribution . In the third process, however, the result is to create a counter story that muddle attribution .
 The picture is unclear, and we may never know who is responsible for what is behind the picture .
 This form of attribution drifts towards agnotology, namely the social and political production of ignorance .
 The concept has similarities to what is known as disinformation in intelligence work . It is used to describe corporate campaigns to deny causality and create confusion .
 Conspiracy Theories is a style of interpretative heuristics that explain events and practices by reference to the machinations of powerful actors who conceal their role to dupe regular people .
This style of reasoning is ostensibly populist but is easily appropriated by powerful actors . This style of thinking is apparently populist but it's easily appropriated. It's not a populist, it's not populist.
 conspiracy theories can be vehicles for that distrust and discontent . In societies characterised by high levels of distrust of or contempt for official institutions, conspiracy theories.
 The disruptive impact of the internet on traditional media has created an unregulated and open communications ecosystem for conspiracy theories to spread and flourish . The rise of personalised expressive social media have created an open and unregulated communications ecosystem .
Research in psychology suggests that human cognition processes are ‘biased’ towards cognitively miserly thinking . conspiracy theories are thus attractive and appealing, especially in times of turmoil and crisis .
Professional standards of journalism are compromised and trust in traditional authority is low. Conspiracy theories flourish when professional standards are compromised .
 Politicians as well as stateand oligarch-controlled media can be conspiracy theory propagators if it serves identified interests . Politicians and state-run media can also be conspiracy theorists .
 conspiracy theory needs to be treated as a category of practice, rather than a scholarly concept, says author .
 The frame itself is part of the discursive struggle of blame attribution and avoidance . The frame has been a struggle for blame attribution.
 Materialities of Shock Events Shock events have their own materialities and contingencies as events .
Catastrophic events have structural, proximate and physical causes as well as multidimensional material impacts and ruins . Catastrophic event have structural and proximate causes, such as physical causes .
 Weapon systems have physical characteristics, material capabilities and visual signatures . Weapon systems can be used to create visual signatures and physical characteristics .
 These challenges pose distinctive technoscientific challenges to investigators and those seeking to control the meaning of these events .
Certain material objects and traces may take on iconic status and may act in ways that defy the meanings being imposed upon them .
 Television News Frames and Blame attribution MH17 was a global media event that was front page news worldwide in the week that followed . The event was front-page news worldwide.
 MH17 coverage by the two most popular channels in Russia and Ukraine. We provide an illustration of the narrative framing that developed in first week of the event .
 According to TV ratings for 2014, Perviy Kanal in Russia and Inter in Ukraine were the most watched channels .
 The Russian government controls the board of directors of Perviy Kanal . The station is widely seen as a vehicle for the communications agenda of the Kremlin .
 In September 2016, the offices of the station were firebombed and subsequent blockaded by Ukrainian militia activists .
 A week after the crash, two rival storylines on MH17 were well established within Russian and Ukrainian geopolitical cultures .
 MH17 is a centrally contested event within the Ukraine crisis, an object of intensive information war on multiple media platforms . The Ukraine crisis is a central contested event in the country .
 This paper is no more than an introduction to the opening rounds of that war and its effects in various locations . This paper has been used as a guide to the start of the war .
 News of the crash was first reported in two brief segments on Perviy Kanal’s 19:00 hour programme Vechernie Novosti . 33.33 The 21:00 television news programme Vremya was the first with sustained coverage of MH17 .
 The broadcast began with distant amateur video and photographs of the wreckage . The broadcast started with distant local amateur video.
 Alexandr Evstigneev, reporting by phone, presented an on-the-ground account of what happened .
 Ukrainian Su-25 fighter jet shot down passenger aircraft, they claimed . They claimed that they shot down the SU-25 and that they subsequently shot the aircraft down .
 Maxim Semin presented a series of ‘facts’ for interpreting the event . A news analysis segment was immediately after by Maxim Semin .
 He claimed they do not have weapon systems capable of destroying a passenger jet at higher altitudes . He also claimed they did not have weapons that could be used to destroy planes at higher altitude .
 Russia's Ministry of Defense indicated that no Russian warplanes were flying near the border of Ukraine . Russia’s Ministry of defense indicated that there were no warplanes flying near Ukraine .
 Semin’s report reminded viewers that the Ukrainian military shot down a Russian Tu-154 airliner in October 2001, with the loss of all 78 lives on board .
 Former President Kuchma was president of the United States from 2001 to 2001 . Semin's commentary on the accident and subsequent investigation accompanied his commentary . The former President of the U.S. State Department has been investigating the accident .
 Ukrainian authorities in 2001 were forced to admit that their missile had indeed destroyed the plane, and that they were at fault .
 The first close-up video footage of a wreckage site shows still smoldering fires, wreckage, human body parts and scattered personal effects . The first video of the wreckage site was shown thereafter .
 The information indirectly inferring that Ukraine was responsible for the downing of MH17 was repeated by other correspondents and experts over the subsequent hours and days . The information was repeated over the next days and days.
Claims about poor training and expertise of the Ukrainian military were made . Further claims were made about the lack of expertise and lack of training .
To this indictment using selective and misleading facts was added a speculative conspiracy theory . To this indictment, the indictment was added to the charge of selective and misled facts .
 A section of Churkin’s speech featured him rhetorically asking why Ukrainian air traffic controllers directed the aircraft into a war zone .
 He declared that ‘ensuring the security of civilian aviation in a state's airspace is that state’s responsibility.’
 The segment features excerpts from an interview with Mikhail Delyagin, director of the Institute for the Problems of Globalization . The segment is part of a discussion about globalization .
 It’s clear that this is a great way to blame everything on the rebel militia. It's clear that it's clear this is the way to blames everything on rebel militia .
 Russia is the world's largest country in Russia . Russia has the fastest-growing economy in the world .
 The Ukrainian Nazi junta is a pure provocation by the Ukrainian junta, I think . I think, it is apure provocation, says the author .
 The real masterminds are Americans, but Poroshenko or Kolomoisky aren't clever enough for this, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The United States sought to break apart Europe from Russian energy supplies . The U.S. sought to separate Europe from Russia, but sought to split it from Russia .
 It is certain that what happened in Ukraine is an attempt to separate Russia from Europe . It's certain that the incident is a bid to separate the two countries .
 The U.S. plan is to prevent a union between Europe and Russia, and instead, make Europe depend exclusively on the United States . The United States plans to prevent the union from happening .
 The energy sector is the most important part of Europe's relations with Europe . The energy industry is a key part of our relations with the EU .
 If this link is cut, then of course we will have difficulties in other directions as well . If thislink is cut then we will be more difficult to find .
 This rupture had not happened, however, while rebel forces were proving difficult for Kiev to eliminate . This is not the first time this has happened, but it has been difficult to eliminate.
 The downing of MH17 allowed the Americans to say to the Europeans that Russia was a terrible country . The Donetsk Republic was like a branch of the evil empire, Simonov says .
 Video montage of Cuban missile crisis images suggests U.S. sought to create a similar catastrophe as a pretext to invade Cuba .
 Putin was returning from a BRICS summit that very day was seen as significant . That Putin was back from the summit that day was a significant moment .
 Pchelkin says the refusal to use the dollar as a reserve currency was a catastrophe for that currency . Pchelkins: "It's a catastrophe"
 Washington cannot accept Russia’s growing role in the world, its energy deals with Iraqi Kurdistan and Argentina, Pchelkin says .
 This conspiratorial mode of reasoning was a feature of similar reports on Perviy Kanal in the days following the disaster .
 The Ukrainian government was condemned for its desire to immediately pronounce separatist rebels guilty of the downing . The government said the rebels were guilty of downing.
 Deputy Defense Minister Anatoly Antonov stressed that ‘political attempts to play on the tragedy were incorrect.’
 He listed ten questions that the Ukrainian military had to answer . Questions insinuated that the government in Kiev was hiding information to serve its interests .
 Poroshenko called on the world to consider the Donetsk and Luhansk republics as terrorist organisations . It was ‘no coincidence’ that Poroshenko subsequently called for the republics to be considered terrorist.
 This report featured a cut-out style animation of a jet being tracked and then attacked by two Ukrainian Buk weapon systems . The report was released by the U.S. government .
 The West remembers the shooting down of the South Korean Boeing in 1983 but not the Ukrainians shooting down the Siberia Air jet in 2001 . The West also remembers the shoot-down of a Russian plane in 2001.
 The shock of MH17 is quickly assimilated into pre-existing blame narratives through a series of strategies . MH17 has been blamed for the tragedy of the MH17 disaster .
 A series of ‘experts’ present ‘facts’ that steer blame away from Russia and the Donbas separatists .
 An anti-American bias, longstanding from Soviet times, is mobilised as available heuristic to locate MH17 within a rich history of U.S. foreign policy provocation and perfidy .
 Inter has an hour-long evening news programme called Podrobnosti at 20:00. Inter’s PodroBNosti Inter has a news programme that is broadcast at 10pm .
 The first visual signature of the downing was an amateur eyewitness video of a plume of black smoke in the distance . The initial visual signature was an Amateur eyewitness video.
 An aviation expert interviewed declared that a Buk system could have brought down the aircraft as could have an air-to-air missile . The Buk system would have been able to launch a missile into the air .
 At the end of the broadcast, the programme displayed a social media photograph of a Buk moving through what it identified as the town of Snezhnoe .
 The U.S. anchor declared that the missile that shot down the Boeing was fired from the territory of Russian Federation . CNN says it has irrefutable evidence .
 The following night’s broadcast featured considerable visual footage of the wreckage of the airplane and of grieving relatives in the Netherlands and elsewhere .
 Human body parts were blurred in the footage, but this blurring and the scattered personal effects of the victims were visual signatures of the loss of life .
 The broadcast focused on audio recording released by the Ukrainian Secret Service of rebel leaders . The audio recording focused on the transfer of the Buk .
Short segment featured a short segment on ‘absurd Russian propaganda,’ the attempt to fake a social media entry by one of the passengers confirming Ukrainian fighters are next to the Boeing .
 Reports from various world capitals highlighted the international reaction amongst politicians to the tragedy .
 In a report on German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the correspondent was openly critical of her conciliatory policy towards Russia .
 A report from Washington highlighted the condemnation of the rebel groups by UN Security Council ambassadors from France and the United States .
 Among them was Putin-critic and historian Andrei Zubov . Zubov expressed great embarrassment at what was happening in Ukraine .
 Another figure interviewed was the Russian writer Viktor Shenderovich who commented on how the MH17 tragedy had ‘spawned monstrous and senseless lies.’ He said that the tragedy hadspawned ‘monster’
 A report highlighted the Russian propaganda effort to divert blame onto Ukraine even to the extent of changing the responsible party from self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic ‘terrorist’ to the ‘Ukrainian military’ on the event’s Wikipedia web page .
 Accusations that rebels were restricting access to the crash site and manipulating evidence were also broadcast . The crash site was used by rebels to manipulate evidence.
 The Russian Ministry of Defense held a press conference on MH17 for the international media in its new operations theatre . Russia’s Public Relations Offensive onMH17 on 21 July .
 The first was by the head of the Main Operations Directorate of the Russian Armed Forces General Staff Andrei Kartapolov . The first is by the chief of the main Operations Directorate.
 His presentation was an elaboration on the alreadyexisting information strategy of the Russian military on MH17 . He said it was to present objective data and pose questions of the Ukrainian military .
 Ukraine, he asserted, had three or four air defense battalions, equipped with Buk surface-to-air missile systems . Ukraine had 3 or 4 airdefense battalions in the area on the day of the crash .
 Kartapolov presented a series of images that inferred that Ukraine was responsible for downing MH17 .
 One was an image of MH17 within the range of the nearby Ukrainian Buk systems . Another was a picture of the Ukrainian Buk system .
Satellite photos show Ukrainian air defense systems and a battery of Buk missiles in the vicinity of Ukraine . Another was a collection of black and white satellite photos showing Ukrainian airdefense systems and Buk missiles .
 The final two images show the same location with the Buk missiles deployed on the day of the crash, and then an empty field some days later . The last two images are of the same place with the missiles deployed .
 A chart of Ukrainian radar activity designed to show its intensity on 17 July was also presented . The chart also showed the intensity of Ukraine's radar activity .
 All of this ‘circumstantial evidence’ was designed to bolster the claim, which Kartapolov does not state directly, that MH17 was shot down .
Russian Air Force Lt. Lt. Kartapolov turned the presentation over to the head of the Main Staff of the Russian Air Force . To corroborate this inference of Ukrainian guilt, Kartapollov turned over the presentation to the chief of the main staff .
 Igor Makushev presented a fourminute flight monitoring video taken by the Russian air traffic control centre in Rostov . He presented the fourminute video to the Russian Air Traffic Control centre .
 Ukraine claimed none of its military aircraft were in that area at the time of the crash . Ukraine claimed no military aircraft was in the area when the crash occurred .
 Kartapolov ended the press conference by challenging the United States to release the data it claimed proves that the rebels shot down MH17 .
 The press conference was covered extensively on Vremya that night and subsequent nights . The press conferences were held on the night of the night .
 An initial video segment weaved together the technospeak of the Ministry of Defense officials with a ground-level witness who asserted she saw two planes that day .
 The press conference was described as providing ‘clear’ and ‘irrefutable evidence’ linking Ukraine to the MH17 tragedy . In a follow-up segment, the next evening, the press conference described the evidence as ‘ clear’
 Ukraine’s non-closure of the air space indicated they knew the separatists did not have any Buk systems . Ukraine could then blame the rebels for the missile they launched, and either of the two Russian theories of the downing were strong possibilities .
 Many salient images from the press conference appeared for 42 seconds as background to a standup report by a Moscow correspondent on Putin’s midnight address the night before .
 The broadcast was dominated by international reaction to the MH17 tragedy . The broadcast is dominated by the international reaction.
 The Berlin correspondent's report was on German newspaper reporting on the possibility of sanctions .
 An aviation expert said a Su-25 could shoot down a plane at an altitude of 11,000 meters . The evidence was an interview clip taken from RBC TV .
 The anchor then reported that Russian pilot-hero Sergey Nefedov termed the Defense Ministry’s version complete nonsense designed for internal Russian consumption .
 Russian ‘experts’ were used to refute Russia’s MH17 storyline. In this way, Russian 'experts' were used.
 Podrobnosti reports on the material effort to remove human remains from the crash site . The following evenings chronicled the efforts to remove the human remains .
 Vostok battalion leader Alexander Khodakovsky admitted that separatists received and returned a Buk missile system a week after the crash . The video was the subject of a brief video segment.
 No feature segment, however, directly deconstructed the two Russian theories on MH17 . The two theories are still being debated .
 Western leaders and the Western press were used to affirm and amplify the Ukrainian government’s position . Instead, the statements of Western leaders, and the western press, have been used to amplify the government's position .
 Ukraine moved BUK to area, then deleted Russian jets not flying in area . Girkin’s social media posting, Ukraine moved to area .
 Initial Privileged Source Rebel sources indicating Ukrainian Su-25 shot CNN reporting photograph of on the Event it down . Initial Privilege Source Rebel Sources indicating UkrainianSu-25 shots were taken in Ukraine .
 U.S. wants to block Russia’s growth and power. Russia wants to ruin Ukraine in international affairs .
 Political authority figures and chosen television ‘experts’ suggest that the United States was behind the events, using provocations to further its geopolitical interests .
 Conspiracy and agnotology go together in the Ministry of Defense press conference .
 To Inter, the MH17 downing was another example of its victimisation at the hands of Russia and its terrorist proxies in the Donbas .
Both Western and Russian authority figures and ‘experts’ attest to their culpability . Both Western and Russia authority figures say they are responsible for their actions .
 It remains an ongoing subject of contestation between Russia, Ukraine and the international community .
 Ukrainian and Russian television consistently broadcast powerfully divergent storylines on what caused MH17 downing . It is worth examining what impact this ‘information war’ had on the attitudes of ordinary residents in parts of Ukraine, Crimea and de facto state territories directly supported by the Russian state .
 In the last weeks of July 2014, the independent Russian polling agency Levada Center asked respondents in the six largest cities about MH17 .
 It posed a question about causality that may or may not involve the allocation of blame to particular actors . Instead, it posed the question about the causality of causality .
 Most responses translate into blaming particular actors is itself an important finding . That most responses translate in to blaming specific actors is a key finding .
 Other diverse explanations were provided by 6% of the sample . 16% indicated that they could not give a reason for the loss of the plane .
 Levada poll asked the same question on MH17 in five other regions . In six oblasts of Southeastern Ukraine, in Crimea and in three Russian-backed states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria .
 A suite of socio-demographic and ideological questions enables cross-tabulation of the answers . The questions include socio-Demographic, ideological questions .
 The MH17 explanation question allows us to probe the relative impact of television habits on causal attribution while considering the effects of socio-demographic and ideological factors .
 The same survey questionnaires in the five sites in late December 2014 allows us to estimate the differential effects of television station access, post-Soviet experiences and local contextual politics .
 The MH17 catastrophe was a catalysing event in widening the divergences between the post-Maidan Ukrainian government and its Western supporters, on one side, and the Putin government .
 The Eurasian de facto states are the products of separatist wars of the early 1990s . They are the result of the collapse of Soviet power and the fall of power .
Anti-government forces in the small autonomous regions of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria eventually prevailed with the backing of Russia .
 Survey Design and Predictors survey contested regions that include Russian-supported de facto states, the annexed Crimean republic and Ukrainian territory .
 The timing of the survey was crucial as events on the ground were shifting quickly . Diplomatic negotiations were underway regarding a ceasefire for the war in the Donbas .
 The survey must be conducted at the same time in all sites as potentially new shock events could lead to different responses if the survey was delayed in one or more regions .
 The region of SE6 Ukraine was nominally contested but peaceful . The region was the site of sporadic violent clashes and struggles over the removal of Soviet-era memorials earlier in 2014 .
 The overall project provided a diversity of local perspectives on the causes and dynamics of possible conflicts . The project provided the intersection between local and international geopolitical aspirations and the prospects of reconciliation .
 The simultaneous survey was managed by Kiev International Institute of Sociology for SE6 Ukraine and by the Levada Center for Crimea, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria .
 Coordination between the two polling companies and sharing of the questionnaire allowed the completion of the surveys in the last two weeks of December 2014 .
 Respondents in SE6 Ukraine were offered a choice of either Ukrainian or Russian and elsewhere were in Russian . Respondents were offered either Ukrainian, Russian or Ukrainian .
 TV habits influence blame attribution by respondents, according to the BBC .
 To highlight this factor, we need to control for other possible explanations, which are included as predictors in the model . We do not give them substantive attention .
First, we considered socio-demographic backgrounds and included 8 predictors in the model from this category . Second, we included socio-Demographic backgrounds.
Self-defined nationality as Russian and Ukrainian were both included in the private and public discussion about the fate of MH17 . The two groups are most directly involved in the discussion about MH17.
 We expect educational status to be related to interest in and information about the event . We included both low educational status and high educational status (university degree or higher)
 age 35 and under is the post-Soviet generation, while age 65 and over are typically pensioners who spent most of their lives in Soviet times . For many of whom thePost-Soviet period has been a time of economic difficulty .
Gender as a control variable since other work has shown men take stronger stands on positions regarding conflict and perceived external aggression . We included gender as a Control variable.
 We include an income effect using the category ‘we can only afford food’ and worse as the measure of low income . We also use the category 'we can't afford food'
 Individuals in this category are generally less interested in geopolitical and public affairs and more concerned about daily material needs . Typically, individuals in this latter category are less interested.
 A second set of predictors measures political and ideological orientations . A third set of predictions will be based on political, ideological orientation .
 We consider attitudes about the ongoing conflict over borders and sovereignty in Ukraine and earlier conflicts in the de facto states as important elements informing a view about the fate of MH17 .
 In April 2014 survey, Kiev International Institute of Sociology asked respondents if they were willing to resist invaders . The survey in 8 oblasts in Southeastern Ukraine, including the war zones of Luhansk and Donetsk, included war zones .
 In their sample, 21% were ‘willing to put armed resistance’ to any Russian troops entering Ukraine .
 The survey settings are in multiple countries . All of them are potentially future war zones due to unsettled borders and territorial preferences .
 We add an interactive term of Ukrainians and ‘willingness to fight’ to account for particular war circumstances in Ukraine at the time of the survey .
 A third set of predictors revolved around post-Soviet material circumstances . The second set was based on post- Soviet material circumstances.
 We expect those who believe that the end of the Soviet Union was correct to be more favourably disposed to current territorial arrangements . We also add a variable specifically asking about future economic prospects to measure economic optimism .
 A third measure in this category of explanations asks respondents to evaluate material interests against territorial arrangements .
 Our variable ‘good salary’ indicates those who agree or strongly agree with this sentiment . Our variable 'good salary' indicates who agrees or strongly agrees.
Our fourth category of predictors is most closely connected to the main argument of the paper about the divergent conspiratorial nature of the crash of MH17 . Our fourth category is the fourth of our predictions.
 We identify respondents who watch more than 20 hours of television per week . Those who trust television news and those for whom television is their main information source .
 Ukrainians would be most likely to accept the explanation coming from the Poroshenko government . We added an interactive term of Ukrainians and ‘trust television news’ to identify those Ukrainians .
We add a dummy variable – residence in SE6 Ukraine – to characterise respondents who do not live in the Russian information space, that is, Russian controlled or Russian dominated sites .
 The main comparison is attributed to Ukrainian forces versus those to the Donbas militants and its Russian supporters . The major categories are collapsed into 7 major options for display .
 A plurality or majorities of the respective nationalities place the blame on Ukrainian forces for the aircraft downing .
 Values most similar to the overwhelming blame attributed to Ukrainian forces by urban Russians in Levada’s July 2014 survey are seen in Transnistria .
 Georgians in Abkhazia and Ukrainians in the SE6 part of the country attribute significant blame to Russian forces . Ukrainians and Georgians say Russian forces are responsible for significant blame .
 Only in SE6 Ukraine and ‘others’ in Transnistria show more than 10% to the Donbas militias .
 It could be argued that asking ‘why was MH17 destroyed’ is a potentially sensitive political question . It is one with a manifest ‘politically correct’ answer, one with an ‘political correct” answer .
Black Sea-Caucasus groups who feel marginalised or alienated in their regional settings show high ratios of ‘don't know’ answers out of an abundance of caution .
 The extreme ratios – over one-fifth of Georgian respondents in Abkhazia, Russians in SE6 Ukraine and one-third of Tatars in Crimea – are higher than the one- fifth ratio in Russia .
 Many of the respondents of Russian nationality believed that it was Russian forces or Donbas militants who shot down the plane but decided against revealing their opinion to interviewers because it did not affirm their usual geopolitical preferences .
 By pooling the 5 samples, we can gain insights into the factors that led people to come to their decision about who was to blame .
Geographers have argued the importance of the contextual factor that has been argued by geographers as an element that can influence respondents’ attitudes .
 We drop respondents who refused to answer the question about MH17 . We also drop respondents whose personal characteristics are not available since they either refuse to answer a specific question .
 These ‘missing cases’ result in 3339 respondents in the statistical models . The results are based on a survey of 3339 people in the UK .
 The Role of Television We summarised the dramatically contrasting blame attributions put out by Russian and Ukrainian broadcasters in the aftermath of the shooting down of MH17 .
 We chose multinomial logit as our preferred modelling approach since it allows examination of circumstances with more than two discrete outcomes . We chose a multinometric logit instead of a multi-millionaire logit .
In these cases, the choice of a comparator is important for interpretation of the coefficients . The choice of the comparator in these cases is important.
 Respondents who chose these options are not specifically opting for Russian, Ukrainian or Donbas militant forces . Neither do they avoid the ascription of blame by choosing the 'don’t know' option .
 Ukrainian forces, Russian forces, Donbas militants and the ‘don’t know’ to the accident/terrorist act comparator . In the multinomial logit modelling, we present the four comparisons .
 We convert the values from the multinominal logistic regression into average marginal effects for clarity of display and identification of the significant factors in predicting the choice of blame attribution .
 Marginal effects are calculated from predictions of the model that was fit for each of the 26 predictors by averaging their values and integrating over the remaining variables .
 Average marginal effects can be interpreted as the probability for a unit change in the variable of interest holding the other variables constant . Average marginal effect can be seen as a result of a change in a variables of interest .
 Standard errors are represented by the vertical lines . When the 95% error estimates cross the zero line, the predictor in that model is not significant .
All of the modelling was completed by the ‘mlogit’ command in STATA 14 . All of the models were completed by 'mlog it’ Command in STATATA 14.
 Those who trust Putin are 19.6% more likely to blame Ukrainian forces for shooting down MH17 than those who do not trust Putin .
 We consider demographic variables as controls in this analysis and do not devote much attention to their coefficients . We consider the demographic variables to be controls.
 Few of these variables show any significant relationship with any of the four blame attributions . Few of the variables show no significant relationship.
 There are significant numbers of Russians and Ukrainians in Transnistria and Crimea as well as in SE6 Ukraine . It should be noted that there are significant number of Russians, Ukrainians and Ukrainians .
 Russians might have different interpretations about MH17 crash because of differential exposure to local television stations, as well as broadcasts emanating from Moscow .
 There is insignificant variation among these sub-populations by study site . But there is insignificant variations among these Sub-Populations by Study site .
 On the four graphs of the average marginal effects, the relative positions of the estimates for both Russians and Ukrainians are very similar .
 Given the debate about the causes of the MH17 plane crash and the key role Putin played in its immediate aftermath, these values are expected .
 The effect of this locational factor is visible in all of the blame attributions (Ukrainian, Donbas or Russian forces) after controlling for individual personal characteristics of the respondents .
 Neither the Dutch Safety Board nor the Joint Investigative Committee had released reports on their findings .
 In contrast, those who trust TV news (minus 3.1%), those who watch Russian television stations and those who are ‘very proud’ of their nationality at minus 3.5% also show significant effects .
 The relative lack of significant effects for this model is not surprising since the public debate over MH17 had focused on either Russian or Ukrainian guilt and divisive lines did not develop as readily among the populations of our survey sites about the Donbas militants .
Blame on Russian forces achieved a high rate at 31% among those who self-identify their nationality as Ukrainian in SE6 Ukraine .
 The ratio was only 22% among Georgians in Abkhazia . Elsewhere, the ratio was just 22% .
 The divide among the survey sample is as clear as it was for the Ukrainian forces, but now the values are reversed . On this blame option, the divide is asclear as it is for Ukrainian forces .
 The final model was not expected to yield much clarity on political, nationality, TV watching and ideological divides since a ‘don’t know’ answer could have many different provenances .
 Those who watch Russian television stations are more likely to give a ‘don’t know’ answer at 6%, perhaps as a response to the accumulating information about the crash at the time of the crash .
 A ‘don’t know’ answer is one way to resolve this asymmetry. This cumulating evidence contradicts their generally pro-Kremlin positions, says the author .
Our analysis of the surveys shows that blame attribution was driven more by television habits than by any other factor .
 Ukraine and Russia try to constrain information to certain reliable sources that stick to the government line . Of course, habits are ingrained.
 Residents in the Black Sea region are increasingly living in 'different worlds' despite shared provenances of their territories in the former Soviet Union .
 The downing of MH17 was a pivotal event in the Ukraine crisis of 2014 . The Ukraine crisis was a moment where its violence became worldwide news .
 A wave of revulsion in the West provided popular impetus for the imposition of new sanctions on Russian individuals and entities by the European Union and United States in July 2014 .
 MH17 is an event that continues to haunt Russia’s foreign policy and the separatists it supports in Ukraine . MH17 has been blamed for the deaths of MH17 and MH17.
 Preliminary hearings on the case began in March 2017, and it is not likely to be decided for years . The case is expected to be heard in 2017 .
 The Dutch Foreign Ministry declared that suspects in the MH17 downing will be tried in a Dutch court . In July 2017, just before the third anniversary of the downing, the Dutch foreign ministry declared that suspect in that downing would be tried .
 The evidence gathered by the JIC on the downing of MH17 can be used to prosecute those responsible . But it must stand up in court .
 Euromaidan, the annexation of Crimea, the Odesa tragedy are at the fulcrum of a multimedia ‘information war’ between Russia and its allies, on one side, and Ukraine, the European Union and the United States, on the other .
 The politicisation of authority and expertise, agnotology and disinformation, othering through conspiracy theory mongering, has produced a self-affirming bubble of understanding that is insulated from inconvenient material facts .
 Residents in a set of study sites across the Black Sea region appear to be guided in their understanding of major geopolitical events, like MH17 .
 Data analysis suggests people tend to follow the narratives of the political leaderships they trust . Data analysis also suggests that people follow narratives of political leaders they trust.
 The high ‘don’t know’ ratios seen in some locations are likely a combination of genuine confusion about the reasons for the plane’s destruction (itself a created condition) and tactical avoidance of a politicised topic .
 scholars need to pay more attention to shock events in international affairs, they say . The storylines are disseminated by politically controlled television networks .
 Some commentators have linked to the influence of ‘filter bubbles’ and a ‘post-truth’ politics driving the BREXIT and Trump campaigns of 2016 . This is particularly important given the manifest fragmentation of traditional media and politics in many Western states .
 Gela Merabishvili for research and translation work on television news reports . Thanks to her work on the TV news reports.
 The comments of two anonymous reviewers for Geopolitics helped refine and sharpen our argument .
Bellingcat later allied with the Washington DC based advocacy organization, the Atlantic Council . Bellingcat also allied with a Washington DC-based advocacy organization .
We have used a paraphrase of the interview question for this article’s title . We have used this paraphrase for the article's title .
 In July and August 2014, Levada asked a more direct blame allocation question in national surveys . The question included the United States .