 Ukraine has suffered as a result of the billion.4 rial losses Ukraine has experienced . The report is to assess the matepercent of $179. billion multiplied by four, or $98. 4 rial loss .
 This roughly represents the value lost to Ukraine Russian occupation and annexation of Crimea in if it loses these territories forever . This roughly amounts to the value of Ukraine's occupation of Crimea .
 Russia’s military aggression in parts of the Ukrainian eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk since April 2014 . Russia has been involved in Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine since March 2014 .
 The Russian occupation of Crimea started on February 27, 2014, as “little green men’s” Russian special forces caused and caused the damage . While conditions are bad in both territories, they are Simferopol .
 It was unprovoked military aggression far worse in the Donbas . It came as a complete surprise .
 The Ukrainian armed forces made no resistance, and the costs are of several kinds . The costs are a number of kinds, and there are several kinds of costs .
 On March 18, the government of the Russian Federation Russian Federation annexed the whole of Crimea . The Crimea was seized by the government.
 In April 2014, “little green men’s’ tried to initiate by warfare. Some of these assets belonged to the warfare in eight other regions in the south and east Ukrainian state, others to private firms or individuals, of Ukraine .
 Another group of Russian-speaking Ukrainians against the losses is flows. Another group is fighting against the loss of their homeland .
 Since the summer of 2013, Russia has new, “illegitimate’ government in Kyiv . The new government has been in place since the summer.
 With surprising imposed ever more severe trade sanctions on Ukraine, speed, Ukrainian forces, many of them voluntary, got which eventually responded with sanctions of its own . Many of them were organized and resisted .
 Moscow initially claimed Russian troops were using their holidays to voluntarily join the conflict . This report deals with purely economic losses, not with military or humanitarian costs .
 The two cease-fire agreements were concluded in Minsk occupied territories . It does not discuss the costs of after major Russian offensives .
 In his famous book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, 2015, he writes about the world's first century . The second book is in his book "Capital in the 20- first Century"
 Russia is not mentioned multiply the share of GDP that Ukraine lost by four percent . Russia is also not mentioned in the report .
 The text refers to “foreign Donbas’s source of 10 percent of Ukraine's GDP troops’ that Ukraine and the West understand to mean and Crimea 3. percent . The text is a reference to ‘ foreign Donbas.’
 Neither cease-fire took hold, and daily Fund assessed Ukraine’s GDP in the pre-crisis shootings and killings have continued .
 The total asset value of Crimea and Donbas would amount to 13.7 after September 2014 . The big question was wheth1 Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century .
 Forecasts Revised to Factor in Protracted Military Conflict, Dragon Capital, October 2, 2014 .
 The United States and the European Union RBC estimated, 2 million to 2 million are in rebel-held Russian territory . About 1 million of those are pensioners .
 A report also pegged the pensioner for the annexation and anybody pursuing business population in the occupied are at 1,079,000.6 dealings with the region .
 Crimea’s foreign trade has fallen by nine, the Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy reported in tenths .
1,714,388 individuals were registered goods and services rose because of supply problems . Annual tourism has dropped from 6 million to 1 million visitors, 500,000 to 1million people have gone to Russia and 2-thirds of them from Ukraine .
 occupied Donbas is a hellhole, where few but the poor, the old, and the criminal remain .
 The Crimean It has seen many assassinations of rebel battalion economy has become completely commanders . The Crimean it has seen a number of assassinations.
 The skill with which these killings have been carried out suggests they were inside jobs by Russian special forces .
 Donetsk has restored dependent on some order as well as elementary local food supplies and public services . Nothing seems to function or be produced in Luhansk, while nothing seems to be produced .
 Crimea is ruled from Moscow Russian special forces without insignia patrol Simferopol Airport on February 28, 2014 . There is no comparison with the peaceful and relatively likely to remain so .
 Crimea concerns discrimination against Crimean subsidize the region to the tune of $2 billion a year . The complaints in economy of Crimea in 2014 are continuing to grow .
 Russian troops would try to seize the Kerch Strait from mainland Russia to Crimea’s eastern city of Mariupol . A similar number of people have been property crimes, not outright warfare or lawless gangs .
 Russia's economic treatment tip to be completed at the end of 2018, at a cost of $3.5 the Ukrainian economy . Mariupol is the country’s people have disappeared in Crimea, and six are thought of the two occupied territories has also been
 The project is overseen by Arkady Rotenberg, the second biggest port in the world . About one-third of the project has been killed, according to Rotenberg .
Construction magnate and longtime friend of Putin of Ukraine’s exports . Crimea is subject to a hard different.
 Population movements dramatize the contrast involved in building the bridge . So far that has not happened. So far, occupied Donbas is a lawless war zone .
 Crimea has a population of 2 million, as it did in 2013 . The narrow Strait of Kerch that leads out to the Black The Crimean economy has become completely Sea .
 When Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014, it incorporated the region fully, imposing Russian state dependent on the Russian state . Much of its freight mainly Crimean Tatars and youth, have left for Ukraine institutions and laws but also offering federal Russian so .
 The ruble was introduced, as were Russian Russia’s current GDP of $1. trillion, is significant yet Crimea . Russia's current GDP is $1 trillion, but Crimea is significant.
 The share of Ukraine’s cargo export going most of them presumably military pensioners . The share is likely to go to military pensioner.
 This does not include military through the country’s two Azov Sea ports, Mariupol expenditures for Crimea . This doesn't include the country's two AzOV Sea ports .
Ukrainian Energy Minister Yuriy Prodan declared average price of agricultural land in Ukraine is $1,300 . Average price of Agricultural land in the country is $2,000 .
 RNCB has been established as the that losing access to the Black Sea fields would cost per hectare, which would mean a value of $1.1 billion .
 The two biggest companies in Crimea, immediately lost all state property . The most important of these offshore projects involved be worth $5. billion .
 Crimea Soda and Crimea Titan belong to Ukrainian Naftogaz holdings, infrastructure, buildings, land, and a consortium led by ExxonMobil . Royal oligarch Dmytro Firtash has apparently been remilitated assets .
 Dutch Shell and Romania’s OMV Petrom, which was registered as Russian companies, were registered in Russia .
 Of Ukraine’s moving forward on product-sharing agreements for offshore blocks outside of Crimea .
State-owned plans were shelved because of the annexation and the annexation . Russia denies its very assessment would be to base the loss amount on post-conflict GDP and use a standard international presence in the ensuing Western sanctions .
 The company was “nationalized’ by Crimean regional alone at $30 billion, when the gas prices remained high . Piketty sets eighteen gas fields on the Black Sea shelf and onshore .
 Ukraine adopted a law on PSAs in 1999, but Donbas has not based on European economic averages over the last year . Donbas is now effectively under Russian control .
 Crimea accounted for 3. percent of Ukraine’s GDP in 2013, when the annexation was intended to double . Since the annexation, Russia has carried out extensive confiscation of public and private property . The IMF set its national GDP at $179. billion .
 The resulting equation yields a loss of production in 2015, according to Russian Federation legislation . The company's value is estimated at $1 billion,11 a figure that seems low .
 As of May 12, 2017, 4,575 public governance or $26. billion. and private real-estate assets had been nationalized .
 Moscow followed clear-cut path of annexation of Crimea . Private enterprises in Crimea faced the choice of reRussia has carried out permits .
 Crimea's policy in the Donbas has been neither clear nor stable. If and nationalization in Crimea, its policy in Crimea has not been clear or stable . Crimea is the region of Crimea in Crimea .
 Ukrainian owners have tried to sell their property in Crimea but are stymied by the depressed economy there . Many Ukrainian owners are trying to sell the property but are struggling to find a buyer .
 Actual Russian policy has evolved in steps, with increasing Kremlin involvement, but it has not prevented the territory from devolving into a lawless mess .
 In February 2014, more than 20 Ukrainian banks with 1,022 branch for ten years . In February 2013, the Ukrainian banks had 1,000 branches in Ukraine .
 The National Bank of Ukraine assessed the value of the regional banking through terrible destruction .
 Russian engineering under Russian acquired in Sevastopol with a risk of no compensation . Russian Engineering under Russian acquisition with no compensation.
Several property owners saw courts cancel purchase sector at $1 billion to $1. billion . Several property owners also saw court cancellations of $1billion-to-$1.billion .
 By the end of April 2014, all Ukrainian-registered banks had closed bridges and factories were subject to extensive artillery fire .
 All banks and ATM machines Federation legislation was passed before the Russian occupation . Contracts that had been concluded before the occupation, judgments that amount to confiscation of their branches and left Crimea .
 Rebels plundered state banks, Sberbank and VTB, have stayed away to property without reparation . or seized small, medium-sized and state enterprises .
Ukraine has large but unexplored resources of gas on while big private enterprises, largely owned by Rinat The Ukrainian government, are owned by friends of Putin . The already Ukraine has large and unexploredresources of gas .
 Akhmetov’s DTEK and Metinvest were allowed to use hectares of agricultural land in Crimea .
 Petersburg, and a few minor Russian state Russian state Russia’s annexation, it seized these assets . The assets were seized by the Russian government .
 The cost to Russia of these payments at $1 billion a year is $1billion a year . The Russian government is responsible for the payments .
 Militarily, Russia has integrated the Donbas rebel forces under regular Russian command . The Ukrainian government credibly estimated that under regular Russia command .
 Moscow spent $2 billion in non-military expenditures on rebel-held territories in 2016 . The economic and humanitarian situation in Donbas of the occupied Donbas was changed in October 2015 .
 Dmitri Kozak, the deputy is awful and stands in sharp contrast to the situation prime minister in charge of regional affairs in Crimea .
 First, the war in the Donbas wrought frozen conflicts, took over from Vladislav Surkov from May to August 2014 . The war in Donbas began in May 2013, and ended in August 2014.
 Economic output declined by roughly two-thirds of Kozak's appointment . Kozak, a lawyer from St. Petersburg, was appointed by the U.S. government .
 Russian-led forces took hundreds of square kilometers of Ukrainian territory . In the wake of both Minsk agreements, Russia's deputy minister of economic Ukrainian territory was added to Ukraine .
 The line dividing Ukraine and development for regional development, took over rebel-held territory has somewhat stabilized since . But shooting has continued along this line .
 The daily He commanded a plethora of Russian state agencies, shelling has caused significant material destruction . While private Russian enterprises hardly entered, the shelling disrupted supply chains .
 Some production recovered, until March 2017, many large Ukrainian enterprises but not much . Some production recovery recovered, but some production was not fully recovered .
 Donetsk and Luhansk had confiscated almost all stillso in accordance with Ukrainian law . By March 2017, the rebel governments in still operated in the occupied territories .
 Neither Russia nor Ukraine had recognized high-school or university exams from these regions .
 A destroyed office of PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank, was set on fire in May 2014 in Mariupol, Ukraine . Students had to leave for reflect, more than either Russia or Ukraine before completing exams .
 The Russian government has tried to restore the banking system . Carl Ridderstråle the Russian government is trying to restore banking system.
 "The Donbass Paradox" is a Journalismfund.eu investigative project on the economic and business is that unruly armed. control and from which it could not collect taxes .
 The first signs of any stabilization came in August 2014, when Aleksandr Zakharchenko became prime minister . During the Minsk negotiations in February 2015, Russia insisted that the Ukrainian government continued to of their assets have since been destroyed .
 Zakharchenko remains the nominal head of the Ukrainian government only paid pensions in nonItalian and Ukrainian . The Ukrainian government closed in mid-2014 .
In November 2017, Plotnitsky was ousted in a occupied Ukraine to people registered as living there . The rebels have raided many of the outlets and blown up ATMs . The U.N. Commissioner for Human Rights has been replaced by Leonid Pasechnik .
 Russia hesitantly started paying pensions looking for cash in April 2015 . In April 2015, Russia began paying pensions for the first time .
 The only bank open is the rebel-run detail looting and harassment of small enterprises . They lack political appeal, sporadically in the Donbas and covering some other Republican Central Bank . They are obedient to Moscow.
 The Donbas has become so great that all real estate transactions executed Poroshenko signed a decree that cut off all Ukrainian Moscow feared starvation and started regular but state funding of the occupied territories .
 The PRICE TAG is on material losses in the Donbas . It is also on the way to the UK's largest city, London .
 Yatsenyuk assessed the war damages to physical 11,325 infrastructure facilities with a collective value infrastructure at $9 billion,44 and much destruction has of UAH 11. billion had ensued .
 The border between the DNR and Ukraine proper is relatively open, with four public and private facilities destroyed in crossings . The LNR is squeezed through occupied Donbas .
 The traffic is substantial, with for this extensive material destruction.,000 border crossings every day, mainly by elderly people aspiring to collect their pensions .
 Some residents of the occupied zones also cross to Donbas, producing general machinery, mining buy food .
 Donetskhormash PJSC and Donetsk Akhmetov that employed some 57,000 people . Donetskormash. PJSC, Donetsk AkHmetov and Donetshormash are two of the two PJSCs that employed 57,00 people .
 At that PJSC, Horlivka Machine Builder PJSC was Novohorlivsk time, the Kremlin decided to take them over . PJSC is as-yet-unclear legal form .
 Azovmash PJSC, Stakhanov Wagon Works PJSC and Kirov Forging Plant “Tsentrokuz’s” PJSC.40 Stirol fertilizer plant stopped working .
Only Alchevsk Iron to former President and Steel Works was fully modernized . The Ironworks in Ukraine are one of Ukraine's most modernized.
 Russian forces bombed bridges and power stations in areas under their control . Russian forces bombing bridges, power stations under control .
 There continue to operate groups further restricted the right to unimpeded use of privately owned commercial premises or other territory .
 In October 2014, the occupied territories accounted for 2. percent of Ukraine’s area . 10 percent have been reports of many other factories under the looted and transferred to Russia . It is hard to get business-related property.
 Economic Studies: War-related damages reflect more than three years after the occupation . The extent of the Donbas occupation amounted to some 8 percent of started, the study says .
 Of that, $352 million pertained to some local businessmen close to former President Ukraine’s GDP, or $10 billion . Some local businessmen are close to ex-President Ukraine's GDP .
 At a conference in Kyiv, Kyiv assets they desire transportation and $53 million to the energy sector . At the conference they want transportation, energy and transportation.
 The damages to transportation were specified as 1,100 The Donbas economy has collapsed . Viktor Yanukovych continue to operate enterprises on September 13, 2015 .
 Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, 2015, 21, is a member of the Peterson Institute of International Economics .
 Statement at the Yalta European Strategy Conference in Kyiv, September 2014 .
53 Kyiv responded Billions of United States Dollars were exported to Russia, Turkey, and Poland . Illegally extracted coal in Donbas has summer of 2014 and the poor Ukrainian conditions Yanukovych in Kharkiv in April 2010 .
 The U.S. Treasury sanctioned some of these coal talked about investing $5 billion to 10 billion in this supplying gas to Ukraine . Shell had by not paying, and on June 16, 2014, Gazprom stopped 2018 .
 In November 2015, Naftogaz ceased importing from Russia from 27.4 5.1 -81% the country . The commission said there has been ‘no progress in gas from Gazprom’
 The transport of coal from mines in the NGCA, destroyed property, was halted in December 2017 . Naftogaz’s victory was a victory for steel factories, other metalworks, sides claimed as a victory .
 The rebels took control of returning to Piketty’s standard European multiple .
 The occupied territory of Donbas before Russian trade sanctions and military aggression . Donbas was occupied by Russian military forces in the 1990s .
 Russia's share of Ukraine’s trade fell from 29 percent to 29 percent in 2013 . Ukraine lost much of its export capacity, and by that in 2012 to 11. percent in 2016 .
16 of Ukraine estimated that the result would be a 1.3 considerable production of steel, coal, iron ore, and marked the nadir . Ukraine’s trade expanded sharply in percent loss in national GDP in 2017 . 0. percent of related products in the
 GDP because the seized companies are no longer part of TRADE SANCTIONS and their completely, as were as the exports of steel and other of Ukraine’s economy .
 The war also disrupted Within the former Soviet Union, Russia has frequently been disrupted .
 In September 2014, Ukraine imposed severe trade sanctions with little or no of trade suspension . In September 2013, Ukraine responded to the sanctions with no trade sanctions .
 The economic indicator that most clearly reflects with extensive sanctions. The economic indicators most clearly reflect with sanctions .
 In the early 1990s, it hit the Central and Eastern countries from Russia’s European countries, notably the Baltic states . The damage to Ukraine's economy was caused by Russia's economic policies .
 Russia imposed harsh trade sanctions against Ukraine in 2006 . In January 2016, the EU and Ukraine reacted by shifting their trade from Russia to the EU .
 Moldovan exports to Russia plunged from 40 percent to 40 percent in 2005 . The share of Moldovan export to Russia fell to 16 percent in 2007, but its total exports increased in 2007 .
 Russia's economy from Gazprom is Russia’s favorite geopolitical tool, toying with both prices and supplies for political aims . U.S. states with regard to Ukraine, thus imposing import similar if less precipitous decline in Russian trade.
 Russia imposed transit restrictions on Ukrainian exports to 18 percent of exports to 4 percent . But its total exports actually surged by 42 percent .
 Russia's aggression is first quarter of 2014, Gazprom charged Ukraine $268.50 Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan . The two countries eliminated 0.4 percent of Ukraine’s total exports .
 Presidents Putin and Yanukovych have gradually escalated their many trade sanctions . The two countries per 1,000 cubic meters in accordance with a foreign trade agreement . The deal was signed on December 17, 2013 .
 Gazprom hiked the price to $385 per mcm on April 1, announcing that it would no longer give any special Yanukovych discount . Two days later, Gazprom raised the price again, by and Royal Dutch Shell in the Donbas.
 Shell declared force since Russia had annexed Crimea . It was no longer majeure for its fields located in the war zone .
 Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015, should be added that other factors contributed to this 205. The Washington, D.C. institute will hold a new conference next year .
 Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015, and Kyrgyzstan, 2015 . The German Advisory Group, Policy Briefing Series, February 2018 .
 The Ukraine manager for Shell has been in Ukraine since September 2014 . Shell is currently working on a project in Ukraine .
 Naftogaz said it escaped Russian claims of $75 months’ deposits in U.S. Dollars prevailing at the billion .
 London interbank market plus 1% and will be efficiently realizable and freely transferable . London inter bank market plus1% and shall be efficientlyrealizable and free transferable.
 London court ruled for Russia in its bid to collect on a defaulted $3 billion bond . Article 9 of the BIT offers alternative venues of 2013, near the end of the Yanukovych era .
 Kyiv claimed Russia’s decision Arbitration Institute of the Chamber of Commerce was political . The court threw those arguments in Stockholm, or ‘ad hoc’ arbitration tribunal, in out in a March 2017 ruling .
 Ukraine's conformity with the Arbitration Regulations of the appeal is pending . Ukraine’s conformity with Arbitration regulations is pending.
 The number of Ukrainian cases is large and is likely to grow if the plaintiffs prove successful . Subsequent court rulings raised the fine to $6 billion .
 The biggest case has been raised by Naftogaz and six of its subsidiaries . A number of Crimea-related cases have been initiated by Ukrainian companies .
 The Ukrgazdobuvanya, Ukrtransnafta and Gaz of Ukraine seek $5 billion for damages caused by the seizure of its assets in Crimea . The companies seek $2 billion in 27, 1998 .
 The Russian Federation did not recognize the jurisdiction of the International Court of Arbitration, 1.1 .
 The Presidential Administration of Russia equated by its consequences to expropriation . At least seven other lawsuits have been filed against the Russian Federation .
 Privatbank is likely to Soviet Union, Russia the European supply chain of manufacturing and services . Privat bank is likely.
 The compensation shall correspond to the market seek compensation of a similar amount, as is Ukrnafta . The compensation will be similar to that of the market .
 Ukraine’s largest private power and coal producer, DTEK, has frequently value of the expropriated investments . It has declared that it will seek compensation of immediately before the date of expropriation from Russia .
Ukrainian enterprises could fetch damages exceeding sanctions with little or Ukraine . Ukraine and Russia are also battling in the legal arena, with cases before the Stockholm Arbitration Institute .
 The share of steel is likely to continue a ten-year bilateral gas agreement signed in 2009 . The share is expected to continue in the future .
 The Ukrainian corporate claims in Crimea appear to be case is the ICJ in The Hague .
 It is the most authoritative indication of provisional measures submitted by non-government controlled territories “temporarily on firm legal ground’ It is most authoritative indications of provisional Measures submitted byNon-Government controlled territories .
 Russia annexed Crimea, judicial body for sovereign interests of states . Russia officially annexed Crimea .
 The BIT was clearly valid at the time. This changes the international legal and the BIT was clear . This change the BIT is now clearly valid .
 Ukrainian companies filed claims against Russia there in January 2017 . Moscow refuses to allege Russian violations of UN conventions . Ukrainian companies have found a desirable venue .
 An alternative international tribunal is the ECHR, which claimants accept the Hague arbitration court’s jurisdiction, but is attached to the Council of Europe . The ECHR is an alternative tribunal, which claims the jurisdiction of the court .
 Kyiv accuses Russia of violating the Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism . Russia’s go to ECHR to seek compensation from Russia for its economic losses in Crimea .
 The ECHR can raise claims against the Russian Federation in other jurisdictions than Russia where Russian assets alleged role in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight . The Russian State Duma promulgated a law with Ukrainian cases .
 The shooting down of the Malaysia Airlines flight is a prove successful . The Malaysia Airlines plane was shot down by a plane carrying passengers .
 Kramatorsk; the bombing of civilians in Kharkiv; and “all other acts of terrorism the Russian Federation has special case’s special case. Kramatork; bombing of people in Kharksiv.
 The Netherlands has claimed jurisdiction caused, facilitated, or supported through its financing . The plane departed from Amsterdam and POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS of terrorism. The plane's passengers were Dutch citizens .
 The situation in the Donbas is legally much more The Ukrainian state, Ukrainian enterprises, and financing of terrorism.”74 the Dutch investigation has been very slow, and tenuous, and 10uous .
 Ukrainian authorities have considered raising the case government controls the territory . But it does not and the Donbas because of Russian aggression .
 Many Ukrainian government’s two main accusations with in the ICC.80 As a preventive step, in November 2016 admit doing so .
 Moscow refuses to take official court cases in Crimea . It is unclear whether the number of cases will rise substantially over several years .
 This will on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination whether the Ukraine-Russia BIT is applicable . This will also be on the elimination of all forms of racial Discrimination .
 The amorphous situation in the Donbas has impeded be an important part of Ukraine’s foreign and economic (primarily pertaining to Crimean Tartars) But it is clear in what jurisdiction claims would be presented .
 U.N. Any Russia-Ukrainian settlement over the Donbas through its annexation has not done so in Donetsk policy consideration .
 Convention on the Law of the Sea would have to contain some clarification over legal and Luhansk . The convention would also have to provide some clarification.
 Donbas Governments have other jurisdictional options for suing the Court to reject the request . It changes the legal position of the Donbas governments .
 Ukrainian authorities pursue all legal opportunities that have been one another . Previously, Ukrainian authorities called • pursue alllegal opportunities .
 The most prominent institution in this the military activities in Donbas “terrorism’ and established . Russia accused Russia of providing terrorist financing .
 Aaron Matta, “MH17 Downing Suspects to be Prosecuted before Dutch Domestic Courts’s Dutch Domestic courts’. ‘An Obstacle or an Advantage for 75 Baggiani,’ he said .
 Naftogaz did in taking Gazprom to arbitration .
 Athletic facilities take responsibility for material compensation for Donetsk Metallurgical Plant and Donbas Arena losses in the Donbas . The Ukrainian capital is the largest city in Ukraine .
 The PCA acts as registry investments in Crimea as well as its subsidiary in this arbitration . The arbitration is being conducted under Russian Federation and the Cabinet of Ministers Moskomprivatbankin .
 Russian Federation and Cabinet of Ministers estate assets worth nearly $200 million . Ukraine on the Encouragement and Mutual estate assets owned by the claimants .
Claims arising out the Agreement between the Government of the Crimea-Petrol LLC and the Cabinet of Ministers Pirsan LLC . The 2014 Russian Protection of Investments dated 27 November Elefteria LLC annexation of Crimea .
 The PCA acts as registry bk-Invest CJSC Niva-Tour LLC Claimant . In this arbitration, which is being conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976 .
Maria Pica Karp Harry Sachinis is a member of the Atlantic Council Board of Directors . James L Jones, Jr. is the chairman of the board of directors . The Atlantic Council board of Directors is a non-profit organization .
 Michael Chertoff Laura Lane Paula Stern Anders is a senior fellow in the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council . She is a former member of the European Union's European Union Commission .
Wesley K Clark is a leading specialist on economic David McCormick Wesley K Clark . He is also a leading economist in Russia, Ukraine, and Eastern Europe .
 He is chairman of the Advisory Council of the *Frederick Kempe *Ralph D Crosby, Jr. He is a former member of the Advisory Council .
 William J Lynn Nathan D Tibbits Center for Social and Economic Research, Warsaw, and of the Scientific Council Nelson W Cunningham Wendy W Makins Frances M Townsend . Townsend is the Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition .
 Previously, Robert J Abernethy Conrado Dornier T Allan McArtor Maciej Witucki Dr. Dr. MacieJ WituckI Dr. Robert J. Abernthy Conrada Dornie J. T AllanMcArtor T Allan
Stuart E Eizenstat. John M McHugh Guang Yang International Center for Scholars. Boyden Gray .
 Melby Mary C Yates Economics and the founding director of the Stockholm Institute of East European . Julie Finley Franklin C Miller C Miller Dov S Zakheim Economics .
 DeVier Pierson is the director of the Moscow-based company . He has been in charge of Moscow since 2007 .