 “Terrorists outshot positions of Ukrainian Armed forces in Donetsk airport three times using artillery, mortar guns and tanks,’s spokesman says .
 According to intelligence data received, over 70% of participants of the terrorist subdivision have deserted . The former police officers established to assault Donetsk airport, have deserted.
 The bombardments were recorded nearby Pisky, Maloorlivka, Debaltseve, Troyitske, Nikishyne, Novoor Livka, Trudivske, Kamyanka, Krasnohorivka, Hostra Mohyla kur
 Tryokhizbenka in Luhansk region and Komuna, Tonenke, Novokalynove were outshot using “Grad’s rocket launchers.”
 NSDC spokesman reported death of 3 Ukrainian servicemen and 10 wounded soldiers over the past 24 hours . The NSDC said 3 Ukrainian soldiers and 10 injured soldiers died over the last 24 hours.
Militants’ activity northwards and in Donetsk direction slightly reduced as compared to the day before . According to Lysenko, militants' activity northward and in the Donetsk direction significantly reduced .
 Terrorist are redeploying their forces nearby Shyrokino, a populated locality . Terrorist were redeployed their forces near the town .
 A reconnaissance team of the Armed Forces of Ukraine found a terrorist group near a ruined bridge in the vicinity of Verkhnyotoretske settlement .
Soldiers used ground relief and the element of surprise to destroy 4 militants at once and wound several of them .
 Colonel informed that one of our servicemen was wounded during the battle . He said he was wounded in the battle.
 The reconnoiters followed by the enemies succeeded in bringing them under fire of the main covering party . The recon noiters were then brought under fire by the enemy .
 An enemy sniper’s bullet ended life of a reconnoiter who was helping to take a wounded comrade out .
 The situation stabilized in the Luhansk region, where intense battles had been taking place for several days . The situation was stabilized and the enemy defeated in a checkpoint nearby .
 Our positions were strengthened and our defenders received reinforcement . Our positions are strengthened and we have received reinforcement.
Use of Russian pilotless aircrafts for air reconnaissance was recorded in Sartany and Velyki Novosilky .
 There were no military clashes on the border segments controlled by Ukrainian troops . No military clashes were reported on the Ukrainian border .
 All the returned Russians are military servicemen of the Armed Forces of the Russia Federation . All the returning Russians are Russian servicemen.
 Security Service of Ukraine opened hotline for Russian citizens ten days ago . It is aimed at helping them to find Russians missing in military actions in Donbas .
 Terrorists continue outshooting residential quarters of towns in the territories temporarily controlled by them . Terrorists also continue to target other areas of the territories .
 artillery fire on central part of Hranitne village in Telmanivskyi district of Donetsk region . Yesterday they delivered artillery fire upon central part.
 Since the beginning of works on 06 July 2014, 24115 units of ammunition were rendered safe . administrative buildings and other premises were checked for presence of explosives .
 Colonel Lysenko informed on the situation in temporarily occupied Crimea . He also informed on situation in Crimea .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine made reprehensions related to illegal adoption of children . The children are on the territory of Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 “Train of Hope – Crimea’ is being implemented in Autonomous Republic of Crimea . It is aimed at Russian citizens’ adoption of orphans and neglected children who are the citizens of Ukraine .
 Article 21 of UN Convention on the Rights of the Child envisages that arties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the adoption of a child is authorized only by competent authorities .
 The document states that the Ukrainian party files a strong and rigorous protest in connection with the described actions referring to the abovemetioned categories of children . The Ukrainian party is accused of neglecting the envisaged procedures in this sphere .
 It also states that such adoption shall be illegal and, consequently, carry no legal weight . It also says such adoption will be illegal .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine called upon the Russian party to take all the necessary measures in compliance with international legal commitments in order to prevent illegal adoption of Ukrainian citizens .
 NSDC spokesman also debriefed on the 10th Summit of “Asia-Europe’s Meeting in Milan . NSDC is a spokesman for the NSDC .
 The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko and the President of Russia Vladimir Putin attended a breakfast in Milan . The two leaders met for the first time in a week .
 It took place within the framework of the 10th Summit of “Asia-Europe’s Meeting and lasted almost an hour and a half . The summit was held in the early hours of the morning .
Prime Minister of Italy Matteo Renzi, the Prime Minister of Great Britain David Cameron, the Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel, the President of France Francois Hollande, and head of the European Council Jose Manuel Barroso and Herman Van Rompuy also took part in the negotiations .
 Prime-minister of Italy Matteo Renzi stated that an important step on Ukrainian discussions had been made as a result of leaders’ extended session within the ASEM meeting .
 The first step in this discussion has been made, though numerous discrepancies remain . The first steps are made, but there are still many discrepancies .
 There is a desire to find a solution which gives hope for search of the settlement’s settlement, he stated . It is understandable, but there is a need to find an solution, he said .
 The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko held meetings with the President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy . He also met with the German Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel and Italy's Prime-minister Matteo Renzi .
 Minsk agreements of 5th and 19th of September were discussed during the meeting . The need to improve its technical supply were discussed .
 The parties mentioned the importance of establishing the control over Ukrainian-Russian segment of the border, absolute ceasefire and all the hostages release . The parties also mentioned the need for a ceasefire and release of hostages .