Ukraine's economy may no longer be in free fall, but it remains in dire straits, says Washington, DC .
 The country's GDP contracted by 6. per cent last year, and is forecast to shrink by another 9 per cent this year . The GDP is expected to grow by about 16 per cent over two years .
 Ukraine's economic problems are being caused by Russia and Putin, who hope the fledgling democracy might collapse . Ukraine's economy is suffering from economic problems, according to the government .
 The country's current-account deficit has been eliminated by a massive fiscal adjustment . The situation remains precarious, but the situation is still precarious .
 Ukraine's primary economic challenges are not homegrown; they are the result of Russian aggression . Ukraine's main economic challenges aren't homegrown, they are result of Russia's aggression . Russia's economic problems are not "homegrown"
 The country's belligerent eastern neighbour has annexed Crimea, sponsored rebels in eastern Ukraine, pursued a trade war, cut off its supply of natural gas .
 Ukraine has miraculously managed to withstand these assaults with little international support . But it is in desperate need of assistance. So far, Ukraine has managed to survive these assaults .
 Russian-supported armed forces have occupied territories in eastern Ukraine that accounted for 10% of the country's GDP in 2013 . Since then, Russian- supported armed forces has occupied territories.
 Russian trade sanctions have slashed Ukraine's exports to the country by 70 per cent since 2013 . Since 2013, Ukraine's total exports to Russia have dropped 18 per cent in total .
 Ukraine's exports to Russia fell by half last year alone, which included machinery, steel, agricultural goods, and chemicals .
 Logistical issues, the lack of commercial links, and the specialisation of some products meant that the goods could not be redirected in the short term .
 Businessmen everywhere are aware of Russia's assault on Ukraine . Few want to invest in a war zone, and few want to go to war zone .
 Ukraine's net foreign-direct investment, which was slightly over 3 per cent of GDP before the start of hostilities, has evaporated .
 Leaving Crimea aside, we can attempt to sum up Ukraine's economic losses from Russia's aggression . We can also sum up the economic losses.
 Ukraine is estimated to have lost 16 per cent of GDP from the beginning of 2014 to the end of this year . Roughly 7 per cent from lost production in occupied eastern Ukraine, 6 per cent losses from trade sanctions, plus 3 per cent.
 Russia's apparent but undeclared aim is to make sure that democratic Ukraine fails, without looking entirely guilty of causing that failure .
Ukraine is not the culprit but the victim, and it should be treated accordingly . Ukraine is not a culprit but it is a victim, says the author .
 One does not counter military aggression only with stabilisation credits, but also with military support . One doesn't counter military aggressions only with stability credits .
 European countries should note that, given the Kremlin's saber-rattling in the Baltic and the Balkans, there is little reason to believe that the Russian threat is limited to Ukraine .
Delivering arms to Ukraine before Russia attacks, openly or covertly, should be a priority . Delivering arms is a priority for Ukraine, according to the U.S. ambassador .
 Gazprom, majority-owned by the Russian state, decided unilaterally to cut off the country's gas supply . Russia opened a new front in the economic war on Ukraine on July 1 .
 Europe is in a position to tell Russia in no uncertain terms that its corrupt practices are no longer acceptable . Russia's corruption practices are not acceptable, Europe says .
 The European Commission should insist that Ukraine be able to continue to import gas from Gazprom in order to augment European supplies .
 The international community, again with the EU in the lead, must provide substantial humanitarian assistance, says the European Union . The EU is the world's most important international community .
 Ukraine's stabilisation program with the International Monetary Fund is sound but underfunded . Ukraine's stabilization program is sound and underfunded, says the IMF .
 An additional credit of roughly $10 billion is needed to raise Ukraine's international reserves and stabilise its currency . Ukraine's currency controls can be lifted so that controls on the country's currency are lifted .
 The EU should make Russia's trade war with Ukraine the focal point of any trade negotiations with the Kremlin .
 Ukrainian government should abolish its remaining strict import quotas for Ukrainian goods . And it should abolish the remaining strict imports of Ukrainian goods.
 Every legal avenue to holding Russia to account must be pursued . The Russian government must be held accountable .
Sanctions against Russian President Vladimir Putin's cronies should not only be continued, but also deepened . Sanctions against the Russian President should also be continued .
 The United States should follow on its success in tackling FIFA by exposing criminals in former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's regime and Putin's entourage .
 Many of them have international bank accounts in U.S. dollars, they are liable to American prosecution .