 The Council's Committee of Permanent Representatives today reached agreement on EU restrictive measures in view of Russia's actions destabilising the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 EU nationals and companies may no more buy or sell new bonds, equity or similar financial instruments with a maturity exceeding 90 days . Russia's banks, development banks, their subsidiaries outside the EU and those acting on their behalf.
 services related to the issuing of such financial instruments,g. brokering, are also prohibited . Services related to such instruments are also banned .
 An embargo on the import and export of arms and related material from/to Russia was agreed . In addition, an embargo was also agreed .
 Coreper also reached agreement on a prohibition on exports of dual use goods and technology for military use in Russia or to Russian military end-users .
 exports of certain energy-related equipment and technology to Russia to Russia will be subject to prior authorisation by competent authorities of Member States . Exports of certain equipment and tech to Russia are subject to pre-authorisation .
 Export licenses will be denied if products are destined for deep water oil exploration and production, arctic oil exploration or production and shale oil projects .
 The restrictions will now be formally adopted by the Council through a written procedure . These restrictions will be officially adopted through a Written procedure .
 They will apply from the day following their publication in the EU Official Journal, which is scheduled for late on 31 July .
 The Coreper meeting of 28 July agreed on trade and investment restrictions for Crimea and Sevastopol . The European Council of 16 July requested the restrictions . Additional restrictions were also agreed .
 Key equipment for the same six sectors may not be exported to Crimea and Sevastopol . Finance and insurance services related to such transactions must not be provided .
 This brings the number of persons and entities under EU restrictions to 95 persons and 23 entities . This brings a total of 23 people under EU rules to 95 people and 23 people .
 The measures will come into force after their formal adoption by the Council . They will be published in the EU Official Journal late on 30 July .
 This includes 87 persons and 9 entities responsible for action against Ukraine's territorial integrity . 11 entities in Crimea and Sevastopol that were confiscated or that have benefitted from a transfer of ownership contrary to Ukrainian law .
 Goods originating in Crimea or Sevastopol may not be imported into the EU unless they have Ukrainian certificates . Goods originate in Crimea and Sevastopopopo may be imported to the EU without Ukrainian certificates.
 EU member states coordinate their positions within the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development . European Investment Bank also requested to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia . The European Council also requested the European investment Bank to suspend new financing operation in Russia.
 A G7 meeting was held in Brussels on 4/5 June . Instead of the G8 summit in Sochi, the G7 met in Sochi on June 4 .
 EU countries also supported the suspension of negotiations over Russia's joining the OECD and the International Energy Agency .
 The EU-Russia summit was cancelled and EU member states decided not to hold regular bilateral summits . The summit was held in Moscow, Russia's capital city of Moscow .
 Bilateral talks with Russia on visa matters as well as on the New Agreement between the EU and Russia suspended .
 A re-assessment of EU-Russia cooperation programmes is currently ongoing with a view to suspending the implementation of EU bilateral and regional cooperation programmes .
 Sergey Valeryevich o.b.1972 Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 17.3.2014 Aksonov 2014 .
 Konstantinov was speaker of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . He played 17.3.3 years as a member of the Verkhovna Rada . The Rada called on voters to cast votes in favour of Crimean Independence .
 Temirgaliev was Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea in 1976 . He played a relevant role in 17.3.2014 . The decisions were taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum against territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Deniz Valentinovich o.b.1974 Berezovskiy was appointed commander of the Ukrainian Navy on 1 March 2014 and swore an 17.3.2014 oath to the Crimean armed force . He was sworn in at the time of the swearing of the
 The Prosecutor-General’s Office of Ukraine launched an investigation against him for high treason .
 Pyotr Anatoliyovych Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Service on 3 March 2014 by 17.3.3 . Zima ‘Prime Minister’ Aksyonov and accepted this appointment .
Former SVR officers of Crimea have proclaimed the formation of an independent Security Service of Crimea .
 Yuriy Zherebtsov Counsellor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea is one of the leading organizers of the 17.3.3-year-old referendum .
 Vladimir Konstantinov drew into this endeavour by threatening him with his dismissal . He drew into the endeavour. He drew in this endeavour.
 Crimea MPs were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over Verkhovna Rada of Crimea . He publicly recognized that the MPs from Crimea were the Initiators.
 He was one of the first Crimean Leaders to ask in public for annexation of Crimea to Russia . He was a Crimean Leader who asked for Crimea's annexation to Russia.
1958 in Chairman of the Security and Defense Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian 17.3.2014 Alekseevich Abakan, Khakassia Federation .
 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defense Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On 1 March 2014, he publicly supported in the federation Council.
1952 First Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . Dzhabarov, Vladimiro.b..9.9.3.2014 Michailovich Russian Federation. The Russian Federation is a member of the
2014 Aleksandrovich Sverdlovsk Federation. Klishas, Andrei o.b.11.1972 in Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Federation Council .
Ryzhkov publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of SSR Russian forces in Ukraine . Ryzhkov is a member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and the North of the Federation 17.3.3 .
 Bushmin publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Sergachiisky Russian forces in Ukraine . Bushmin, Evgeni o.b..10.10.1958 in Deputy Speaker of the Russian Federation .
3.3.1957 in Member of the Committee on culture, science, and information of the Federation Council of the 17.3 .
 North Ossetia publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian forces have been deployed in Ukraine since 2009 .
 Mironov, Sergei o.b..2.1953 in Member of the Council of the State Duma; Leader of Fair Russia faction in the Duma of the 17.3.2014 Mikhailovich Pushkin, Leningrad Russian Federation. region Initiator of the bill
2014 Vladimirovich St Petersburg. Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea .
 Viktorovich Vitebsk (Belarusian Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory)
3.2014 Alekseevich Commander of Russia's Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea .
 Annex 1 5/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 21. The date is listed as 21 .
 Galkin, Aleksandr Russia's Southern Military District, is in Crimea . Much of the force movement into Crimea has come through the Southern Military district . The Black Sea Fleet comes 17.3.3 years under Galkins' command .
 Rogozin, Dmitry o.b..12.1963; Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation .3.2014 Olegovich in Moscow Publicly called for the annexation of Crimea .
2014 Zaporozhye, Publicly called for the annexation of Crimea .
 Valentina Ivanova Shepetovka is the head of the Federation Council of Ukraine . The Russian forces have been deployed to Ukraine by Russian forces in the past .
 Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law . Publicly backed the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Mihailovich Sevastopol, Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 Vladimirovich Zaporozhye, Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 Surkov, Vladislav o.b..9.9.1964, Aide to the President of the Russian Federation. Surkov was a Russian President .
 Yurievich Solntsevo was an organiser of the process in Crimea by 21.3.2014 . He was an organizer of the project in Crimea. He was a member of the Crimean community.
 Mikhail Malyshev Chair of the Crimea Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum . He is the chair of the Crimean Responsible For administering the referendum .
 Responsible under the Russian system 21.3.2014 Electoral for signing referendum results . Responsible for signing ballot results .
 Valery Medvedev Chair of Sevastopol Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum . He is the chair of the Sevastolian government .
 Elena Borisovna Deputy in the State Originator and co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia that would have allowed 21.3.3 2014 Mizulina Duma regions to join Russia without central authorities' prior agreement .
2014 Kozak Kirovohrad, Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation. Responsible for overseeing the integration of the annexed Autonomous 29.4.2014. 2014 Kozak.
 Oleg Yevgenyvich born 15.9.1949 in Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the so called 29.4.2014 Belaventsev Moscow .
2014 Savelyev Leningrad of Crimea into the Russian Federation . The annexed Autonomous Republic 29.4.4 is responsible for the integration of the Crimea .
 Sergei Ivanovich was acting governor of the Ukrainian annexed city of Sevastopol . He was born 22.8.8 years ago .
 Olga Fedorovna was born 7.5.1962 in Member of the Russian Federation Council from the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 Ludmila Ivanovna Born 24.9.1949 in Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia — Responsible for initiating legislation to 29.4.4 . Shvetsova Alma-Ata, USSR integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian
 Sergei Ivanovich Born 21.12.1961 in Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia . Ivanovich was born in Moscow, Russia, in November 2011 .
 Neverov Tashtagol, USSR the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation . Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 is the first time the Crimea has been incorporated into Russia .
 Igor Dmitrievich Born 28.3.1957 Director of GRU, Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed 29.4.2014 Sergun Forces of the Russian Federation, Lieutenant-General .
 Valery Vasilevich was Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, First Deputy Minister of 29.4.2014 Gerasimov Kazan Defence of the Russians, General of the Army .
 Security Service recorded a video address to President Putin and Russia from the occupied building . Took part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk 29.4.2014 regional office .
Valeriy Bolotov is one of the leaders of the 'Army of the South-East' The group occupied the building of 29.4.2014 the Security Service in the Lugansk region .
 Before seizing the building he and other accomplices possessed arms supplied illegally from Russia and from local criminal groups .
 Andriy Purgin Head of the ‘Donetsk Republic’ is active participant and organiser of separatist actions, 29.4.2014 .
 Denys Pushylin is one of the leaders of the Donetsk People's Republic . He was born in Makiivka.
 Tsyplakov Sergey One of the leaders of ideologically radical organization People's Militia of Donbas . He is one of the leading leaders of the group's ideologically radical group .
 Gennadevich took active part in seizure of state buildings in Donetsk region . He took active 29.4.4 years to take part in the seizure of buildings .
 Vyacheslav born 4 February. First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia . He was born in February 2013 .
 Viktorovich Volodin 1964 in the political integration of the annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into the Russian Federation . Responsible for overseeing 12.5.5 years of the annexation of the Crimea region .
 Vladimir Shamanov Born 15.02.1954 in Commander of the Russian Airborne Troops, Colonel-General .
 In his senior position holds 12.5.2014 Barnaul. responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea .
 Vladimir Nikolaevich Born 19.05.05 . He was the Chair of the Duma Constitutional Law Committee . He is also the President of the Russian National Council .
2014 Pligin Ignatovo, legislation on the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation. Responsible for facilitating the adoption of 12.5.5 years ago .
 Petr Grigorievich is Acting Head of the Federal Migration Service office for Crimea . He is the head of the federal Migration Service in Crimea .
2014 Jarosh and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea . Responsible for the systematic 12.5.5 years of passport issuance .
 Oleg Grigorievich was Acting Head of the Federal Migration Service office for Sevastopol . He was born in 19.12.1962 . He is currently in charge of the federal Migration Service in Sevastop.
2014 Kozyura Zaporozhye and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea. Responsible for the systematic 12.5.5-year-old.
 Ponomarev called on Vladimir Putin to send in Russian troops 12.5.5 2014 Ponomariov to protect the city . He later asked him to supply weapons .
 Igor Mykolaiovych Born in 1965 . One of the leaders of self-proclaimed militia of Horlivka .
2014 Bezler Ukraine's Office in Donetsk region building and seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka . He took control of the Security Service of 12.5.5%.
 Publicly called for the creation of the Federal Republic of Novorossia, 12.5.5 2014 composed of South Eastern Ukrainian regions .
 Roman Lyagin Head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission . Lyagin head of the 'Donetsk people's Republic'
 Aleksandr Malykhin is the head of the ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission .
2014 Poklonskaya Eupatoria. Actively implementing Russia's annexation of Crimea..5.5.2014 . Actively implement Russia's annexed of Crimea .
 Shevchenko 62.5. Actively implementing Russia's annexation of Sevastopol . Actively implemented Russia’s annexation of the Crimea .
 The ‘government of the People’s s Republic of Luhansk’ Annex 1 11/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 67. The Annex 1 is responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘
 The Army of the Southeast says Ukrainian presidential elections cannot take place due to the 'new' status of the region .
 Nikolay KOZITSYN June 20, 1956 in Commander of Cossack forces .7.2014 Donetsk region Responsible for commanding separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
 Oleksiy MOZGOVY is one of the leaders of armed groups in Eastern Ukraine . He is responsible for training separatists to fight against the Ukrainian government forces .
 Mikhail Efimovich was born on 1.9.9 years ago . He was a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . He is currently the Director of the Foreign 25.7.7 .
 As a member of the Security Council, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Nikolai Platonovich Born on 11.7.1951 Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation .
 As a 25.7.2014 PATRUSHEV in Leningrad, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He was a member of the Security Council.
 He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He was a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and BORTNIKOV coordinates security affairs .
 Rashid Gumarovich Born on 8.10.1956 Permanent member and Deputy Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation .
 As a 25.7.2014 NURGALIEV in Zhetikara, he was a member of the Security Council . He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 Boris Born on 15.12.1950 Permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation .
 Vyacheslavovich is a member of the Vladivostok Security Council . He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine .
 Sergei Orestovoch 1954 Commander of the Fifth Service of the FSB, Federal Security Service of Russian Federation . He heads a service responsible which oversees intelligence operations .
 Mikhail Born on 10.7.1981 Member of the State Duma..7.2014 Vladimirovich in Kuibyshev on 23.5.2014 .
 Kadyrov made statements in support of the illegal 25.7.2014 Akhmadovitch in Tsentaroy . annexation of Crimea and support of an armed insurgency in Ukraine .
 Alexander Born on 23.12.12 . He was the Krasnodar Krai's first elected governor in 1960 .
 He was awarded the medal ‘for the liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting head of the Autonomous TKACHYOV Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea .
 Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea said that Tkachyov was one of the first to express his support to the new ‘leadership’ of Crimea .
 Russian troops are deployed in eastern Ukraine . Russian peacekeeping forces have been deployed in the region .
 Ekaterina Born on 5.7.1983 in her capacity of so called ‘Minister of Foreign Affairs’ she is responsible of defending the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ GUBAREVA Kakhovka called 'Don
 Igor Strelkov/Girkin is the so-called 'defence minister' of the 'Donetsk' People's Republic . He is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 The self-described ‘president’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ has called on Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine . Valery Vladimirovich was born on 2.4.1956 in the Russian capital .
 Serhii Anatoliyovych born on 23.6.6 years ago . Serhius Anatolyovych was born on 24.7 years ago in Ukraine . He is a former member of the Ukrainian army .
 Former ‘Ministry of State Security’ in the separatist region of Transnistria .
 In his capacity, he is responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the Donetsk People’s Republic .
 Alexey Alexeyevich is the first Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration . He is responsible for instructing 30.7.6 million people to take a line favourable with the separatists in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea . He has also been responsible for
 Oksana TCHIGRINA Spokesperson of the 'government' of the so called ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ made declarations justifying the shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages, fighting activities by the illegal armed groups .
 Boris LITVINOV was chairman of the so-called ‘Supreme Council’ of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ He was at the source of policies and the organisation of the illegal referendum leading to the proclamation of the 'Donetsk people's Republic
 Sergey ABISOV born on 27.11.1967 . By accepting his appointment as so-called ‘Minister of Interior of the Republic of Crimea’ by the 30.7.2014 President of Russia on 5 May 2014 . By his actions as so
 Arkady Romanovich was born on 15.12.1951 . He is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin and former judo sparring partner .
 He has been favoured by Russian Petersburg decision-makers in the award of important contracts by the Russian State or by State-owned enterprises . He has also been favoured in the awarding of important contract contracts by Russian State .
 His companies were notably awarded several highly lucrative contracts for the preparations of the Sochi Olympic Games . His companies have been awarded many lucrative contracts.
 Giprotransmost has received a public procurement contract by a Russian State-owned Company to conduct the feasibility study of the construction of a bridge from Russia to the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea . This consolidates its integration into the Russian Federation .
 Konstantin Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ulkraine and Crimea . He was born on 3.7.5 years ago .
 Valerevich Puschino is former employer of Mr Borodai, so-called Prime Minister of the 'Donetsk People's MALOFEEV Republic' He met with Mr Aksyonov during the period of the Crimean annexation process .
 Yuriy Valentinovich was born on 25.7.1951 . He is a long-time acquaintance of Russian President Putin .
 He is a co-founder of the so-called 30.7.2014 KOVALCHUK in Leningrad (St Ozero Dacha) President Putin is a former member of the society .
 He is the chairman and largest shareholder of Bank Rossiya, of which he owned around 38 % in 2013 . He is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation .
 Since the illegal annexation of Crimea, Bank Rossiya has opened branches across Crimea and Sevastopol, thereby consolidating their integration into the Russian Federation .
 Nikolay Terentievich Born on 24.1.1950 Mr Shamalov is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin .
 He is a co-founder of the so-called 30.7.2014 SHAMALOV Ozero Dacha . Dacha is the founder of the 30.6-year-old group that brings together an influential group of individuals .
 He is the second largest shareholder of Bank Rossiya, of which he owned around 10 % in 2013 . He is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation .
 Annex 1 18/24 Annex 2 List of entities under sanctions N Name Reasons Date of listing 1. Annex 1 is a list of entities that are under sanctions .
 The so called 'Lugansk People's Republic' was established on 27 April 2014 . So called ‘Lugans People'sRepublic’ The so-called ‘lugansk people's Republic’ was established.
 Declaration of independence ‘Luganskaya narodnaya respublika’ on May 12 2014 . The declaration of independence was signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 This is in breach of Ukrainian constitutional law, and, as a consequence, of international law, according to the U.S. State Department . This is a breach of Ukraine's constitutional law. This is also in breach, says the U.-S. Department of
 It is also involved in the recruitment to the separatist ‘Army of Southeast’ and other illegal armed separatist groups . This undermines the stability or security of Ukraine .
 The so called 'Donetsk People's Republic' was declared on 7 April 2014 . So called ‘Donetsk people's Republic’ The so-called ‘donetsk People’ was declared.
 Declaration of independence ‘Donétskaya naródnaya respúblika’ on May 12 2014 .
 It is also involved in the recruitment to illegal armed separatist groups, thus threatening stability or security of Ukraine .
 The ‘Great Don army’ established the ‘Cossack National Guard’ responsible for fighting against 25.7.2014 ‘great Don Army’ the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine .
 'Lugansk Guard' Self-defence militia of Lugansk is responsible for training separatists to fight against the Ukrainian government .
 German PROPOKIV is responsible for taking part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Ukrainian Security Service .
 The 'Army of the Southeast' is considered to be one of the most important in Eastern 25.7.2014 ‘Армии’ Ukraine is called ‘Army of The Southeast’ The illegal armed separatist group is called the �
 Security Service in Lugansk region. Responsible for occupying the building of the Security Service .
 Mr Valeriy BOLOTOV is listed as one of the leaders of the group . He is also listed as a member of a group that has been formed in the past .
 separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘government of the People’ s Republic of Luhansk’ Annex 2 20/24 N Name Reasons Date of listing 10 .
 'Donbass People's Militia' is an illegal armed separatist group responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in 25.7.2014 . The Eastern Ukraine is threatening the stability or security of Ukraine .
Inter alia, the militant group seized control of several government buildings in Eastern Ukraine in early April 2014 . The militant group is undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine .
 State ferry enterprise ‘Kerch ferry’ The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . State enterprise ‘Sevastopol commercial’ was transferred.
 In Gosudarstvenoye predpriyatiye terms of volume of trade, it is the biggest commercial seaport in Crimea .
 Sevastopolski morskoy torgovy port Annex 2 21/24 N Name Reasons Date of listing 14. The port is located in the city of Sevastopol .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . State enterprise ‘Kerch commercial sea’ was transferred to Ukraine .
 Crimea is the second biggest commercial seaport in Crimea . In terms of volume of trade, it is the third biggest commercial Seaport .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . State enterprise Universal -Avia was transferred to Ukraine .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . Resort ‘Nizhnyaya Oreanda’ is a resort in Ukraine .
 Crimean enterprise ‘Azov distillery plant’ was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . The ownership of the entity was transferred Contrary to the Ukraine law .
 State concern ‘National Association of The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.’
 State enterprise ‘Factory of sparkling wine’ was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law .
Russian state-owned company is a Russian state- owned company .
 The company manufactures anti-aircraft weaponry including 30.7.7-year-old ALMAZ-ANTEY (a.k.a.a.) It also makes 30.5-year old anti- aircraft weaponry .
 The Russian army supplies surface-to-air missiles to the Russian army .
 ALMAZ-ANTEY Defense provides heavy weaponry to separatists in Eastern Ukraine . The group is responsible for the destabilization of CORPORATION .
 These weapons are used by the separatists, including for shooting down airplanes . They are also used to shoot down planes .
 state-owned company, Almaz-Antei, contributes to the destabilization of Ukraine . As a JSC;), state- owned company, the company contributes to Ukraine's destabilization .
 DOBROLYOT Dobrolet is a subsidiary of a Russian state-owned airline .
 Dobrolet has so far exclusively operated flights between Moscow and Simferopol . Since the illegal annexation of Crimea 30.7.2014, Dob Chevrolet has operated flights from Moscow to Crimea .
 The annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation undermines Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity . It therefore facilitates the integration of the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea.