 The document defines the features of the use of land plots located in an array of agricultural lands . It also includes field-protective forest belts, which limit such an array .
 The document assumes the right of owners, land users of land plots for agricultural purposes, to use them also for commercial agricultural production without changing the purpose of such sites .
Owners of land plots of all forms of ownership were legally allowed to exchange such land plots . In addition, owners of all types of ownership could exchange such plots with land plots.
 The document specifies the features of the disposal of lands that remained in collective ownership after the distribution of land plots between owners of land shares .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko has discussed the release of the Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov as the press service of the president reported .
 Poroshenko and Merkel coordinated the positions before the meeting of the German Chancellor and Russian President Putin on August 18 .
 The leaders discussed the situation in Donbas and further efforts for the progress in the peaceful settlement of the conflict . Also, the leaders discussed a possible solution to the conflict in the region .
 Poroshenko put special attention to the release of Ukrainian prisoners and political prisoners illegally detained in Russia .
 Poroshenko and Merkel have discussed the security issues connected with the construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline . The pair have agreed on the schedule of the next contacts within the development of the bilateral dialogue .
 Sentsov has been serving time in the Russian penal colony in Labytnangi since May 2014 . Sentsov is a film director and political activist .
 This spring, he announced a hunger strike, demanding to release all Ukrainian political prisoners, illegally held by the Kremlin . This spring he announced the hunger strike .
 Oleg Sentsov was illegally detained in Crimea in 2014, then taken to Russia . He was arrested in Crimea, then moved to Russia in 2014 .
 He was sentenced to 20 years of imprisonment at a high-security penal colony . He was judged and sentenced to a 20-year sentence .
 Prosecutors charged Sentsov with preparing terrorist acts in the occupied Crimea . Sentsov is accused of preparing terrorist attacks in Crimea .
 Ukraine's government, common citizens and international society politicians, artists, public figures urge the Kremlin to release him . Ukraine's president, Ukraine's prime minister and the prime minister are among those calling for his release .