 UC Berkeley Social Sciences Portal Reimagining Democracy Town Hall Series about democracy Town Hall .
Political scientist Edward Walker agrees that the conflict is as much about symbolism as geography . Walker is a political scientist and director of UC Berkeley's Program in Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies .
 Russia's invasion of Crimea marked an assertion of its sphere of influence, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It was a response to the post-Soviet EU and NATO policy of expanding into countries on Russia's borders .
 Some analysts ascribe blame for this aggressive stance to Russia's President, Vladimir Putin . Others say the root causes run deeper .
 Roland points out that the EU and Russia have been major players in Ukraine . The ultimate cause of the recent events stems from the desire for democracy from the people of Ukraine .
 The internal logic of Russian politics is a large part of the picture, says Walker . Walker concurs that the internal logic is a big part of Russia's political history .
 In large part, this has to do with Putin’s highly controlled media and “increasing constraints on free public discourse,” Walker says .
 Crawford is especially troubled by the way the conflict has stirred up ethnic tensions in the region . Crawford is particularly troubled by how the conflict is stirring up ethnic tension in Crawford .
 The West, she says, “needs to recognize Russia as a great power and reiterate that they won’t attack’s Russia .
 Walker is keeping an eye on the military dimensions of the standoff . Walker, meanwhile, is keeping a eye of the military.
 Russia has “2000 operational nuclear tactical weapons and thousands more in storage and a huge military,” Walker notes . Russia not only feels threatened by the actions of the West, but it has ‘2000 operationalnuclear tactical weapons’
 Pérez, Professor of Ethnic Studies and Chair of the Latinx Research Center, was joined by Natalia Brizuela, Associate Professor of Modern and Contemporary Latin American Literature & Culture, UC Berkeley .
 UC Berkeley economics professor Dr. Adora Lily Svitak changed the face of Economics UC Berkeley economist Dr. Dr. Lily Svitsak's new book will be published December 7 .
 Martha Olney explains the importance of diversity in the field . She supports initiatives designed to welcome underrepresented groups to the major field .