 Ukraine is a virtual U.S. colony – the way it's been since the Obama regime’s February 2014 coup . Ukraine is now a virtual United States colony .
 Ukraine shares a near-1,500 mile land and sea border with the Russian Federation . Ukraine is the longest Western frontier with the country .
 The regime running things is a hotbed of militarized extremism. The regime is waging war on its own people, committing appalling human rights abuses . Washington and key NATO countries have full support and encouragement from Washington and NATO countries .
 NATO’s Rick Rozoff earlier explained that Ukraine is “the decisive linchpin in plans by the U.S. and its NATO allies to effect a military cordon sanitaire, severing Russia from Europe’ – part of a sinister plot, he said .
 U.S. orchestrated and directed Kiev war on Donbass in the country's southwest since March 2014 . The war has intensified in the past year .
 Ukrainian forces began heavily shelling residential areas of the People’s Republic of Donetsk in Donbass . The heaviest aggression in over a year has been in the region .
 Kiev installed S-300 air defense systems along the Donbass border, at the same time as a likely United States orchestrated CW false flag occurred in Aleppo, Syria, and a provocation by Ukrainian naval vessels in Russian Black Sea waters .
 Kiev understands proper navigation procedures for passing through Russian territorial waters, including the Kerch-Yenikale Canal . Kiev understands properly navigation procedures.
 The U.S. installed Poroshenko regime followed innocent passage procedure before, not on Sunday, committing an unacceptable provocation . The United States installed the regime before, but not Sunday .
 Two more Ukrainian warships headed toward the same area, turning back before improperly and illegally entering Russian waters .
 Russia has what it calls “irrefutable evidence of the staged provocation’s to be revealed soon . Russia has called for the evidence of staged provocation to be shown .
 Its aim was likely to be to impose martial law for 60 days ahead of March 2019 presidential elections . It was a pretext for imposing more illegal U.S. sanctions on Russia .
 Moscow called for an emergency Security Council meeting on Monday to discuss what it called “maintenance of international peace and security’ Despite US/UK/French veto power preventing condemnation of what happened .
 Russia no doubt will be blamed for the provocation committed against the country, a familiar pattern repeated many times before . Russia is no doubt to be blamed, but the pattern is familiar .
 Kiev’s action violated Articles 19 and 21 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea by entering Russian territorial waters without permission . Kiev also failed to respond as required to legal Russian demands and conducting dangerous maneuvers .
 Russia and Ukraine have freedom of navigation rights in the Kerch Strait . Under a 2003 treaty, Russia andUkraine have freedom to navigate in the waterway .
 Requesting and receiving permission to sail through the Strait is required . Requesting permission is required to sail in the Strait .
 The Kerch Strait separates the Crimean Republic from the Russian mainland . The Crimean Republic is part of the Russian Republic .
 Russian Federal Security Service forces are responsible for maintaining order along the country’s land and maritime borders .
 Ukrainian vessels repeatedly asked the Ukrainian vessels to leave Russian territorial waters . Their commanders ignored the request by their commanders .
 The maritime area in question was temporarily closed to navigation for security reasons . The maritime region in question has been temporarily closed for safety reasons .
 Video released by Moscow showed Ukrainian vessels maneuvering provocatively close to Russian ones .
 Russian warships opened fire after Ukrainian vessels repeatedly ignored “legal demands to stop” and leave the area . FSB statement said Russian warships open fire after Ukraine vessels ignored ‘legal demands’
 Kiev “first stages a provocation, then plays power games, and accuses Russia for its own unacceptable provocation,’s spokesman says . Kiev ‘first stages’ then ‘plays power games’, he says .
 US forces are in Ukraine, training and directing its military, including its war of aggression on Donbass . U.S. forces in Ukraine are training, directing and directing military .
 The self-styled newspaper of record repeated the Big Lie about Russia annexing “the Crimean Peninsula in 2014,’s waterways where the incident occurred .
 Putin and Trump are expected to meet on the sidelines of this week’s Nov.-Dec. The two will be in Moscow on the weekend .
 G20 summit in Buenos Aires, Argentina, to be discussed . Incident will be discussed at G20 Summit .
 Russia, Ukraine and Ukraine and Tagged America, Azov, CIA, Crimea and Crimea, Crimea, Europe, fleet, imperialism, Kiev, Lvov, NATO, Obama, Pentagon, Poroshenka.