 Russian President Vladimir Putin will travel to Crimea on Monday to mark the fifth anniversary of Moscow's annexation of the Black Sea peninsula from Ukraine . Most Russians celebrated by most Russians .
 Putin will visit the peninsula and Sevastopol to attend celebrations marking five years since Crimea “rejoined’s Russia. A Kremlin statement on Sunday said Putin would visit the region and its largest city Sevastop .
 On March 18, 2014, Putin signed a treaty with representatives from Crimea to make it part of Russia . It was two days after a referendum that was not recognised by international community .
 More than a dozen SU-27 and SU-30 fighter jets arrived in Crimea on Saturday . Russia is deploying its air force amid heightened tensions with Ukraine .
 A Reuters witness saw the jets land at Belbek air base in Crimea . Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014 after Moscow-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich fled Kiev .
 Russia plans to build a new missile early-warning radar station in Crimea next year . The Interfax news agency reports on Thursday, citing a Crimean security source . The agency says Russia will build the radar station.
 A new military facility will be built in Crimea, which Russia annexed from Ukraine in 2014 . Russia's seizure of three Ukrainian navy vessels off the coast of the peninsula on Sunday .
 The new radar station will be built near the port of Sevastopol where Russia's Black Sea fleet is based . It will be able to track ballistic and cruise missiles from a long distance .
 Ukraine has been offered ‘military assistance’ by the U.S. amid rising tension with Russia, the country’s president says .
 America’s secretary of state Mike Pompeo had assured him in a phone call that his country had the “full support, full assistance, including military assistance, full coordination, what we to do to protect Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity’
 Russia has seized three Ukrainian naval ships in waters near Moscow-annexed Crimea . It has raised fears of military escalation and prompted an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council on Monday .
 Russia used weapons against the Ukranian ships which it claims illegally entered its waters . Russia's FSB security service confirmed the incident .
 Two Ukrainian small warships and a tugboat were heading through the Kerch Strait on Sunday . The narrow waterway gives access to the Sea of Azov that is used by Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia’s FSB security service says its border patrol boats seized the Ukrainian naval vessels in the Black Sea . Russian news agencies say they used weapons to force them to stop .
 The FSB said it had been forced to act because the ships had illegally entered its territorial waters . The ships – two small Ukrainian armored artillery vessels and a tug boat – had attempted illegal actions, the FSB says .
 John Bolton said it would be helpful if Russia got out of Ukraine’s Crimea and eastern Ukraine, stopped meddling in U.S. elections . He said Russia was less intrusive in the Middle East .
 Bolton made the comments in an interview with Reuters in Tbilisi, Georgia . He was holding talks with senior government officials .
 Students wept over the coffins of classmates Friday at the funeral of 20 people killed in a school shooting in Crimea . It was the worst massacre of its kind in the region’s history .