 The EU has imposed a separate set of visa ban and asset freeze sanctions against individual Russian and Ukrainian figures for backing the separatist cause in early 2014 .
 Crimea sanctions prohibit certain exports and imports, and ban investment and tourism services by EU-based companies there . The Crimea sanctions also ban investment, tourism services and ban certain exports .
 The European Union on Friday rolled over for another year sanctions imposed to protest Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea from Ukraine . The bloc deems Crimea's annexation of Ukraine, which the bloc deems illegal, illegal .
 The announcement comes amid growing speculation that the bloc will also renew much wider economic sanctions against Russia for aiding and abetting pro-Moscow rebels in eastern Ukraine .
 The sanctions were imposed in the wake of the annexation of Crimea in March 2014 .
 The broader sanctions targeting economic sectors in Russia were imposed after the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 in July 2014 .
 EU diplomatic sources say the economic sanctions will likely be extended for another six months from end-July . Russia has failed to live up to its commitments to the Minsk ceasefire accord in eastern Ukraine .
 The extension is set to be approved despite growing calls in some EU countries for them to be relaxed . The extension will be approved by the European Commission .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine has claimed some 9,400 lives and plunged relations with Moscow into a deep freeze . The conflict has also plunged relations between Russia and Ukraine into the deep freeze.
 Some EU member states led by Italy make the case that Russia is a neighbour and its help is needed in tackling key shared problems, such as Islamic State terror threat .
 Russia says sanctions regime is pointless if damaging, and President Vladimir Putin regularly insists Crimea will never be given back . For its part, Russia says the sanctions regime was pointless, and Russia says it is not a threat .
 Putin told a top economic forum in Saint Petersburg he was ready for a fresh start . He said he was prepared for a new start if the EU also played its part .
 European Commission chief Jean-Claude Juncker made his first visit to Russia this week . Juncker told Putin that there could be no lifting of sanctions until the Minsk deal was honoured .
 Ukraine President Petro Poroshenko said he welcomed the EU's decision to roll over the Crimea sanctions . Ukraine President Poroshenko meanwhile said he welcomes the decision .