 Three Ukrainian naval vessels crossed into Russian territorial waters in the Kerch Strait on 25th November .
 The Russians blame the three Ukrainian warships that illegally crossed Russia’s state border in the Black Sea . The Ukrainian warships entered its territorial waters, performing dangerous maneuvers .
 The Ukrainian ships did not adhere to the legitimate demands of the Border Security Service and the Black Sea Fleet . The fleet pursued the ships to stop and thwart their dangerous maneuvers .
 The Russian Navy had to use gunfire to stop the intruding ships . Because the ships did not cooperate, the Navy used gunfire .
 Ukrainian media reports that the coast guard of the Russian Federal Security Service attacked and seized three Ukrainian Navy boats . The vessels tried to go from the Black Sea into the Azov Sea through the Russian-controlled Kerch Strait .
 The bottom line is tensions between Russia and Ukraine do not seem to die down. Whichever side of the story one believes, one believes .
 To answer these questions, one needs to start by understanding the geographical location of the Kerch Strait .
 The Kerch Strait is a vital waterway that separates the Crimean peninsula from the Russian mainland . It is one of the world's most important waterways .
 It is also an important waterway that connects the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea . It's also a vital waterway.
 The Sea of Azov plays host to two important Donbass ports of Mariupol and Berdiansk . The Sea Of Azov is one of the most important ports in the region .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine divided the region into two power pockets . One controlled by the Ukrainian forces on the west and the other by Russian separatists on the east .
 Mariupol which lies in Donetsk Oblast was controlled briefly by Russia-backed separatists before the Ukrainian military and its volunteer battalions dislodged them . The Ukrainian military has been fighting Russian-backed rebels in the past .
 The Kerch Strait is used by Ukrainian merchant vessels to deliver goods to and from the Mariupol and Berdiansk port . The city’s economic activity, to a large part, depends on the access to the Kerch.
 Moscow’s complete dominance over the Kerch strait could put an economic strain on Mariupol . It could have wider implications for the region .
 Russia has initiated a series of activities in the Sea of Azov region . Russia has also initiated series of activity in Sea ofAzov region.
 In 2015 Russia began the construction of a bridge across the Kerch Strait . The bridge was built in 2015 .
 The bridge is a direct road link to Crimea's easternmost point and mainland Russia’s Krasnodar Krai . It is expected to increase mobility from the mainland to the peninsula .
 The bridge is also designed in such a way that it can have an impact on the north-south shipping into and out of Mariupol and Berdiansk .
 The height of the bridge is just 33 meters, making it impossible for larger ships to pass fully loaded . The bridge is only 33 meters tall .
 The width of the strait in itself is narrow and even before the construction of the bridge, vessels would often have to wait before proceeding through .
 There are also reports that since April, Moscow began delaying commercial vessels . Both Ukrainian and those with flags of third-party states are also being delayed .
 Russia also maintains a large naval base in Sevastopol . In recent months, Russia has redeployed several ships from the Caspian Sea to the Azov Sea .
 Russia has a greater strategic presence in the Black Sea region . Having dominance over the Kerch Strait serves two purposes . It enables Russia to economically weaken Ukraine .
 The government had to seek a fresh $4 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund in September . The economic conditions in Ukraine are fragile and the government has to seek the loan just to keep the economy going .
 presidential elections are set for March next year . With Petro Poroshenko losing popularity it is likely that a pro-Russian government could come to power in Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is set to meet U.S. President Donald Trump at the G-20 Summit in Argentina .
 The intention from Russia would be to improve relations with the U.S. Russia would not be beneficial going ahead into the talks, according to the Russian government .
 Russia does not need to provoke a confrontation with Kiev as the domestic compulsion in Ukraine currently works in Russia’s favour .
 Russia's actions by Russia were more or less intended to keep Ukraine in check with the ground reality, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has not defaulted on the 2003 Russian-Ukrainian State Border treaty on the shared status of the Sea of Azov . The treaty was signed in 2003 .
 It is the treaty that allows both Ukrainian and Russian ships to pass through the Kerch Strait .
 Moscow views the strait as part of its own territorial waters . However, what has changed since Russia’s annexation of Crimea is that Moscow views it as its own waters .
 Both sides developed informal protocols that would allow the passage of Ukrainian naval ships under the Crimean bridge . In order for the smooth use of the Kerch Strait, both sides developed protocols .
 The Russian side alleged that the protocols were broken by Ukrainian naval vessels . However, time and again, the Russian side claimed that they were broken .
 Moscow wanted Ukraine to accept the new ground reality as to who controls the waters around Crimea . In the current incident, Moscow wanted Ukrainian to accept new ground realities .
 The current incident could further severe Moscow’s relations with the West, depending on how serious it is .
 France, Germany, Poland, Estonia, Estonia and Austria are pushing for further sanctions on Russia . The European governments, in particular, have condemned Russia .
Not all countries would agree on sanctioning Moscow due to their business interests and energy needs . However, the likelihood of new sanctions is low as not all countries will agree on sanctions .
 A disapproval on further sanctions would just be another irritant in the growing divergences among European allies . European allies are finding it hard to agree on common solutions .
 The conflict in Ukraine is one of the major sticking points which both sides would want to work on . US-Russia relations are a major sticking point for both sides .
 The Trump administration has continued sanctions it imposed on Russia over the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . The previous Obama administration was hesitant to approve the sale of lethal weapons to Ukraine .
 The recent incident could be yet another irritant in the relations between the two countries . It could have serious implications for the region if the Trump administration has further plans to arm Ukraine or sanction Russia .