 The demise of the regime was brought about by bitter protests that had erupted in Kyiv’s Maidan Square in late 2013 . Civil society's reaction to a brutal government response to the Maidan protestors was also responsible .
 In the wake of the Maidan, the country saw the emergence of a pro-Western government promising reform . The country is determined to draw closer to Europe and the United States .
Despite a commitment to reform and the initiation of a pro-Western political and economic orientation, throughout 2015 many felt the government was too slowly and cautiously in implementing anticorruption reform .
 The government’s cautious approach, although moving in a positive direction, failed to impress a frustrated public and a still-skeptical international community, both of which demanded a faster implementation of change .
 By the beginning of 2016, Ukraine remained far from achieving political and economic progress and internal security sought by supporters of Maidan .
 The government was confronted with the resignations of a popular, reform-minded economy minister and a deputy prosecutor . Several European nations warned Ukraine risked losing continued international political and financial support if progress was not made .
 President Poroshe nk o to ask for the resignations of Yatsenyuk and Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin . Many accused of running a corrupt office .
 Transparency International continues to ra nk Ukraine worse than Russia on its corruption perception index . That appears to be changing, but that appears to have changed .
 A small group of old-time oligarchs who refuse to relinquish power or influence continue to plague the country . The continued presence of a small group.
 Since Groysman government took control, the pace of reform process has accelerated . A number of reforms in the energy and banking sector, among others, have been put in place .
 The international community appears to be more encouraged by the new government . But many concede that more work needs to be done .
 Ukraine's problems have not been solely political and economic . Ukraine’s problems, however, have been political, economic .
 A 12-point agreement to end the conflict, known as Minsk-2, was signed in late 2014 by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany .
 Minsk-2 has been in talks with Kyiv to implement the agreement . Since then, the separatists and their patrons in the Kremlin have shown little interest in fulfilling their responsibilities . Europe and the U.S. have continued to press Kyiv.
 U.S. government has committed more than $1. billion in foreign assistance to Ukraine, USAID says . The crisis began in late 2013, but has since improved since then .
 This amount includes some $135 million in humanitarian assistance provided through the U.N., and three $1 billion loan guarantees . This amount is part of a $1billion loan guarantee .
 The United States Congress has been a strong advocate for assisting Ukraine . The U.S. Congress has also been an advocate for Ukraine .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act was adopted in 2014 . It authorized increased military and economic assistance for Ukraine . It also authorized funding for U.S. Russianlanguage broadcasting in the region .
 The legislation also urged the Administration to provide weapons to the Ukrainian military .
 The House adopted the STAND for Ukraine Act in September 2016 . It tightened sanctions on Russia, and sought new options to provide support for Ukraine .
 Ukraine was the center of the first eastern Slavic state, Kyivan Rus, during the 10 th and 11 th centuries . The state was one of the largest and most powerful states in Europe .
Kyivan Rus was incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and into the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth . Eventually, Kyivan Rus became part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania .
 Ukraine achieved a short-lived period of independence but was reconquered and incorporated into the former Soviet Union . Following the collapse of czarist Russia in 1917, Ukraine achieved an independent period .
 Ukraine is a large, important, European state . Today, Ukraine is in size and population. Today, it's in size, population, and is an important state .
 Ukraine has played a prominent role in the geopolitical competition between the West and Russia . Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania have played a key role in Ukraine's position .
 Ethnic Russians make up approximately 17% of Ukraine’s population . They are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country .
 Crimea is home to 60% of the Crimea's population . They form a majority in the Crimea, where they make up close to 60%.
 The Crimean city of Sevastopol is the home base of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet . Approximately 72% of the population is Russian .
 Many Russian politicians, as well as ordinary citizens, have never been fully reconciled to Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Russian support for the 2014 annexation of Crimea was seen in the Crimea annexation . This historical sense of “ownership’ was witnessed in the strong Russian support of Crimea .
 Ukraine’s political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well-connected businessmen, or “oligarchs,” who regularly manipulate the government .
 Ukraine’s recent political unrest began largely at the hands of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych drew his main political support from oligarchs from the Donets region of eastern Ukraine . The region was also fairly pro-Russian .
 Yanukovych’s government was criticized for high levels of corruption, in part among his own family and close associates .
 U.S. and European Union officials expressed concern over the government's human rights record . The targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution and Yanukovych’s flirtations with Moscow .
 Yanukovych government rejected an Association Agreement in November 2013 . It would have aligned Ukraine more toward Europe, at least in the areas of economics and trade .
 Yanukovych appeared to bend to pressure from the Kremlin, which opposed the AA, and instead opted for closer economic links to Moscow . The Kremlin opposes the AA.
 The decision sparked antigovemment demonstrations in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square .
 The death toll likely caused the support for the governmentcontrolled Ukrainian Rada to evaporate . The regime's regime is likely to collapse .
 The Rada restored many democratic provisions of the 2004 constitution, eliminating changes made by Yanukovych . New presidential elections to be held on May 25, 2014 .
 The Kremlin reacted with great hostility to the emergence of the new, pro-Western leadership in Ukraine . The Kremlin seized Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
 heavily armed Russian-speaking forces, aided by Russian troops, began seizing airports and other key installations throughout the peninsula in February 2014 .
 At the time, Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that many of the troops that poured into Crimea were not Russian Federation military forces but only local Crimean selfdefense forces or volunteers from Russia .
 Crimean authorities held a referendum in support of annexation by Russia on March 16 . On March 16, Crimean authorities voted to annex Crimea .
 Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and other countries denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner . Ukraine, U.S. and the EU said the referendum was not free and fair .
 Petro Poroshenko is a wealthy businessman who pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West . He was elected as president on May 25, 2014 .
 Some of the information in this report appeared in previous versions written by Steven Woehrel . The World Factbook is based on previous versions of this report .
 The Opposition Bloc, composed of supporters of the former Yanukovych regime, won 29 seats . The opposition Bloc was formed by supporters of former regime .
Far-right groups often held up by Russian propaganda as neo-Nazi gangs dominant in Ukraine . Far- right groups, often held by Russia, won only a few seats .
 One group, Svoboda, won only six seats; another group, Right Sector, won one seat . One group won only one seat, the other won six seats .
 The overall election result was seen as a victory for forces in favor of closer ties with the EU and the U.S. The overall result is seen as an election result for forces that want closer ties.
 On December 2, 2014, the incoming parliament approved the new coalition government, again led by Yatsenyuk as prime minister . The incoming parliament approves the new government, which is led by the former PM .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk maintained that his government's main goal was to adopt European standards . The ultimate objective of EU membership for Ukraine is to adopt EU standards .
 Ukraine's president says his government would be to fight corruption by reducing government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy . He also wants to minimize the influence of certain elements of Ukraine's society .
 He stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collected and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities . He said the government will cut the amount of taxes collected .
Ukrainians believe the country's morally compromised political elite were not from what many Ukrainians believe was the country’s morally compromised politicians . These moves were likely intended to signal that the new government was dedicated to initiating reforms and moving the country toward the West .
 Through the remainder of 2014 and well into 2015, the record of passage of reform measures was mixed . The record was mixed.
 The government is setting up an Anti-Corruption Bureau that would investigate corruption among government officials . New anticorruption laws would require annual disclosures of income by public officials .
 President Poroshenko complained that Shokin was taking too long to clean up corruption . He asked for Shokin’s resignation .
 Others observed that it was very difficult initially to keep reform progress moving forward . Others also observed that the reform process was difficult initially .
 U.S. Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt praised Abromavicius for his efforts . Pyatt expressed disappointment with the resignation .
 The International Monetary Fund had already postponed the 2015 delivery of the third and fourth installments of funds for Ukraine . The slow pace of reform, including the lack of tax reform, further delayed the payment .
 Rada chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that the legislature would conduct a review of the Yatsenyuk cabinet’s work . The review would precede a vote of no confidence on the government .
 The vote further complicated the political environment because Poroshenko argued that change was necessary to reassure the public . Many in Poroshe nk o’s own political bloc refused to support the ouster of Yatsenyuk .
 The number of votes against Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and Poroshe nk o called for his resignation created doubts within the government .
 Ukrainian law prohibits the Rada from considering additional no-confidence votes against a government for six months . Yatsenyuk was given time to form a new government, make changes, and move the reform process forward .
 Observers believed that although the government had been weakened, all three former coalition partners likely would have continued to support the government’s reform agenda .
 Speculation centered on Volodymyr Groysman, the Speaker of the Rada and Poroshe nk o supporter, as a replacement for Yatsenyuk .
 Yatsenyuk refused to resign until a new governing coalition was agreed to. Nevertheless, he refused to quit until the new coalition agreed to .
 The U.S. and EU did not want the government to collapse, as failure to form a new government would have required new elections . The United States and the EU, despite their concerns over the pace of reform, didn't want a collapse .
 The idea of new elections, which could have generated nationwide political and 10 Op. cit, could have been a success .
 New elections could have called into question the ability of a new government to be any more dedicated to reform or successful in achieving such reforms .
 Ukraine's leaders quarreled bitterly after attaining power . The leaders of which, Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko and President Victor Yushchenko, quarrele bitterly . Some observers fear the shift among political leaders triggered fear among reformers .
Observers recall how the Orange Revolution paralyzed the government, alienated voters, and delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovich in 2010 . But conditions this time around were not exactly like those of those of theOrange Revolution .
 The appointment process for anticorruption prosecutors is mandatory asset disclosure for public officials . Privatization of state owned enterprises, Improvements in corporate governance of stateowned enterprises, Asset seizure and recovery .
 Opinion polls indicate public skepticism remains high regarding the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government’s ability to implement reforms . The government is committed to fighting the country's deeply ingrained, crippling problem with corruption .
 Yatsenyuk initially survived the political uprising, but a new level of disenchantment on the part of an already skeptical public . Some within the Rada felt Yatenyuk no 12 Elizabeth Pond, “Gunfight at the Ukraine Corral,’s�
 Yatsenyuk indicated that he would resign if he failed to form a new government by April 2016 . He said he would only resign if a new prime minister was agreed to .
 On April 14, 2016, the Rada, by a very slim margin, approved Volodymyr Groysman as the new prime minister .
 Groysman’s coalition started out in a weakened state, with serious doubts about his ability to move the agenda forward in the very Rada he recently led .
 Groysman's close association with Poroshenko raised some doubts about his ability to effectively carry out major reforms .
 Ukraine's parliament rejects economic populism proposed by many in parliament . They say they are committed to continuing an International Monetary Fund program that is keeping Ukraine financially afloat .
 The period since the formation of the Groysman government has been marked by slow but increasingly successful progress in addressing reform and in the economy .
 Some believe the move to oust former prime minister Yatsenyuk was driven by his reluctance to challenge certain oligarchs and politicians .
 Yury Lutsenko, the head of the Poroshenko parliamentary group, was subsequently appointed the new prosecutor general . He was appointed as the new Prosecutor general .
 Lutsenko appears committed to move forward on needed reforms and prosecutions of corrupt officials of both the former and current governments . The move was seen initially as a political move to consolidate Poroshenko’s influence .
 Danyliuk raised some initial concern as to whether he would be willing or able to undertake meaningful reforms over the long term . He is seen by some as a progressive technocrat .
 Danyliuk appears to have won increasing support for his efforts. Since then, he appears to be winning increasing support .
 The Groysman government has achieved some notable successes, particularly on the issues of energy subsidies and corruption .
 The government was able to move forward with the further reduction of household energy subsidies, even though the prospect of increased electricity prices spurred several street protests .
 corruption was viewed as rampant throughout the Ukrainian banking system . Similarly, corruption was seen as rampant in Ukraine .
 Valeriya Flontareva is Chairwoman of the National Ra nk of Ukraine . Some believe she has made significant progress in cleaning up the industry .
 Kyiv's reform efforts have been successful, but there are concerns about who in Kyiv loses from the success of the reform efforts .
An attempt is under way in the Ukrainian parliament to deprive the NBU of its independence and oust Flontareva . Anders Aslund recently warned that an attempt is being made to oust the N BU .
 This would be a major reversal of Ukraine’s economic reforms, according to Aslund . This, says Aslund, would be the biggest reversal in Ukraine's economic reforms .
 The effort has been resisted by President Poroshenko, Prime Minister Groysman, and others . Thus far, the effort has not been resisted.
 U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland says she was encouraged by signs of commitment to reform from Ukraine's government .
 The Groysman government has been setting the right tone for moving the country forward . The EU and the IMF are satisfied that the Groysmen government has set the righttone for reform .
 Recently, the IMF approved another $ 1 billion for Ukraine as part of the IMF’s $17 billion assistance program for the country .
 The IMF has warned Kyiv that more difficult reforms are needed in the banking sector . The country needs to receive the next $1. billion increment of funding .
 U.S. Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt reviewed some of the progress he had seen Ukraine achieve during his time as ambassador . Pyatt was speaking to a Ukrainian youth club before he departed Ukraine .
 Ukrainian civil society is one of the strongest and most active anywhere in Europe today, says Pyatt . Pyatt: This progress included the establishment of new anticorruption institutions and the transformation of the energy sector . He says reforms on the judiciary would make it easier to prosecute corruption .
 Pyatt indicated that if he had to identify the single area that still required the greatest sustained focus and engagement from civil society, it would be rule of law . The Ukrainian people have confidence, Pyatt said .
 The Poroshenko/Groysman government has not entirely succeeded in winning over a solid majority in the Rada, former Maidan reformists or among the general public at large . Still, the Poroshenko and Groysman have not entirely won over the majority .
Oligarchs have managed to retain their status as important players in Ukraine’s politics and economy due to a number of factors, says Carnegie Europe .
 One is the oligarchs’ continued dominance of certain strategic sectors of the economy through their financial capabilities and their organizational strength . Another is the dominance of some strategic sectors.
Oligarchic groups still possess powerful instruments to defend their positions, in particular control over dozens of members of parliament and ownership of nearly all major television stations . Another factor is that oligarchic group still possess power to defend its positions .
 Any attempt to strip the strongest oligarchs of influence could lead to open political conflict and possible retaliatory action by those oligarchs who control many sectors of the economy . Ukraine's internal situation could seriously destabilized Ukraine’s internal situation .
 The study concluded that the process to get control over the influence of the oligarchs will take time . The success of any efforts to weaken their influence will depend primarily on whether Ukraine’s present-day institutions can be reformed .
 The Ukrainian government has settled in and moved the reform effort forward . Several incidents have called into question the stability and public acceptance of the government .
 Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko was released from prison in June 2016 . Savchenko had recently been released from jail in Russia . In June 2016, criticism of the government came from Savchenko .
 While in prison, Savchenko was elected to the Rada as a member of the opposition Fatherland party led by Yulia Tymoshenko . Savchenko is currently in prison .
 In an interview with the Associated Press, Savchenko apparently said that the Ukrainian government had failed public expectations . The Ukrainian people deserved a better government than they had.
 Savchenko calls for early parliamentary elections to “infuse fresh blood’s politics’ in Ukraine . She also speaks of her own presidential ambitions .
Coming from a national icon, these comments sent shock waves across the nation and throughout the international community, which continues to oppose new national elections .
 In August 2016, Savchenko announced a hunger strike to speed up the release of 25 other Ukrainian prisoners of war . He accused Ukraine’s president of ignoring their plight .
 In early July 2016, a new push to form a European liberal political party was reportedly launched by many young, former Maidan activists who are now in the government .
 The new movement backs free-market approaches and specifically supports the smalland medium-sized business community . The movement backs the small and medium-size businesses .
 The new party is steadfastly libertarian on matters of personal choice . It is a staunch proponent of tough anticorruption measures . The party is a strong rule of law and an impartial judiciary .
 The group intends to rely on social media, Internetbased news, civic networks, and crowd funding to spread its message and build support . The group plans to use Facebook, Twitter and other social media to spread the message .
 Some believe that if this movement can evolve into a full-fledged political party with public support, it could present challenges to the current dominance of the Poroshenko Bloc and the People's Front party .
 In July 2016, increased fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine, reminding the public that security had not yet been achieved . In July 2017, increasedFighting broke out.
 Ukraine Defense Ministry says 27 “Ukraine’s Omnipresent Oligarchs’ died in October 2016 .
 In July, a car bomb explosion in Kyiv killed a well-known Belarussian investigative reporter, Pavel Sheremet . Also in July, an explosion in the same city killed an investigative reporter .
 Sheremet was known for his criticism of Russia’s leadership and his friendship with the slain opposition leader Boris Nemtsov .
 It is still unclear whether his killing was internally motivated by individuals who may have been the target of an ongoing investigation by Sheremet or external forces .
 President Poroshenko said the killing was an attempt to destabilize Ukraine . The incident occurred in Ukraine's capital city of Kiev .
 Amnesty International released a report documenting widespread prisoner abuse by Russian-backed separatists . In the same month, the government was dealt another headache by Amnesty International .
 The report also said that Ukrainian authorities and pro-Kyiv paramilitary groups illegally imprisoned and in some instances tortured prisoners .
Allegations forced the government to defend what had been seen by the public as a well-respected armed forces institution .
On July 17, Ukraine held special elections in seven districts to fill seats vacated by members of the Rada . Rada members had been appointed to Cabinet of Prime Minister Groysman and one Rada member who had died .
 One of the districts was Stansiya Lughansk, part of which borders an area occupied by the separatists . The area is part of the region occupied by separatists .
 These special elections were seen as symbolic tests of the public’s mood toward the government .
 Two winners were supported by Yulia Tymoshenko , and two weresupported by the Renaissance faction . Two winners are supported by the Russian government .
 As Ukraine transitioned into the fall of 2016, the Poroshenko/Groysman government seemed to feel it had achieved much . The Poroshenko-Groysmen government seems to feel that it has achieved much.
 Ukraine has gone through the “longest and most successful reform process,’s Finance Minister from 2014 to early 2016, Natalie Jaresko said . Ukraine has seen inflation drop, lending reduced and credit expanded, she said .
 This has occurred in spite of Russia’s occupation of Crimea, the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, hybrid war carried out by the Kremlin . An estimated 1. million internally displaced persons.
 Jaresko noted that the reforms were not yet irreversible and required continued international support . On the other hand, he said the reforms needed continued support .
 New Ukrainian government becomes complacent, says some . Others have warned that if the new government is complacent the country's gains could be lost .
 Ukrainians know that corruption remains endemic, and little progress has been made in breaking the old elite’s power structure .
 As people continue to tire of poverty and war, the appeal of populism will grow . As people are tired of war and poverty, populism is likely to grow .
 The new government has a window of opportunity to push through additional reforms and continue the economic recovery . With fresh IMF and U.S. financing coming through, the new government can push through more reforms .
 Otherwise, it risks an early parliamentary election, which might not survive next spring .
 Jaresko issued the same kind of warning, but blamed a large share of the country's slow progress on populist politicians .
 Parliamentary elections are not slated until 2019, but populist 24 “Ukraine Sees Ulterior Motives After Car Bomb Kills Journalist"
 Ukraine's anti-Russia Azov Battalion apparently decided to form its own political party . This concern was heightened recently when Ukraine's populist, anti-Russian Azov battalion apparently formed its own party .
Far-right leaning ideology could present a challenge to the Poroshenko/Groysman government . Although small in number, the group could align itself with others .
 Poroshenko and Groysman vowed to continue their efforts to meet the demands for reform and economic progress .
 For Poroshe nk o and Groysman, another major concern continues to be the strength of support Ukraine will continue to receive from the U.S. and the European Union .
 Observers believe any wavering of that support could signal to Moscow that Ukraine “fatigue’s growing. Moscow could take additional steps to destabilize the government, they say .
 Many in Ukraine became concerned over the EU’s ability to sustain its support in the wake of the UK vote in the UK .
 Russia's actions in Syria as well as Moscow’s failure to ease the conflict in the Donbas seem to be hardening the EU position on Russia, which may benefit Kyiv for a while longer .
 Ukraine’s economy was in decline in 2013, some believe . Some believe Ukraine's primary economic challenges were not all self-inflicted .
 Russian trade sanctions imposed in 2013, even before the Maidan, slashed Ukraine’s exports to Russia by 70% . That drop of 18% in Ukraine's total exports.
 In 2014, Ukraine’s exports to Russia, which included machinery, steel, agricultural goods, and chemicals, fell by half .
 Russia’s aggression in Ukraine still unsettled, few had wanted to invest in what some felt could be 29 Op. cit. cit .
 Ukraine’s net foreign direct investment, which was slightly over 3% of GDP, evaporated . As a consequence, Ukraine's net foreigndirect investment was over 3%.
 The tender for a 99.6% stake in the Odessa Port Plant failed to attract any bidders, particularly any international companies .
 Some signs of financial and economic stabilization began to appear as a result of a series of measures . The first payments of the $17.5-billion program loan approved by the IMF in March 2015 .
 In December 2015, the IMF tweaked its rules regarding lending to countries in arrears to other states . Ukraine has thus far refused to repay a $3 billion bond, issued by the previous government and held by Russia .
 The EIU says this target is in line with the government’s commitments made as part of its April 2014 request for an IMF loan of $17 billion .
 The IMF also wanted to make rapid progress on reforms, including energy price increases, bank restructuring, governance reforms of state-owned enterprises, and legal changes .
 In February 2016, with little progress on the IMF’s demands, Fagarde warned then Prime Minister Yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long . The IMF support for Ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased .
After Yatsenyuk was replaced by Groysman as prime minister, the IMF sent a new assessment team to Ukraine . The IMF sent an assessment team.
 The IMF agreed that progress was being made and that the next tranche of IMF funding, around $1. billion, would be forthcoming . The IMF agrees that progress is being made, and that it will be made .
 In September, the IMF voted to release $1 billion of Ukraine’s $17. billion bailout package . Ukraine had hoped for more assistance, but nevertheless a welcome infusion of assistance .
 The new funding brought total funding from the IMF so far to $7. billion . The IMF has spent $7 billion on new funding so far .
 Reductions in the energy subsidies have resulted in a rise in electricity prices, which has spurred some public outrage and protests .
 Russia suspended its own free-trade deal with Ukraine in January 2016 . Russia banned all imports of Ukrainian 33 Anders Aslund from the EU .
 EU accounts for around one-third of Ukraine's exports, following a rise in uncertainty after the UK’s vote . At the same time, this could be inhibited by a deterioration in the economic outlook for the EU .
 Natalie Jaresko suggested Ukraine could see 1.5% GDP growth this year . She said the country could see a 1.4% growth in 2014 .
 Inflation has slowed recently to around 9.8% -- the lowest rate since early 2014 . Inflation is tied to a modest appreciation of the hryvnya to the United States dollar .
 A reform measure recently enacted by the Rada could spur a new round of inflation . Elowever, an increase of almost 50% in domestic gas tariffs, also needed to pave the way for the release of a delayed IMF loan tranche .
 Ukraine possesses some of the richest agricultural soil in all of Europe . Ukraine has the most fertile soil in the world .
 Ukraine sold $7. billion of bulk farm commodities worldwide in 2015, quintupling its revenue from a decade earlier . It topped Russia, its closest rival on world markets.
 At the end of 2015 the value of Ukraine’s foreign investments was $62bn . At the beginning of 2015, Ukraine's foreign investments were $62billion .
 Ukraine fell six spots to 85 th place in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index . Ukraine fell from six to 85th in the index.
Investors’ survey: Corruption, lack of trust in the judiciary, conflict with Russia, unstable financial system, financial system .
 James Brooke made several observations regarding the business climate in Ukraine in 2016 . Brooke is a foreign correspondent for the Atlantic Council .
 The old guard, with their misconceptions of a free economy, is slowly being sidelined . The old guards are slowly becoming sidelined .
 Japan's Fujikura has recently opened a car parts factory . Similarly, in Lviv, Japan’s Fujikur has opened a vehicle parts factory.
 Ukraine’s vulnerability to Russian political pressure through energy policy has been mitigated by the fact that the main oil and natural gas pipelines to Central and Western Europe transit Ukraine.
 In 2014, about 40% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe transited to Ukraine . In 2013, about 30% of Russia's natural gas was transported to Europe .
 Russia has long sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities . Russia had long sought Control of Ukraine's natural gas pipeline andstorage facilities .
 Moscow had also proposed a pipeline under the Black Sea to Bulgaria and through the Balkans to Western Europe .
 Russia canceled the South Stream project in December 2014 . The EU raised objections that the project violated EU rules, but Russia canceled it .
 The Ukrainian Rada also passed legislation reducing the energy subsidy provided to consumers . But some reductions in energy consumption were also seen .
 Some gas price increases implemented in 2015 resulted in a 20% reduction in gas consumption in 2015 . Such consumption reductions have continued in 2016, according to some experts .
 Ukraine is currently only able to do without Russian gas because a deep economic contraction has reduced demand . However, according to the E1U, Ukraine is still able to use Russian gas .
 The scope of Ukraine’s foreign policy is focused on a few main foreign policy priorities . The focus is on the domestic problems facing the government .
 Ukraine is seeking continued international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . These include nonrecognition of Russia's annexation of Crimea and reorienting its economy as quickly as possible .
 Relations with Russia achieved independence in 1991 after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Relations with Ukraine achieved independence from Russia in 1991 .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central arid Eastern Europe, coordinated by Paul Belkin . Response to crisis in Ukraine, security concerns in Europe .
 Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incorporate Crimea and most of the rest of Ukraine into the Russian Empire .
 Russia has consistently reminded everyone of the strong religious connections between Russia and Ukraine through the Eastern Orthodox Church . Russia has also reminded everyone that the Orthodox Church has strong ties with Ukraine .
Ukrainian government servers have been hit by numerous and sophisticated cyberattacks . Some experts suggest some may have come from Russia .
 ethnic Russians are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country where ties to Russia remain strong .
 Sentiments toward Russia among a majority of Ukrainians have clearly declined since the events of 2014 .
 In June 2014, President Poroshenko announced that Ukraine would ban military cooperation with Russia . The move would have on close to 80 defense firms that had been closely li nk ed to Russian firms as a result of their former Soviet heritage .
 A ban could cut close to 70% of Ukrainian-made military goods exported to Russia . The move could force the closing or downsizing of the Ukraine military industrial base .
 Crimea has been relatively stable since the 2014 annexation of Crimea, with the exception of the Russian treatment of the Crimean Tatars . The likelihood of its return to Ukraine continues to fade as the region remains relatively stable .
 Tensions in Crimea and southern Ukraine flared briefly in August 2016 . Moscow accused Ukraine of “resorting to terrorism’ and threatened to take swift action against Kyiv .
 Russia recently announced plans to deploy its latest S-400 anti-aircraft missile system to Crimea in August . With some 30,000 Russian servicemen already in Crimea, Russia has more than 20,000 servicemen .
 This missile system poses a significant threat to the Ukrainian air force . It would be needed for the Ukraine government’s defense of the city of Mariupol .
 Russian elections were held in Crimea on September 18 for four seats in the Russian Duma . In another sign regarding the future of Crimea, for the first time since Russia annexed Crimea .
 The local population has dealt with increased inflation in food prices and a collapse of tourism . Tourism is a vital sector of the local economy .
 Ukraine has shut off all trade to the peninsula, making Crimea economically closer to and more dependent on Russia . In the meantime, Ukraine has closed off allTrade to the Peninsula, making it more dependent for Russia .
 Unrest in eastern Ukraine took an even more ominous turn in April 2014, when armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukraine restarted an “anti-terrorist operation’ against the separatist forces . After a brief unilateral cease-fire by Ukraine in late June 2014 failed to lead to progress on a peace plan .
 The Donbas region refers to area comprised of Donetsk and Luhansk Provinces . Accusations flew on 47 The Donba region .
 Fighting a heavily supplied separatist force, joined by Russian regular troops, Ukrainian forces lost ground and suffered heavy casualties .
 The Minsk-1 agreement also called for Ukraine to adopt a law on amnesty for those involved in the conflict in the Donbas .
 Obama Administration left leading role in negotiating such a settlement to France, Germany, and Ukraine . Russia's representatives have met with those of Russia in the socalled Normandy format .
 Minsk-2 contains no obligations whatsoever for Russia, which is not even mentioned in the agreement . In fact, the agreement does not mention Russia's obligations .
 The agreement calls for the removal of all “foreign’s troops but does not mention Russian troops . The agreement does not include Russian troops.
 Minsk-2 was signed not by Putin but by Mikhail Zurabov, Russia’s ambassador to Ukraine . Also signed by Russian ambassador.
 Minsk-2 provisions have come from the Kyiv side, despite commitments by both sides to do so . By September 2016, what little had been accomplished in fully implementing the Minsk 2 provisions had been completed .
 In Kyiv, the Rada has passed an amnesty law, had the first reading of a constitutional amendment related to eastern autonomy . The Donbas has also passed a special status law for the citizens of the Donbas .
 The separatists have not implemented any of the provisions. The separatists, on the other hand, have not implement any provisions .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission was established and is monitoring the cease-fire along the line controlled by Ukraine . Russia-backed separatists continue to restrict the operational area of the SMM . OSCE is unable to ascertain the full extent of which the separatists or Russia are participating in or Minsk
 The OSCE’s SMM has consistently reported daily violations, mostly on the part of the separatists . Many of the violations have resulted in numerous casualties .
Fighting has periodically flared up in the past. Although various cease-fire arrangements have been put in place .
 An estimated 4,000 people have died in the region since Minsk-2 went into effect . An estimated 5,000 have died since the start of the new regime .
 The Ukraine Defense Ministry noted that heavy fighting had taken place along the line of contact . 27 Ukrainian soldiers were killed and an additional 123 were wounded .
 July was the deadliest month for the Ukrainian military in nearly a year . This action made July the deadliest year for the military in almost a year.
 U.S. Ambassador Daniel Baer spoke at a meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna in late July . He said armed separatists refused to allow Monitoring Team to cross the line of contact .
 Separatist forces also block monitors’ access at transit hubs, near the pedestrian bridge at Stanytsia-Luhanska, and even at sites proposed for disengagement .
 Combined Russianseparatist forces continue to disable SMM cameras and unmanned aerial vehicles in order to blind monitors . The Russian military forces are still disabling SMM camera and aerial vehicles .
 Most recently, a third SMM long-range UAV was brought down in an area near the Line of Contact . The area is near where Russian separatist heavy weapons had recently been reported .
 The OSCE has also reported that much of the separatists’ heavy weapons and the military personnel supplied by Russia have been repeatedly repositioned along the front lines but not removed from Ukraine .
 The SMM continues to find weapon systems in separatist-held territory that are only available in the Russian arsenal .
 OSCE reported sporadic fighting throughout August . Heavy fighting seemed to have subsided .
 In September 2016 both sides agreed to a “back to school’ ceasefire along with an agreement that Ukrainian and separatists’ heavy weapons and the Russian military personnel supporting the separatists were to be withdrawn from three areas along the contact line .
19 Ukrainian soldiers have been injured in fighting along the line of conflict since the new cease-fire took effect . 19 Ukrainian soldiers had been injured.
 Ukraine's military postponed a planned parallel withdrawal with pro-Russian separatists from one town on the eastern frontline . The rebels had disregarded the agreement and fired artillery at Ukrainian positions .
 U.S. Ambassador Daniel Baer to the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna, Vienna, July 2016 . Baer is a member of the United States. Baer has served as ambassador to the European Union for more than 30 years .
 separatists blame the government in Kyiv and vow to retaliate, which could result in an increase in fighting . Other prominent separatists have recently met with suspicious deaths .
 On October 20, 2016, the Normandy Group, including Putin, met in Berlin for several hours of apparently heated debate on what to do about Minsk-2 .
 The Ukrainians initially stated that no elections law would be passed in the Rada until a real cease-fire went into effect . Russian heavy weapons and troops were withdrawn, and the OSCE was given unfettered access to the UkraineRussia border .
 control of the border is critical for Kyiv in halting the continuous flow of Russian forces and equipment for the separatists . Control of the borders is critical to Kyiv's efforts to halt the flow of Russia's forces.
There is a question whether the OSCE can handle such a mission. For some, it is not clear whether it can handle the mission .
 Some Ukrainian politicians the border should be controlled by the Ukrainian Armed Forces as a precondition to elections . The border is currently being controlled by Ukrainian armed forces .
 Russia seems little inclined to push for a resolution of the conflict, despite Moscow’s continued participation in the Normandy group .
 Putin continued to insist on the elections, a special status for the Donbas and amnesty . The election was held without any guarantees from Moscow .
 In the end, Poroshenko apparently agreed to draw up a more precise roadmap for implementing the Minsk-2 peace accords .
 The plan could include deploying an armed OSCE mission to the east to better protect the monitoring mission . The plan, some say, would be ready in November .
 It is unclear at the moment what exactly the roadmap would envision. It is unlikely that the separatists would agree to such a provision . Russia continues to insist that it has no military forces in eastern Ukraine .
 President Poroshe nk o won a hard-fought victory in initially moving legislation through the Rada . He does not have the necessary votes to pass this legislation as an amendment to the constitution .
 separatists appear to have no intention to stop fighting or ensure free and fair elections are held in the disputed regions . He is unlikely to secure those votes unless major progress is made by the other side .
 Moscow has insisted on decentralization of Ukraine, under which the regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finance, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions .
 Moscow's policy in Ukraine's east continues to look more likely to strengthen the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics .
 Moscow has been bankrolling pensions, social benefits, and salaries of local officials and the separatist military .
 Most of the daily activities in the two areas, including financing, taxation, and electric power, are planned and administered by Russian ministries in Moscow .
 ICG suggested that these measures are increasingly clear signs that Moscow has decided to transform the crisis into a frozen conflict . The ICG said these measures were increasingly clear.
 The one unanswered question at the moment is how long would the leadership of the DPR and LPR continue to adhere to Moscow’s strict line .
 Some believe the DPR would like to become more independent of Moscow, at least exercising more control over economic and business assets .
 Some observers believe that Putin will eventually create the conditions for an election and reintegration of the Donbas region into the country . The other hand, some observers say that Putin is prepared to give up the region .
 Some Europeans have already suggested that sanctions could be incrementally lifted as parts of Minsk-2 are implemented .
 Moscow also appears to believe that by reintegrating the Donbas and having pro-Russians elected to the Rada, Moscow could gain even more leverage in Kyiv . Moscow also seems to believe by re-integrating Donbas.
 Russia’s proxies could control a certain bloc of votes on key issues in the Rada, effectively blocking some reform progress and perpetuating political instability . Russia's proxies could be able to control some votes on some key issues.
 Putin's move would also force Kyiv and the Rada to honor democratically elected MPs from the Donbas . Such a move by Putin could invite criticism from the West .
 The concept of ‘Novorossiya’ has largely disappeared from official Russian rhetoric for now . The concept is expanding the Russian-controlled area to include most of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military forces have become somewhat more capable, and it may appear to Putin that such an objective would likely require a massive infusion of Russian military forces . Since then, however, Ukrainian troops have become more capable .
 EU and U.S. pressure on Ukraine to comply with Minsk-2 is misplaced, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Few believe neither pro-Russia separatists nor Kremlin have any intention of complying with their parts of the agreement .
 Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko said she disagreed with key aspects of the Minsk cease-fire agreement . She said she wanted eastern Ukraine more autonomy and holding local elections in the Donbas .
 Foreign ministers of France and Germany met with President Poroshenko in February 2016 . This pressure seemed to be on full display earlier in 2016 when the foreign ministers met with Poroshenko .
 This pressure seemed evident in the October meeting of the Normandy group, as noted above . This pressure also seemed evident.
 Kyiv must meet Minsk-2 requirements, including amending the Ukrainian constitution . Many Ukrainians see the separatists as mere street thugs with guns . The separatists have taken sovereign territory from their own country .
 August 1, 2016, marked the 41 st anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act . The Helsinki Act was signed by the Finnish parliament in 2007 .
 Russia continues to flagrantly flout all of the OSCE principles enshrined in the agreement . Russia is a signatory, including territorial integrity, inviolability of borders, and sovereignty . For many, by its illegal occupation and annexation of Crimea and its aggression in eastern Ukraine,
Members of the Rada are amending the county's constitution to “reward’s constitution. Those members who vote for these measures could be labeled as national traitors .
 Ukrainian pilot Savchenko to be a “small piranha. This approach, in the eyes of 63 “Among Political Sharks’s Ukrainian pilot, Savchenko.”
 The EU policy is intended to forge a close relationship that encompasses political association and economic integration . Ukraine could prepare for eventual membership in the union in the future .
 The desire among some segments of the Ukrainian public for stronger relations with the EU and the West fueled the initial protests in late 2013 that culminated in the collapse of the Yanukovych regime .
 DCFTA also requires Ukraine to adopt EU legislation and standards and to gradually expose Ukrainian firms to tough competition from EU imports .
 The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s AA dealing with political issues in March 2014 and the parts dealing with economic issues on June 27 . The AA was signed by the European Union and Ukraine in March.
Ratification of the pact was delayed due to Russian threats to block Ukrainian imports from Russian markets . The pact is meant to protect Russia's interests .
 The EU established a High Level Investment Forum/Task Force and created a dedicated Ukraine Support Group to provide advice and support to the Ukrainian authorities in the mentioned reform sectors .
 The EU was hesitant to impose additional sanctions on Ukraine despite Russia's support for the destabilization of eastern Ukraine and its assault on Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty .
After the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on July 17, 2014, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond U.S. sanctions . Elowever, after the Malaysia Airlines tragedy, says the EU was largely matched .
 On July 29, 2014, the EU agreed to impose sanctions on Russia’s financial, defense, and certain energy sectors . The EU has imposed sanctions on the country's financial and defense sectors .
 The sanctions had been crafted to minimize the economic harm to EU countries, says Observers .
 Some business sectors in Europe that were geared toward the Russian market as well as the agriculture sectors have continued to complain .
 Russia has implemented counter-sanctions against Europe, such as in the agriculture sector, among others . Some countries continue to have a negative impact on some countries, despite the ability of some sectors to find new markets .
 A study by the European Parliament’s Research Service analyzes the impact of the sanctions and Russian counter-sanctions on European economies .
 Since January 2015, the United States and the EU have extended the sanctions on Russian individuals and entities three times . The sanctions have been extended three times since 2015 .
 Key sectoral sanctions were set to expire in July 2016 but were renewed again until January 2017 . The sanctions were due to expire again in January 2017 but were still in place .
 Extending the sanctions requires unanimous vote among all 28 EU member states . EU leaders are seeing weakening support for continued sanctions .
 The EU sanctions were extended again. The EU will conduct a thorough review of the sanctions and hold a debate over their continued implementation .
 Individual EU member states have different views on how to deal with Russia in the future . The EU has a different view on the future of Russia and Russia .
 Several countries have argued the sanctions have not forced a change in Russia’s policies toward Ukraine .
 Others have complained about the impact of the EU sanctions and Russian counter-sanctions on their economies . Others have expressed a desire to see the sanctions eased or lifted altogether .
 Italy, Greece, Cyprus, and Elungary have been among the more skeptical .
 Both the French General Assembly and the French Senate passed nonbinding resolutions asking the French government to support lifting the sanctions . The French Senate voted to lift the sanctions on the French President .
 European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker met President Putin during a June 16, 2016, economic forum .
 Poland and Baltic states have repeatedly pressed for maintaining pressure on Moscow . By contrast, Poland and the Baltic states, which have lost economic markets in Russia, have pressed for maintain pressure .
 Merkel government in Germany has been thrust into role of seeking EU consensus on Russia . Germany's business community has been under serious pressure to lift the sanctions .
 German Foreign Minister Frank Walter Steinmeier floated the possibility of a “step by step’s reduction of sanctions even if the Minsk agreements for resolving the Ukraine conflict are not entirely fulfilled .
 Merkel has remained fairly strong in her desire not to lift the sanctions until Russia shows some positive actions in resolving the conflict in the Donbas . Merkel has said she wants to wait for Russia to show positive actions.
Guy Verhofstadt: This is no time for Europe to “go soft’ on Russia . He says it's no time to ‘go soft on Russia’
 EU leaders must remain firm and united in ensuring that existing economic sanctions are lifted only if the Minsk agreement is implemented fully . EU leaders need to remain firm.
 Russian forces and military equipment withdrawn from Ukrainian territory . Ukraine's government of complete control over its border with Russia .
 A weakening of sanctions on Russia might please European business leaders, but it would come at a steep long-term cost .
 Even with sanctions in place, the frozen conflict in Ukraine looks increasingly permanent .
 Easing sanctions now would amount to a catastrophic collapse in Europe’s impact and credibility . A major loss for Ukraine would be a major loss to Ukraine .
 The U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control updated the Specially Designated Nationals List and the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List to target sanctions evasion and other activities related to the conflict in Ukraine .
 37 individuals, 11 Crimean officials and 18 companies are included in the new sanctions . The sanctions include a number of defense and shipbuilding firms and companies directly involved in the construction of the 11-mile road-and-rail connection across the Kerch Strait separating Russia and Crimea .
 NATO summit in Bucharest declared that Ukraine would eventually become a NATO member . No date was ever set for that goal to be accomplished .
 Ukraine is not likely to receive a Membership Action Plan from NATO in the near future . Ukraine's current military instability in Ukraine's east, the annexation of Crimea by Russia, and concerns among NATO allies over Russia’s actions to keep Ukraine from becoming too close to Europe .
 Key assistance includes capacity and institution building, professional development of civilian employees, and strategic communications . Key assistance include capacity, institution building and professional development.
 Allied experts are cooperating with eight defense education institutions, three training centers, and the Diplomatic Academy in Ukraine to improve staff skills and develop curricula that meet Western standards .
 NATO is conducting humanitarian demining operations and will implement a project to increase Ukraine’s capabilities to counter lEDs .
 Allies are supporting Ukraine in disposing of obsolete small arms/light weapons, ammunition, and anti-personnel mines .
 The Alliance restated its commitment at the 2014 Wales Summit to support Ukraine . In addition, it established five trust funds to support the country .
 These trust funds include Command, Control, Communications and Computers . Cyber Defense, Military Career Transition, and Medical Rehabilitation .
 Relations with the United States established diplomatic relations with Ukraine in 1991 . Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union led to the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine .
 The United States has committed significant financial and technical assistance to Ukraine to achieve those goals . The U.S. is committed to helping Ukraine achieve that goals .
 Vice President Biden, Secretary of State Kerry, USAID Assistant Administrator Tom Melia have reaffirmed this support . Nuland's visit to Kyiv will be on June 22, 2016, and July 6, 2016 .
 Vice President Biden spoke with President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Groysman on May 13 . The U.S. has approved a third $ 1 billion loan guarantee agreement, which will support continued progress on Ukrainian reforms .
 Ukraine is currently the United States’ 80 th -largest goods trading partner, 79 percent of the world's largest trade partner .
 U.S. imports from Ukraine include iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, oil, oil and iron products, aircraft, and agricultural products . The United States imports include iron, steel, and other products .
 U.S. advisers and technical assistance support almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities . They are aimed at helping Ukraine stabilize its financial sector and carry out reforms in the agricultural sector .
 The Administration also requested $15 million in International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement funding to support justice and law enforcement reform .
 The Elouse version of the FY2016 Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Agencies Appropriations bill would make $337 million available for Ukraine . The bill would be the first time the bill has been passed .
 United States aid has been used by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America to produce Russian-language news broadcasts .
 The U.S.-Ukraine defense relationship is transitioning from ‘crisis-response’ to an enduring partnership aimed at developing more capable, NATO-interoperable Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 This partnership is intended to help Ukraine’s 100,000-strong security forces effectively preserve and enforce its territorial integrity .
 In 2015, the U.S. announced a comprehensive $335 million bilateral security assistance package for Ukraine for FY2016 . The United States has committed $600 million in security assistance to Ukraine since 2014 .
 A U.S. Army battalion has been training Ukrainian forces in Poland . The battalion is trained on how to operate against Russian electronic warfare and how to protect themselves from rebel artillery .
 24 RQ-11B Raven Unmanned Aircraft Systems (comprised of 72 aircraft and associated equipment) arrived in Ukraine .
 The Raven UAV System is a hand-launched reconnaissance and surveillance tool . It is also a surveillance tool for surveillance .
 The system transmits live airborne video images and location information to a ground control station . The system sends live video images to ground control stations .
 This capability can provide day or night aerial intelligence . It enables operators to navigate, recognize terrain, and record information for analysis . This capability is available for day and night .
 The Raven system is part of the European Reassurance Initiative package and ongoing security assistance efforts in Ukraine . It is also part of an ongoing security aid package for Ukraine .
 Ukrainian soldiers already have completed training on Raven UAVs in Huntsville, Alabama . Several dozen Ukrainian soldiers have already completed training in Alabama .
 The Multinational Joint Commission on Defense Reform and Security Cooperation with Ukraine also assesses Ukrainian requirements and prioritizes training, equipment, and advisory initiatives . The U.S. is in partnership with Canada, Lithuania, and the UK .
 The United States and Ukraine also host two military exercises each year in Ukraine . The U.S. and Ukraine host a ground forces peacekeeping exercise and a naval exercise .
 These exercises seek to enhance interoperability and strengthen regional security through realistic training . Ukraine and 84 Op. cit. cit also send an important signal of reassurance to Ukraine and the Ukraine .
 Ukraine also participates in other U.S.-hosted exercises elsewhere in Europe . Ukraine is also participating in U.N. exercises in the United States .
 Secretary of Defense Ash Carter met with Ukrainian Minister of Defense Stepan Poltorak in September 2016 . Carter signed a bilateral partner concept that provides a framework for the United States and Ukraine to enhance the defense capacity of Ukraine’s military forces .
 Secretary Carter also named General John Abizaid, former CENTCOM commander, as senior defense adviser to Ukraine for military affairs .
 In April 2014, President Obama signed into law H.R. 4152, which authorized aid to help Ukraine carry out reforms . It required the President to impose visa bans and asset seizures against persons in Ukraine and Russia who were responsible for violence .
 Members of Congress have expressed support for going beyond the nonlethal support given by the U.S. so far to provide “defensive weapons’ such as man-portable anti-tank weapons .
 The legislation addresses the ongoing crisis in Ukraine by clarifying the position of the U.S. on Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea . It also addresses new options to provide support for Ukraine .
 H.R. 5094 would link any sanctions relief to Russia fulfilling its obligations under the Minsk Agreement . It would make Crimea-related sanctions permanent so long as the Russian occupation there continues .
 The legislation would also tighten sanctions enforcement with a new anti-evasion framework . It would require regular reports on ha nk s illegally controlling Ukrainian assets .
 The fighting between Russian-supported separatists and Ukrainian military continues to flare up at times .
 July 2016 was the most lethal month in almost a year for the Ukrainian military . July 2016 is the most deadly month for the Ukraine military .
 Another truce initiated in September essentially lasted one week before the shelling started up again . Another truce began in September .
 The Kremlin-supported separatists have no intention of honoring the cease-fire provisions of the Minsk-2 agreement . These flare-ups in fighting have been seen as another indication that the separatists are not honoring the agreement .
 Few of the rebel-held Russian medium and heavy military weapons have been withdrawn, OSCE says . There have been periodic reports that weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern Ukraine from Russia .
 Some are concerned that heavy fighting could resume in late November if the so-called “roadmap” Kyiv agreed to present is not favorable to the separatists or Moscow .
Fighting could increase in January, if as expected the EU extends its sanctions on Russia for another six or 12 months . Others suggest fighting could be increased in January .
 The prolonged discord at the beginning of 2016 over how to replace Yatsenyuk has fueled doubts among the public regarding the reform agenda .
 Prime Minister Groysman has shown a relatively strong commitment to enact serious reforms . He has proven not to be intimidated by those who oppose those reforms .
 The potential for a significant period of instability and the possible necessity of a new national election in 2016 seemed to have been avoided by early summer . The potential of a major instability in 2016 was avoided by late summer .
Government in Kyiv was hit by several new developments, which required Groysman to deal with these additional challenges to his government .
 Recent attempts by some to stall the reforms have presented additional challenges to the reform agenda . The reform agenda must be overcome .
 The second internal challenge appears to be a growing gap between those inside Ukraine, particularly inside Ukraine . Those who want to keep the process moving forward as long as the other side appears willing to do so .
 This dilemma for Poroshenko and Groysman could serve to weaken European resolve to continue to impose sanctions on Russia . The sanctions were initially imposed in reaction to Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its activities in eastern Ukraine .
 separatist rebels in the Donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing their parts of the Minsk-2 agreement . The separatist rebels are still not implementing their part of the agreement .
Elections are supposed to take place in the disputed territory . The House Foreign Affairs Committee will hold a hearing July 14, 2016 .
 Putin and his supporters are trying to stir up political chaos in Kyiv . Europe may not at some point continue to impose sanctions on Russia . This, of course, could change .
 Putin could conclude that for the West, progress would still be progress, but that would be good enough for Putin’s overall plans for Ukraine . He could conclude for theWest, progress, would nevertheless be progress .
 Some European leaders have suggested that sanctions could be incrementally reduced as individual elements of the Minsk-2 agreement are achieved . Some of this thinking inside the Kremlin seems to be paying off .
 The internal political dynamics in Kyiv would make it more difficult for the Groysman government to address meaningful political reform, attack corruption, and promote economic growth .
 The government has moved forward with a reform agenda that appears to be gaining momentum . Those concerns have been partially addressed.
 A new political crisis could arise among the frustrated general public, including calls for new national elections . However, if the current government shows weakness or loses its base of power, it could be a new crisis .
 The public has long been skeptical of the ability of the government to significantly address the problems facing the country .
 Recent public opinion polls show the government continues to suffer from low support . The opposition parties are gaining strength, with opposition parties gaining strength .
 Any new political crisis could also result in a slowing of talks over the implementation of Minsk-2 and further movement toward a ‘frozen conflict’ in the east . Ukraine’s economic and political consolidation, as well as its integration with the West, could further hinder
Despite the continued conflict in the east, Kyiv could also cause problems for Kyiv . On the other hand, a period of political stability and progress in the economic and reform efforts of the Groysman government could also be a problem .
There was renewed fear in Kyiv and elsewhere that the summer of 2016 could have presented new challenges for the West . There was renewed fears in Kyv and elsewhere.
 Putin could turn his attention back to Ukraine. Some felt that with Putin’s objectives in Syria well on their way to being realized, Putin could return to Ukraine .
 Putin could have reacted by stirring trouble in eastern Ukraine . The EU’s decision to renew sanctions on Russia until 2017, and NATO Summit in Warsaw endorsing new military deployments in Eastern Europe .
 The recent death of one of the more prominent separatist officials could still trigger an increase in the conflict . The death of a prominent separatist official could also trigger a rise in conflict .
 Moscow has not reacted well to Europe’s continued sanctions or to recent NATO statements in support of Eastern Europe .
 Putin and his allies, faced with actual reform successes in Kyiv, could be forced to react in some way to protect his position at home .
 The Kremlin's disinformation efforts could be increased, along with support channeled to opposition political groups intended to stir the skeptical public . For instance, the Kremlin’s disinformation efforts may be increased .
 Putin also could, for instance, support an increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 Both options pose substantial risks for the interests of the U.S. and the EU to promote stability, security, and economic development in Ukraine . Both options would pose substantial risk to the United States and EU .
 The United States and the EU continued to add additional travel freezes, visa restrictions, and economic sanctions on Russia for its failure to cease its support for the pro-separatists’ actions in the Donbas regions of eastern Ukraine .
 The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle, such as energy trader Genneddy Timche nk o and bankers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg .
 The Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control updated the Specially Designated Nationals List and the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List to target sanctions evasion and other activities related to the conflict in Ukraine .
 Some 18 companies operating in Crimea, including defense and shipbuilding firms, are included in the new sanctions . The new sanctions include 37 individuals, as well as multiple subsidiaries of Russian gas giant Gazprom .