 Ukraine got dragged into the ‘arguments’ presented by advocates for Britain’s exit from the European Union on Monday . In a manner both startling and depressingly reminiscent of two years of Kremlin propaganda .
 Boris Johnson says it was not Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea and its military aggression in Eastern Ukraine that had caused ‘real trouble’ Former Mayor of London and Brexit lobbyist Boris Johnson said the EU's actions were not Russia's .
 He would certainly not be the first European politician to justify Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 UKIP leader Nigel Farrage has not been far behind in expressing support for Russian President Vladimir Putin . The Kremlin’s most prominent apologist is, of course, Marine Le Pen .
Members known for their neo-Nazi views include Luc Michel and Manuel Ochsenreiter . They are regularly invited to act as 'observers' rubberstamping Russia’s ‘Crimean referendum’ and ‘elections’
 Johnson has since reacted angrily to what he calls ‘smears’ He denies that he is a Putin apologist .
 The EU had done to stoke tensions in Ukraine, says EU leader . He might be more convincing if he explained more credibly what he had meant, and what he said .
 Viktor Yanukovych reneged on his pre-election promise to sign the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement that led to Euromaidan and the end of the Yanukovych regime .
 Yanukovych and his cronies all fled to Russia, and Russian troops within days had seized control in Crimea .
 Russia was simply forced to invade and annex Ukrainian sovereign territory . In short, Russia was just forced to invasion and annex Ukraine .
 The Kremlin, its far-right friends and formidable propaganda machine have been taking for the last two years and more . This is more or less exactly the line that the Kremlin has been taking .
 Johnson is seriously distorting the facts regarding who is responsible for the worst threat to European stability and security since the Second World War . Johnson's reasons are unclear .
 Russia sent troops in to seize government buildings and airports in Crimea on Feb 27, 2014 . The previous day, Russia failed to achieve an internal coup .
 It then organized a illegal ‘referendum’ with no possibility of voting for the status quo . The referendum was held in a referendum in the early hours of the morning .
 Putin's Human Rights Council was held at gunpoint 10 days later . The results were heavily falsified, with results that even Putin’s human rights council suggested were falsified .
 Russia has carried out a policy of repression against all opponents of annexation . It has severely curtailed all rights and freedoms and imprisoned people on politically motivated charges . Since then Russia's policy has been carried out by Russia.
 It has effectively declared war against the Crimean Tatars, the main indigenous people of the peninsula . It is carrying out a policy of terror and intimidation.
 The EU is also to blame, but it seems unlikely that the lack of hard-hitting sanctions was what Johnson had in mind .
 The West continued ineffectually threatening reaction for months after Russia began its military aggression in Eastern Ukraine . The West continues to threaten Russia for months.
 There was ample evidence from the outset that Russia was providing the men and weapons for the armed seizure of areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts from April 2014 .
 The so-called ‘Donetsk people’s republic’ was even led for some time by Russians .
 Russian troops were deployed to prevent Ukrainian army from regaining control in Donbas . It was only after Russian or pro-Russian militants downed the Malaysian MH17 airliner in July 2014 .
 Johnson spoke of NATO, not the EU, being the real ‘guarantor of peace’ in Europe . He asserted that the EU should not try to encroach on its peacekeeping role .
 NATO is indeed the guarantor of peace for its members if one is directly attacked . NATO is also the guarantors of peace if one was directly attacked.
 Britons would do well to look at the attitude of people in Eastern Europe, especially the Baltic Republics .
 Russian so-called ‘hybrid warfare’ measures aimed at destabilizing their countries and influencing the country’s political course . They have experience, like Ukraine.
 These steer clear of the kind of military intervention that would demand NATO response . But are nonetheless hostile and extremely dangerous .
 Parroting Russia’s excuses for its aggression against Ukraine hardly enhances the Brexit camp's position. Parrots Russia's excuses hardly enhances its position in the UK .