 The main goal of the Kremlin in relation to the elections of 2019 is not to strengthen a “party of compromise’s” goal, but to present new evidence that Ukraine is a failed-state .
 The concept allows the Kremlin to avoid the Minsk settlement. This is not only because the Kremlin is trying to avoid a settlement . It is not the first time the concept has been used by the Kremlin .
 The Elections in Ukraine are the single most important events in the internal politics of the Kremlin .
Since 2014, the entire Russian domestic policy was strongly dedicated to Ukraine . The entire agenda of Russia’s relations with the world was tied to the ‘Minsk settlement agreement’ The campaigns on the occupation of the Crimea and the invasion of Donbass continued to play important roles
 The second Ukrainian Maidan was the second Maidan to be killed in the Ukraine . It was the first Maidan in the country to have been killed in Ukraine .
 It could not provide any support to the pro-Russian sentiments, even in the east of Ukraine . It was so rude that it could not give any support. It was also so rude.
 The anti-Ukrainian propaganda of such content created inconvenience for the “Opposition bloc’s” small group of Ukrainian politicians who were eager for reconciliation relations with Russia .
 Many experts agree that the Kremlin cannot make such strong influence on the outcome of elections in Ukraine through its preferred candidates or its parties . Now, many experts agree.
 None of these plots can lead to a serious turn in Ukrainian politics, writes Peter Bergen . Neither Yuri Boyko, nor the hypothetical unification of all the anti-Poroshenko resources of Dmytro Firtash, Rinat Akhmetov, Viktor Medvedchuk,
 The Ukrainian society took yet another form for five years after the annexation of Crimea .
 The policy of Poroshenko and the coalition of politcal parties in the Parliament led Ukraine far away from a possible return to Eurasia with the pro EU and NATO position .
 Putin’s policy transformed to such a form which didn’t afford to support Russian-Ukrainian friendship . Thirdly, because Putin's policy changed to such an form that didn't afford to do or to say something .
 Vadim Novinsky is a Member of Parliament of Ukraine and an opponent of the autocephaly of the Ukrainian local church . He is also a former Russian citizen, and now a member of the Ukraine's Parliament .
 The main goal of the Kremlin in relation to the elections of 2019 lies not in the possible strengthening of the “party of compromise’s party of compromise, but in presenting new evidence that Ukraine is failed-state .
 The concept allows the Kremlin to avoid the Minsk settlement. And not only because it is a concept that allows the Russian government to avoid a settlement .
 The entire machine of the four main hubs of Kremlin propaganda creates a non-stop stream of ‘Ukrainian horrors’ in order to show the confused Russian media consumer that “we still have it’s not so bad.”
 The evolution of the image of Ukraine in the Russian media is well described by specialists . Andreas Umland, Eugene Magda, and others have written about Ukraine's image .
 The image of the “russian world’s” lost relevance as well as the glorification of specific characters of Donbass collaborationism .
Three main topics of 'Ukrainian horror' remain in demand for exploitation. But there are three main topics that remain in need for exploitation .
 This was picked up in Europe by Marxists and radicals, including those who left to work on Russia Today and Sputnik .
Ukrainian far-right parties today play a smaller role in domestic politics than similar parties in Austria or Hungary .
 The Kremlin proceeded to show to its inner viewer total violations of “human rights’ in Ukraine . The Kremlin is stopping the rhetoric of the ‘russian world’
 The Kremlin media does not publish any independent essays, investigations, or any exclusive materials about Ukraine . It was at an early stage in 2014, when it was at the same time, as it was in 2014 .
 Russia is a "neighboring state" in which all the same problems as existed in Russia, says the author . The Russian government is accused of violating Civil rights, race inequality, systemic government corruption .
 Putin saves and protects us from this. These violations in Ukraine are in a more dramatic manner than at home, but Putin protects us, he says .
 The entire Ukrainian topic, which took the center position in the political agenda of the Russian media, worked only for the idea of the 'stability and sustaining' of Putin’s policy .
 Ukraine's elections could not be "sold" to voters, even if they were supporters of the anti-Maidan or pro-Russian segments in the south-east .
 Putin's apparent decreasing domestic policy was very important for Putin’s apparent decreasing foreign policy . But it was also very important to Putin for his apparent decreasing policy .
 Europe should be wary of extensive provocations from Moscow in the Ukrainian elections of 2019. That was why Europe was wary of Moscow's provocations .
Ukrainian journalist Dmitry Krapivenko described scenarios of possible complications . He described scenarios.
From the unrealistic re-attempt to shake the southern regions of Ukraine, to return to the failed plan of destroying of Ukraine . The far-right to take to the streets or trigger local military provocation.
 The Kremlin comments deeply the conflicts between Hungary and Ukraine, Poland and Ukraine . It awaits conflicts around Orthodox parishes, protests of the far-right, and any evidence of instability .