 During more than seven years of armed conflict, this bitter and bloody separation has cost over 14,000 lives and forced millions of Ukrainians to flee their homes .
 It has sent shock waves through the wider region and plunged the entire world into a new Cold War .
 Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution served as a particularly important milestone in the deteriorating relationship between the two newly independent nations .
 The final collapse in bilateral ties came in early 2014, when Russia responded to Ukraine’s Euromaidan Revolution by occupying Crimea and attempting to orchestrate pro-Kremlin uprisings in Ukrainian cities across the country .
 More than seven years on, the two countries remain locked in an undeclared low-intensity war with little prospect of any progress towards a sustainable peace settlement .
 Russia continues to occupy Crimea and much of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region . Russia has seen its influence decline to historically unprecedented lows throughout the rest of Ukraine .
 This decline has been mirrored in other sectors including business, media, and popular culture . This decline is similar to that of other sectors such as business and media .
 Russia has lost its longstanding position as Ukraine’s dominant trade partner . Russia finds itself more excluded from Ukrainian daily life than at any time in over three centuries .
 Vladimir Putin has stubbornly refused to reverse course on Ukraine and appears committed to maintaining the current confrontation indefinitely . Despite these setbacks, Putin has remained defiant .
 Putin’s apparent obsession with Ukraine dates back to his disastrous intervention in the 2004 presidential election, which played a key role in sparking the Orange Revolution . Russian leader was widely seen as a personal humiliation for the Russian leader .
 The most recent evidence of Putin's Ukraine fixation was a 5,000 word essay on the “historical unity’ of Russia and Ukraine published in July 2021 . The essay pushed the imperialistic notion of Russians and Ukrainians as “one people’s
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy first came to power in spring 2019 . He expressed hopes that he could sit down face-to-face with Putin and reach a reasonable compromise .
 Zelenskyy’s efforts have met with little but intransigence and further hostility from the Kremlin . However, Zelenskiy's efforts have been met withlittle but intranigence .
 The Atlantic Council invited a range of experts to share their views on the future of Russian-Ukrainian relations . They asked whether the geopolitical split between the two countries is irreversible .
 Putin is doing a lot to encourage Ukraine’s national identity to crystalize in opposition to Russia . Few things are truly irreversible, but Putin is encouraging Ukraine's national identity.
 According to Russian nationalist ideology, Ukrainian nation does not exist except as a sort of little brother tied and subordinate to Russia .
 It is an extreme view, but there is a basis for deep Russian-Ukrainian partnership . It is not a very extreme view .
 A different set of Russian policies toward Ukraine over the past 30 years of Ukrainian independence might have nurtured it .
Putin pursued policies that were hostile to Ukraine’s national interest, as Ukrainians seemed to define it . Instead, Putin pursued policies hostile to the Ukraine's national interest .
 Putin aligned himself with the corrupt, Kremlin-friendly Ukrainian politician Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych refused to sign an EU-Ukraine Association Agreement in 2013 that was widely popular in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych's ouster triggered protests in Kyiv that led to Yanukovych’s ouster, which then sparked Putin's invasion of Ukraine . Crimea, the annexation of Crimea, and a war still ongoing in the east of the country has alienated Ukrainian opinion .
 Ukrainians are now far more pro-NATO and anti-Kremlin than would have been the case otherwise . Ukrainians are far more pro-NATo and anti Kremlin than would be the cases otherwise .
 Putin’s actions, so damaging to Russia-Ukraine relations, have a logic, but a bad one . Putin's actions have a Logic, but bad one, says Putin .
 Putinism keeps Russia economically backward as a value-extracted rather than value-added economy . Putinism, a system of authoritarian kleptocracy, keeps Russia economic backward .
 It puts a premium on keeping foreign influences, especially from Western democracies, far away . It therefore puts a Premium on keeping Foreign influences, particularly from Western countries .
 If Ukraine succeeds in becoming a free market, rule-of-law, democratic success story, it would stand as a rebuke to Putinism .
 Putin, who seems to hate pro-democracy “color revolutions, probably knows this and will try to prevent it, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin also hates NATO, which he also hates, he says .
 Russia and Ukraine will remain at odds. While Putinism remains Russia’s system, the two countries are at odds . Putinism is Russia's system, but it is not Russia's.
 Moscow continues to see itself as the ultimate authority over what this independence means in practice . Thirty years after the Russian Federation recognized Ukraine’s independence, Moscow continues.
 Ukraine's refusal to accept Russia’s authority led to a war that shows no sign of ending. In 2014, Ukraine’'s refusal of Russia's authority led the war to an end .
 Vladimir Putin has given Ukrainians a rigorous education in nationhood . Nevertheless, Vladimir Putin is given a rigorous educational education in Ukraine .
For Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the war has been a rite of passage into political adulthood . For Ukraine’s president, he says, it's been a rites of passage.
 The earthquakes generated by Washington’s recent reversals over Nord Stream 2 and Afghanistan could have more lasting consequences .
 Nikolay Patrushev warned Ukraine to prepare itself for betrayal and desertion by its closest ally, the U.S.
Patrushev is no dispassionate observer, but even if he were silent, the reverberations of these events would still corrode Ukraine’s confidence .
 The current geopolitical split between Ukraine and Russia is directly due to the position of the Russian leadership . The current political split between the two countries is due to a Russian leadership position .
 The shock and trauma felt by Ukrainians as a result of Russia’s invasion, the annexation of Crimea, and the ongoing war in eastern Ukraine will remain for a long time . Many Ukrainians have negative attitudes towards the Kremlin among a majority of the Ukrainian population .
 Last year’s amendments to the Russian Constitution have left little room for doubt that Putin will remain in power until 2036 . There is no reason to expect any change in the tone of bilateral relations for the foreseeable future .
 Putin made clear once again that he does not believe in the existence of an independent Ukrainian nation . In his recent history essay on the “historical unity’ of Russians and Ukrainians, he made clear .
 Ukraine is a key battlefield in his geopolitical struggle with the West, he says . Instead, he views Ukraine as a key battleground in his struggle with West .
 As long as Putin is in control, Moscow's current aggressive policies towards Ukraine will continue . Russia will split between Ukraine and Ukraine, so will the split between Russia and Ukraine .
 Most Ukrainians have turned decisively away from the idea of close ties with Russia . I am convinced that following the 2014 Revolution of Dignity, most Ukrainians are now turning away from Russia .
 A majority of Ukrainians regard Russia as responsible for the war and understand that the Russian authorities do not have any good intentions towards Ukraine or its people .
 It is safe to say that the core values embraced by most Ukrainians are now very close to what we understand as ‘Western values’ While at the same time being incompatible with the principles that shape modern Russian society, they are also incompatible .
 There are still regions of Ukraine where this rejection of Russia and Russian values is not yet so dominant . However, there are still areas of Ukraine.
 Russia's future strategy towards Ukraine will likely take this into account . Russia’s future strategy will likely be taken into account.
 Moscow will look to target individual regions of Ukraine and specific demographics in a bid to amplify internal tensions and break up Ukraine from within .
 This approach represents a key threat to Ukraine’s national security and must be addressed by the government . This approach has been described as a 'key threat' to Ukraine's national security .
 The current Russian regime has no desire to restore partnership with Ukraine . The current Russia regime is not interested in restoring partnership with the Ukraine .
 The Kremlin's goal is to force Ukraine into the Russian sphere of influence while depriving the country of its sovereignty . Instead, the Kremlin’s goal remains to force the country into its sphere of control .
 Ukrainians have resisted Russian aggression for more than seven years . It looks likely that the conflict will continue until Russia renounces its imperial claims .
 The emergence of a democratic Russia currently looks extremely unlikely . It is unlikely to emerge as a democratic Russian country .
 Most observers expect Putin's eventual successor to share his authoritarian instincts . On the contrary, most expect Putin’s successor to shared his authoritarian tendencies .
 The idea of a new Russian collapse may be marginally more plausible in light of growing dissatisfaction with Moscow’s policies of economic stagnation and political repression .
 Ukrainians should not pin their hopes on a dramatic change in the Russian political climate or the convenient collapse of Putin’s regime .
 For Ukraine, the most pragmatic way to address the Russian threat is to focus on winning the hybrid war . Ukraine's most pragmatic approach is to win a hybrid war, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine needs to strengthen its traditional defense capabilities, but it also means enhanced diplomatic, cultural, and ideological efforts to safeguard the country’s independence .
 Most of Ukraine’s people and elite have rejected Russia politically and economically . Most of the country's people and elites have rejected the Russian government .
 Many European leaders would happily cut a deal with Russia at Ukraine’s expense . Many European countries would happily agree to a deal.
 Russia is determined to recapture Ukraine, and is patient, cynical, and willing to devote substantial resources to do so . Second, Russia is willing to spend substantial resources on recapture of Ukraine .
 Corruption in Ukraine provides both an avenue for Russian influence and a justification for Western detachment . Third, corruption in Ukraine is both a reason for Western detachments .
 Russia's aggression has made co-opting Ukraine’s elite harder, many channels of influence remain . Russia’'s aggression is making it harder to co-operate with Ukraine's elite .
 The West is tired of supporting Ukraine and eager to strike a deal with Moscow . It is not difficult to imagine that the West will pressure Ukraine to accept a deal that allows the West to move on to other concerns .
 Ukraine's unwillingness to tackle corruption has led to the outcome to have been inevitable, says David Cameron . If that happens, we will blame Ukraine’s unwillingness to tackling corruption, much as we have done regarding Afghanistan .
 The schism of 2014 has had a profound impact on Russian-Ukrainian relations . The schisms of 2014 have had an impact on Russia's relations with Russia .
 Ongoing Russian aggression and occupation of Crimea make a return to earlier levels of interaction impossible . Ongoing Russia aggression and the occupation of the Crimea make it impossible.
 The pro-Russian segment of Ukraine’s political spectrum has become more restrained . Public attitudes remain steadily critical of Moscow .
 There is no going back to the status quo that existed prior to the outbreak of hostilities in 2014 . So there is no Going back to that status quo.
 Moscow has lost some of the ground lost over the past seven years . At the same time, it remains entirely possible for Moscow to recapture some ground lost .
 Much will depend on progress of the conflict in eastern Ukraine, along with the pace of Ukraine’s domestic reforms and Kyiv's relations with the West .
 As the conflict in eastern Ukraine drags on with no end in sight, it inevitably becomes part of the landscape .
 Ukrainian society may eventually grow more susceptible to the idea that the time has come to seek resolution with Russia . There is little sign of this happening yet.
 The danger remains that Ukraine’s Western partners may lose their appetite for cooperation, especially if Kyiv jeopardizes existing partnerships by its own actions .
 A lack of palpable change and the persistence of corruption both serve to erode the post-2014 consensus . The persistence of Corruption and lack of change are both contributing to the decline of the consensus .
 This could create potentially fertile ground for pro-Kremlin forces to promote the idea of a geopolitical turn away from Euro-Atlantic integration and back towards Russia .
 The current geopolitical divide between Ukraine and Russia is sharp, but political orientations can change . The current political divide between the two countries is sharp .
 Ukrainian support for NATO membership was only around 20 percent prior to the 2014 war .
 Moscow is working to checkmate Ukraine into returning to its sphere of influence . Nord Stream 2 is the latest harsh move by Russia towards achieving this goal .
 Ukraine has shown resilience in resisting Russia’s pressure, but this resistance must be sustained over a long-term period that will likely last for decades to come . Russia has been under pressure for decades.
 Ukraine can best ensure its permanent separation from Russia by accelerating integration into the European Union . Ukraine can also create a higher standard of living for its citizens .
 Ukraine will have cemented its independence irreversibly. When the overall quality of life in Ukraine is clearly better than the standard of living on offer for the average Russian across the border, Ukraine will be better .
 Peter Dickinson is Editor of the Atlantic Council’s UkraineAlert Service . He is editor of the UkraineAlert service .
 Vladimir Putin continues to menace Ukraine with border region troop buildups and the threat of a major escalation in the seven-year war between the two countries .
 The inaugural meeting of Ukraine’s new Crimean Platform initiative will take place in Kyiv later this month . efforts continue to end the seven-year Russian occupation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula .
 Putin has published a new essay on the “historical unity’ of Russians and Ukrainians . It illustrates the imperial thinking behind his ongoing seven-year war against Ukraine .
 Ukrainian tanks in downtown Kyiv during a rehearsal for the country's August 24 Independence Day parade .