I am officially confused by the outcome of Ukrainian election polling about Poroshenko vs. Poroshenko . I am officially confusion by the result of the election polling .
 A friend said to me, “Polling suggests Zelenskiy will win which is bizarre,’s friend said . ‘Polling suggested Zelenskyy would win,” he said .
 A lot of people are waiting for presidential debates to finally see what Z has to offer . Z is a candidate for the presidency .
 People appreciate what P has done in terms of foreign policy & army, but he has failed on internal reforms . Now before 2nd round is working on his mistakes, says P .
 Based on negative media coverage, Tetyana Stadnyuk shared the following figures . Based onnegative media coverage.
 We have seen the same intensely negative media coverage of Trump since mid-2015, continuing through today . We have also seen thesame intensely negative press coverage of the president .
 In light of those numbers, the negativism shown towards Poroshenko makes more sense . Poroshenko has shown more sense in light of the number of people who support him .
 Piontkovsky again warns about Russia’s first use of nuclear warfighting doctrine . He has some choice words for Western commentators showing even the slightest weakness to Russia .
 Russia’s conscription debate may become moot as the demographic collapses and money runs out .
 Russia's aerospace industry has collapsed, mostly as a result of losing access to Ukrainian industry .
 Some interesting samples of Russian propaganda and its support in the West . Some interesting sample samples of Russia's support in West .
 Pres Poroshenko arrives at the stadium to debate Zelenskiy, who refuses to attend . He is expected to meet with theoshenko family .
 The debate becomes a one-sided 90-minute election pitch by Poroshenko . It is possibly one of his best performances to date, and multi-lingual .
 Zelenskiy invited to attend a talk show event and explain his policies . He invites Zelenskyy to attend the event and talk show .
 Many analytical articles on the election, especially by Euromaidan authors, were published . Many of the articles were written by the authors .
 More on the hacked data suggesting possible Russian funding for Zelenskiy .
 Four Kyiv MPs pressure MoD for Zelenskiy’s military records, a summary of which was released by the MoD on Saturday . It appears he ignored four military reserves call up notices sent in 2014 and 2015, yet inexplicably was not prosecuted for evading his
 Butusov lambasts the Military Prosecutor’s office for dereliction of duty in not charging Zelenskiy with avoiding his compulsory military call up . Many others were jailed for the same thing .
 Zelenskiy complains about Poroshenko supporters labeling him a junkie, and attributes this to Poroshenko . Poroshenko pointed out he had no evidence of this and never claimed that Zelenkiy was a junkies .
 Poroshenko's team is convinced that Zelenskiy will win the second election round in a landslide . Poroshenko had not attuned his campaign focus to Russian speaking Ukrainians .
 Poroshenko's analysis includes a long list of things Poroshenko should do before the final vote . She also includes a list of what she should do.
 The polls were dead accurate on the first round of the election . It is unclear whether Zelenskiy's position is as unassailable as claimed .
 Moscow in a couple of months will be able to break the unity of the North Atlantic alliance . Moscow in the next few months could break the alliance .
 Jon Huntsman spoke to Irina Lagunina of RFE/RL’s Russian Service in Prague on April 12 .
 Huntsman raised concerns about the recent arrests of members of religious minorities in Russia . He shared hopes for the democratic outcome of the presidential election in Ukraine .
 Maintaining sanctions against Russia is one of the matters on which both major U.S. political parties agree . Both parties agree on the matter .
 Moscow's Basmanny Court has approved a petition for Michael Calvey to be placed under house arrest . Calvey spent almost two months in a pretrial detention center .
 Calvey was released from the control of his guards on the spot in the courtroom . Interfax reported that Calvey had been released from his control of the court room .
 Igor Korotchenko, editor of Moscow’s National Defense journal, says the draft won’t completely disappear, but it will “simply be minimized” as an element of the army .
 Russia needs the mobilized reserve that draftees can serve in the event of a military conflict . Russia needs “the mobilized reserve’s mobilized reserve. Russia needs a mobilized reserve to serve in military conflict.
 Russia must have a military based on both the draft and the recruitment of professionals, he argues . He argues, Russia must be able to recruit professionals .
 Korotchenko: Over the next several decades, this principle will not be changed fundamentally . Over the future, he says, it will not change fundamentally .
 The number of draftees will be reduced to a certain figure, according to the General Staff of the Russian Federation .
 geography and tradition are not the only reasons the draft will continue . But geography, tradition and tradition will be the reason for the draft to continue .
 A draftee who is paid 2,000 rubles a month is a lot less expensive than a professional soldier, military commentator says . That doesn’t include the additional supports and benefits the latter must receive in order to make such service attractive .
 Putin likely has in mind retaining a “symbolic’ draft of about 50,000 a year, according to Baranets . A sixth of the current call up would be about a sixth of that call up .
 The General Staff could tolerate that if it received enough money to fund the professionals who would be needed as replacements . The General staff could tolerate it if it got enough money for replacements .
 The Russian military has already made progress in that direction, the commentator says . The military has made progress, he says .
 The number of soldiers and officers who were draftees was about the same as the number of contract professional. Before 2016, the number was about same.
 The balance has shifted to 260,000 draftees as against 370,000 professionals . Now the balance has been shifted to260,000.
 Viktor Litovkin, a retired colonel, says the draft in Russia will disappear . But at some point in the future, probably not very soon, he says .
 Russian economy turns around and there is enough money to pay for the expensive professional force . But that will happen only once the Russian economy is back in business .
 The Russian aircraft industry has lost its competitiveness and is spending “insane money’ on the import substitution technology of half a century ago . The industry is not paying due attention to maintaining current production and maintaining existing technology .
 Anatoly Serdyukov, who oversees the integration of UAC in Rostec, made the statement .
 I'm not even talking about quality, because it’s practically impossible to work out qualitatively on small volumes . I’m not even talk about quality. I'm just talking about the quality, as it”s almost impossible to do it qualitatively
 Airbus launched a new project, the A-350, to produce 16 jets a month . Airbus produces 16 jets per month .
 The former Russian defense minister noted that there are practically no bearings in the Russian aviation industry .
 The Khrunichev Center is the most problematic enterprise of the state corporation . It is a consequence of the reforms of the military-industrial complex, initiated by Serdyukov .
 Russian defense minister Anatoly Serdyukov was Russia’s defense minister in 2007-2012 . Roskosmos responded to the statement by the director of the Rostec aviation cluster in July 2018 .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office did not allow the Ministry of Industry and Trade to replace the Ukrainian Be-200 amphibious aircraft with Ukrainian-made engines .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office informed the Ministry the risk of disrupting the defense order due to the imposed sanctions .
 The position of the supervisory authority was taken into account, the prosecutor general says . The decision to replace one foreign engine with another has been canceled, he says .
 The Chaika report notes the measures taken by the department made it possible to reduce the dependence of defense companies on foreign components . The state armament program until 2027 was implemented by the Chaika department .
Engine replacement has always existed only in the inflamed embryo of the Katsapsky brain .
 New engine is a new aircraft, new work, new certification, new spending, new time, new deadlines . New aircraft and new work are among the items on the list .
 Katsapa state services would not fly on choosing An-148, or rather fly and fly . If it weren't for the French SaM-146, then the state services wouldn't fly .
CaM is not suitable, since 436TP is special technologies with protection against sea water . CaM is also not suitable for sea water, as it is not a suitable technology .
 The Russian Federation is not rational to make a new plane, says the Russian Federation . For the sake of Russian Federation, it is notrational to make new plane .
 The Be-200 is generally a failed project, created by another scoop . We are already silent about the fact that the Be- 200 is generally an failed project .
 Katsapov has a rejection of Ukrainian engines, turbines, rockets, x-35. s300 / 400, aircraft, rvsn, sea launch. Like everything else, Katsapova has been rejected by Ukrainian authorities .
 The Ukrainian Olympic Games are taking place in Ukraine . Organisers of the scheme need to give medals to the organizer of the event .
 The Russian Federation was not able to organize the delivery of critical components from Ukraine with gray schemes . But the Russian Federation did not organize the deliveries of critical parts .
 The network has a video on which Russian soldiers are trying to place a tank on the pontoon, and it drops . The video shows a tank being placed on a pontoon by Russian soldiers .
 Mikhail Gorbachev told Ukrainians that “the pursuit of independence is a form of suicidal nationalism,’s Ukrainian commentator Pavel Podobed says . The U.S. leader told Ukrainians in August that the pursuit of independent was suicidal nationalism . It was a reflection of the West
 In the weeks that followed Bush’s remarks, the national movements in the USSR proved to be far stronger than the democratic opposition .
 The Soviet Union crumbled and despite the hopes of the West, neither Russia nor most of the successor states became democratic in more than name only .
 Podobed continues. Unfortunately, this tradition continues and not just in the West, it continues .
 First, Ukraine like the West in 1991 and now overrates the possibilities of the democratic opposition in Russia . First, the West and Russia in 1991 overrated the possibility of democracy in Russia.
Despite Putin’s campaign against the non-Russians, the latter have greater potential than most think . It is not nearly as strong as many want to believe, and despite Putin's campaign against them, it has greater potential .
 Ukraine or the West focus on the North Caucasus, which puts them off . The North Caucasus is Russia's most populous region .
 On the one hand, the region is violent; and on the other, it is Islamic . On the other hand, it's violent; on the one side, it was Islamic .
 Neither Kyiv nor Western capitals shy away from giving it support . Kyiv and Western capitals give it support for both of these reasons .
 Moscow has successfully presented itself as a defender of national rights by appearing to support the micro-nations under its control . Moscow does everything in its power to assimilate and weaken larger nations like the Tatars that might threaten its control.
 Ukraine needs to focus on the Middle Volga and especially on Tatarstan . Despite the weakening of its national movement still represents a serious “headache’ for Moscow’s Moscow given its central location .
 Most people assume Idel-Ural cannot go anywhere because it does not border on a foreign state, Podobed suggests . The fact that none of its component parts does is the product of Moscow’s imperial strategy rather than some natural phenomenon .
 The Orenburg corridor which divided the two republics from each other, the commentator continues .
 northern Kazakhstan is becoming ever more Kazakh and Orenburg is becoming more Russian . The region has become ever less Russian .
 The trust rating for Vladimir Putin has reached its lowest level in the last 13 years . The poll was published in late January .
 Currently, only 33% of respondents express trust in the Russian president .
 The number of Russians supporting Putin’s foreign policy also fell in 2018 . A number of Russian opposition politicians warned that the polls do not show sharp changes in the Russians’ opinion of the president .
 Many commentators point out that the majority of Russians are tired of aggressive militaristic propaganda .
 At least several groups of people who support Russia’s aggressive foreign policy can still be identified .
Several categories can be divided into several categories, each of which expresses direct or veiled support for the current foreign policy course . They can be split into categories of support for foreign policy.
 I will try to analyze these categories, identifying possible pros and cons in working with these groups of people . I will also try to identify possible pros, cons and cons .
 Lenin's Tomb, situated in Red Square in the centre of Moscow, is a mausoleum that currently serves as the resting place of Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin .
 His preserved body has been on public display there since shortly after his death in 1924 . Rare exceptions in wartime have been made in the past .
Alexey Shchusev’s diminutive but monumental granite structure incorporates some elements from ancient mausoleums . The Step Pyramid, the Tomb of Cyrus the Great and Temple of the Inscriptions are among the elements in the structure .
 UK Forensic Explosives Laboratory confirms those of the Polish Sub-Commission on the Investigation of the Smolensk Plane Crash . President of Poland Lech Kaczynski and about a hundred high-ranking Polish officials died in the crash .
 The cause of the crash was a series of explosions as traces of TNT were discovered . Head of the Sub-Commission, Antoni Macierewicz, cites the study’s findings .
 The cause of ex-Polish President Lech Kaczyński’s plane crash near Smolensk was an explosion, said the chairman of the subcommittee on the re-investigation of the Smolenk disaster .
 The Tu-154M crash in April 2010 was not caused by pilot error or the actions of other people on board . He confirmed once again that the crash of the Tu- 154M was not cause by a pilot error .
 traces of TNT were found in the rubble . It was established that TNT was used in the explosion .
 He was quoted as saying on Polish Radio. We have not defined the nature of the explosion .
 The announcement was made on the basis of previous research and the conclusions of the sub-commission .
 Polish President Lech Kaczyński, the crew, and members of the official delegation traveling to an event commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre . The event is being held in Poland .
 In January 2011, the Interstate Aviation Committee published a report on the crash investigation . The pilots were responsible for the crash, according to the report . They rejected the advice to go to an alternate airport .
 The inadequate qualification of the crew is stated to be the indirect cause of the crash . The crew is said to have failed to qualify for the crew .
 A commission led by former Polish defense minister Antoni Macierewicz refuted the theory that the pilots were to blame .
 While the plane was still in the air, an explosion in the aircraft’s fuselage occurred .
 The operators in Smolensk gave the Polish Tu-154 crew incorrect information for landing . The commission also determined that the operators gave the crew incorrect info for landing.
 Polish Air Force General Andrzej Błasik was in the cockpit during the landing approach . The commission also ruled out the possibility that Polish air force general was in cockpit during approach .
 Macierewicz said that the technical report does not yet reflect the official stance of the Polish government . The Prosecutor General's Office is conducting its own investigation into the aviation catastrophe .
 Russia has been unwilling to send the aircraft fragments and other physical evidence to Poland . The Russian investigation is not yet complete, according to the Russian government .
 Colonel Nikolay Poroskov explains it all in the February issue of the Russian Armed Forces monthly journal for research .
 Anyone mastering the means of metacontact can perform a non-verbal interrogation .
 Colonel Poroskov describes how the method was fine-tuned on dolphins, which eventually yielded to the willpower of the Russian soldiers .
 The technology proved applicable also on humans, and even on machines . But it also proved applicable to humans and on machines.
 With willpower it is possible to hack computer programmes, for instance, burn crystals in generators, eavesdrop or jam radio signals .
 Experiments demonstrated successfully the possibility to read documents in locked safes . Even in foreign languages we don’t know, the study found .
 It was possible to identify members of terror groups and discover whoever was considering joining a terrorist organisation . It was also possible to find out who is considering joining an organisation .
 The West’s way of doing things is “losing its attractiveness and is no more viewed as a perfect model for all,’ Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov says .
 No War, No NATO will centre on the key relationship between US-NATO military operations directed against targeted countries and the imposition of far-reaching neoliberal economic reforms .
 This article will address the dangers and consequences of a Third World War as well as the nature of advanced weapons systems deployed by the broader US-NATO coalition .
 Europeans should not rely on Americans to spend, fight, and die for them, they say . Europeans should be able to spend and fight for their own lives, not their own .
 For years presidents, secretaries of defense and secretaries of state have demanded, begged, demanded, whined, and urged NATO's European members to do more . NATO’s European members have urged NATO”s European countries to doMore.
 As a percentage of GDP, the continent’s military expenditures remain below those of seven years ago .
 That number fell to 1. percent in 2014; it was only slightly higher 1.47 percent last year . That number was 1.1 percent in 2013, but it was just slightly higher in 2014 .
 Russia’s aggressive behavior toward Ukraine sparked a slight bump in allied expenditures. Primary responsibility for that increase is Russia's aggressive behavior .
 The increase started well before President Trump took office . Also, that increase began well before he took office.
 The only policy change which would make a difference is for the U.S. to end Europe's military dependency and turn responsibility for Europe’s defense over to Europe . The only change would be for the United States.
 Russia has ten times the economic strength and four times the population of Russia . The continent is well able to defend itself, with 10 times the size of the country .
 European governments then could spend as much or as little as desired on the military, free of hectoring by Washington .
 America and Europe still could cooperate militarily on shared interests, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Should an unexpected hegemonic threat arise, the U.S. could reengage. The United States could be reengaging with the world .
After 70 years of NATO, the U.S. should declare their work in Europe done. But after seventy years, the American people should declare that it is done .
 It is time for the Europeans to take over responsibility for their security. It's time for Europe to take control of their security, according to experts .
 Petro Poroshenko discussed the issue of Ukrainian political prisoners held in Russia and in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions . He also announced a new initiative to free Ukrainian journalist Roman Sushchenko convicted in Russia .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko raised the issue of release of Ukrainian sailors – prisoners of war, political prisoners and violation of rights of Crimean Tatars . The issue was discussed with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and President of France Emmanuel Macron .
 They must be returned home immediately and unconditionally along with the military property . The military property must also be returned to their home immediately .
 The freedom of navigation in the Kerch Strait must be restored, Poroshenko said in an interview .
 The Head of State also raised the issue of the release of political prisoners . Political prisoners are currently held in prisons in Russia and in occupied territories .
 The issue of Paris-based Ukrinform correspondent Roman Sushchenko was also discussed during the meetings with European leaders .
 Petro Poroshenko said in the near future we would come up with the initiative again for Putin to keep his word, release Ukrainian Sushchenko .
 Petro Poroshenko: "We resolutely start to prepare for the summit in the Normandy format" "These issues will definitively be on the agenda,’ he said .
Ukrinform journalist Roman Sushchenko was sentenced to 12 years in a maximum security penal colony for alleged spying . More than 70 political prisoners are being held in Russia and in the occupied Crimea .
 Ukraine continues its struggle to halt the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline . President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, at a briefing with Angela Merkel .
 The President of Ukraine noted that the Nord Stream 2 is not a new topic in discussions between the European Union, Germany and Ukraine . The President said that the issue is not new topic.
 Moody's rating agency confirmed the Chief Executive Officer of Ukrainian state energy company Naftogaz, Andriy Kobolyev’s statement about the delay in the Nord Stream gas pipeline construction due to Denmark’'s position .
 The Danish Energy Agency has asked Nord Stream 2 AG to prepare an environmental assessment of an alternative gas pipeline in the Danish exclusive economic zone . The Energy Agency also asked the company to prepare a possible alternative pipeline .
 Denmark refused to agree on the Nord Stream 2 route, which was supposed to pass through its territory . The route is supposed to go through Denmark's territory .
 The construction of this gas pipeline has been at the center of international attention since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 . The pipeline is being built in the Crimea region .
 Nord Stream 2 will pass through the Baltic Sea, connecting Russian suppliers with consumers in Europe . Germany is trying to convince other countries to support the move .
 He made a statement during a working visit to the French Republic, the press service of the Head of State reports .
 Petro Poroshenko: When Ukraine itself does not demonstrate the resolve of its move forward, it does not show resolve . The Ukrainian president says the EU and Ukraine will not change their relations after the elections .
 The number of foreign observers in the elections exceeded 2,300 people, including from France and from Germany .
 Petro Poroshenko noted that during the campaign there were tough discussions and expressed hope that we would manage to avoid provocations . At the same time, he noted that there were also tough discussions .
 No one will turn us back and return to the previous conditions when we were a colony of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is a Russian Federation colony .
 A free Ukraine will certainly not allow doing that, Petro Poroshenko summed up . AFree Ukraine will not allow that, he said .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko told the press during his working visit to France . Possible attempts to stop Ukraine’s entry into NATO and the EU would violate the Ukrainian constitution, Poroshenko said .
 24 Ukrainian sailors captured by Russia in Black Sea neutral waters near Kerch Strait in November 2018 . President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko and Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel coordinated actions on possibility of prompt return of 24 sailors .
 The German Chancellor stressed the need to ensure free navigation through the Kerch Strait .
 The European Union has removed nine persons close to fugitive ex-President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych from its anti-Russian sanctions list . The EU has also removed nine people close to the former President of Ukraine.
 Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the European Union Mykola Tochytskyi has denied information about the lifting of sanctions against persons close to fugitive ex-President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych .
 Tochytskyi says the EU has significantly expanded the sanctions list for five years . On the contrary, the EU's sanctions list has been expanded for 5 years .
 Ukrainian ships will continue navigation through the Kerch Strait during the 12th Kyiv Security Forum . Ukrainian Defence Minister Stepan Poltorak said ships will be able to sail through the Strait .
 The Defense Minister stated that abandoning the Kerch strait would mean that Ukraine surrenders the Sea of Azov and its territory .
 Ukrainian vessels will pass through the Kerch Strait when the Navy and the international partners of Ukraine are ready for this . Ukraine's Navy and international partners are ready to do this .
 UNIAN news agency: "I hope that the safe passage will be ensured exactly this way" Poltorak says he hopes that "the safe passage" will be assured .
 The Russian Federation Council urged Ukraine to follow the Russian procedures for passage of ships through the Kerch Strait .
 Sea Shield 2019, an annual Romanian-led naval exercise, continued in the Black Sea on April 12 .
 The exercise, which began on April 5, involved more than 20 ships and crews from Romania, Bulgaria, Canada, Greece, the Netherlands, and Turkey .
 Five ships from a standing NATO maritime group participated in the exercise . The exercise was part of a NATO maritime exercise .
 The exercises took place amid increased tensions in the Black Sea region after Russia’s capture of three Ukrainian naval vessels in November .
 The peninsula had disappeared from the first pages of international media outlets long ago .
 The only ones who stir up the information wave come from inside the occupied peninsula . They put themselves on the line to prevent their homeland from becoming an isolated island of lawlessness .
 Crimea became more isolated after Crimea was annexed by Russia . The peninsula became more and more isolated and information became nearly inaccessible .
 The Crimean Tatar TV channel ATR worked under the blows of security officials for several days . The channel was forced to move to Kyiv at the end of spring 2014 .
 The stifling of media pluralism, the closure of Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar media, and criminal cases launched against Ukrainian journalists make information from Crimea completely inaccessible .
Rare exceptions to the narrative “happy return of Crimea to the homeland’s homeland. But with rare exceptions, there are rare exceptions .
Every Thursday, law enforcement raids the homes of Crimean Tatars . The indigenous population of Crimea overwhelmingly opposed Russian occupation .
 Over fifty people have been arrested because of disagreeing with the regime . Over 50 people were arrested over the weekend .
 Some voices have been broadcast through social networks . It's possible to seek out a more complex picture of the situation .
 We collected the voices of our colleagues – civil journalists – in Crimea . We collected their voices.
 Hundreds of armed police operatives parked their cars near some 50 houses in a Crimean Tatar village .
 Masked men with dogs barged inside kitchens and bedrooms, searching for banned literature in houses of the ethnic Muslims .
 Crimean Tatars arrested and beaten during an FSB operation in Rostov-on-Don . During the first day, 20 people were arrested, and the next day, three more were beaten . The operation took place in the Russian city of Rostov on-Don
 Over the past day, April 13, Russian proxy forces in eastern Ukraine 14 times violated the ceasefire .
 Russia-led forces on April 13 mounted six attacks on the Ukrainian army’s positions in Donbas . The attacks included once with the use of weapons proscribed by the Minsk agreements .
 No Ukrainian army casualties have been reported from the start of the day .
 Occupation forces fired on the Armed Forces’ positions in Donbas 14 times over the past 24 hours . One soldier had been killed, two more wounded, the Joint Forces Operation reported .
 Russia’s hybrid military forces in the past 24 hours mounted 14 attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action, and another two wounded in action .
 Two invaders were killed and another three were wounded on Friday, intelligence reports say .
 On April 12, Russian occupation forces launched 14 attacks, using weapons banned under the Minsk agreements seven times, on Ukrainian troops in Donbas .
Ukrinform. One Ukrainian soldier was killed and two more were wounded . One of the wounded was a soldier from Ukraine .
 Petro Poroshenko signs decree dismissing first deputy head of SZRU, the Ukrainian Foreign Intelligence Service, Serhiy Semochko . Poroshenko is now running for re-election in Ukraine .
 The official has long been in public focus over journalists’ allegations of illegal enrichment and possible connections with Russia .
 Poroshenko made the announcement as he spoke in front of journalists and supporters at the Olimpiyskiy Stadium . Poroshenko was speaking to journalists and fans .
 The aggressor country has increased its military potential in the occupied Crimea . It has launched its troops into Belarus . The country has also launched its forces into Belarus.
 Moscow has the potential to attack Ukraine from the south-east and from the north . Thus, Moscow could attack Ukraine.
 Lieutenant-General of the stock Igor Romanenko says Tsensor . Former deputy head of the General Staff of the Armed Forces .
 According to him, Russia substantially increased its military potential in Crimea, bringing it to a strategic level . Russia has increased its potential in the Crimea, he says .
 Ukraine is actually surrounded by Russia on three sides, says Romanenko . Ukraine is surrounded by the two countries, he says .
 Russian troops were brought to Belarus last year on the pretext of establishing a common air defense system in Russia and Belarus . Former chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces says Russian troops brought to the country last year .
 This corridor will be necessary for Russia to allow Russian troops to enter Ukraine from Ukraine . For Russia this is a strategic direction, because it is the shortest distance to the capital of Ukraine – Kiev .
 Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu in 2014 promised that Russia would return Ukraine all military equipment from the occupied Crimea . Neither the ships nor the airplanes returned.
 The expert says that we were returned was suitable except for dismantling for spare parts .
 Some 35 Hummer combat vehicles have arrived in Odesa from the United States . They will be sent to combat units on the collision line, Ukraine's defense minister says .
 This year inspires optimism regarding the fulfillment of the state defense order, a military official says .
 Vizar in Ukraine were manufacturing subassemblies for the 48N6 SAM until June 2014 . Vizar was also overhauling and repairing up to dozens of R-27 AA-10 ALAMO AAMs for Russian defense contractors .
 A man has been arrested on suspicion of attempting to murder police officers . A car was allegedly driven straight at them outside the Ukrainian embassy in Ukraine .
 Armed officers were responding to reports the Mercedes had repeatedly rammed into the Ukraine ambassador’s official vehicle in Holland Park .
 London police fired gunshots at a man who rammed into a diplomatic car parked outside Ukraine’s Embassy . The man then tried to drive into officers and tried to get into them, police say .
 President of Canada-Ukraine International Assistance Fund Antonina Kumka says the Ukrainian Cultural Center, located in Hamilton, near Toronto, has been destroyed as a result of the fire .
 The Ukrainian presidential administration is accrediting the press to cover Petro Poroshenko’s attendance of the debate at the Olympiysky Stadium in Kyiv on April 14 .
 Presidential Administration of Ukraine has announced Petro Poroshenko's attendance of the debate at Kyiv’s Olimpiyskiy Stadium on April 14 . The second round of the elections will be held in the Ukraine on April 16 .
 Petro Poroshenko will arrive at NSC Olympiysky on April 14 . He is the fifth Ukrainian President and presidential candidate for the second term .
 The President's visit is connected with the pre-election debates with presidential candidate Volodymyr Zelensky . The visit of the President is connected to the presidential debates .
 Most likely, the debates will be the monologue of the President, as the candidates have not reached an agreement concerning the date of the debates .
 The headquarters of candidates for presidency Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko did not come up with a compromise on the holding of the debates at the Olympic Stadium . The candidates' headquarters did not agree on a compromise .
On April 3, Zelensky replied to Poroshenko’s invitation to participate in debates and put forward his conditions . Zelenski replied to the invitation on April 3 .
 A few hours later Poroshenko changed his mind and agreed to participate in the debates . The Ukrainian president later agreed to take part in the debate .
 On April 7, Poroshenko stated that he waits for Volodymyr Zelensky on April 14 at Olympic Stadium . Poroshenko said that he waited for Zelenski on April 7 .
 Zelensky says he wants to hold debates with Poroshenko on April 19 at Olympic Stadium . In his turn, Zelenski said he wants the debates to take place at the Olympics .
 Olympic Stadium reported that it got two applications for holding debates from two presidential candidates . Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko are the two candidates .
 Petro Poroshenko has arrived at Olimpiyskiy Stadium in Kyiv for a presidential debate . His challenger, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he will only agree to spar with Poroshenko at the stadium five days later .
 Poroshenko is to face Zelenskiy in Ukraine’s presidential runoff on April 21 .
 Zelenskiy won the first round earlier this month by a large margin . He is well out in front of the incumbent ahead of the final vote .
 Petro Poroshenko agreed to wait for his competitor Volodymyr Zelensky, who did not appear before them, until 15:00. President Poroshenko came to the presidential debates at the NSC “Olympic’s ‘Olympics’
 Mr Zelensky, Volodymyr Alexandrovich, until 15 o’clock, until the end of the day . We wait for him to arrive .
Poroshenko says he hopes Parisians have already returned from Paris . He says they have rested and are ready to embark on a key element of democracy .
 Poroshenko held a press conference responding to journalists’ questions . Instead, Poroshenko answered questions from journalists .
 Poroshenko: "I'm sorry that people in this area also did not answer these questions" "I’m sorry that ... people in the area also didn't answer these Questions," Poroshenko said .
 Poroshenko expressed hope that the debate that Zelensky’s headquarters intends to organize on the NSC “Olimpiyskiy’y” will be canceled . Instead he will come to the TV debates on the Public TV channel .
 Poroshenko invited his supporters to be photographed at the stadium . After communicating with journalists, Poroshenko went to his supporters and invited them to be photos .
 Petro Poroshenko said that if, “God forbid, Volodymyr Zelensky will be elected president of Ukraine, he will respect the people’s choice .
 Poroshenko arrives at the debate on the Olympiyskiy Stadium . The Ukrainian president is expected to attend the debate .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko made a statement in front of the National Sports Complex “Olimpiysky’s’ in Kyiv . He arrived to participate in the pre-election debate .
 We are doing everything possible for the country to find out the truth, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ukraine should elect a real president, a real Supreme Commander-in-Chief, says Head of State . Ukraine should continue to lead our country on the path towards the EU and NATO, says the Head of state .
 showman Volodymyr Zelensky did not come to the NSC ‘Olimpiysky’ to participate in the debate . At the same time, another candidate for the post of the President of Ukraine didn't come to participate .
 The President proposed to wait for presidential candidate Zelensky until 15:00. The President would wait for the presidential candidate until 15.00 . The President is expected to announce his decision on Friday .
 Let’s wait for Mr Zelensky for 40 minutes, even 45 minutes, until 15:00 .
 Poroshenko: "I hope you’ve already returned from Paris and had a rest" Poroshenko said .
 Petro Poroshenko announced his intention to come to the NSC “Olimpiysky’ to participate in the debate at 14:14 on April 14 .
 Volodymyr Zelensky refused to come to the stadium on April 14 and said that he would come there to participate in the debate at 19:00 on April 19 . At the same time, Zelenski refused to attend the debate .
 The incumbent head of state and presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko said he would respect any choice of the Ukrainian people . The second round of elections will be held on April 21 .
 "Because we are a democratic state, there is already no doubt about this," he said . "There is alreadyno doubt about that," he added .
 Poroshenko added that he was concerned about the likely presidency of Zelensky . At the same time Poroshenko said he was also concerned about Zelenski .
For example, I’m concerned that we should now stop European, Euro-Atlantic integration in order to go for a referendum again . For example, we should stop European and Euro- Atlantic integration, he says .
 The people now have more than half of NATO’s support and almost 2/3 of EU support . The people are more than 50% of NATO's support .
 "I think this is a deliberate delay of our way to return our people to the family of European nations," he said . "This is a deliberately delay," he added .
 Petro Poroshenko promised to learn the Hungarian language if necessary . Earlier presidential candidate promised to learning the language .
 Poroshenko made a statement in response to a question from a Hungarian journalist about the next steps of Ukraine on the path to European integration .
 The President noted that he was confident in Hungary's support and support of Ukraine’s aspirations to join the EU .
2023nd is 2023nd when we must sign a membership action plan . We must fulfill the criteria to apply for EU membership . And I named a specific year – 2023rd – when we need to sign a member action plan.
 Hungary together with other EU member states will support Ukraine, it was promised many times a few years ago .
 We are open to compromises on the rights of the Hungarian minority, their right to education . We are also open to compromise on the right toEducation, says the government .
 As a guarantor of the Constitution and rights of Ukrainian citizens, I support the rights of Hungarian citizens to study in Ukrainian schools, Ukrainian universities, work in Ukrainian companies .
 President: "You know that this is impossible if you do not know the Ukrainian language in Ukraine”
 President of Ukraine and presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko promised to learn the Hungarian language if necessary . President Poroshenko said he would learn the language if needed .
 Ukraine is ready to invest for children of national minorities learning two languages, Ukrainian and native – in particular, Hungarian . He clarified that Ukraine is prepared to invest in children of minorities.
 Poroshenko expressed confidence that citizens of the European Union should know several languages .
 I understand Romanian, I lived in the place where the Romanian minority lives, for more than two years . I understand Romania, I understand it, I live in the area where the minority lives .
 When I was at university, I learned Polish, I speak English, Russian and other languages fluently . I speak Polish, Russian, English, and other language fluently.
 This is the future of a European nation, when EU citizens should know a lot of languages. This is a European country, when European citizens should be able to know a lots of languages, says the author .
 The president promised to learn the Hungarian language at a low level . He said he would have learned the language at low level.
 The election campaign headquarters of Ukraine's incumbent President Petro Poroshenko no longer believes its candidate can win, an inside source says .
 The situation ahead of the second round of voting is described as candidate Volodymyr Zelensky’s blatant mockery of topics that should be treated seriously, constructively and in depth . Poroshenko has launched himself into an aggressive attack on the candidate .
 Objectively, such a significant gap cannot be eliminated in three weeks, says author . The gap can't be eliminated by three weeks .
 At most, it can be reduced, but even then, only insignificantly,’s article states .
 The article’s sources claim that they did not expect such results in the first round, after the initial shock, they accepted the failure with relative equanimity . The article's sources claim.
 If we were to beat Zelensky, it would have to be done with a significant lead to beat him . To win, we would need to be at least 45, for example, to win the game .
 "Many would struggle to believe, and thus to accept that,’ one of the insiders explained . But definitely not 51 to 49 – many would struggle, one of them said .
 Volunteer activity is already being wrapped up, and team members are preparing to leave their offices and even planning a holiday .
 Several people in Poroshenko's entourage believe he should focus on diplomacy, even if he does not obtain any official position in the new government .
 Even for the country, there will definitely be a benefit, a source commented .
Volodymyr Zelensky is likely to beat incumbent Poroshenko by a significant margin in the second round of presidential elections . The actor is expected to win the presidential election by a large margin .
 By the start of the race – came in complete confidence in being able to win. By the time of the start, the race was in full confidence .
 Comedian Vladimir Zelensky will not be called otherwise. Almost a two-fold lag from a comedian actor, Vladimir Zelenky.
 He is determined to draw the substantive conclusions, from which he will draw the conclusions .
 Two of the past two, instead of competition, pursued the goals, programs, and development strategies of the country into a base-guilty party . The past two have focused on goals and programs, rather than competition .
 One candidate, having already heard the smell of triumph, frankly favors over all who call him seriously, in depth, and constructive . He will be supported and so – he knows that. He knows that he will besupported and so - he knows.
 The second, aware of the prospect of losing, rushed into an aggressive attack – appealing to common sense, intimidating Putin without deflection of black technology . The first, the second, knew of the possibility of losing and rushed into a aggressive attack .
 Victor Fedorovich won the parliamentary triumph of white-blue in 2012 . Zelensky is a former member of the Russian parliament .
 He allowed himself to focus on “time for pleasure,’ and to transfer things to his son . He allowed his son to move things to him .
 In 2019, between the two rounds, and in the case of Poroshenko, and Zelensky form won a victory over meaning . The two rounds were held at the same time .
 What should not be so much the “sharply green’s elector, but – – – in many respects – the current power, says the author . The current power is not so much so much, but in many respect, it is a power.
 Crowds of “young democrats’, “progressive public’s” and so on, including the frustration and fatigue of people from ‘progressive expats,’
 The gap between the favorites – in absolute numbers – is 2. million votes . The gap is between 2 million and 2 million votes.
 Objectively, eliminating such a significant gap in three weeks is impossible . The gap is impossible.
 Sociology is not definitely the truth in the last instance, but the latest figures do not leave hope for Petr Alekseyevich .
 The fall of the meteorite to the ground, and the victory of Petro Poroshenko, is the first time the president has been elected .
 The fifth President of the country has been in for five years and what mistakes were made already at the final stage – during the electoral race .
 When the shock went, it turned out that the core of the team Poroshenko took the failure quite calmly . It turned out the team took the loss quite calmly.
 If we assume that we are defeating Zelensky, this must be done with a serious overvaluation . Moreover, if we assume we are defeated Zelenski, we must be doing this with serious overValuation .
 It will be hard to believe and, therefore, to accept, “adds’s. But certainly not 51 against 49 – in such a lot it will be difficult to believe, says John Sutter .
 There was no special mobilization on the Bank on April 1 . Perhaps this is precisely why there was not a special mobilization .
 Thief, where ideas were collectively formulated and discussed, “tasks’ “cut’s’ were not created, says the author .
 The failure of the first round in the list of ‘exceptional cases’ is obviously not included . It is not the first time the list has failed to make the list .
 The President's inclination to make decisions on his own is not just the inclination of the President to make all decisions on himself .
 Gryniv gave his suggestions ‘how to live next’ on March 31 . Only five points were given – only five points .
 In a word, everyone would be as if in fact, but in and of itself, in his sandbox “describes the insider LB.ua.ua’s ‘insider’ If, in the word,everyone would be in fact.
 Not using them to strengthen their own positions is even more dumb. And not using them – at least just just to strengthen themselves – is more dumb .
President Obama has to show he has an instrument, he says, in concrete cases, like the President .
 Many Ukrainian “zabotchane’s’ return home. These days in Europe are traditional holidays .
 Guarantine supporters are for some reason certain that people who have left the country because they can't make decent money will still vote for the current government .
 More than three percent to Petr Alexeiyevich this will not add. However, even if so, more than three per cent to him will add .
 TV is only a channel of delivery of meanings, and if there is nothing to deliver, then even even the media empire will not help .
 The image of Vasily Goloborodko is simple and understandable to a simple person . To say, there is nothing to counter here .
 Odessa gave a modest nine percent . Kharkiv and a gifted guarantor of the Dnieper – eight percent .
 The ratings of mayors do not always affect the rating of the President,’ – specifies . But we see that the ratings of Mayor's ratings are not always affected .
Kherson or Nikolayev. Well, let's say, for Lviv, it's totally unacceptable for Kherson and Nikolayeva .
 The metamorphoses that have occurred with the conventionally white-and-white electorate over the past five years . Also – the metamorphosis that have happened with the Conventionally white and white electorate .
 The fact that Zelensky really defeats is not very believable in the president’s team, says CNN.com .
 Someone, as was said, packs books, others – plan long-awaited vacations .
 The degree of attention is shifted to the area of ​​party-building. The first one we discussed quite thoroughly above, that to the second, that's not the first .
 The President is an honorary leader of the BPP Solidarity .
 He has applied for the addition of appropriate powers more than two years ago . He has written an application for the additions to appropriate powers .
 Only the Solidarity Congress has not been held since then, so the statement hasn't been considered . The statement has been considered since then .
 Klitschko intends to re-elect in Kyiv in 2020 . He will simply head the “Dyorovsky’s’ list, bringing to parliament the maximum of supporters .
 Vladimir Groisman is one more associate of the guarantor, whose cooperation with which in October 2019 in the AP was counted another six months ago . Groisman's cooperation in October 2018 was counted again six months earlier .
 "sharing" in the public plane, which they considered their own, is one of their achievements . " sharing" is a way of sharing your own, they say .
 Vladimir Borisovich expects to head the Cabinet until December . He is expected to be in charge of the cabinet until December.
 Even from a public point of view, the situation is good – the continuity of power, everything, everything. Even from the public view, it is good .
 Even the “rebranding’ of the party, eliminating the ‘binding” of his surname will not help, he says . The “binding’s’ name will not be changed.
 In the future he should concentrate on diplomatic work, according to some of his colleagues .
 He’s effective in this, and there will certainly be benefits for the country, they explain .
 Over 30% voted for comic-turned-presidential candidate Volodymyr Zelenskyi . Under 16% supported incumbent President Petro Poroshenko, who was elected after Euromaidan revolution .
 Volodymyr Zelenskyi is struggling to put together a team and program, and avoids live interviews and debates on political issues . He gathered his impressive popularity rating thanks to ample airtime of his comic group Kvartal 95 and the TV series “Servant of
 Ukrainian society was thought of having matured after Euromaidan . This is at least surprising given the fact that Ukrainian society had matured after the event . The country was thought to have grown up in the aftermath of Eurom Maidan .
 Iryna Bekeshkina is a Ukrainian sociologist who directs the Ilko Kucheriv “Democratic Initiatives’ fund . She is on the sidelines of the Kyiv Security Forum to understand the Zelenskyi phenomenon amid changes among regular Ukrainians .
 Zelenskyi is also a result of Euromaidan. I would say that what happened now with Zelenskia is also the result of Zelenskii .
After Euromaidan there was a lot of optimism and hopes that didn’t materialize .
 Maybe they were inflated, maybe because the authorities didn’t do all they should. Maybe they weren't doing all they could .
 Ukrainian civic society activated because of the war, because they needed to save Ukraine . Ukraine's civil society was activated because it was needed to protect Ukraine .
 The volunteers, the crowdfunding for the army, this all was there, and it activated civil society significantly . The army is the largest army in the world .
 We asked how many people donated money for different civic activities . We asked people to donate money for various activities .
 They are hoping that civil society will make everything well, which will achieve everything, they idealize it to a great extent .
 Ukraine is preparing for the second round of presidential elections on 21 April . Ukraine's presidential elections will take place in the country's second round.
Political novice Volodymyr Zelenskyi had taken the lead with over 30%, and incumbent President Petro Poroshenko was trailing behind with under 16% . Some fear Ukrainian society is getting irreversibly polarized .
 Both candidates declare their pro-western course . Supporters of Poroshenko accuse Zelenskyi of being tolerant to Russian aggression .
 The existing evidence of corruption incriminates Poroshenko's close colleagues who, admittedly, still walk free, and not him directly . This cloud of corruption overshadows any other Poroshenko’s achievements of the last 5 years .
 To understand where the real division between two groups of voters lies, let’s look at the most important strengths and faults of candidates .
 The pre-recorded interview of Zelenskyi with journalists of the ICTV channel started with the question “You are in politics already for three months.’s in politics.”
 Zelenskyi’s opponents point to the irony in this question, arguing that a person with three months of political experience can’t be a president .
 He was an MP in the Verkhovna Rada several times, the secretary of the National Security and Defense Council . He was the minister of Foreign Affairs during Yushchenko's presidency .
 He also was Minister of Economic Development and Trade at the time of Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency . He was also Minister of economic development and Trade.
 Poroshenko blamed to be from the old system, unable to break up old personal ties and implement reforms with required passion . Poroshenko is one of the Ukrainian oligarchs himself .
 Zelenskyi's goal is to change tge staff, not policies, not policy . Three months of political experience may be enough for Zelenskii .
 A candidate should have at least a basic understanding of presidential responsibilities and constitutional powers . But, he says, a candidate should be able to understand presidential responsibilities .
 Zelenskyi's opponents found it hard to accuse him of being ignorant about politics in a fact-based manner . For a long time, Zelenkyi’s opponents had accused him of not being ignorant .
 According to the famous philosophical rule, there is no possibility to prove the absence of something and to speak in any way about it .
 Zelenskyi hasn't told much about his future policies and hasn't shown many team members yet . The same went for Zelenkyi.
 A piece of strong evidence finally appeared after Poroshenko's political demands to Poroshenko on 3 April . However, after his political demands, a piece of evidence appeared .
 The candidate confused the key responsibilities of Parliament and President .
 The president can't ensure the adoption of any law, even by the influence of his party which doesn't hold the majority alone . restart the NAZK by new staff appointments .
NAZK is an institution appointed by the Cabinet, NOT by the president . NAZK publishes a list of Poroshenko’s offshore companies .
 All data about property, assets, and deposits of Poroshenko is already publicized . But all data about the president's assets, assets and deposits are already publicized.
 Poroshenko is an expert in the field of international relations diplomacy, military, and security issues . His key problem seems to be with his team members .
 The scandals involving the top members of Poroshenko’s political team inflicted a devastating blow to the reputation of the incumbent president . Poroshenko's billions of hryvnias of wealth are the backdrop of the scandals .
 These scandals created the image of Poroshenko as the chief of corruption in Ukraine, stealing even from the defense industry .
 There is still no evidence of Poroshenko trying to make illegal profits himself . Poroshenko's disregard of the violations of his colleagues and the reluctance of the NABU made a bad reputation for him .
 Ihor Kononenko, former deputy head of the Poroshenko Bloc, was accused of lobbying the appointment of desired people to managing positions of the main state enterprises . In 2016, he was accused by the government of lobbying for people to manage positions .
 Aivaras Abromavicius now professes his support for Zelenskyi, Ihor Kononenko and other members of Poroshenko's political party .
 Law enforcement agencies claim this is a failure of the Prosecutor’s office, which is subordinated to the president .
In 2016, Poroshenko made a scandalous decision to appoint Yuriy Lutsenko as Prosecutor General . In 2016, he made the scandalous choice to appoint him as prosecutor general .
 Lutsenko is unskilled for this particular position, as he doesn’t have a law degree . He is not qualified for this position .
 He was a close ally of President Poroshenko, never opposing the President’s will . However, he was never opposing President's will .
 2016 became the year when Poroshenko tried to consolidate power around himself . A number of new appointments were criticized by civil society .
 The latest corruption-related scandal in the Ukrainian state defense monopolist Ukroboronprom had hit Poroshenko especially hard . The latest scandal in Ukraine's defense monopoly has hit the president especially hard.
 Oleh Hladkovskyi, the First Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council, was appointed by the President . He managed purchases of the details for the military vehicles from fictitious companies by an overcharge .
 A Bihus journalist investigation claimed that President's friends laundered at least US$9.2m in state defense procurements .
After the first round of elections, Poroshenko recognized that he made mistakes with staff appointments . Poroshenko recognizes that he has made mistakes.
 Andryi Hordieiev, the Head of Kherson Oblast Administration who was possibly implicated to the murder of the journalist Kateryna Handziuk, a whistleblower exposing local corruption schemes . He talked about this at the meeting with civil activists on 6 April .
 Oleh Hladkovskyi, accused of money laundering in the defense industry, was also dismissed by Poroshenko . He was accused of laundering money for defense industry .
 Volodymyr Zelensky’s team is still not completely known, but the personalities who have already been named are also not absolutely clean . The personalities who are already named are still not totally clean .
 Several persons linked to Russia or to oligarch Kolomoyskyi are known to Zelenskyi .
 Dmytro Razumkov, the main political advisor of Zelenskyi, gives rise to suspicions . He is a former member of the Russian parliament .
 It’s no surprise that he is quite pro-Russian or, at least, indifferent to Ukrainian national identity .
 The ties between Zelenskyi and oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi are obvious, despite Zelenskii denying them . The ties are quite obvious, even though Zelenskayai denies them .
 Kolomoyskyi supports the candidate by the media-coverage at his 1+1 channel . He also provides his guards for Zelenskyi .
During the last three months, he had flown 20 times from Kyiv to Geneva . He had flown from Zelenskyi's headquarters to Ihor Kolomoyskyi’s.
On 9 April, his team published an expanded list of experts who currently advise the candidate . Yet, on 9 April.
 The list contains some well-known and experienced politicians such as former Finance Minister Oleksandr Danyliuk and former Minister of Economic Development and Trade Aivaras Abromovicius . The list includes former Deputy Minister of Justice Ruslan Riaboshapka .
 These skilled persons were among the reformers and members of anti-corruption initiatives in the governments of 2014-2018 . All left the government due to disagreement with particular policies of the prime minister .
 Zelenskyi didn't state anything publicly on this behalf . However, their role in the team is still not clear since they didn’t state anything .
 Marta Bersh doesn't know anything about her possible appointment as Prosecutor General, journalists uncovered .
 She is an American but used to work as a prosecutor in the Ukrainian National Anti-Corruption Bureau for some time . She is a former prosecutor for the Ukrainian Anti- Corruption Bureau .
 Zelensky’s team included her to the list of their team members as a future Prosecutor General without notifying her . Zelenky's team also included her on the list.
 Borshch instead of Bersh, claiming she is a Ukrainian, was mistakenly written in Ukrainian manner .
 Other members of the team are unknown and come mainly from business . The other members are rather unknown .
 Oleg Bondarenko, head of the Green Fund, joined Zelensky's team as an expert on ecology and law . He is also an expert in law.
 Oleksandr Kharebin, Zelensky's adviser on language and information policy, has been working for pro-Russian oligarch Kurchenko and Taruta .
 Poroshenko appeals to the things which are already done, such as the visa-free regime with EU, international support for Ukraine, military improvement, new missiles, stabilization of economy, decentralization .
 Poroshenko emphasizes the need to continue and finish reforms as well as to overcome poverty . Poroshenko stresses the need for reforms to be completed .
 Zelenskyi makes populist promises regarding the rise of economy and income . Peace is Moscow’s undeniable recognition of our right to go our own way’
 The other key point is the power of people through local and national referendums which should become a widespread practice in Ukraine .
 Zelenskyi promises a decline in taxes and the rise in social payments and salaries for teachers simultaneously . Zelenkyi also promises a rise in salaries and social payments for teachers .
 Zelenskyi promises a free land market as well as the liberalization of the economy . Zelenkyi also promises aFree land market and a free economy .
 Zelenskyi says liberalization will facilitate large oligarchs’ or small enterprises . He says it would be interesting to hear from Zelenskii during debates .
 Once Zelenskyi’s team promised to raise salaries for teachers to $4000, they promised to increase salaries .
 This could cost $2 bn per month to the state budget, according to state officials . They calculated that this would cost an overall $200 mn annually, but made elementary arithmetic mistakes .
 The first ten steps to be done were announced by Zelenskyi’s team, not himself . The first 10 steps were announced in a press conference .
Current reforms include mainly the continuation of current reforms which already started . They include mainly a continuation of the current reforms .
 Among the novel proposals are economic laws on a tax amnesty in order to legalize the shadow economy . The proposals include tax amnesty and legalizing shadow economies .
 Another proposal outlines the possibility for citizens to solve their disputes through mediation as well . The proposal is part of a proposal to allow citizens to resolve their disputes in the courts .
 The Normandy Group is a diplomatic group of senior representatives from Ukraine, Russia, Germany, and France to resolve the war in eastern Ukraine . Zelenskyi has proposed points to clearly define the difference between General Staff and Ministry of Defense .
Security questions are not properly addressed, says the president . The war in eastern Ukraine is the main responsibilities of the president, he says .
 At the same time, his main goal is “that shooting stops’s in eastern Ukraine, he says . He says he wants to see that shooting stops in Ukraine .
 Zelenskyi told Ukrayinska Pravda that ‘I think it’s possible to come to an agreement.’ He continued to say that “I think the agreement is possible’
 Poroshenko didn’t announce any clear plan for the reintegration of Crimea and Donbas as well .
 His main point seems to keep the growth of Ukrainian military capabilities and keep international pressure on Russia . He says his main point is to keep international Pressure on Russia.
 Pro-Russian and anti-Russian This division is not what candidates tell about themselves but how their opponents try to portray them . The division is what candidates say about themselves.
 Some western media have praised these elections due to the absence of pro-Russian candidates among the leaders and low Russian influence .
 Russian media and politicians openly tell that Zelenskyi is their preferred candidate . However, Russian media say Zelenskii is the preferred candidate.
 If Zelenskyi remains, then he will be known as Vladimir, and Lenin was Vladimir . But if he is still alive, he would be known for his work in Russia .
 The map is great, then yes, I will recognize the elections. And he already drew a map. And I'll recognize the election, he already drawn a map . And then yes. And the map is good, he will recognize it, he says .
 Zelensky’s film ‘Servant of the People’ shows Ukraine as a number of separate territories, where each region has its own army and government .
 Zhirinovsky’s words gain greater importance in the light of documents of his party which were hacked in 2014 .
 It describes a Russian political technology plan to bring a comedian into Ukrainian parliament, artificially support the discontent with the Ukrainian elites . In that way establish a pro-Russian and negotiable President .
 Zelenskyi tells little about his policies, but the most promising way to understand his views is to analyze his film . The film is about a man who wants to change his policies .
 He concluded that Ukraine is depicted almost completely Russian-speaking in the film, and most Ukrainians speaking Ukrainian look like radicals .
 Ukrainian is spoken at least as often as Russian in Ukraine and is used overwhelmingly within the government and state institutions . In reality, Ukrainian is speaking at least a third of the Russian population .
 Ukrainian corruption is also significantly exaggerated and shown as the main problem in Ukraine . The film also includes the complete absence of Russia, Russian aggression, or Putin in the film .
 Crimea and the Donbas seem to be not occupied, and Ukrainian soldiers are not dying on a daily basis . In this alternative world, Crimea and Donbas are not occupied .
 Zelenskyi used to joke about Ukrainians and humiliate them in his shows . He used to laugh about Ukrainians in his show .
 Ukrainian volunteers, priests, veterans and activists started to remind him about that and urge him to apologize . Now Ukrainian volunteers and priests, priests and veterans have started to tell him about his actions .
 The flashmob “I give you 24 hours’ started in Ukrainian social networks, joking about Zelenskyi's video .
 Kseniya Klym, a warrior from Donbas, asked Zelenskyi to apologize for his cynicism at jokes about the Tomos, the bill of independence for the Ukrainian church .
 You are the descendant of the sons of Abraham and the representative of the Jewish people . You know well what are the holy and untouchable topics and know well.
 Iryna Herashchenko, First Deputy Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada, asked Zelenskyi to apologize for his humiliation of disabled children and children with Down’s syndrome .
 Ivan Lepich, a veteran from Rivne, appealed to Volodymyr Zelenskyi and asked him how a person calling Ukraine “an actress for German films for adults’s adults” can aim for the position of President .
 Poroshenko is portrayed by his opponents as a Putin hater and even the President who suppresses Russian-speakers . Poroshenko, on the other hand, is portrayed as aPutin hater .
 Poroshenko's speech was spread by Russian propaganda and, also, by people indifferent to questions of national identity which Poroshenko stresses .
 This portrait of being a enemy of Putin is something which Poroshenko’s oppoarenents dislike . This portrait is something that Poroshenko's oppoarnents dislike.
 Poroshenko is blamed for speculating on the issue of war, especially against the background of economic problems and poverty .
 Poroshenko’s pre-election strategy exploited this image – he was portrayed as the only president who can withstand Putin . But Poroshenko's pre- election strategy exploited the image - he is portrayed as only president with the strength of Putin .
 Poroshenko's team says the boards suggest that the President should be powerful enough to withstand Putin’s aggression . Poroshenko”s team says that the boards suggests that the president should be strong enough in order to withstand the Russian President .
 Anatoliy Hrytsenko's supporters say Zelenskyi is pro-Russian and voters should choose between Putin and Poroshenko . However, the former candidate for the Presidency says such boards imply Zelenskii is Pro-Russian .
 Poroshenko told on TV that he doesn't have any facts to accuse Zelenskyi of being pro-Russian . However, the day before the boards were installed, Poroshenko said he doesn’t have any information .
 Zelenskyi thinks he has not enough knowledge, experience, and strength to withstand Putin . But he thinks that Zelenskii has not been able to withstand the Russian leader .
 President Poroshenko with 16% result has little chance of outrunning showman Zelenskyi, who has 30% . Second round of elections will take place on 21 April .
 Zelenskyi on that day hinted he might agree to it, but later backtracked with a frivolous declaration that he'll come to the debates only if his comic troop’s schedule allows .
 Ukrainian law says debates must take place on the last Friday before the second round . Debate must be held in the studio of the public broadcaster .
 The broadcaster had sent invitations to attend debates to the three leading candidates . Both Zelenskyi and Poroshenko had ignored them .
Only second runner-up Yuliya Tymoshenko had come, and was swiftly gone . Only second runner up Yulya Tymchenko had come .
 Zelenskyi had avoided live broadcasts during the campaign . He had not shown up for at least two interviews he had promised to come to .
 One FSB operative tells a local office of Zelenskyi campaign to withdraw 200,000 from the comedian's budget . Another tells the local office that they have approved the budget for the comedian’s actions .
 It turns out that the hack is most probably authentic, but it is impossible to completely verify the most compromising messages . The hack is the most likely to be authentic, though it is difficult to verify .
Volodymyr Zelenskyi was partially funded by Russia via a cryptocurrency trading site owned by a former pro-Russian mercenary in the Donbas .
 The NGO shared the dump of the email account so that anyone can check and validate the e-mail messages .
 Myrotvorets provided videos showing the process of the validation of the messages which contain a DKIM e-signature .
 Ukraine’s presidential election reflects global trends that continue to shake the global order . A popular comedian with no political experience is projected to beat a seasoned incumbent .
Across the world, economic stagnation, immigration, and other challenges are fueling disgust with traditional politics . Voters are increasingly attracted to candidates who offer a fresh face and a new approach .
 The question is whether novice leaders adapt to the post-war arrangements that have served the world well for three-quarters of a century .
 Washington is cooling toward its Western allies and eschewing multilateral trade opportunities . Beijing is promoting an authoritarian alternative to U.S.-led freedom, China and Russia are working more closely in an antiUnited States axis, and nuclear weaponry threatens to proliferate .
 Volodymyr Zelensky, a comedian who pretends to be President in a Ukrainian TV show, squares off against the actual incumbent President, Petro Poroshenko, who has served since 2014 .
 Zelensky and Poroshenko symbolize the unsettling global politics of our time . In their battle, they symbolize a disturbing world of politics .
 Zelensky is what the ancient philosophers called a ‘Tabula Rasa’ He has offered few ideas about what he would propose or whether he can work the mechanics of a parliamentary government .
 The same forces that may catapult him to victory, however, offer him a huge opportunity .
 Only 9 percent of Ukrainians express confidence in their government, which is the world’s lowest level for a second straight year .
 Zelensky would need an effective reform agenda that increases public confidence, he says . To succeed, he would need to reduce corruption, nourishing transparency, and addressing the country's serious economic problems .
 An oligarch known as the "Chocolate King" for his great financial success in confectionaries . He was first elected to Parliament more than 20 years ago .
 He served in the governments of Presidents Leonid Kuchma, Viktor Yushchenko and Viktor Yanukovych . He helped establish different political parties between stints as a Parliamentarian .
 He won the Presidency in 2014 and has fought Russian-backed forces on the battlefield . He sought a diplomatic solution to the conflict, and reoriented Ukraine away from Russia and towards the West .
 The same public disgust with economic stagnation, population migration, and unresponsive government could well catapult another one to the top spot in Kiev .
 Even when fed-up populations aren’t changing leaders, they’re forcing radical change through other means .
 Theresa May still can't gather the votes in Parliament around a plan to leave the EU without sending Britain’s economy into a tailspin .
 Ukraine's new President is expected to find less disruptive means to address economic concerns . A projected new President in Ukraine will be the first in the country to take office .
In unsettled times, fear is an effective campaign tool is hardly breaking news . That, in unsettled time, it's a good campaign tool, but it's not always breaking news.
 Donald Trump rode fears of lost jobs and falling wages due to immigration to victory . Benjamin Netanyahu has long retained office by stoking Israeli security fears .
 Poroshenko is stoking fears about what Zelensky could mean for his besieged country . Theoshenko is well behind in the polls, well behind the polls .
 Zelensky calls for “a total mobilization of all Ukrainian patriots,’s calling for a total mobilization. He calls such adversaries as “pseudo-patriots’ and ‘open agents of the Kremlin’ He warns Ukraine will push Ukraine toward Russia
 The post-war global order was a dramatic change itself when the U.S.-led West began laying the groundwork for it . The Allies were still fighting the Axis powers .
 Ukraine's new leader can reassure a potentially skeptical West by taking reasoned and effective steps to address corruption, raise living standards and keep Russia at bay .
 A citizen Zelensky VO is in military registration of military personnel in the Metallurgical-Dovgyntsevsky . The military rank is a soldier, a military-account specialty is a clerk of clerical work .
 Citizen Zelensky VO to the military commissariat did not arrive on this request . The request was made by Citizen Zelenky VO .
 To impose a fine of 17 hryvnias for failure to appear in the military office – four times – is a fine . To impose the fine, the fine will be imposed at least four times .
 Zelensky for a term of two to five years imprisonment . To break the case under Art. of the Criminal Code and condemn Zelenski for two-to-five years .
 Yulia Tymoshenko has called on candidates for the presidency of Ukraine . Petro Poroshenko is the incumbent head of state and showman Volodymyr Zelensky .
 "I think, just like me, millions of Ukrainians, did not want to see this," she said in a video posted on Facebook .
 Poroshenko advised the current head of state to keep the presidential bar and not to become part of someone else’s show .
 If you want to hold this post, take care of the dignity and honor of this position. If you don't want to be in this position, you should be in the post .
 Tymoshenko: "You do not need to organize battles around it and you don't need to, leading the struggle for the right to become president, destroy the honor and pride of presidential status"
I do not undertake to evaluate his actions, I like to talk at all on an equal basis . I think that for the past five minutes, Mr Poroshenko has done everything. For someone, he did everything to ensure that our country did not develop, he says .
 Ukraine's president says he would never have looked at the top because he is the president . He says he was wrong when he became president .
 "I always communicate, I always communicate," says Zelensky . "I speak about my shortcomings, do not crush anyone," he says. "I have been a very well-known person for many years"
 The politician stressed that it is quite difficult to withdraw from himself .
 I have respect for the presidential institution because it is a popularly elected president, but on a moral level, purely human, I believe that he is just insulting . I believe he is simply insulting, he says .
 Kvartal 95 studios is based in London, England . The company has been in the UK for more than 20 years .
 I have no more cheeks, I have substituted the left, I've substituted the right . I have replaced the left with the right. I have substituted the left. I've replaced the right with the left . I've substitute the left for the right in the
 "explained the presidential candidate. With me so much I responded as I could, as I thought fit, as he thought fit," he said .
 Volodymyr Zelensky did not want to go to the NSC “Olimpiyskiy’s’ for delivery of analyzes . He received a notification of the provocation that is being prepared there .
 "I saw so many journalists, I can understand,’ he said . Well, the girl was upset, he said.
 Zelensky said he did not want to go to the NSC because he received a notification of a provocation that was being prepared . He said he was not prepared to go because he had been notified of the provocation .
At stake, his fate, his children, his parents, his wife, so he did not play . At stake, my fate, my children, my parents, my wife, and my wife were at stake .
 Olimpiysky: "Somebody was preparing I’m not going to go there, I'm not ready to talk about it. Sometime after all these elections, information will be spilled on," he says .
 When you find out the information, you will understand me, “said the presidential candidate,’ said the president . “I’m a man who’s not a man,” he says .
 "I do not blame anyone and did not turn to the police, he said. See, maybe the information I received the day before is lying," he said . "I don't blame anyone," he says .
 I'm a strong guy and not ready, you know, change in principle, the conditions and your positions. See, I'm not him, and so it was all scary, painful, painful to me, but I’m a strong man, but not ready. Change in
 You decide, honestly, for me – or do not interfere, because at all I do not care only about my interests, therefore, I perceive so painfully, it offends me so, it is repeated analyzes or something else .
 "I am a strong person, but sometimes it hurts me, so you have to understand me, I'm ready for anything," he says . "I'm ready to anything. I am aStrong person," he adds .
 As journalists say, I hide, I do not hide when I’m humanly wanting to talk directly, as a husband and wife, I don’t escape from anyone . As journalists have said, he hides when he’s humanly wants to talk straight,
In order to make our safe streets safe in our country, we have to ride a bike . But in order to do this, we need to make the streets safe .
Ukrinform. The candidate for the post of President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky has revealed the details of the meeting with Emmanuel Macron .
 Ukrainian presidential candidate Volodymyr Zelensky met with French President Emmanuel Macron on Friday . Zelenky shared his impressions following his meeting with Macron .
 French media write that Paris sought to learn more about Zelensky’s views . The meeting offer was accepted .
 Ministry of Internal Affairs asks presidential candidates Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko to refrain from radical appeals .
 The First Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs Serhiy Yarovyi said this was stated by the press service of the department .
 The Interior Ministry will hold consultations with representatives of both headquarters on the eve of the debate between presidential candidates and before the second round of voting .
 In the information space, the mood of open hostility between candidates is fueled, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Our task is to prevent such situations. In the Information space, we need to stop such situations"
 He urged the heads of law enforcement units to work closely with members of the public . He also urged them to explain to them the inadmissibility of violations of public order and safety of citizens .
 Poroshenko's task is to convince Zelenskyi's electorate. Today, everyone's sayings that Poroshenko’s task was to convince the electorate .
 The minority group that took part in the Revolution of Dignity. Even if there are fewer of them, they are part of the minority group .
 Russia’s attempt to turn back the clock and push Ukraine back into a pro-Russian prison colony, where the Holodomor famine and the Great Terror have been justified and excused . There is absolutely no future for the protection of Ukrainian culture and language, where Ukrainian media
 You can't buy a pig in a poke at the expense of your own life, the lives of your children and the country . You can’t buy a Pig in a poked at the cost of your life .
 People may object and say some of these issues should not be addressed to the President, that they’re not within his competence .
 Both candidates plan to have a powerful faction in Parliament . Both candidates are expected to have such a faction .