Long-serving Russian ambassador to the EU, Vladimir Chizhov, provided insights into his country’s position on the Azov Sea situation . He also gave insights into the cancellation of a meeting between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin at the G20 in Argentina .
Before being appointed Ambassador to the EU in 2005, he was Russia’s Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs .
 Russia-Western relations have deteriorated in the last ten years, ambassador says . Ambassador: "We have had such interview meetings for the last 10 years"
 I wouldn't describe the past ten years as continued deterioration of our relations . I wouldn’t describe these past 10 years as continuing deterioration of the relations .
 During these ten years we launched negotiations for a new basic agreement, which were later stalled for a number of reasons .
 The EU doesn't want to call ‘strategic’ or even “partnership’ any longer, unfortunately, unfortunately .
 Russia never considered the EU to be an enemy or even an adversary. We – I mean Russia – we never considered Russia to be a enemy or an adversary . We never considered it an enemy, or even a adversary.
 It has always been a partner, albeit quite a difficult one, but it hasn't been an easy one to anyone . Ask the Americans, ask the Chinese or anybody else, or anyone else .
 You mentioned the Azov Sea, which has nothing to do with the EU of course, as well as the EU . The Azov sea is the largest part of the Russian Sea .
 From 1 April up to 31 October 1,492 ships were inspected, either on way in or the way back .
 This has been the usual procedure throughout the existence of the Kerch-Yenikale canal . The canal was built in 1960s and is located in the city's eastern part of the city .
 The narrow canal is maintained artificially by digging it at least twice a year . The canal is dug at least two times a year to keep it open .
 This was done during the 60 years when Crimea was part of Ukraine, this continued after Crimea was reunited with Russia . This was carried out during the 1960s.
 There is only one gate in the new bridge, which allows ships to proceed, is either ignorance, or blatant lie . So any reference to newly created obstacles is either ignorant or blatant lies .
 Ukraine has ceased to be a littoral state of the Kerch Strait, so now only Russia . Since 2014 Ukraine has stopped being a state of Ukraine, only Russia has been in it .
 Ukraine, as well as the EU and the West in general don’t recognise the annexation of Crimea by Russia . But Ukraine and the EU don't recognise Crimea's annexation .
 People of Crimea voted overwhelmingly to join Russia, and ever since Crimea has accepted to become part of Russia it is part of the country .
 Most checks are conducted while ships are standing on anchor, waiting in line for a caravan to be formed . Most of those checks are done while the ships are on anchor .
Only on a couple of occasions waiting time was extended to five hours, not more . Only on a few occasions, waiting time has been extended.
 There is a treaty between Russia and Ukraine of 2003 for having the Azov Sea under joint sovereignty . It's not part of the world ocean and is not covered by the International Law of the Sea .
 Russia has been accused of militarisation of the Azov Sea by Russia . What we have been hearing for several months already were expressions of concern over alleged militarisation by Russia.
 There is no significant presence of the Russian navy in the Azov Sea. No, because there is nosignificant presence in the sea .
 Ukraine is involved in militarisation of the Azov Sea, it is Ukraine .
 In September, a small flotilla of Ukrainian warships traveled through the Kerch Strait to the port of Berdyansk in the Azov Sea .
 Russian Coast guard escorted them through Kerch Strait, they were waived off and nothing happened . They followed existing procedures, they filed a request for passage .
 The crews of small vessels had instructions, and those were produced on TV when the crews were detained . This time, the crews of these small vessels were given instructions .
 The Russian side was instructed to proceed through the Kerch Strait without giving any information, clandestinely . They were instructed to go through without contacting the Russian side .
 I don't know what they were hoping for, because they were detected early and tracked all the way from Odessa where they started . I don’t know what it was for them, but they were found early, and tracked to Odessa .
 They were heavily armed and instructed to open fire, which they fortunately didn't, in case they were stopped . And they were heavilyarmed, and they were instructed to shoot .
 Ukrainian security service on board, who admitted they were in charge of this operation .
 A well-prepared provocation that had started weeks before the incident itself, by raising attention to the situation in the Azov Sea .
 The Rada took a decision after a heated debate, resulting in a compromise, the timeline cut to 30 days . The application of the new law was limited to slightly over half of the Ukrainian territory .
 speaker of the Rada, the infamous Mr Parubiy, issued a decree confirming the election for 31 March .
 The IMF released the tranche for reasons that need to be clarified . But this time the IMF said they are not going to hinder the flow of money whatever happens . The tranche was released by the IMF on Monday .
 Ukrainian lawmakers passed the 2019 budget early on Friday . It is a crucial step to unlock $3. billion of loans from the International Monetary Fund to tide over a choppy election period .
 He knows that playing the strong man in Crimea will boost his ratings again. And he knows that he will be able to do so again .
 Georgi has an image and reputation of a strong man, with Ukraine or without Ukraine . He already has a reputation for being strong man with Ukraine and Ukraine .
 No, because they have to be escorted through this narrow canal, as they were escorted before . No. Because they are escorted before, they are not allowed to enter the narrow canal .
 Since the construction of the Kerch bridge the security checks have been increased . There are people, including politicians in Ukraine, who promise to blow it up, and these promises keep coming .
Previous Ukrainian convoys have shown that they know the rules, but not this time . But the procedure is established and agreed, as previous Ukrainian convoy have shown .
 Russia and Ukraine can go on a friendly visit, with the consent of both countries . Well, theoretically, they can go, on afriendly visit .
 He can invite the air force of Mars and Venus together, but that would hardly have any significance . Well, he can invite air force.
 NATO is not foolish enough to undertake such a dangerous, risky endeavour, I'm sure . That would depend on their behaviour, of course, but I’m sure it would depend upon their behaviour .
 Some political leaders could have tried to find out what was really happening and contact the Russian side, as did two EU countries, Germany and France .
 Ukraine is procrastinating fulfilling its own obligations, says Ukraine . Yes, because Ukraine is Procrastinating. Yes, as Ukraine is doing its own duties .
 Frank-Walter Steinmeier was still foreign minister two or three years ago . It was two or 3 years ago, when he was foreign minister .
 The Normandy format met in Berlin and Steinmeier proposed certain provisions of the Minsk agreement to be implemented according to a certain stage-by-stage procedure .
Like the law on the special status would enter into force provisionally on the date elections would be proclaimed . Then would enter in full after the elections are held and the results are pronounced .
 The United States dismisses leadership elections in separatist-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine as a "sham" The U.S. dismissed leadership elections as a “sham’s’ one day after voters cast their ballots .
 Donetsk People's Republic had to provide some sort of system of government of the territory, whatever the status . The situation is quite understandable, I think, after the assassination of the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic .
 You know, we don’t intend to sit and wait for pro-Russian leaders in Kiev . You know that we don't intend to wait for Pro-Russian leader in Kiev, says Putin .
 We would be satisfied with pro-Ukrainian leaders, not pro-American or pro-Western . We would have been satisfied with Pro-Ukraine leaders, but would be happy with them .
 The problem with today's leadership is that it’s pointless to reach agreements with them, because they don’t deliver on their own promises .
 Russia’s interest is concerned, not only we don’t want to procrastinate things, we are sick and tired of the Ukrainian conflict . We want to see it ended as soon as possible, peace and stability returning to that much-suffered land .
 A visit by a NATO vessel would be a confidence-building, stabilizing action that could reduce tensions in the region and contribute to President Putin's stature as a global leader .
 Russia and NATO have cooperated in combatting terrorism and during periods in the conflict in Afghanistan . Russian transport corridors were opened to resupply NATO operations in that country .
 The multiple climate related and other crises on the horizon could open new opportunities for cooperation . The multiple crises could open the door for cooperation.
 NATO has ceased being defensive when the URSS disbanded the Warsaw Pact in 1991 . The Warsaw Pact was disbanded in 1991.
 NATO has been involved in wars that run against its statutes and mission . Since then, NATO has had wars that ran against its law, mission and statutes .
My guess is Putin will be deposed by his own people long before he sees his dream realized . My guess is that Putin's dream will be realized by the end of the year .
 If Putin is a power-hungry maniac trying to put the Russian empire back together, he’ll get poisoned with Novichok .
 RT/Sputnik, the official Russian state liars, will be out of a job. If the leader is replaced, then maybe they don’t have to lie so much .
 I would rather be accused of being a Russian troll than of brainlessly regurgitating Western propaganda . Well, whatever, whatever. I would instead be accused.
 It is the United States that is not interested in solving the Ukrainian conflicts. It is not the U.S. that's not interested i solving the Ukraine conflicts .
 The EU wants to keep Russia and the EU apart and will do anything to achieve that . It wants Russia and EU to be apart and to keep them apart .