 Andrei Illarionov was a Russian expert, economic adviser to Vladimir Putin in 2000-2005 . The start of the Kremlin aggression in Ukraine brought bad news and alarming forecasts .
 Russian troops are expected to strike on Kiev Chernigov on Sunday . Ukrainian leaders have been warned by the master of the Kremlin that the Ukrainian leadership is facing and unable to confront the aggressor .
 ILLARIONOV's critics accuse him of spreading panic and even provocative recommendations leading to full-scale war with Russia . ILLarionov's critics say he is spreading panic, leading to a full- scale war .
Syria already affects the Donbass, and aggravating way . Russia has enough forces on multiple fronts to take on the region .
 Putin found himself as a result of aggression against Ukraine, he said . Putin's regime of international poluizolâcii has been involved in the Syrian conflict for Putin .
 The second objective is the restoration of relations with Western countries, and even the translation of these relations in the State of the Alliance . The third objective is to restore relations with the West .
 France and its New President. As we see, that in the course of just a few last weeks and days this operation has been brilliantly successful against France .
 French President has not only made the statements, but he came to Moscow, met with Putin and agreed on a de facto Allied relations in the Middle East .
 Hollande in Moscow said that they discussed the question of Ukraine without Ukraine . He also said that anyone in Moscow has discussed the issue without Ukraine.
 The French view coincides with the opinion of the aggressor. They match a position about the Ukraine-and it means that in this case the French view coincided with that of the attacker .
 Putin regime was in breaking international isolation, forming new alliances and using these relationships to further isolate Ukraine . The Putin regime is in breaking the international isolation and forming new allies .
Visit Hollande took place after a series of terrorist attacks in Paris . In other words, this convergence of views regarding the isolation of Ukraine and not restore sovereignty over part of the country .
 Terror-one of the most effective instruments of internal and external policies. Terror- one of most effective tools of internal, external policies .
 Various terrorist acts, regardless of who carried them out, always were used to achieve specific political results . Many terrorist acts have been carried out in the past .
 Hollande participated actively in the preparation of the Minsk accords, according to Hollande .
Turkish crisis in this case fulfils the role of improving the overall tension in the world at large and in the Middle East in particular .
 There is nothing more effective for impact on the level of oil prices than increase tensions in the Middle East .
 This reaction directly to those aircraft and the relevant statements of Moscow and Ankara . This reaction is directly to the aircraft and statements of Russia and Ankara. This is the first time the two countries have issued such a statement .
 Putin's desire of Putin to establish relations with the countries of the West, on the other hand, immediately the threat of military conflict with Turkey, one of the most powerful military alliance members. On the one hand, this in no way contradicts the desire of the Putin to
 Ankara is not supported, and allies quickly distanced themselves from the position of Erdogan . As we can see, in this situation, Ankara isnot supported, says CNN .
There is an opinion that Erdogan and Putin policy style is similar-both have a penchant for authoritarianism . Both are managed by ethnically disparate States, and unlike Westerners, easily send your soldiers to death .
 Attempts to present the same Erdogan just benefit those who justify the Kremlin's policy against Turkey .
 Turkey is still a democratic country, though not completely, but still a democracy . Even if we compare the political regimes in Russia and Turkey, we see that Turkey is a democratic nation .
 Russia annexed the same piece of land-Crimea, Turkey nothing annexed when Erdogan was in power . Turkey was nothing annexed by Russia when Erdogan took power .
 Ukrainian diplomacy managed to correct the situation to your advantage . I didn't say "conspiracy" - and said that it is a disease of Western leaders .
At the same time, Russian companies and individuals were not lifted, there is reason to talk about their tightening . In this regard, nothing has changed, says the author .
 The current leaders of Western countries, and, above all, are not in a position to make a truly drastic actions against Russia . The current U.S. leaders are in no position to take action against Russia, the author says .
 Minsk agreement to prevent the restoration of Ukraine's sovereignty on the part of its territory, namely in Crimea and Eastern Donbass .
 The President of the Minsk agreement calls Poroshenko is hardly the biggest success of the Ukrainian diplomacy .
 It consists of the UN Charter, the 1975 Helsinki accords year Budapest memorandum 1993 onwards . It is part of a series of bilateral agreements between Ukraine and Russia .
 In all of these documents clearly recognized the inviolability of the State border between Russia and Ukraine . In all, these documents are clearly established internationally .
 Minsk agreement is preventing the restoration of the sovereignty of Ukraine on the part of its territory . Minsk deal prevents restoration of Ukraine's sovereignty on its part of Ukraine .
 The Minsk agreements require change Constitution in accordance with the wishes of the eastern neighbour . The Elimination of the sovereignty of the Kiev authorities requires change Constitution .
 Minsk agreement in this sense contrary to everything, including the UN Charter, in contravention of all norms of contemporary international law, says Minsk . Minsk Agreement is contrary to all norms, including UN Charter .
 The Minsk agreement does not have such status in international law, as all of the above Treaty .
 The Ukrainian leadership deliberately chose a document that neither the status nor the more content is not relevant to the norms of international law and had not focused on it .
 Putin regularly expounded on the need for Ukrainian authorities to implement the agreements . Putin fully supported these agreements .
 As a citizen of another country, I will not give estimates, but I will say the most important thing . You can share your impressions about its effectiveness .
 Ukraine has taken a 'slightly affected' step by Ukraine's government . Ukraine's president has been accused of using the country's anti-government tactics .
Only a couple of statements, does not change the situation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin did not think about it at all-would somehow come electricity there and okay. Crimeans suffer, but Putin didn't think it would happen .
 The Ukrainians did so just now, not a year and a half ago. I am surprised why they did so. If no effect, then why do it even now? I said that Putin is not affected, but crimeans influences very strongly .
 The risk of a full-scale invasion by forces of the Russian Federation to Ukraine? -Full-unlikely, and the continuation of aggression-certainly yes .
 A full-scale invasion is impossible, because Russia does not have the physical strength to do so, says the Russian government .
 The Kremlin would have torn on two fronts-Ukrainian and Syriac. And it's not that the Kremlin would.
 Putin may try to reach their goal in Ukraine, but there are a lot of decision-makers in Ukraine . In particular, in addition to the green men have greenbacks .
 The purpose of the "Kiev and whole Ukraine" is not installing the Russian flags in Kyiv . Understand that the purpose of  Kiev is not installing the Russian flags .
 Objective-preventing the integration of Ukraine into European and Euro-Atlantic structures .
 Putin's operation to establish control over Ukraine, in his hands all the trumps . Putin has been trying to take control of Ukraine for years .
 Ukrainian side agrees to actively help implement Minsk agreement . Ukrainian side to him agreeing to help implement the Minsk deal .
 In the midst of war, people have an idea about who the enemy is, and who is an ally . But in the middle of war have a idea about the enemy.
 In war you cannot do pardon the terrorists, but in "Minsk world" please. In war, you can't do pardon terrorists. In the world, in war you can be forgiven for your actions, in the world .
 Erdogan is not afraid to shoot down Russian aircraft is an example . For Erdogan, NATO and Ukraine, it's an example for Erdogan and Ukraine .
 Erdogan's deed with downed RUSSIAN AIR FORCE aircraft shows that in Turkey there are elite, there are interests of the State and the willingness to defend them .
 The RUSSIAN AIR FORCE aircraft downed ex-. the President of Ukraine . Turkey has approved of the State Security actions of Turkey .
 Crimea's power military units opposed Russia's seizure of Crimea . But only he gave his own assessment guide when he was in Crimea .
 If necessary, you can reconcile comparatively beyond the short term . The events occur, if necessary, they can be reconciled .
At least restore the internationally recognized border between Ukraine and Russia . Let's say, for one generation .
 Russia's recognition of the facts of aggression and refusal of the RUSSIAN FEDERATION from conducting an aggressive policy towards Ukraine and other neighbors is almost impossible to achieve .
 Navalny, Khodorkovsky, Kasyanov, Yashin? -I would not call Bulk counter-example .
 Khodorkovsky's views coincide with those of Putin, says Putin . He says his views on matters of principle coincide with Putin's .
 Bulk and Khodorkovsky did not consider Crimea Ukrainian territory and that is all you need to know about their opposition .
 Lenin said that there are idiots, and there are useful idiots . There is no single structure, it cannot be under the totalitarian regime, which now ruled by Russia .
 Arkady Babchenko, Eider Muždabaev, Boris Vishnevsky, Andrei Piontkovsky, Lilia Shevtsova, Garry Kasparov. If by name, it is EiderMuž dabaev and Boris Vish
 Himmler and Bormann's positions coincide with the different clans of Putin's Entourage . The different clans are different, but not all issues coincide .
 The existing sanctions are kindergarten, he says . And played an important role, by the way, he adds .
For each of his cellmate or supporters logoff or elimination of the system will lead to their own destruction . The fact is that the number of crimes committed by the regime is that for each of their cellmates or supporters will be destroyed .
 The root cause of your tv? - No, tv is just one of the tools . And mental illness the most scary, because they disable the consciousness and people cease to adequately analyze reality .
 The population of the USSR was poisoned 70 years, including a long period of time when there was no tv . The population was poisoned.
 Germany was among some of the richest, developed and educated countries in Western Europe . Germany in the first third of the 20th century was one of the most developed countries in the world .
 Nevertheless, infect their totalitarian ideology turned out very easily and in a very short period of time . Nevertheless, they turned out to be very easily.
 Russia still 25 years ago had nothing to do with today's Putin's State . Russia still has nothing todo with Putin's state .
 There is a sick, sick state elite, which is worse than in Russia, and a weak economy . There are problems, there is a strange personality, but there is also a sick state.
 In Russia a very specific, aggressive, hamskaâ Imperial elites with atrofirovannym view on the right, but it's there .
 In Ukraine, in my opinion there is no elite, which associated itself with the existence of Ukraine as a nation State . In Ukraine. In my opinion, in his opinion, there are no elite.
 In March 2014 at an emergency economic summit in Ukraine, Kakha Bendukidze said nothing has improved for a year . In March the year 2014, he told everyone about it, and then said the same thing-for a year nothing had improved .
 No problem, that were in Ukraine a year and a half ago, not simply has not been solved . Even, even, in fact, had not been affected by the power .
Ukrainian economy over two years is 20 percent weaker than in two years . Then there are the Ukrainian economy over the past two years. The Ukrainian economy is 20% weaker.
 External debt of Ukraine in 2014-m was approximately 40% of GDP, 94% this year . In 2014-M, the external debt of the Ukraine in the GDP was about 40% .
Last spring was meeting with your Prime Minister Yatsenyuk . Give advice? Give advice.
 Bendukidze Kahoj listened to how many managed to say . He as much as 20 minutes talking with me and us, he listened to many of us . He listened to us for 20 minutes .
 What impress you fired the Prime Minister, what can you say about his professional qualifications? - It does not matter what impression on alien fired PM of your country .
 He did not make an impression and did something for Ukrainians . Better yet, that he did not made an impression .
 There is no country in the post-Soviet area, which from that time not just remained at 89 and still and went . The post- Soviet area is now in the middle of the world .