 Mattis stressed that Donald Trump has not yet made a decision on arming Ukraine . But there are certainly legitimate arguments for doing so .
 Moscow illegally annexed Ukraine’s Crimea region in March 2014, and the Kremlin supplies both arms and Russian troops to separatist proxies .
 Arming Kyiv would help it better confront this Russian threat . Washington would also allow Washington to send a strong message to Putin that changing borders by force is unacceptable .
 Moscow's response to criticism of Moscow's behaviour is risky, but justified the outrage . But retaliation is risky for the Russian government .
 If the U.S. arms Ukraine, the Kremlin will almost certainly respond in ways that could damage American national security interests .
 Russia could escalate the violence by sending more troops or arms to support its separatist proxies . Putin already implied that it would happen .
 Trump could then face pressure to send more weapons – thereby escalating Russian-American tensions .
 Russia could also retaliate against U.S. interests in other parts of the world . Russia is also considering retaliating against the United States in other countries .
 In North Korea, it could undermine U.S. sanctions measures intended to force Pyongyang to end its nuclear weapons program .
 Russia could restart these projects – thereby providing Pyongyang with additional hard currency for its testing program . A number of Russian-North Korean economic projects remain frozen because of the embargoes .
 In Syria, Putin could end US-Russian cooperation on enforcing a ceasefire in southern Syria .
 Moscow could also move additional weaponry – perhaps even including nuclear weapons – into Russia’s Kaliningrad region .
 Given the risks to American interests from arming Ukraine, Trump needs to carefully consider both the pros and cons of this step .
 The U.S. can help Ukraine in other ways that include increased support for Ukraine’s anti-corruption reformers . The United States is nudging international donors to help Kyiv rebuild war-damaged regions .
 Ukraine needs most of all to complete the economic and political reforms to consolidate its young democracy. What Ukraine needs is breathing space to complete its political reforms.
 A package of measures signed by Russia and Ukraine to bring an end to the war remains elusive . That remains elusive in spite of the February 2015 Minsk II accord – a package signed by the two countries .
 Keeping Ukraine out of NATO wouldn’t be a big sacrifice for its members, says the U.S. ambassador .
 Russia’s overwhelming military strength in the Black Sea region makes it unlikely NATO could effectively defend Ukraine . Many NATO countries don’t support Kyiv's admission anyway .
 Kyiv gives up little by foregoing NATO membership while potentially setting itself up to demand concessions from Moscow in other areas . All 29 members need to approve new members the alliance’s expansion to Ukraine is extremely unlikely .
 Ukraine's right to pursue membership in the European Union is a priority for Kyiv . In exchange for concessions on NATO, Moscow must accept it cannot block Ukraine’s right to join the EU .
 Moscow wants Ukraine to join a Russian-dominated free trade bloc aimed at consolidating Russian influence . This will be a difficult pill for Moscow to swallow.
 Kiev wants a decisive break from Russia's political and economic orbit . Washington should make clear to Moscow it has no right to prevent Ukraine from pursuing what it sees as its Western destiny .
 Once these two geopolitical issues are resolved it will be easier for Washington to help Russia and Ukraine to reach agreement in other areas . Washington will be able to help both countries reach agreement on other issues .
 Any final deal must require that the Kremlin end military support for its separatist proxies in eastern Ukraine and allow Kyiv to regain full control over its border with Russia .
 This would include full control over their own tax and spending, as well as control over social issues such as education, culture and the status of the Russian language . This would also include control of their own taxes and spending .
 Moscow says it considers Crimea part of Russia while Ukrainian officials insist it is part of Ukraine . Moscow says that it considers the region part of the country .
 Any final agreement may have to defer negotiations over Crimea . It may be possible to suggest some kind of formula for shared sovereignty or Russian payment to Ukraine .
 Crimea is part of Russia until a deal on the peninsula’s status acceptable to Kyiv is reached . The United States can make this more palatable to Ukraine by not recognising Crimea as part of Ukraine .
 The United States employed a similar policy regarding the Soviet Union’s annexation of the Baltic states during the Cold War . The U.S. employed similar policy during the 1950s .
 Putin may not settle for anything other than pulling Ukraine back into Russia's orbit . Kyiv may consider any deal preventing NATO membership or fudging on Crimea to be unacceptable .
 U.S. could offer to ease sanctions against Russia while Ukraine could be offered assistance in rebuilding its war-torn Donbass region . The United States could provide a sweetener.
 USA and Great Britain after Russian ocupation of Ukraine territory just confirms that only stupid politicans would get rid of its nuclear weapons for exchange of paper .
 Had the greed and old useless rivalries blinded the West? Anyone can now see what disaster forced regime change does. The West can see what the regime does .
 Russia advised Yanukovich that the proposed treaty was not in UKraine’s interests . It gives the EU free access to the Ukraine market while restricting Ukraine’'s access to EU markets with strict quota .
 Yanukovich went with that information to Merkel but he just got a cold shoulder . Yanukovich has been in charge of the Ukraine since 2009 .
 Ukraine is not a free country, it was only then that he withdrew from the treaty . It was only after he withdrew the treaty that he pulled out of the treaty.
 Anyone talking too “pro-Russian’s’ faces serious problems – from fake accusations to right-extremist violence .
 LPR-DPR integration into Ukraine is almost unthinkable as it would lead to a ferocious witch hunt . As long as this doesn’t improve integration of the country is not good, it would be almost unthinkable .
 I would suggest that Mr Cohen reads a little history of Ukraine and especially Crimea then re-write this nonsense. I would suggestion that Mr. Cohen reads the history of the Ukraine andespecially Crimea thenRe- write this nonsense .
 Crimea has been a part of Russia since long before California and Texas were grabbed from Mexico . Also, Crimea was part of Ukraine before it was taken from Russia .
 Actually most Crimeans are Russian and voted overwhelmingly to remain part of Russia . Most Crimeans vote overwhelmingly to stay in Russia .
 Cohen: Human beings, even ethnic Russians, have a right to self-determination . Cohen: "We have a human right toself-determination" Cohen: We have the right to choose ourselves .
 People in Crimea and Donbass, Ukraine, and other parts of Ukraine, too, include people in Crimea, Donbass . That includes people in Ukraine, Crimea, and others in Ukraine .