 Permission to make digital or hard copies of any information contained in these web publications is granted for personal use, without fee and without formal request .
 Copies may not be made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage . Copies can be made and distributed for Profit or commercial benefit .
The Crimean Peninsula is the heartland of Russian nationhood . The Crimean Peninsula has been dubbed the Crimean Peninsula .
 Prince Vladimir was baptised in Khersones in the ancient Kherssones . The location of his baptism is the location of the Khersones.
 A Russian nationstate emerged in 1992 and has been independent for over a quarter of a century . There ae no histories of the Russian Federation . There is no history of the nationstate .
 Since the late 1980s, Western historians of Ukraine have adopted this approach . Orest Subtelny, Paul R Magocsi, Serhiy Plokhy,Serhiy Yekelchyk, and George Liber, have adopted it .
 Western histories of ‘Russia’ continue to ignore its territorial limitations by conflating empire with nation-state .
 Western historians of ‘Russia’ have not adapted to the emergence of an independent Russia by using standard Western frameworks .
 The history of France and Great Britain, for example, includes all events that took place within the internationally recognised boundaries of these nations .
 Magosci’s A History of Ukraine surveys 2,500 year of history of Ukrainians and other peoples . Greeks, Crimean Tatars, Poles, Russians, Jews, Germans, Hungarians and Romanians.
 Western histories of “Russia and Ukraine, and histories of Ukraine published since 1991, are incompatible with one another .
 Histories of Ukraine are no different to standard European histories of states that cover all of the events that took place within the Ukrainian nation-state .
 These histories of “Russia’s expropriate history that took place on Ukrainian territory for “Russian history.’ These histories are part of the history of ‘Russian’ history.
 Ukrainian and Russian Federation histories continue to be “Russian’s history with Ukrainians as an accident of history . Ukrainians are always eager to re-embrace Moscow .
 This was surely fake news long before the appearance of social media and Russia Today . This was certainly fake news.
 Western historians and political experts on Russia have become apologists for Russian imperialism in the Crimea . In continuing to use Russian imperialist historiography, Western historians are becoming apologists.
 Tatar claim to be the indigenous people of the Crimea . Russian President Vladimir Putin's imperialism had to air brush out the Tatar.
 argument claiming white settlers were the indigenous peoples in North and South America would be condemned as racist .
 Claiming Russians are the indigenous people of the Crimea is no different. Claiming Russian people of Crimea is not different, it is not the same thing .
 Western histories of “Russia’s” people and Tatars are not the indigenous First Nations of the Crimea .
 De-colonisation of Western history writing of “Russia’s” is long overdue, says author .
 Western historians working in conditions of academic freedom were free to pursue the study of ‘Russian history’ in as objective a manner as is possible .
 Western histories of imperial Russia and the former USSR usually portrayed it as a homogenous nation-state rather than as a multinational empire .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin repeatedly asserts that Ukrainians and Belarusians were 5 “Russians’s’. This, in turn, could only be undertaken by assuming that Ukrainians, Belarusians and Ukrainians were also 5 ‘Russians.’
 Tsarist policies and Russian historiography were patently misplaced and could only be premised upon a denial of any history for Ukrainians and Belarusians separate to Russian .
 The Russian Empire was not, and could not be, a nation-state. As Theodore R Weeks argues, ‘And yet the Russian Empire wasn't,’ he says .
 Ukrainians and Belarusians were ‘ethnographic raw material’ and simply regional ethnoses of the larger Russkii people . That is, they were simply “Little’s or “White Russians’ — not separate nations .
 The only choice given to Ukrainians and Belarusians by the Tsarist authorities was to become Russians or less favourably Poles . The decision was made by the Russian authorities .
Non-Slavic peoples of the Tsarist empire would agree to assimilation into this planned ‘Russian nation-state’ or enter into “voluntary union’ with it . The Tsarist peoples would also agree to assimilate into this plan.
 This policy, supported by Tsarist officials and all non-left-wing political parties, rejected any group rights for the empire . This policy was supported byTsarist officials. This policy is supported by the Tsarist official and allnon-left political parties .
 In the Russian civil war, all Russian political groups opposed Ukrainian autonomy or independence . All Russian political Groups opposed Ukrainian independence or autonomy .
 “Russian’s’ history would be the equivalent of German nationalists and Nazis claiming prior to World War II that the ‘German World’ includes Prussia, Germany, Bavaria, Austria, Switzerland and parts of France, Italy, Czechoslovakia and Poland .
 A “German World’ would be the equivalent of the Russkii Mir covering Orthodox and Slavic civilisation in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus . A ‘German World' would cover an area that belonged to ’German civilisation’
 France, Spain and Great Britain both have links to Rome and the Roman empire . Their histories are confined to the borders of the nation-states created during the past two centuries .
 This should be the model for the Russian Federation with its origins in the Novgrorod Republic, Vladimir-Suzdal, and Muscovy, rather than Kyivan Rus . The Russian Federation should be a model for Russia's Russian Federation .
 The pre-1945 German World 6 and contemporary Russkii Mir are never equated because the former is seen as belonging to the evils of Nazism . The latter is not viewed as extremist but merely as bringing together three “fraternal” branches of the �
 Riasanovsky's terminological confusion is evident when he discusses the division of the eastern Slavs into three nations after the disintegration of Kyiv Rus .
 Riasanovsky, in the tradition of Soviet, post-Soviet and Western historiographies, describes Kyivan Rus as a united state of eastern Slavs whose unity was only broken because of Mongol invasion .
 Ukrainians and Belarusians are accidents of history and their “natural state is to be in union with Russians’s. Viewed in such a framework, Ukraine and Belarus are accidents.
 The transfer of ‘Russian history from Kyiv Rus’ has its origins in the imperialist Russian school of history . It was expounded by nineteenth century historians Sergey M.Solovyov and Vasily O Kliuchevskyi .
 Martin only devotes four lines to the alternative view propounded by the Ukrainian historian Hrushevskyy . Martin's view is based on the view of the Ukrainian history of the Ukraine. Martin's views are based on a book written by the historian.
 Hosking’s writing is that Rus constituted one united entity that would have evolved into a Russian nation-state if only its unity had not been destroyed by the Mongol invasion .
 Hosking and other Western historians of ‘Russia’ cannot explain how “Russians’ who allegedly happened to live in today’s Ukraine in the medieval era, were replaced by “Ukrainians” at an undisclosed later stage .
 Hosking, typically for many Western historians of ‘Russia,’ belittles the Belarusians who do not seem to know who they are .
 This poor analysis of Ukrainian national identity lay behind Putin's assumption that Ukraine’s Russian speakers would support Russian intervention in ‘Novorossiya’ (easternsouthern Ukraine) in spring 2014 .
 Ukrainian soldiers fighting Putin's proxies in the Donbas are Russian speakers . Dnipropetrovsk region has the highest Ukrainian number of military casualties .
 The Concise Columbia Encyclopaedia admits that Kyiv Rus included all of present-day Ukraine and Belarus and only north-western Russia . This does not influence its conflation of KyivRus into ‘Russian history’
 The history of Rus is assumed to be part of ‘The Origins of Russia’ which allegedly Christianised itself in 988 . It is also assumed that Rus was part of the ‘Origination of Russia.’
 This is also what Putin believed and, in both cases, it is historically inaccurate . This is what Putin thought and in both case, it's also what he believed and what he thought .
 The Soviet state commemorated the millennium of “Russian’s 10 Christianity in Moscow in 1988 in a city which did not exist until nearly two centuries after Christianity arrived in Kyiv and six centuries after the founding of Kyiv itself .
 A 17-metre monument to Kyiv Rus Grand Prince Volodymyr the Great was unveiled in Moscow in November 2016 . Putin subscribes to this mythological history of "Russia"
 Western historians are in agreement with Russian nationalists such as Putin about “Kiev Russia” as being the first stage of ‘Russian’ history .
 Ukrainians stubbornly refuse to follow Belarusians as a branch of the Russkii people . They are equally as confused about why Ukrainians refuse to Follow Belarusians .
 The 2014 crisis has widened the gulf between Ukrainian and Russian national identities . This confusion is even more the case since the 2014 crisis which has widen the gulf .
 Ukraine-Russia divorce that began in 1992 and speeded up after 2014 is irreversible. Their confusion will only grow as the Ukraine- Russia divorce that started in 1992 is irreversible . The divorce is expected to continue until 2014 .
 Current debates about whether monuments to racists, imperialists and those who committed crimes against humanity against native peoples have had no impact upon Western historians of “Russia’s and Russian politics experts .
 If scholars and journalists wrote that European settlers who landed in 1607–1608 in Virginia and Quebec were “native peoples, they would be rightly accused of racism’s.
 Russian and 11 Western historians and Russian politicians continue to describe ‘Russians’ as the “native people’ of the Crimea . Yet, they continue to say “Russians'’s” are the ‘native people of Crimea.
Russian rule over Crimea has been disastrous for the indigenous Crimean Tatars . European settlers were for First Native and indigenous peoples in North and South America, Australia and New Zealand . Western and Russian racism has been a continued unwillingness to accept Russian rule over the Crimea .
 In these continents and countries, First Native and indigenous peoples experienced forced assimilation, the taking away of their children from parents, destruction of cultures and genocide .
 Museums and history textbooks no longer portray European settlers arriving in an empty Canadian land .
 Prime Ministers have publicly apologised for past mistreatment of First Nations . They describe them as Canada's indigenous people .
 Malcolm Turnbull said ‘The impact of European settlement on Aboriginals was tragic, of course it was.’
 Continents and countries that have experienced European settlers are coming to terms with their past racism, exploitation, assimilation, and genocide of First Nation indigenous 12 peoples .
 Centre-left, liberal and green governments are seeking to redress past crimes . Centre- left, liberal, green governments want to redress previous crimes .
 All political forces, including on the centre-right, describe the indigenous native peoples as First Nations .
0,000 of the 300,000 Crimean Tatars emigrated to Ottoman Turkey in the nineteenth century . Russian rule over the Crimea included all of the elements found in white settler rule of the America’s, Australia and New Zealand .
 In the Crimea they were subjected to racism, ethnic and religious discrimination, assimilationist policies and in 1944, ethnic cleansing to Soviet Central Asia .
 The ethnic cleansing of Crimean Tatars, in May 1944, is commemorated as a genocide by Tatars each year . Half of them perished during the deportation .
 Russian occupation authorities in Crimea have revived Soviet era repressive policies of imprisonment, closing down of Tatar institutions and deportations . Tatar leaders and abduction and possible murder of up to 17 Crimean Tatar activists are possible .
 Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz was sentenced to eight years imprisonment by Russian occupation authorities . He was jailed for eight years by the occupation authorities.
 Western historians and experts have depicted Crimean history in a racist manner by excluding, marginalising or ignoring the indigenous Crimean Tatars .
 Crimean Tatars have claimed Crimea as “Russian’s’ Crimea has led to them muting and denying the new round of human rights violations and crimes committed against Crimean Tatar .
 In Western books written about the 2014 crisis, repression of Crimean Tatars is marginalised or downplayed by apologists and some experts on Russian politics .
 Canadians, Americans, Australians, and other white settler countries also built museums and published textbooks with a similar claim that the Europeans had arrived in an empty land . These have been long replaced by greater inclusivity incorporating indigenous First Nations .
 Western and Russian scholars and Russian politicians continue to use an imperialist approach to “Russian’s history and a racist exclusion of indigenous Crimean Tatars .
 Crimea should be returned to Tatars who ruled the peninsula from the thirteenth to the late eighteenth century . Magocsi and Andrew Wilson both point out that if length of time within a state is the criterion we use to decide to decide who Crimea should belong, then it should be
 The Slavic population of the Crimea only arrived in the 19th century . The Crimea only came to Crimea in the nineteenth century .
 The Crimea was annexed by Russia in 1783, but was under Russian rule for seventy-three years . Wilson calculates that the Crimea was only truly Russian from the Crimean War of 1853-56 until 1917 .
 Plokhy has written how Russian imperial identity was forged during Muscovy’s expansionism . It asserted ‘myths of origins’ by laying historical, ideological and dynastic claims to Kyiv Rus .
 Muscovite Tsars and contemporary Russian presidents claimed descent from Kyiv Rus Grand Princes . The Russian state is the birthplace of the “Russian state”
 As part of this mythology they claimed Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians are branches of the “Russian people’s” mythology .
 Moscow, the “Third Rome,’ became the successor to Constantinople which had fallen to the Ottoman Turks . Moscow became the "Third Rome"
 This imperialist history became – and remains the norm for Western historians when writing about “Russia’s’ and the Crimea .
 Muscovy and the Tsarist Russian Empire sought to block the emergence of Ukrainian national identity .
 The Ukrainian language was the only one to be banned in Tsarist Empire in the nineteenth century . The language was banned in the 19th century .
 Ukrainian identity was being repressed in the Tsarist Empire while it was being promoted in the Austrian-Hungarian Empire .
 Anne Applebaum discusses the origins of Chekist Ukrainophobia in the early 1930s during the Holodomor and mass arrest of national 15 communists, educators and cultural elites .
 This took place amid a frenzied search for ‘Petlurite counter-revolutionaries’ allied to external enemies of the Soviet Union .
 Paranoia about Ukrainian nationalism “was taught to every successive generation of secret policemen, from the OGPU to the NKVD to the KGB, as well as every successive generations of party leaders,’s party leaders .
 Imperialist thinking permeates even left-wing scholars, such as Sakwa and Chris Kaspar de Ploeg .
 Putin’s imperialism and racism emerged in 2007 with the launch of Russkii Mir which elaborates a common, ‘fraternal’ and ever-lasting Slavic and Orthodox “civilisation’ for Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians .
 This was further crystallised during the 1020th and 1025th anniversaries of the adoption of Christianity by Kyiv Rus in 2008 and 2013 .
 Putin was invited by his Ukrainian satrap, President Viktor Yanukovych, to participate in celebrations organised by the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine .
 Putin’s renewed emphasis on the “fraternal” and “irrevocable unity’ of the three eastern Slavic peoples . Ukraine's destiny as lying within the Russkii Mir therefore predates the 2014 crisis by many years .
 The Russian Orthodox Church and President Putin persistently highlight the eternal “fraternal bonds of Russians and Ukrainians, stretching from ‘Kievan Russia’ to the present . The Russian Patriarchal Church and Russian President Putin have been in touch for years .
 Ukraine as the origin of “Russian civilisation was clearly laid out in Putin’s 18 March 2014 speech to the State Duma and Federation Council welcoming Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation . Ukraine was the first country in Russia to be granted access to the
Today these 17 areas form the southeast of Ukraine. This was done with no consideration for the ethnic make-up of the population .
 In 1954, Crimean Region was transferred to Ukraine, along with Sevastopol, despite the fact that it was a federal city . Then, in 1954, a decision was made to transfer Crimean Region to Ukraine .
 Tatars and Ukrainians accounted for 36% in Ukraine's 2001 census . Many of them did not support Russia’s annexation in spring 2014 .
 It is impossible to accept that Sergei Aksyonov, who was installed by Russian troops as Crimean Prime Minister, was a popular political figure . It is also impossible to believe that Sergei Aksyonova, also known as a popular politician.
 Aksyonov’s neo-Nazi Russian Unity party, which harbours racist and xenophobic attitudes towards Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians, won only 4% of the vote .
 Ukrainians and Belarusians were ignored and only appeared briefly in the mid-seventeenth century . Cossacks who allied themselves with Muscovy and then again in 1917 .
 There are no Ukrainian people and there are three “branches’ of the “Russian’s people. It was never made clear how Ukrainians came to be living on territory that had been “primordial Russian” territory .
 Russia's first nation-state should become the basis for a new history of Russia based upon the territory of the Russian Federation . Since 1992, Russia’s first state should be the basis of a new Russian history .
 This civic-territorial approach would support Russia’s democratisation by dropping imperialist and racist approaches to history . This would help Russia's democratisation.
 In the post-Soviet era, imperialist and racist Tsarist, Soviet and Western histories of "Russia" are out of step with the times, says CNN's John Sutter . In the Soviet era, "Russia's" history is "out of step" with
Historians should write new histories of Russia which are confined to the territorial boundaries of the Russian Federation .
 Western and Russian historians support the mythology underpinning Russian territorial claims to the Crimea and Novorossiya . Russian hegemony over a Ukraine that “naturally” belongs to the Russkii Mir .
 This approach defines Russians not Tatars – as the so-called “indigenous people of the Crimea’s Crimea . This approach is not the same as that of the ‘indigenous’ people of Crimea .
 A history of Russia based upon the Russian Federation would accomplish three tasks . A history based upon Russia's territorial history would accomplish the tasks .
 It would no longer equate the Russian empire with a budding Russian nation-state .
 It would no longer incorporate Belarusians and Ukrainians within “Russian’s’ history . It would also no longer include Ukrainians and Belarusians in ‘Russian history’
Thirdly, it would support civic Russian nation building within the borders of the Russian Federation . Thirdly it would back civic Russian building within Russia's borders .
 In the twenty-first century, and a quarter of a century after the USSR disintegrated, it is incumbent upon Western historians to end their use of an imperialist historiography .
 Imperialist historical writing leads to chauvinism towards Ukrainians and racism towards Crimean Tatars that should have no place in the twenty first century. Imperialist history leads to a chauvinist attitude towards Ukrainians .
 Ukraine and the Challenge to the European Order, Putin’s War Against Ukraine, is Putin's War against Ukraine . Putin's war against Ukraine is the latest in a long line of anti-Ukrainian actions .
 Chamber of Commerce Maastricht 41078444 20 NOTES . Richard Sakwa, Frontline Ukraine, is the head of the Ukraine's frontline Ukraine .
 Magocsi's and Plokhy’s histories have been re-published in Ukraine . They are extensively used since the early 1990s .
 The Seventeenth Annual Philadelphia Theta Distinguished Lecture on History, 1977, 9.9.2.