 The authors employ content analysis to examine how the conflict was represented and interpreted in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian online communities during the peak of violence in 2014 .
 The findings point to the existence of profound differences in framing the conflict among proUkrainian and pro-Russian online communities . The findings are based on the findings of the Russian and Ukrainian online communities.
 The former tended to interpret the conflict as a limited military action against local insurgents . The latter presented it as an all-out war against the Russian population of Eastern Ukraine .
 The article suggests that framing the conflict through social media facilitated the propagation of mutually exclusive views on the conflict and led to the formation of divergent expectations in Ukraine and Russia concerning the outcome of the war in Donbas .
 An unshaven man with a machine gun waves a toy monkey from the downed Malaysia Airlines plane in front of photographers .
 A column of armoured personnel carriers flying Ukrainian flags speeds through a dusty country road . The Ukrainian flags fly through the country road.
 A group of armed insurgents with an Eastern Orthodox icon and a Russian imperial flag sit around a military truck .
Small company of smiling Ukrainian soldiers with new automatic rifles stand in a sunflower field under the blue sky .
 Thousands of images flooded Ukrainian and Russian social networking sites in summer 2014 . Internet users from both countries perceived and interpreted conflict between Ukrainian army and pro-Russian insurgents in Eastern Ukraine .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine is also known as the war in Donbas . In our article, we investigate the role of social media in visual framing of the conflict .
 Hoskins and O’Loughlin argue that in the current age of mediatized war, the media become an integral part of warfare . They argue that the media is a key part of the conflict, affecting the ways in which the conflict is perceived by the public .
Digital media ‘form a pivotal discursive territory’ for framing past and present conflict alike, says author . The recognition of this transformation is particularly urgent in the case of post-socialist countries, such as Ukraine and Russia .
In order to contribute to the conflict framing research in the post-socialist context, we examined the emergence of visual frames related to the war in Eastern Ukraine in social media, using data from Vkontakte .
Images published in two public Vkontakte groups – Anti-terrorist operation and Reports from the Novorossiyan Militia – in the second half of summer 2014 .
 The origins of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine can be traced back to pro-Russian rallies, which took place in March 2014 in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 The crisis of legitimacy of the post-Yanukovich government, together with the fear of disruption of cultural and economic relations with Russia, served as a starting point for the wave of anti-government protests . Russia was historically strong.
 Crimea referendum resulted in the annexation of Crimea by Russia on 18 March . rallies intensified during the Crimean crisis, reaching their peak after referendum .
 The next day, the Ukrainian government led by Oleksand Turchinov announced that ‘anti-terrorist measures’ would be taken against armed insurgents in Eastern Ukraine .
 The proRussian militant groups continued to expand their control over the Donbas region . They captured administrative buildings and police stations in Kramatorsk, Horlivka and Mariupol .
 Sloviansk was captured by pro-Russian insurgents led by Igor Girkin2 on 12 April . The city became the centre of rebellion as well as a place of major confrontation between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russia forces .
 The conflict escalated in May 2014 after a referendum was held in DNR and LNR calling for two independent People’s Republics . The presidential elections in Ukraine were won by Petro Poroshenko .
 Following Poroshenko's promise to end the anti-terrorist operation in ‘a matter of hours’ Ukrainian army started advancing to insurgent-controlled territory at the end of May .
 A number of skirmishes took place both in and around Donetsk and Luhansk, resulting in dozens of deaths on both sides .
 Pro-government forces managed to re-capture a number of cities in Eastern Ukraine, including Krasnyi Liman and Mariupol . Despite active resistance from the People’s Republics, which presumably received military support from Russia, they managed to
 The Ukrainian government declared a week-long ceasefire in an attempt to implement Poroshenko’s peace plan . Both sides used armoured vehicles and tanks in a massive battle near Yampil on 19 June .
 The compromise, however, was not reached, and the fighting continued with a new government offensive that started on 1 July .
 Ukrainian army seized Sloviansk, which for three months remained a major insurgent stronghold . Besides capturing a number of villages in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, on 5 July the Ukrainian army seize Sloviank .
 The army’s offensive continued in the following days, resulting in the capture of Kramatorsk and Artemivsk and the retreat of insurgent troops under the command of Girkin to the Donetsk city .
 The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on 17 July brought a brief break to the fighting . Both the Ukrainian government and insurgents blamed each other for the destruction of the plane .
 Ukrainian forces continue to capture small towns across Donbas in order to surround and isolate insurgent forces . At the same time, the Ukrainian troops undertook another attempt to secure a border between Ukraine and Russia .
 The city of Horlivka, one of the major industrial hubs in the Donbas region, also came under heavy shelling . Dozens of deaths and flight of the civilian population were reported .
 Ukrainian government forces were not able to secure the Ukrainian state border at the end of July .
 attempts to surround Donetsk and isolate the territory of DNR failed after a series of meeting engagements around Shakhtarsk and Miusinsk .
During the battle of Ilovaisk, pro-Russian insurgents started their counteroffensive, which resulted in the encirclement of Ukrainian troops, including several volunteer battalions . The decisive breakthrough occurred in the second half of August when, during the battle, the pro-Russia
Up to 4,000 Russian soldiers participated in the insurgent counteroffensive, according to the Ukrainian side . The Ukrainian side says the counteroffensive was supported by regular Russian army troops .
 The People’s Republics and the first Minsk agreements were intended to ensure a ceasefire between the Ukrainian government and insurgents . The subsequent advancement of insurgent forces resulted in the expansion of the territories of the People's Republics .
Frames themselves can be understood as organizing principles that are both socially shared and persistent . Reese argues that by revealing those principles through symbolic forms of expressions, individuals and societies can meaningfully structure the social world around them .
 D’Angelo notes that in the process of frame building both types of frames interact with each other as the prior knowledge that individuals have is essential for the processing of information conveyed in media frames .
 The role of media frames is important in any social context because their selection affects the way in which an audience perceives a particular issue . Media frames are important because they are important in social context .
 The increased connectivity of today’s media ecology facilitates the dissemination of images and stories related to war and conflict across the globe . But such an unprecedented visibility of modern conflicts has an ambivalent impact on their representation .
 The use of visual images has significant potential for the framing effort . Despite the prevalence of analyses of verbal accounts of conflicts, the use of images is significant .
Schwalbe and Dougherty say images are processed quicker than texts . They say they also produce an immediate emotional response .
 visual frames have a higher degree of memorability, which makes their impact higher as compared with verbal ones . Parry argues that visual frames make their impact as much as verbal frames .
 The majority of works dedicated to visual framing of conflicts rely upon news media, such as newspapers and information agencies . The majority are based on data from news media .
 Social media is a major source of frames for professional journalists for mainstream media . Social media should also be recognized, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Neumann and Fahmy note that social media reinforce the impact of visual images by facilitating and accelerating their distribution .
 Hamdy and Gomaa studied 2011 civic unrest in Egypt . They found social media was distinguished from other media platforms by their interactivity and participatory potential .
 Only a few works examine the use of social media for framing the post-Euromaidan Ukraine crisis .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian social media users . This article strives to achieve better understanding of the ways digital visuals are used for framing contemporary conflicts .
Methodology used data from Vkontake, which is one of the most popular social networking sites in post-socialist countries . The study was based on data from the social networking site Vkonake .
 Vkontake audience is significantly larger than other social networking sites, such as Twitter, Facebook, or LiveJournal . The audience of VKontake in these two countries is significantly bigger than other sites .
 27 million Ukrainian users registered on Vkontakte in 2014, twice as large as the second most popular social networking site in Ukraine, Odnoklasniki .
 The first group was founded on 6 April 2014, and at the time of data collection it included more than 118,000 members . At the time, the group expressed support for the Ukrainian government .
 The second group was founded on 26 May 2014 and at the time of data collection it included almost 440,000 members and supported the proRussian insurgents . At the time, the second group included almost440,000 people .
 The choice of groups was related to several factors, including their similar thematic and administrative profiles . The large number of subscribers and the large amount of visual materials published .
We coded all images from our sample using a selection of metrics, which are described below . The images were used to create content analysis of conflict-related images .
In our selection of categories, we relied on previous works by Griffin and Lee on visual representation of the Gulf war . In our selection, we used previous works, in particular the study by Griffin.
 All the above-mentioned classifications were produced by two independent coders, each of whom examined all images from the collection .
 In the case of discrepancies, two original coders discussed and consensus-coded them . This procedure was used for all classifications in this article .
 Vkontakte users received images from different categories. After classifying images based on their content features, we used descriptive statistics for examining how users received pictures .
 The Like button in Vkontakte indicates that a user added a certain object to the list of his or her preferred materials . Similar to Facebook, the use of the Like button indicates that the user adds a certain item to his or his preferred materials, which would be recommended to
 likes allow for not only expressing interest towards certain materials, but also automatically sharing them with friends . Unlike comments, likes do not appear in activity feed of users’ friends .
 We counted the number of likes and comments that each individual image received . We then calculated five-number summaries to examine what kind of reactions were provoked by different categories .
 The ATO group was mostly active in the second half of July and in the third half of August . Unlike the RftNM group, the ATO Group sustained consistent activity during the whole period .
 The low activity in one group was contrasted by the high activity in another one, according to the study .
Local peaks of activity in the ATO group were contrasted by activity drops in the RftNM group and vice versa . This pattern is particularly illustrative in the period between 17 July and 28 July .
 The ATO and RftNM groups were involved in the conflict . The conflict was related to the course of the conflict, according to the authors .
 The rate of frame production increased at the time of gains for a particular side and decreased at the times of losses .
 In the ATO group, the largest activity was observed in the second half of July . It was the period of significant gains for the Ukrainian army that preceded the encirclement of Ukrainian troops .
 The rise of activity was observed at the end of July and the beginning of August, which corresponds to several successful meeting engagements around Shakhtarsk and the encirclement of the large group of Ukrainian troops .
 The largest peak of activity of the RftNM group corresponds to the turning point in the conflict . Successful defensive actions on the part of pro-Russian insurgents allowed them to stop the advancement of the Ukrainian army in Ilovaisk .
 The August peak was related to the appearance of messages about the active involvement of the Russian army in the conflict and the presence of regular Russian units near Ilovaisk .
 The dynamics of frame production in proUkrainian and pro-Russian communities changed significantly during the conflict . These changes seem to be influenced by the course of the conflict itself, authors say .
 In both the ATO and RftNM groups, the increase in framing activity corresponded to periods of military gains with activity peaks often coinciding with the end of successful military operations .
 The conflict can be connected to the coverage of the conflict in mainstream media, which in the case of Ukraine was mostly focused on successful advancement of Ukrainian troops . Russian media with its emphasis on the suffering endured by civilians and criticism of Ukraine's actions was more consistent in its coverage.
We examined the content features of images used in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian communities . We examined the dynamics of frame production .
 The ATO and RftNM groups were equally rarely employed in the ATO groups . However, these similarities mainly concerned the least frequent thematic categories of images .
Both sides employed relatively few images of combat action and enemies . Both sides employed little images of each other .
Some similarities in thematic selection of images that we observed between the two groups also contrasted with recognized patterns of framing conflicts in mainstream media . Some similarities in the images were similar to those that we found in other images .
 The majority of individuals present on images were rank-and-file combatants or ordinary civilians . The majority were prominent military figures, such as Girkin, or political leaders .
 Both Vkontakte groups employed images of dead combatants and civilians more frequently than mainstream media . This can be explained by a lower risk of reputational damage and thus lesser incentive for censorship .
 The conflict was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users . Despite these similarities, our findings also pointed to the presence of profound differences in how the conflict is framed .
 The ATO group represented the war in Donbas through images of shining military vehicles and photogenic young soldiers . Similar to the way recent conflicts were portrayed in Western mainstream media .
 A number of images with recognizable symbols, such as blue and yellow flags, appeared more frequently than in the case of the RftNM group . This patriotic perspective on the conflict was amplified by a number of symbols .
 The frequent use of such images can be viewed as a combination of two common strategies of security depiction . It is also worth noting that images of civilians were almost absent from the ATO group, which instead focused on the images of combatants .
Pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian communities can be traced in the way human actors were represented in both groups . Further distinctions between framing of the conflict by pro-Ukranian and Pro-Russian groups can also be traced .
 RftNM group used images to highlight non-military aspects of the conflict . The images evoked more emotional reactions from users .
 The most common number of people showed on images was either one or between two and five . In the ATO group such images usually showed combatants, who posed as lone fighters or brothers in arms .
 The majority of images of single individuals from the RftNM group propagated feelings of isolation and suffering by showing civilians .
 These observations point to the presence of profound differences in framing the conflict in Eastern Ukraine by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users .
 The former tended to use visual images for propagating the patriotic view on the events in Eastern Ukraine and emphasizing ‘the good war’ interpretation of the conflict .
 For these purposes, images of combatants, military machines and captured trophies were mostly used . In contrast, images that showed traces of destruction or civilians were underrepresented .
 The opposite situation was observed in the pro-Russian community, which accentuated images of destruction and suffering civilians . Such a selection of visual images led to the representation of the conflict as an humanitarian crisis, according to CNN .
 Vkontakte users used likes and comments as indicators of interest towards particular categories of images .
Pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users interacted with distinct categories of thematic as well as gender/ age/number content features . A separate study would be necessary for the detailed investigation of factors that influenced the reception of individual images .
 Images from this category usually show kittens and puppies, often sitting on the knees of combatants or civilians .
 Images of significant personalities, such as Poroshenko, Semenchenko and Girkin, were frequently liked by both sides .
 The popularity of the personalities category among Vkontakte users can be attributed to the frequent use of images of military leaders by mainstream media . Internet users recognized this pattern and reacted to it positively by liking images of this sort .
 The last category of images was also popular among pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users . The images showed maps of the conflict .
 The popularity of maps can be explained by their interpretative potential, we suggest . It was particularly valuable in the context of chaos and misinformation that characterized the conflict in Eastern Ukraine in 2014 .
 We also identified several thematic categories that were popular in one group, but attracted lesser attention in the other one .
In the ATO group, images of enemies, mostly, prisoners of war, attracted significantly greater attention than in the RftNM group . For instance, in the ATo group, pictures of enemies attracted much greater attention .
Pro-Ukrainian users tended to like images that emphasized gains on their side, in particular captured enemy soldiers . It can be viewed as a positive reception of the belittling strategy of the depiction of the Other, which should make the Other's threat look manageable .
Pro-Ukrainian side. At the same time, such images had significant interpretative value because they allowed supporters of the pro-Ukranian side to visualize their opponents .
 Pro-Russian users were particularly eager to like images that were dealing with insurgent forces . They presented them as the defenders of the Russian population and/or the Orthodox faith in Donbas .
 We identified categories that attracted the least popularity from Vkontakte users .
 In both groups, images related to local landscapes and documents received the least number of likes .
 Images related to dead people attracted few likes compared to other categories. Similarly, images related to the deceased attracted few Likes .
 Both sides preferred to conceal more nefarious aspects of war by avoiding liking images that showed them and not recommending them to their friends .
 The ruins category was the least liked in the ATO group . This suggestion is also supported by the relatively small number of likes received by the ruins category .
 Both pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users were active in commenting on images that showed either significant personalities or military maps . Both users were eager to comment on images of animals .
 Images of males attracted a significantly larger number of likes than those of females . In both cases, images of male males attracted significantly larger numbers of likes .
 Both sides preferred to interpret the conflict in Eastern Ukraine as a male affair . Such a distribution can be viewed as an indicator that both sides preferred the conflict to be seen as male .
 The number of likes was higher for images that showed adults, which can be viewed as another point of agreement between both sides .
 The number of likes tended to increase according to the number of individuals present in the image . In both cases, the likes tend to increase.
Despite the relatively small number of images showing large groups of individuals, such images attracted the largest number of likes from Vkontakte users .
Military conflicts were represented as communal efforts with a larger emphasis on collective, rather than individual, aspects of the war . The latter observation can be connected with established patterns of portraying war both in the Soviet and post-Soviet period .
 Unlike likes, which were mostly associated with images of males, comments in both cases were mostly produced in relation to images of females .
 Burke and Develin say social networking images tend to provoke more empathic reactions from web users . Such a distribution can be explained by the predominantly negative sentiment of the latter images .
 The same logic can explain the larger number of comments for images that showed actors of mixed ages .
 The RftNM group usually showed either living or dead women with children and thus invoked more compassionate reactions in the form of verbal comments .
Pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users tended to present the conflict in Donbas to their personal audiences outside the ATO and RftNM groups . Like buttons in Vkontake, users can share the conflict with their friends .
 Both sides preferred to avoid the more gruesome sides of the war and instead emphasize more light-hearted and/or symbolic (i.e. national flags and Orthodox icons) sides of conflict .
 The study examined visual framing of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian online communities . The results were published in the Journal of Human Rights and Human Rights journal .
 The war in Donbas experienced significant changes during the period of observation . However, we also found that dynamics of production of visual frames related to the war experienced significant change .
 The supply of visual materials depended on the situation in the conflict zone, says John Sutter . Sutter: These changes seem common for mainstream and social media .
 The fluctuations were particularly significant in the case of the pro-Ukrainian group . The pro-Russian group was more consistent in terms of frame production .
In the case of the pro-Russian group, the group was related to public mobilization and thus required more consistent framing effort . The differences between groups can be traced back to diverse patterns of mainstream media framing of the conflict .
 Study points to the presence of fundamental differences in the way the conflict was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users .
 The former tended to present the conflict in Eastern Ukraine from the patriotic perspective . Such an interpretation was articulated through the predominant use of such thematic categories as military machines, combatants and trophies .
 Pro-Russian users presented the conflict as an humanitarian crisis, emphasizing the destruction and suffering of civilians and ruins . In contrast, pro-Russian user presented the war as a humanitarian crisis .
 The pro-Russian group provided a more nuanced representation of the conflict in terms of gender and age of human actors . Further distinctions were found in the use of content features related to gender/age/number of persons . Both groups tended to frame the conflict as a predominantly male and adult affair
Pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian users were contrasted by similarities in the reception of those features . These profound differences in the choice of content features between pro-Russian users were compared to pro-Ukraine users .
 In both cases, users tended to like those images that articulated light-hearted aspects of the conflict, such as pets or symbols, or those common in mainstream media coverage .
 Images dealing with more gruesome aspects of the conflict, such as death and destruction, garnered less popularity and were confined to online communities where they originated . In contrast, images dealing with the more gruesome aspect of the war were confined.
 The pro-Russian group can be attributed to a recognized social media trend . Images with negative sentiment attract more empathic reactions in the form of comments. Such images, however, spawned a larger number of comments .
Users' reactions to conflict-related frames in social media were influenced by social media trends, such as an affinity for images of cute animals, and mainstream media patterns of conflict framing .
 Vkontakte users presented the conflict to their individual audiences through the use of like buttons . The difference between the ways in which the conflict was framed inside the two initial groups and the way in which users presented it to their own audiences also poses additional questions about the
 The process of frame building on social media becomes less deliberate. Such a double cycle of frame prosumption makes the study of frame setting more complex, because of social media .
 The use of social media for visual framing of the war in Donbas facilitated construction of different views on the conflict in Eastern Ukraine among pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users .
 Pro-Russian users interpreted the conflict as an allout war initiated by an extremist Ukrainian government . Unlike pro-Ukrainian users, pro-Russia users presented the conflict in Eastern Ukraine as a limited military action .
 The conflict in Donbas has been described as one of the most violent conflicts in the world . The conflict is currently being fought in the region of Donbas .
 Social media have complicated the potential dialogue between Ukraine and the People's Republics, says author . We argue that social media has aggravated collective traumas from both sides of the frontline . The Ilovaisk battle and the Minsk agreements interfered with the above-mentioned patterns in framing the
 This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors .
 Igor Strelkov is a former Russian officer, who allegedly served in Russia’s Federal Security Service before retirement in 2013 . More commonly known as Igor St Relkov, Girkin is a ex-Russian officer .
 He participated in several military conflicts in Eastern Europe, including those in Transnistria, Bosnia and Chechnya .
 In 2014, Girkin became one of the major leaders of pro-Russian paramilitary units in Crimea . He played an important role in the annexation of the peninsula by Russia .
 Girkin became one of the leaders of the military insurgency in Eastern Ukraine until August 2014 . He resigned and returned to Russia after the withdrawal of Crimea .
 The Ukraine crisis continued beyond the first Minsk agreements in September 2014 . We are not examining its subsequent stages in this article because of the focus on the conflict's early stage .
 The suggestion is related to general confusion that characterized the representation of enemies of the Ukrainian army in Eastern Ukraine both in mainstream and digital Ukrainian media .
 Ukrainian media provided rather fragmentary images of opponents, ranging from Russian special forces and conscripts to local bandits .
 visual frames that allowed pro-Ukrainian users to see what kind of enemy the Ukrainian army was dealing with were able to attract significant interest .
 I Effects of visual framing on emotional responses and evaluations of news stories about the Gaza conflict 2009. Brantner C, Lobinger K and Wetzstein I effects of visualframing on emotional response to stories about Gaza conflict .
 CSCW ‘16 Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. CSCw is the first time the conference has been held in the U.S. since 1998 .
 D’Angelo P, Kuypers J. Doing News Framing Analysis: Empirical, Theoretical, and Normative Perspectives .
 Demirjian K and Birnbaum M Russia reported firing of artillery inside Ukraine . The incident comes amid tensions with aid convoy .
 Dubrovkin D Erich Fromm’s ‘Escape from Freedom’ as a ‘Field Manual’ for Donbas .
 Fahmy S and Kim D Picturing the Iraq War constructing the image of war in the British and U.S. press . The Iraq War was the first time the war was fought in the UK and the United States .
 Greenwood K and Jenkins J Visual framing of the Syrian conflict in news and public affairs magazines . Greenwood K, Jenkins Jvisual framing of Syrian conflict.
 Constructing an image of the war in Time, Newsweek, and U.S. News & World Report. Constructing a photo of the War in Time .
Hamdy N and Gomaa E Framing the Egyptian uprising in Arabic language newspapers and social media . Hamdy N. E Framed the uprising in Egyptian language newspapers, social media and newspapers .
 WWW ‘14 Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web’ is held in New York .
 Kuntsman A Online memories, digital conflicts and the cybertouch of war . Kuntsmen A Online.
 Analyzing the role of technologies in various phases of the confrontation . Analyzing role of technology in various parts of the conflict .
 Markwick R. The great patriotic war in Soviet and post-Soviet collective memory . MarkwickR. The Great patriotic war.
 Messaris P and Abraham L. L. The convergence of agenda setting and framing is the result of the two men's work .
 A war/peace framing analysis of the Sri Lankan civil war in Western newswires .
 Visual framing, humanitarianism and British press photography during the 2003 Iraq invasion .
Schwalbe C Visually framing the invasion and occupation of Iraq in TIME, Newsweek, Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report . SchwalbeC Visually framed the invasion in TIME and Newsweek .
 An analysis of Georgian online and print news around the 2008 Russo-Georgian War . The Russian War was the first Russian war in Russia .
 Turchynov declared the beginning of anti-terrorist operation in South-Eastern Ukraine . Turchinov ob’javil o nachale antiterroristicheskoj operacii na jugo-vostoke Ukraine .
 The SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems is held in New York . The conference is the first of its kind in the U.S.
 His PhD research is focused on Second World War memory in Ukraine and how it is affected by the processes of de-Sovietization, nationalization and digitization .
 In his recent research, he has also explored the use of social media in the context of the Ukraine crisis and the role of cultural memory in securitization of the conflict .
 Maryna Sydorova is an Amsterdam-based data analyst . She is currently working as an independent social media expert and information and communication technology specialist .
 In the recent years she was involved in a number of research projects which were dealing with digital trauma in Eastern and Central Europe .
 Her major area of expertise is audience/interest metrics . Her current research is focused on digital representation of war and conflict in post-socialist states .