 A group of youngsters performs as part of a Youth Ballet and Contemporary Dance of Saskatchewan recital at Conexus Arts Centre on Sunday .
 The dancers took the stage during a portion of the program based on fairy tales, including Twelve Dancing Princesses, Princess and the Pea and Sleeping Beauty .
 The company also held a recital on Saturday night, ross romaniuk/metro Wildfire forces evacuation of Stanley Mission .
 Stanley Mission First Nation in Saskatoon ordered to evacuate as wildfire threatens the community's only access road and power source . Hundreds find refuge elsewhere as blaze threatens community's sole access road .
 The largest of nine wildfires in Saskatchewan is said to cover about 4,000 hectares . The blaze north of Stanley Mission is the largest in the province .
 Response teams and aircraft have joined the battle to stop the fire from reaching the road . Firefighters have been called in to help stop the blaze.
 Saskatchewan’s water bombers are fighting the blaze out of La Ronge, about 80 kilometres away . The province has ordered further aerial support from Ontario .
 provincial co-ordinator of emergency social services said 1,100 more people would be needed . Deanna Wysoslcey said the government is able to accommodate 1, 100 more people if needed .
 Emergency liaison crews were sent in on Wednesday after two fires were brought under control . One of the fires has since been brought undercontrol, one of which has been put under control.
 FURNITURE & ACCESSORIES (kitchen tables, pictures, lamps, mirrors, coffee & end tables) TAKE an ADDITIONAL 10% off* of Sale tags of items already reduced .
 Most low rate mortgages come with restrictive terms that could keep you in your mortgage longer than you'd like . But most low rate mortgage rates come with less restrictive terms than you want .
 Instead of thinking about the cost of your mortgage in rate terms, think about it in dollar terms .
 The key to saving interest costs is having the flexibility to increase payments or make extra payments .
 With rates as low as they are, regular lump sum and increased payments will save you more interest over your mortgage .
 Small changes can make a big difference in helping you become mortgage-free faster . Keep in mind that small changes are essential so keeping that flexibility is essential .
 We refuse to overload our mortgages with restrictions and we insist on giving people competitively low rates . The only way we can do it is for a limited time, we say .
 A typical appraisal fee of $300 is assumed, the APR equals 3.02% (compounded semi-annually, not in advance), for a term of 5 years assuming a mortgage of $100,000 with a 25-year amortization .
 A typical appraisal fee of $300 is assumed, the APR equals 2.52% . For a term of 5 years assuming a mortgage of $100,000 with a 25-year amortization .
 The Scotia Flex Value® Mortgage interest rate varies with Scotiabank Prime . The mortgage interest rate is at the same rate as the mortgage rate .
 These offers expire June 7th, 2014 but are subject to change or withdrawal at any time . The offers expire on July 7th .
 If you keep your monthly payment frequency, apply annual lump sum prepayments of $500 and increase your regular payments by just $20 every year . After your first year, you will decrease your amortization to less than 21 years and save approximately $18,923 in interest
 Taxpayer advocate urges accountability after big jump in wastewater report's contract value . A consultant's report on regional collaboration opportunities for wastewater services went $82,000 over budget .
City officials need to be more vigilant when it comes to safeguarding the public purse . Colin Craig, Prairie-region director for the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, says city officials need more vigilant .
Craig says the amount over budget appears ‘fairly high’ for a consultant’s report . He cautions against prematurely ringing alarm bells over a possibility that this will lead to the city’'s planned wastewater treatment plant exceeding its projected $224-million price tag .
 In 2013, city staff awarded consulting firm CH2M-HILL a contract to conduct a study on the region's water services .
 The scope of the study was “updated’ to account for the “unanticipated additional amount of consultation time’s required with stakeholders, according to a report prepared by administrative staff . The report is slated to go before council on Monday .
 Actor and playwright Daniel Macdonald reads poetry on Sunday at Regina’s Mercury Cafe and Grill . The Hair of the Dog Cafe wrapped up the Cathedral Village Arts Festival .
Council wards Regina is eyeing a potential adjustment to the boundaries of its 10 city council wards to reflect shifting population patterns and incorporate newly annexed land from the neighbouring Rural Municipality of Sherwood . The festival — held annually — included a street fair on Saturday, as well as many other events throughout
 Boundaries of wards in the east, west, northwest and southwest have been moved to incorporate land absorbed by the city as part of last year's annexation agreement .
 It appears that no voters would become residents of different wards, according to the map .
 The changes appear poised to affect only RM of Sherwood residents who would fall within the city’s enlarged area .
 The map will be on display to the public at city hall from June 9 to 13 . The map is on display at the city hall for the first time .
 The commission will hold public hearings on July 3 to provide information and solicit feedback . The public hearings will take place in the summer .
 The commission will finalize its boundaries proposal and submit it to COUncil . After the hearings, the commission will submit the proposal to the commission .
 Ukrainian soldier, with his daughter, casts a ballot during voting in the presidential election at a polling station in the village of Kovyri in western Ukraine .
 Ukrainian presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko speaks to press at a polling Station in Kyiv .
 May 26, 2014, is Ukraine's decision day Presidential election .
 An exit poll showed that Petro Poroshenko won Ukraine’s presidential election Sunday in the first round . Authorities hoped the vote would unify the deeply fractured nation .
 The ballot took place amid weeks of fighting in Ukraine’s industrial heartland . Pro-Russia separatists have seized government buildings and battled government troops .
 rebels had vowed to block the ballot in the east — and less than 20 per cent of the polling stations were open there .
 The exit poll for Sunday’s election was conducted by three respected Ukrainian survey agencies . The 48-year-old candy tycoon Poroshenko got 55 per cent of the vote .
 Former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenlco was second with 12 per cent of the vote .
 Full results are expected Monday in the election that could be a critical step toward resolving Ukraine’s protracted crisis . The election is expected to be held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 He said his first visit would be to Donbass, Ukraine’s eastern industrial region . He also said he would visit Ukraine's eastern industrial regions .
 Low voter turnout in the east Rebels close polling stations . The question of who was able to vote Sunday loomed large over the democratic process .
 Some 35. million Ukrainians were eligible to vote, but separatists in the eastern Donetsk and Luhanslc regions said they would not hold the vote . They said they are no longer part of Ukraine .
 There was no voting in the city of Luhanslc either, but some stations were open in the region . Some stations were opened in the wider LuHanslc region .
About 50 armed pro-Russia rebels attacked a polling station in Novoaidar, Ukraine . Government forces thwarted the move and captured 13 rebels .
InterfaxUlcraine news agency quoted the deputy interior minister as saying one person was killed and another injured in the fighting . The InterfaxULCraine said one person died and another was injured in fighting .
 Thailand's ruling militaiy council stiffened its warnings Sunday against protests over its takeover of power . Thai military threatens action on protesters.
 Prayuth Chan-ocha expected to receive the king’s endorsement formalizing his status as head of government .
 Prayuth may announce plans for reshaping Thailand’s political scene with an interim constitution . An interim constitution will replace the one scrapped by the army after Thursday's coup .
Ruling National Council for Peace and Order warns that officials may need to strictly enforce an army-imposed law . The law prohibits people from demonstrating against the coup .
 Winthai Suvaree said that in case of clashes in which losses or injuries incur, no compensation can be claimed because the country is under martial law .
 The military has sought to limit the protests by detaining figures who might play leadership roles . On Sunday, protesters appeared to number as many as 2,000, growing from a few hundred on Friday .
 Exit polls show the far right and Euroskeptics have made sweeping gains in European Parliament elections . The far right want to slash the European Union’s powers or abolish it altogether .
 One of the most significant winners appeared to be France’s far-right National Front . The National Front is France's far- right National Front.
 Two polling companies said Sunday that Marine Le Pen was the outright winner in France . The party, led by Marine LePen, won one-quarter of the popular vote, they said .
 Egypt Interim president says vote will shape the nation’s future . Egypt's interim president promises fair election .
 Adly Mansour also sought to assure Egyptians that state institutions, including his office, would not interfere in Monday and Tuesday voting .
 Mansour: "Choosing, without being guided or dictated to, the person we trust to have the ability to build and run the nation" Mansour says the nation's future is in the future .
 Poll results from SVT Sunday suggested seven per cent of Swedes back the feminist party . SVT wants to boost rights of women and minorities in the European Union .
 The poll showed farright Sweden democrats with seven per cent support compared to 3 per cent in 2009 . The poll also showed far right Sweden Democrats with 7 per cent.
 The Pope expresses solidarity with Palestinians Holy Land pilgrimage .
Francis arranged a meeting between the Israeli and Palestinian presidents at the Vatican next month .
 Poland's last communist leader, the general in tinted glasses, died Sunday at age 90 . The meeting, while largely symbolic, shows how the Pope has sought to Poland .
 Wojciech Jaruzelski and his family were deported to Siberia by the Red Army during the Second World War .
 Jaruzelski faithfully imposed Moscow’s will on his subjugated nation until communism crumbled across the region in 1989 .
 Poland is deeply divided over whether to view Jaruzelski as a traitor or as a patriot . Poland is also divided over the decision to spare the bloodshed of a Soviet invasion . The Polish president made an agonizing decision.
 The ASSOCIATED PRESS transform his immensely popular appeal into a moral force for peace .
 Pope arrives in Bethlehem, the birthplace of Christianity, before heading to Israel for the final leg of his visit . The Pope is on a threeday swing through the region .
 Francis mingled warmly with Israeli hosts as he visited Bethlehem . He expressed sympathy and solidarity with the Palestinians .
 The Pope's arrival in Bethlehem carried important symbolic significance . Even the Pope’s arrival by helicopter straight from Jordan was symbolic .
 Past papal visits to the West Bank have come through Israel . Israel captured the territory in the 1967 Mideast war .
 A worker weighs a shark in Banyuwangi, Indonesia, on Sunday .
 Indonesia has become one of the major exporters of meat and shark fins in the world . Indonesia is the world's largest exporter of shark fins and meat .
 Lobbyists in Jamaica are urging the government to move quickly to decriminalize pot and establish a local medical marijuana industry .
 The Cannabis Commercial and Medicinal Research Taskforce organized a threeday conference on marijuana decriminalization with Jamaica’s largest university . The Cannabis commercial and MedicINAL Research Task force organized the conference .
 On Sunday, the lobbyists issued a 12-point roadmap they want the government to follow . The roadmap was released by the government.
 Jamaica can significantly benefit from cannabis commercialization, they say . They assert Jamaica can benefit from the commercialization of cannabis .
 There's a growing push to lift restrictions on the Caribbean island of Caribbean island . Some successes by the legalization movement around the globe, there’s a growingpush to lift the restrictions .
 Some cabinet ministers have publicly taken up the idea . The government has provided little indication of its thinking on the issue .
 Belgium launches a nationwide hunt for a lone gunman who walked into the Jewish Museum . Four people with a short burst of fire were killed with a Kalashnikov rifle .
 Belgian officials raise anti-terror measures and increase protection for Jewish sites . Saturday’s attack was widely seen as an anti-Semitic attack .
 Belgium's national election is on the eve of Belgium's nationwide election . Voters across the continent picked a new European Parliament .
 Video of the attack shows an athletic man with a cap walking into the small Jewish Museum in the swank Sablon area .
 The fourth victim died Sunday afternoon, according to a government official . The news had not yet been officially announced .
 Leaders from Belgium and France, Pope Francis, Benjamin Netanyahu and others condemned the cold-blooded attack .
 The ASSOCIATED PRESS Killer blamed women who rejected him California college rampage . The killer was on a rampage at the University of California .
 Rodger then apparently shot and killed himself inside the black BMW he used in the violence, authorities say .
 The rampage played out largely as he laid it out in the public postings, including a YouTube video where he sits in the BMW in sunset light .
 The first three killed Friday were male stabbing victims in Rodger's own apartment . The names of the victims have not been released .
 At about 9:30m, the citywide shooting and vehicle-ramming rampage began . Then, at about 9.30m., the city wide shooting began . The citywide rampage began in the early hours of the morning .
 No one answered the door after one to two minutes of aggressive pounding, but he soon shot three women who were standing nearby . Two of them were killed, two of them, Veronika Weiss and Katherine Cooper .
 UC Santa Barbara student Christopher Michaels-Martinez, 20, shot and killed another student . He then drove to a deli where he walked inside and shot another student, 20-year-old Christopher Michaels.
 Michaels-Martinez was the last one killed, but the rampage would continue . Rodger drove across Isla Vista, shooting at some and running down others with his car, twice exchanging gunfire with deputies .
 The gunshot to the head that killed him was thought to be self-inflicted, Brown said . He was shot in the hip, but the gunshot was believed to have been self-inlicted .
 Thirteen people were injured, eight from gunshot wounds, four from the vehicle and one whose origin wasn’t clear . Thirteen were injured.
 Brown told CNN on Sunday that investigators were still finalizing next-ofkin notifications and positive identifications . Brown said that investigators are still working on next- ofkin notifications .
 Rodgers' lawyer says the family warned the police about the videos . Rodgers’ lawyer says family warned police about videos .
 Deputies visited Rodger last month after being alerted by local health officials . They had been in touch with the family .
 The right to be forgotten Marketing is the right to forget marketing, says the company .
 An American is pinning the recent court ruling on searchengine results on ‘prissy European sensibilities’ Europe’s moves to rein in Google .
Users should be able to edit Google search results in the name of privacy . But the idea is being slammed as weird and difficult to enforce at best .
 Mountain View, California, says it's still figuring out how to comply with the European Court of Justice’s May 13 ruling . The company must respond to complaints about private information that turns up in searches .
 Google must then decide whether the public’s right to be able to find the information outweighs an individual's right to control it . The associated press taste a lot better than they sound .
 Ottawa has been in Ottawa recently and tried one of Angela Firman and Kathy Aldridge’s Hot Cream Holes .
 The names are sexual and that’s no accident when you talk to the two ladies serving up hot donuts stuffed with ice cream .
 Santamaria’s Bunz and Balls are Italian arancini and ravazzata stuffed with ground beef, green peas and a homemade ragu sauce .
 The cannoli is a long, skinny dessert shaped like a Bunz and Ballz . Customers didn't really take note until they added the cannoli to complement the Bunz.
 He said a good brand goes beyond just a name, but encompasses the entire philosophy and personality of the people behind the business . He said that a goodbrand goes beyond the name, and encompasses the whole philosophy of the company .
 Shopping.com is a popular online shopping site for e-cigarette flavours . The site is based in the UK and Australia .
Thin Mint, Tootsie Roll and Cinnamon Toast Crunch are among the brands battling to keep the flavoured nicotine used in electronic cigarettes .
 General Mills Inc., the Girl Scouts of the USA and Tootsie Roll Industries Inc. are among several companies that have sent ceaseand-desist letters to makers of the liquid nicotine . The companies may take further legal action if necessary .
 They want to make sure their brands aren’t being used to sell an addictive drug or make it appealing to children .
 The actions highlight the debate about the array of flavours available for the battery-powered devices that heat a liquid nicotine solution .
 The Food and Drug Administration last month proposed regulating electronic cigarettes . But didn’t immediately ban fruit or candy flavours, which are barred for use in regular cigarettes .
 The industry reached nearly $2 billion in sales last year in the U.S. It's growing pains for the industry in the face of looming regulation .
 E-cigarette users say the devices address both the addictive and behavioural aspects of smoking without the chemicals found in regular cigarettes .
 There are about 1,500 e-liquid makers in the U.S. and countless others abroad selling vials of nicotine from traditional tobacco to cherry cola on the Internet .
 Using the brand name like Thin Mint or Fireball conjures up a very specific flavour in buyers’ minds .
 Rogers Communications Inc. and a new focus on agility but no large-scale reductions are planned, the company's new chief executive says .
 Rogers president and CEO Guy Laurence spent Friday telling the company’s workforce . He likened it to a bowl of ‘cold spaghetti’ so it can be better at meeting the needs of customers .
 Laurence said he doesn’t expect job losses among the company’s front-line employees . He said he sees investment in that area .
 Analytics has long been a major part of e-commerce. Analytics has been a big part of the online shopping industry .
 RetailNext uses algorithms to interpret data taken from surveillance video cameras and smartphone trackers installed inside some of North America's biggest retailers .
 Video cameras and Wi-Fi trackers can tell store owners details, like how long a customer spends looking at a specific pair of jeans .
 Wi-Fi trackers can be set up on store shelves . They gather data by automatically activating and reading anonymous identifiers in customer's smartphones .
 Raynell Andreychuk in the thick of Sunday’s Ukrainian election was as difficult as trying to secure democracy in a nation that has seen political struggle for generations past .
 Saskatchewan's senator hardly had time for an interview. When the connection was finally made, it was understandable that Saskatchewan’s senator barely had time .
 Andreychuk led Canada's observation missions for the 2010 and 2012 elections in Ukraine . He led Canada’s observation missions in the Ukraine .
Former Ontario premier Mike Harris is leading this year's Ontario election campaign . She is also leading this one as well, with ex-Ontario premier MikeHarris .
 Andreychuk says Ukrainians are weary of crisis after crisis and simply want to get on . He says Ukrainians in Canada and in U.S. and in Canada are tired of the crisis .
 If accepted and unchallenged, this vote will help restore the stability Kyiv needs . If accepted, it will help restored the stability the country needs .
 It will boost solidarity and pride, and perhaps shine a brighter, more hopeful light on the future . It will be a boost to solidarity, pride and hope. It will also be a sign of the future.
 Faith for reform in Ukraine dimmed rapidly after the Orange Revolution of 2004 . Faith for change in Ukrainedimmed rapidly.
 A recognition of Ukraine’s solidarity now should optimistically ease tensions with Russia . A recognition. of Ukraine's solidarity should optimally ease tensions.
 Andreychuk said many have approached her and spoke of Saskatchewan as one of the beacons for Ukrainian immigrants . She said many of the people she spoke of are Ukrainian immigrants.
 Andreychuk is a lawyer, former judge and former ambassador . He hails from Saskatoon, Saskatoon .
 Andreychuk has been an ideal representative for Canada in Ukraine, not only because of her roots, but because of the compassion she delivers for Ukrainians and Canadians alike .
 When I finished my observation mission in 2012,1 was genuinely confused as to who had won, despite media reports and results, which made no sense .
 Andreychuk respects every last one of his observers . For the observers who have taken time away from work or family, he says .
 The Athabasca Glacier is the la rgest of six ice sheets that form partofthe Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park . The Athaasca Glacier in Jasper is the world's largest glacier .
 You should see the AR in action — like a video, slide show or mobile content experience . You should be able to use the AR to help you understand what you want .
 You can even move your phone away from the page and interact with the content directly on your device . You can also use the mobile phone to interact with content on your phone .
 New phone app helps you find your perfect match . If you’re looking for a cat or dog, that is what is your match .
 The PetMatch app allows users to upload an image of a cute critter and then searches its database of animals that are almost identical, and up for adoption .
 The gizmo, launched by California startup Superfish, uses techy algorithms and patented image recognition technology to plot key characteristics (eyes, mouth and colour)
 Metro chats to co-founder Adi Pinhas about why pictures are worth a thousand words .
Animals are a great news case study for a visual search. We started with animals because it’s a greatnews case study .
Technology shows that visual searches can be more fun and efficient than text searches . It demonstrates the technology in a way that shows the technology is more fun than text search .
 Rarely you know the name of a breed’s name or how to search for it . This app does the hard bit for you .
 People are taking images of desserts in a restaurant and we can show them restaurants that are selling similar desserts .
 We're thinking how can we make the camera a lot smarter. Yes, we are looking and we’re thinking how to make it smarter .
 If you want a handbag or want to know the name of a flower, you can take a pic and find out its name and where it is .
 Xavier Dolan’s new film Mommy SCENE 09 Young Canadian wows Cannes jury metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 The Mozart Project By .
 A mind-blowing, definitive look at Mozart's music and genius, this ebook is astonishingly alive .
 There are hours of music, discussion, and short films, all so veiy humbling, surprising, and beautiful . There are many short films.
 Days of Future Past is the second-highest opener in the X-Men franchise . It is the third-highest opening day in the franchise .
 Xavier Dolan won the Juiy Prize for his film Mommy at the Cannes Film Festival Saturday . He shared the honour with French filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard .
 Dolan won the Palme d'Or award for the Turkish drama Winter Sleep . The drama won the festival’s top award for drama Winter sleep .
 Dolan so was moved that he shared his prize with Godard, the 83-year-old film icon . Dolan was moved to share his prize.
 Dolan, 25, was youngest director at the festival, while Godard, 83, was the oldest . Dolan was the youngest director, with Godard (Goodbye to Language), 83, the oldest.
 Dolan was veiy emotional when he went on stage, having to interrupt his speech to regain his composure .
 He seized the opportunity to urge his peers, in terms of age, to think big . He also seized the chance to urge peers to think bigger .
 In 2009 he made a splash with his directorial debut, I Killed My Mother, written when he was just 17 . He made his debut in 2009.
 The film is a semi-autobiographical stoiy about a boy discovering his homosexuality and battling with his mother . The film reportedly earned an eightminute standing ovation at the festival .
 Montreal-born filmmaker began acting in commercials at age four . He appeared in the TV movie Misericorde in 1994, and the 2008 horror film Martyrs in 2008 .
 Moore won the best actress prize at the 67th Cannes Film Festival Saturday for her role as a shallow starlet in Canadian director David Cronenberg’s biting Hollywood satire Maps to the Stars .
 In the film, the 53-year-old redhead plays an aging actress feeling increasingly sidelined by an industry obsessed with youth .
 Moore does a dance of joy that remained one of the enduring shocks of this year's festival . The young son of a rival for a new film role is killed in a freak drowning accident .
 Moore has played everything from a porn star to an FBI agent in her 20-year film career . Her career has already brought four Oscar nominations, two Golden Globes and a Primetime Emmy .
 Her best-known films include 1998’s The Big Lebowslci, Crazy Stupid Love as well as The Hours and Far From Heaven, both from 2002 .
 The actress scored two Oscar nominations for different films in the same year . She joined the elite club of actors to score two nominations in same year.
 Moore won a Golden Globe and an Emmy for portraying Sarah Palin in 2012’s Game Change . The former Alaska governor played Sarah Palin as John McCain's gaffe-prone running mate .
 Robert Pattinson says that “I couldn’t do another Twilight movie.’s Twilights out for too old’ Pattinson STARGAZING Maiene Arpe scene@metronews.ca .
 Women are getting plastic surgeiy on their hands so their engagement ring selfies will look better .
 Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris Martin are still living together even though they've consciously uncoupled Awww . That’s so civilized and wonderful and gives hope to eveiyone terrified they’d inadvertently end up in a relationship .
 Try to think of the longest, most rambling wedding reception speech you’ve ever had to endure .
 The one Kanye West gave this weekend might have been longer and ramblier than he gave this week .
 Kim Kardashian married Kim Kardashian on Saturday at Fort Belvedere in Florence .
 West “went on and on about the culture of being in the limelight and that all the spoofing and tabloid covers don’t get him or the Kardashian family down’s. West said he and Kardashian family are not down to spoofing .
 The site also reported that West “got very heated during certain parts of his speech, but he also had veiy sweet things to say about his new bride .
 Eva Mendes is apparently bitter rivals with Jessica Chastain, even if she is completely unaware of it . Eva is apparently happy after losing role to Chastian Eva Mendedes .
 Mendes “feels an intense, one-sided rivalry that stems from when she lost out to Jessica for the role of Maya in Zero Dark Thirty,’ a source tells Radar Online .
 Complicating matters is the fact that the actresses reportedly share a talent agent .
 Your closet is jammed to the rafters with stuff. You may not be in the red, but your closet is jamming with stuff .
 Chronic spending is often unconscious spending, so you may not even know you’re doing it .
 Emotional shoppers turn to the high they derive from spending money to compensate from the low they’re feeling in their lives .
 shopping isn't going to make up for a crappy childhood. I hate to burst your bubble, but shopping isn’t going to made up for your crappy childhood .
 Nor will it cure an unhappy career, a disintegrating relationship or anything else that ails you emotionally .
 If you're buying to feel better, you’re spending for the wrong reasons, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The problem for people who can’t curb their desire for immediate gratification is that they’re not prioritizing. The problem is that people can't curb their want to immediate gratification .
 They’ve lost the ability to figure out if they can do without, so they’re living in debt or, worse, a centimetre away from destitution . They are living a centimeter away from the destitution.
 As counterintuitive as it may seem, some people become chronic spenders out of a fear of poverty .
 If you have a trophy kitchen but you’re not cooking, take it as a sign . If you're not cooking it's a sign.
 Your credit limit is not actually money in your pocket. Not to put too fine a point on it, but your credit limit isn't actually money .
 When you shop on credit and don’t pay your balance off in full, you’re spending money you have yet to earn .
 If you have 30 pairs of shoes, only five of which you wear regularly, steer clear of shoe stores .
 Buy only the basic necessities such as food and transportation . Keep track of every penny you spend and keep track of your money .
 Throw your credit cards behind the refrigerator and pay for everything with cash . Use your credit card to pay for all of your food and drink .
 At some point we've got to move back to the idea that acquisition of stuff should fulfil our needs, not make us work longer and longer hours .
 The study concludes that the best way to foster healthy eating habits in young children is to avoid telling them how fruits and vegetables will make them stronger, taller or smarter .
 A separate study published last year found that teaching kids about nutrition through books could boost their vegetable intake .
 Two couples, one year to make them richer, have been working to improve their finances . Since January I have been trying to improve the finances of two Canadian couples .
 We have tackled debt, bought a home, prepared for the arrival of a new baby and started preparing for the long term — eventual retirement .
With two weeks left before their baby arrives, AnneMarie and Peter Carolina have raced toward firming up their insurance coverage . They have finished their nursery, finishing their nursery and putting the final touches on their maternity-leave budget .
 AnneMarie and Peter have amped up Anne-Marie’s insurance policy provided through her employer and completed their wills .
 Anne-Marie now has three times her basic salary in a death benefit, approximately $200,000 .
 She also signed up for $500,000 in accidental death and dismemberment insurance . $15,000 for Peter and $7,500 for their child should either pass away .
 Peter’s employer offers minimal life and accident insurance, so he is seeking term life coverage . He is seeking “useit-or-lose-it’ insurance.
 The couple will consider a whole-life policy, one where your beneficiaries are guaranteed a payout, in a few years .
 Toronto: 37 and 33 years old. Toronto: 33 and 33 .
 Medium use budgets to help guide spending, but have some cies that are too expensive .
 The couple is focused on improving their RRSPs, and is researching their mutual funds . The couple has been working together to improve their RRSs .
 Anne-Marie and Peter are balanced mediumrisk investors . They are currently invested in a low-risk portfolio, with only one year of performance history .
 A blend of bonds and blue-chip stocks with more than 10 years performance history . They are exploring opportunities to transition into a balanced mutual fund portfolio .
Past performance isn’t indicative of future performance, retirement savings, and are committed to paying off debt . But past performance isn't indicative ofFuture performance.
Pay off debt, start a savings program for child's education and down payment on first home . Pay off debt and start a Savings Program for children's education .
 Peter is in the process of confirming his freelance opportunity valued at approximately $18,000 . Peter is currently working on a freelance job with a company .
 Anne-Marie and Peter will focus on selecting new investments, welcoming their baby . They will also apply for a social insurance number for the baby .
 The couple found a suburban townhome that meets the needs of their growing family . They were outbid by other buyers and fought the temptation to compromise on their wish list .
 The townhome is well located near schools and transit, which will ease Jose's commute to work and reduce his time in the car .
 The townhome needs a little work. Jose and Carolina have been given a list of low-cost, highimpact home improvements .
Medium to low — they recently established a budget, are term at approximately three per cent interest . Medium to low - they recently set up a budget .
 This decision reduced their overall interest expenses, and allowed them to qualify for a more suitable mortgage . This decision reduces their overallInterest expenses and allows them to qualified for more suitable mortgages .
 The couple's concerns over closing costs have been tempered through Jose’s recent job promotion and raise, insurance savings by eliminating the mini-van loan and receiving a healthy tax return .
 The focus for Carolina and Jose throughout June is to pack up and move into their very frugal spenders . They have no retirement savings and are committed to paying off debt .
 The couple will begin the process of creating a plan to officially move their net worth into a positive position by the end of the year . The couple's financial momentum is primarily resulting from the gift of the down payment .
 $50* when you open your first Chequing Account by June 30 . Earn up to $150 with Tangerine . $50*, when you switch your pay by July 31 .
Get a 2.50%* interest rate on new savings deposits made until July 31 . Plus, get a2.50 percent interest rate.
 "Langerine T Forward Banking Tangerine" is a trademark of The Bank of Nova Scotia, used under license .
 The combination of apricot preserves and hoisin sauce in this Apricot Glazed Shrimp Skewers recipe goes well with the sweetness of the shrimp .
 You can also use a variety of fish such as scallops, or a firm white fish like swordfish, cod or halibut .
 Catelli has launched a preservative-free whole-wheat pasta with only wheat as the ingredient .
 Wooden skewers soak in water for 20 minutes before grilling to prevent the wood from burning .
 Combine the apricot jam, oyster and hoisin sauce in a Nutritional information per serving . The recipe is based on a recipe for a healthy meal .
 In the meantime, cook the pasta in boiling water just until tender, approximately 5 minutes . In the same time, cook it in a boiling water for about five minutes .
 In a grill pan or a skillet lightly coated with cooking spray, saute the shrimp just until about 5 minutes . In a skillet or a Grill pan, the shrimp can be saute for about five minutes .
 Top of the pasta, drizzle and garnish with basil is no longer pink . Serve over with the remaining sauce they are not pink, top of pasta is still pink .
 Recommendation letters have always been a big part of the graduate school application process . When you need your teacher to vouch for you, make sure you reach out with respect .
 These letters provide admissions officers a window into your academic interests, job performance, and, ideally, your personality .
 Students thinking about applying to graduate programs and fellowships in the fall should start thinking now about which professors they would like to ask to recommend them .
Writing detailed recommendations can be very time-consuming for faculty members . Taking these simple steps can make the entire process go smoother for everyone, professor says .
 Dodd often blogs about jobs and internships on her blog Thoughts on Teaching . Dodd often writes about jobs, internships and jobs in her blog thoughts on teaching .
 It’s also a good idea to talk to your professors about your life outside of class .
 Don’t be shy about inviting a professor to a concert you are performing in or mentioning the play that you are producing . Don't be shy of inviting professor to concert you're performing in and mentioning play you're producing .
 extending the invite is a great chance to talk about your interests and goals . While they may not be able to come, it's a good chance to discuss your interests .
 Dodd recently recommended a student who had taken a class with her while he was a sophomore, yet made it a point to regularly stop by her office for two years afterwards . Dodd recently asked a student to stop by his office for 2 years after taking the class .
 “I was really invested in him,’ she said. When he asked her for a job recommendation, she said she was ‘invested in him.’
 A good recommendation letter takes time to research and compose, so it's important to be respectful of the faculty member's schedule . Ask as early as possible.
 Ask at least a month before your deadline, says Dodd, though earlier is always better . Dodd: Ask for at least one month before you're deadline .
 The deadlines all tend to fall around the same dates. Keep in mind that a lot of other students are also asking for letters .
 Be sure to let your instructor know which school you selected in the end . Also, be sure to tell your instructor what school you chose in the final round .
 Ask in person Schedule a meeting with your professor so you can discuss the schools you are applying for, your goals, and why you want to go to grad school .
 Making a request for a recommendation over email or just after class can seem too casual and rushed .
 Dodd adds that you should also tell your professor why you would like a recommendation from them specifically . Dodd says you should tell your teacher why you'd like to recommend a recommendation .
 The professor lets the professor know why you requested them in particular . ‘I think as a student, you really saw me as a writer,’ he says .
 You want your recommendations to be from people who are enthusiastic about you and your abilities . Take no for an answer You want a recommendation from someone who is enthusiastic about your abilities.
 If a professor tells you that they are not the best person to write your letter, believe them and move on . If you want to write a letter, move on.
 The health-care field is probably the biggest growth area in terms of future job prospects across Canada . Fill these positions for Metro Next to the oil industry .
 As the population ages and retires, the demand for skilled health-care professionals will steadily increase, experts predict .
 Health-carerelated positions consistently lead the list of top jobs across the country . Statistics Canada uses Statistics Canada data to compile the top jobs list .
 Of all the medical professions likely to be sought after in the future, nursing could be at the top of the list .
 A 2009 report predicted that if action isn’t taken right away, the shortage of registered nurses will climb to almost 60,000 by 2022 .
 These professionals clean and scale teeth, take X-rays, provide fluoride treatments and oral hygiene information to patients as well as assist dentists during procedures . They also provide information about dental hygiene and dental care .
 Students typically must complete a three-year diploma course before being eligible to become a registered dental hygienist in the field . Students usually must complete the course before becoming a registered dentist .
 Demand for technologists, especially those with more advanced diagnostics and medical imaging skills, will increase as use of technology increases .
 They operate X-ray, radiographic, fluoroscopic and radiation detection equipment . The equipment is used to detect radiation in the United States and Canada .
 These medical professionals diagnose and treat airway-related health issues . They also treat airways-related issues .
 Expert care.ca 16 HEALTH-CARE CAREERS metronews.ca.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 metr A personal approach Radiologists.com .
Metro Diagnostic radiology uses body-imaging techniques to study, diagnosis and treat diseases and other health conditions . Integral part of the health-care team that studies, diagnoses and treats JANE DOUCET for Metro Diagnostic Radiology .
 According to the Canadian Medical Association, there are more than 2,300 diagnostic radiologists practising in Canada .
 From 1998 to 2004, he was chief of the radiology department at the Centre hospitalier universitaire de Quebec . He was chief at the centre hospitalier Universitaire de France from 1998- 2004 .
 Levesque is a clinical professor of radiology at the Universite of Laval and the medical director of the Clinique radiologique de la Capitale in Quebec City .
 The biggest change he has seen during his 33-year career has been the advances in the imaging equipment used to detect things like tumours, cysts, broken bones, blocked arteries and pneumonia .
 The enhancements to Xrays, mammograms, ultrasounds, CT, MRI and other imaging equipment has meant that radiologists are better able to make an accurate diagnosis at an earlier stage of the disease or condition .
 radiologists have more direct contact with patients. Another change is that radiologists are more direct with patients . The change is also that radiologist has more contact with patient patients .
Levesque finds radiology interesting because it covers all parts of the body . Levesque found radiologyinteresting because it covered all parts.
 He also likes working with patients’ family physicians and specialists . He also like working with family physicians.
 He enjoys what he calls "personalized medicine" When he and his patients get to know each other, he says . He says he enjoys his patients and their patients .
After graduating from medical school, it takes another five years of residency training to become certified in diagnostic radiology .
 The residency may be followed by one or more years of fellowship subspecialty training . The residency could also be followed with a fellowship sub specialty training.
 We are a nursing community working together to make a difference locally, provincially and around the world . We are also working to make the difference locally and globally .
 Feeding the trend is a constellation of factors, including an aging population, and increased public awareness of what it takes to remain healthy .
 Canadian Business magazine's list of the top 10 jobs by demand by 2020 includes three in the healthcare sector . It should come as no surprise that the list includes three healthcare jobs .
Demand is also expected to remain strong for new and emerging careers, such as dietician, care co-ordinator and healthpolicy specialist .
 As provinces scramble to meet rising costs, many are assigning work to doctors to nurses, nurse practitioners and medical technologists . Many are assigning the work to nurses and nurse practitioners .
 Navigating these shifting sands is a challenge not only for someone building a career, but also for those who prepare people to enter the workforce .
 He believes success depends largely on how much effort a person invests in learning about particular sectors and jobs . He says success depends mostly on how many people invest in particular sectors .
 I encourage people to learn as much as possible about what’s out there. I encourage them to learn more about what's out there .
 Attend job fairs, ask lots of questions, take advantage of co-op and volunteer opportunities . Take advantage of the opportunities to attend and volunteer events .
 Edmonton captures junior title behind two goals and three assists . Samuelsson DAVE LANGFORD Metro in London, Ont. Samuelsson scored two goals for Edmonton .
 Edmonton Oil Kings coach did not have enough adjectives to use to describe his team after winning the Memorial Cup on Sunday .
 The Guelph Storm are one of the best junior hockey teams in the countiy in the world . The Storm are a junior hockey team in the country's top division .
 The Oil Kings beat the Storm 6-3 to win their first Memorial Cup in the current version of the Edmonton franchise . Laxdal gave the Oil Kings credit for the win .
 Kristian Pelss passed away last year after a diving accident back in his home countiy of Latvia . Laxdal and the players shared this win with their late teammate, Kristianpelss .
 The Edmonton Oil Kings beat the Guelph Storm in the Memorial Cup final on Sunday in London, Ont. But you can't wait to see how the team reacts to the win .
 Henrik Samuelsson agreed with his coach. Samuelsson was the scoring star of the game for the Oil Kings .
 Samuelsson: "I know he was watching over us today and definitely had a part of it" Samuelsson said. "He was watching"
 Samuelsson had two goals, including one into the empty net, and three assists . Samuelsson also had three assists, including two goals .
 Edgars Kulda added a goal and two assists and Cody Corbett, Tyler Robertson and Mitch Moroz added singles . EdgarsKulda added two goals and a goal in the second half .
 The Storm had won three straight games before losing their first game in the championship final . Robby Fabbri, Stephen Pierog and Zaclc Mitchell scored for the Storm .
 Goalie Justin Nichols had trouble with the high shot, but did make 40 saves .
 Beckett pitched the first no-hitter of his stellar career and the first in the majors this season . The Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Philadelphia Phillies 6-0 on Sunday . Beckett is the first pitcher in the Dodgers' history.
 Beckett struck out six, walked three and didn't come close to allowing a hit against a lineup that included two former NL MVPs and four former all-stars .
 Milos Raonic hopes his recent success on clay leads to a long run at the French Open . Raonic is off to a solid start in Paris this week .
 Canadian star won his opening match at the second Grand Slam of the year on Sunday . Canadian star beat Australian wild card Nick Kyrgios 6-3, 7-6, 6- 3 to reach the second round .
 Raonic needed exactly two hours to eliminate Kyrgios . Raonic, the eighth seed from Thornhill, Ont., needed exactly 2 hours to eliminated Kyrgio .
 Raonic finished with 50 winners and 30 unforced errors, breaking on four of 10 chances . Raonic came to Roland Garros from a Rome semifinal last weekend . He came to a semifinal in Rome last weekend.
 Toronto Blue Jays beat Oakland Athletics 3-1 on Sunday to extend winning streak to seasonbest six games . Happ pitched seven scoreless innings and Edwin Encarnacion homered .
 The Blue Jays have won 16 of their past 21 games to occupy first place in the American League East . The Jays have also won 15 of their last 21 games in the league .
 Happ allowed four hits and three walks while striking out seven in his longest outing of the season . He struck out seven times in the longest outing in the season. Happ allowed 4 hits and 3 walks.
 Dustin McGowan replaced Happ in the eighth and allowed Josh Donaldson’s 11th homer of the season . McGowan replaces Happ in eighth and allows Donaldson to hit 11th home of season .
 Casey Janssen pitched the ninth inning to earn his seventh save in as many tries this season . He pitched the 9th inning to make it his seventh saves in a row .
 Drew Pomeranz allowed five hits, four walks and two runs in four-plus innings . A’s left-hander Drew Pomersanz allowed 5 hits, 4 walks and 2 runs .
 The Blue Jays did not have a hit until Encarnacion homered to left on a 2-2 fastball with one out in the fourth . The Jays had a hit in the third and fourth .
 It was his 14th of the year and the 12th of May, tying him with Jose Bautista for the team record for homers in May . It was the 14th in May and his 12th in the month .
 The run also snapped a string of 18 consecutive runless innings for Pomeranz . The run was also the 18th consecutive run without a run for the German side .
 Reyes finished the game with three steals, tying a career best for the shortstop, who has done it eight times . Reyes has done this eight times, and is the shortstop's career best .
 This should be one of the most enjoyable times of the year, but if you want it to be really special, be more optimistic .
 Things that have been hidden from you in recent weeks and months will be revealed over the next few days .
 The moment you start seeing yourself as a victim is the moment you lose. V Taurus April 21 May 21 .
 No matter what others may be saying and doing you are master of your fate, no matter what other people say. No matter who you are, you're master ofyour fate .
 If you still don't know what you are aiming to do with your life, you must give it some thought this week .
 II Gemini May 22-June 21 . For some time now you have been doing too many things for too many people and hardly anything for yourself .
 The most important thing over the next few days is that you don't give anyone the authority to make decisions on your behalf . You don't have the power to make your own decisions .
Stay in control of your destiny because everything else depends on that . Stay in control. Stay in your destiny .
 If you feel run down as the new week begins that's a sure sign you have been overdoing it . The new week is the first of the new year to start with a good start .
 There is so much you want to do in life but you are beginning to wonder if time and opportunity have passed you by .
 You have so many options open to you now but you need to choose one and stick with it . You have many options to choose from.
 K Pisces Feb. March 20 You are carrying a load at the moment and need to find someone who can help take the strain .
 The good news is there are people you have done favours for who would like nothing better than to return the compliment, sallybrompton TIP Virgo Aug. Sept.
 People in positions of power will make demands of you over the next few days that you may find hard to meet . People in position of power may make demands that you will find hard.
 Large amount 34 Cartoons voicer Mel 35 Music chord type 37 "The Simpsons" character 38 . The Simpsons’s character 38.
 In the light summer breeze, lose yourself in the j wonderment of world-class musicians or the enduring works of Shakespeare .
 Savour one tradition after another and take a trip around the world at Folkfest .
 The cultures of Saskatoon deliver an endless variety of entertainment . The city is home to many of the world's most famous attractions .