 NATO leaders agreed on Friday to deploy military forces to the Baltic states and eastern Poland for the first time . The move will reassure allies who were once part of the Soviet bloc following Russia's seizure of Crimea from Ukraine .
 The 28-nation Western defense alliance decided to move four battalions totaling 3,000 to 4,000 troops into northeastern Europe on a rotating basis to display its readiness to defend eastern members against any Russian aggression .
 Russia underlined its willingness to pursue dialogue with Moscow and revive confidence-building measures . Russia has spurned Russia's annexation of Crimea and support for Russian-speaking rebels in Ukraine .
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg tells a news conference after the summit's first working session in Warsaw . "An attack on one ally will be considered an attack on the whole alliance," he says .
 Germany will lead the battalion in Lithuania, Britain in Estonia and Canada in Latvia . The battalion will be based in Estonia, Estonia and Latvia .
 White House deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes told reporters that continued aggression by Russia would provoke a response by NATO and a greater alliance presence in Eastern Europe .
 Obama said earlier that Britain's referendum vote to leave the European Union should not weaken the Western alliance . But he raised "significant questions" about the future of European integration .
 America's "special relationship" with the UK would survive, the president said . America's special relationship with UK will survive.
 Obama discussed the procedure with the heads of the main EU institutions, Donald Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker . Rhodes told reporters there would be an orderly transition to as close an economic relationship as possible .
 Obama was more diplomatic, calling for dialogue with Russia, but he too urged allies to keep sanctions on Moscow in place until it fully complies with a ceasefire agreement in Ukraine .
 Obama poses for picture next to Poland's President Andrzej Duda and NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg . Obama arrives at NATO Summit in Warsaw, Poland, July 8, 2016 .
 President Petro Poroshenko will meet allied leaders on Saturday . He may face pressure to fulfill Kiev's part of the agreement by accepting more decentralization and local elections in the rebel-held eastern Donbass region .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel said NATO was always keen for dialogue with Moscow . Merkel said that NATO was increasing its defense capabilities .
 A planned meeting of the long frozen NATO-Russia Council next week would address ways to avoid dangerous situations in Baltic air space .
 Russian warplanes have been buzzing Western civilian and military aircraft and switching off their identification signals as part of an apparent campaign of intimidation in response to Western sanctions over its action in Ukraine .
 The U.S. State Department expelled two Russian diplomats on June 17 in response to an attack by a Russian policeman on a United States diplomat in Moscow earlier last month . The State Department announced it had expelled the two diplomats .
 It was not clear why the U.S. waited until Friday to disclose the news .
 Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Poland had requested a permanent NATO presence . They feared Moscow would seek to destabilize their pro-Western governments through cyber attacks .
 The three Baltic states, as well as Ukraine, are former Soviet republics that gained independence when the Soviet Union broke up in 1991 .
 The head of NATO's military committee said Russia was attempting to restore its status as a world power . Czech General Petr Pavel said the effort included using its military . The Czech general said Russia is trying to restore the world power.
 The Kremlin said it was absurd for NATO to talk of any threat from Russia . It hoped "common sense" would prevail at the Warsaw summit .
 Moscow remains open to dialogue with NATO and is ready to cooperate with it, Kremlin spokesman says . Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov says in a conference call with journalists .
 Russia President Vladimir Putin discussed diplomatic efforts for a settlement in Ukraine in a phone call with Merkel and Hollande just before the summit began .
 The Kremlin said he asked them to "influence more actively the Ukrainian side" to grant wider autonomy to eastern Ukraine .
 United States President Barack Obama speaks to British Prime Minister David Cameron during NATO Summit in Warsaw, Poland July 8, 2016 .
 Moscow has declared its intention to deploy nuclear-capable missiles in Kaliningrad, a Russian enclave between Poland and Lithuania . The move is in response to NATO's activation of a U.S.-built missile shield on Polish soil .
 David Cameron vows Britain will not turn its back on European security once it leaves the EU following the vote .
 Hollande urges other European allies to increase their defense budgets . Hollande has sent French forces on missions against Islamist militants in Mali, the Central African Republic, Iraq and Syria .
 NATO and EU signed an agreement on deeper military and security cooperation . NATO and the EU signed a deal on deeperMilitary and Security cooperation .
 The U.S.-led alliance is set to announce on Saturday its support for the EU's Mediterranean interdiction operation . The alliance is expected to announce its support on Saturday .
 NATO is already backing EU efforts to stem a refugee influx from Turkey into Greece . The EU-Turkey deal will curb migration in return for benefits for Ankara .
 NATO defense ministers would consider calls from Romania and Bulgaria for stronger allied air and sea presence in the Black Sea . Russia has a fleet based in Crimea and is building up its interdiction capacity .