 Referendums on the status of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, parts of Ukraine that together make up the Donbass region, took place on 11 May 2014 in many towns under the control of the self-proclaimed Donetsk andLuhansk People's Republics .
 These referendums sought to legitimise the establishment of the republics, in the context of rising pro-Russian unrest in the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution .
Counter-referendum on accession to Dnipropetrovsk Oblast was held in some Ukrainian-controlled parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The results of the separatist referendums were not officially recognised by any government, including those of Ukraine, the United States, the European Union, and Russia .
 Germany and the U.S. stated that the referendums had ""no democratic legitimacy" The Russian government expressed "respect" for the results and urged a "civilised" implementation .
 The referendums were modelled on a similar disputed referendum held in Crimea during the Crimean crisis .
 The vote ultimately resulted in the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . That vote ultimately led to Crimea's annexation by Russia .
Self-proclaimed authorities of the Donetsk People's Republic announced that they would carry out a referendum on 11 May . The referendum will determine the future status of the region, and legitimise the Republic .
 Many government buildings in towns and cities across Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts became occupied by separatist insurgents as the Republic expanded its territorial control .
 Ukrainian government launched counter-offensive against insurgents in some parts of Donetsk Oblast .
 An agreement made in Geneva between the United States, European Union, Russia, and Ukraine was intended to demilitarise and de-escalate the conflict . But leaders of the republics rejected it .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov did not represent them, they said . They stated that an agreement made by uninvolved parties was not binding on their behaviour .
 They said they would only end their occupation of government buildings after the referendums . Instead, they said they will only end the occupation after the referendum . They said that they would not be able to do so until after the vote .
 The referendums took place as mounting anger rose against the so-called "anti-terrorist" operations by Ukrainian forces against separatists . The referenda took place in Ukraine as the Ukrainian forces fought separatists .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin publicly asked pro-Russian separatists to postpone the proposed referendums to create the necessary conditions for dialogue on 7 May .
Self-proclaimed authorities of Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People'sRepublic say they will still carry out the referendum .
 The principal of a secondary school in Luhansk was kidnapped by four masked gunmen, police say .
 41.1% of people in Donetsk were for decentralisation of Ukraine with powers transferred to regions . 38.4% for changing Ukraine into federation, 27.5% were in favour of secession from Ukraine to join the Russian Federation . Only 10.6% supported current unitary structure
18.6% of those polled in the Donetsk region opposed changes to the government structure . 47% favoured federalisation or at least more economic independence from Kiev . 27% wanted to join Russia in some form, and 5% wanted an independent state .
18% of eastern Ukrainians were in favour of secession, according to Pew Research Centre survey . 70% wished to remain part of a united Ukraine .
Early polls in April reported that supporters of independence were a small minority . Later violence in Odessa and Mariupol turned many against the Ukrainian transitional government .
 94.8% of those who intended to vote for independence, according to a poll taken on the day of the referendum and the day before .
 The poll did not claim to have scientific precision, but was carried out to get a basis from which to judge the outcome of the referendum . Independent observers were not present to monitor it .
 A 65.6% majority supported separation from Ukraine . Even with those who said they would not vote counted in, a 65. 6% majority support separation from the country .
According to article 73 of the 1996 Constitution of Ukraine, territorial changes can only be approved via a referendum . All citizens of the Ukraine are allowed to vote, including those that do not reside in the area .
 The Central Election Commission of Ukraine also stated that there was no possibility for regional authorities to initiate such a referendum .
 The Security Service of Ukraine released an audio recording on 5 May that they said was a phone call between a Donetsk separatist leader and the leader of the far-right Russian National Unity group Alexander Barkashov .
 separatist said he wanted to postpone the referendum, due to the DPR's inability to control all of Donetsk Oblast . In the recording, the separatist says he wants to postpone it .
 Barkashov said that he had communicated with Putin, and insisted on holding the referendum regardless of the separatist leader's concerns .
 He instructed separatists to tabulate the results as 89% in favour of autonomy . He instructed the separatists toTabulate the result as 89%.
 Swiss left-wing newspaper Tages-Anzeiger reported that voters were able to vote as many times as they wanted .
 Internal Affairs ministry officials branded the vote a farce . Just over 32 percent of registered voters in Donetsk Oblast participated in the vote .
 GOLOS Association co-chair Andrei Buzin says there were significant irregularities in the organisation and holding of the referendum .
 Preliminary results announced by the Central Election Commission of the Donetsk People's Republic . Preliminary Results announced by Central Election commission of Donetsk.
 Fifty-five local election committees, and 2,279 polling stations were to be established to carry out the election .
 To cover all the region's registered voters, 3. million voting ballots needed to be produced . The region is home to more than 3 million voters .
 They began to be printed on 29 April, and printing continued for eight days after that . The first printing began on April 29, and the printing continued until April 29 .
 The ballots used had no protective features to prevent mass-duplication . They were printed with standard commercial printers .
 Donetsk officials say the separatists would require at least 85 million U.S. dollars to fund the referendum . They say it would cost at least 8 million for Donetsk city alone .
 The budget of the referendum was minimal, mostly being composed of donations from private citizens and businesses . According to authorities from the republic, the budget was minimal .
 Ballots cost only 9,000 U.S. dollars to produce . Ballots, for example, cost only 8,000 dollars to make .
 Fifty-three local election committees and 1,527 polling stations had been established . By 10 May, fifty-three election committees had beenestablished .
 Donetsk regional education superintendent informed reporters that they were forced under threat of death to organise polling stations in the schools . The Donetsk education superintendent told reporters that he was forced to organise the polling stations .
 Two official electoral commissioners were kidnapped by separatists prior to the vote . The two were kidnapped before the vote.
 The Russian word used, татетоятельнощ, can be translated as either full independence or broad autonomy . The word used in Russian is used in the Russian language .
 One polling station manager interviewed by VICE News insisted the vote had nothing to do with secession .
 The day before the referendum, it was reported in Ukrainian media that a group of pro-Russian separatists in possession of a 100,000 ballots already marked with a 'yes' vote were captured . The ballots were seized by government forces, according to Ukrainian media .
 Local news reported that polling in some occupied schools had already begun a day in advance . Local news reports that polling has already begun in some schools .
 A campaign of intimidation, beatings and hostage taking has forced many pro-Ukrainian activists to flee the region . The referendum to take place without any dissent or opposing voices .
 At least 24 people were being held by insurgents in Donetsk region at the time of the referendum, Human Rights Watch says .
 VICE News crew were detained for three hours by masked men with assault rifles . They were interviewing voters at a polling station in Donetsk .
 The referendum began early on 10 May in Mariupol, according to the separatist group's election official Sergey Beshulya . It was due to the possibility of Ukrainian security forces returning .
 Donetsk and Luhansk residents living in Russia were able to cast their votes in Moscow . Donetsk residents in Russia voted in Moscow for the first time .
 Non-binding votes also cast abroad, including in Barcelona as a show of support .
 Local news sources claimed that many residents did not intend to vote while others did not know where polling stations were located . Local media sources said many residents didn't want to vote .
 Many of the voters were not on the registration lists but were allowed to vote after showing identification documents . Many of those who voted did not have to show identification documents.
 Reporters with German newspaper Bild followed a man that they said voted eight times .
 Referendum organisers reduced the number of voting stations, leading to long queues, which were then broadcast on Russian television as proof that voter turnout was high .
 The announced result of 89% matched the number requested by Russian politician Alexander Barkashov in a conversation that the SBU claimed to have recorded before the poll .
 Luhansk People's Republic authorities stated that the turnout was 81% . However officials of the Ukrainian Ministry of Internal Affairs estimated only 24 percent of the population eligible to vote .
Leaders of Luhansk People's Republic demanded federalisation of Ukraine as the only way to stop disintegration of the country .
 Seven village councils, as well as the districts of Dobropillia Raion and Krasnoarmiisk Raion, requested accession to Dnipropetrovsk Oblast .
 Dnipropetrovsk governor Ihor Kolomoisky announced that local referendums would take place to allow for his oblast to administer and provide service to cities in Donetsk and Luhansk . He was willing to accept absorbing areas that wished to accede
 The poll, entitled "Referendum for Peace, Order, and Unity of Ukraine" was held on 11 May to coincide with separatist referendums .
Ukrinform said that cities taking part in the referendum included Debaltseve, Yenakiieve, Yasynuvata, Avdiivka, Volnovakha, Novoazovsk and Mariupol in Donetsk Oblast .
Around 2,883,000 people voted in counter-referendum . 1% of those polled voted in favour of accession to Dnipropetrovsk Oblast . 3.7% voted for separation from Ukraine as part of Donetsk and Luhansk republics .
 Donetsk People's Republic – Chairman Denis Pushilin announced immediately after the referendum passed that the Ukrainian military must leave Donetsk . The Ukrainian military has been ordered to leave Donetsk.
 Parliamentary Assembly President Ranko Krivokapic called on separatists to cancel referendum . He said the idea that free and fair voting could take place in these so-called referendums is absurd .
 Donetsk and Luhansk referendums are illegitimate in the eyes of the international community, says Peter Bergen . Bergen calls on de facto authorities to call off these mockeries of a vote .
 At the same time, President Putin postponed a statement to "analyze" the result . Putin postponed the statement to analyze the result .
 Republic of Crimea Head of Crimea Sergey Aksyonov recognised the right of citizens to express their will at referendums . Crimea's President Vladimir Putin has been in charge of the Crimea since 2007 .
 The Republic of Crimea will move to establish relations with the two breakaway republics . He recognises the results of the elections and has said that the republic will move.
 State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said: "This is the Crimea playbook all over again. U.S. State Department says it's "the Crimea playbook"
 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko declared that the Donbass status referendums "don't have any significance from a legal point of view" He promised not to allow similar scenario in his own country .
 He refused to describe the pro-Russian rebels as "separatists" However, he expressed his support for the negotiations .
 One civilian casualty from a direct shot to head and two people wounded . It resulted in one civilian casualty.
 Andrey Denisenko, deputy chief of Right Sector and acting head in the Dnipropetrovsk region, was present at the scene . He fired shots above the crowd's head from a Kalashnikov rifle .
 The Ukrainian government has denied that the National Guard or any unit of its regular forces took part in the operation . The government has opened a criminal investigation into the incident .
 Rebels claim high turnout and landslide 'yes' vote in independence referendum . Rebels say high turnout was due to a 'l landslide' vote .
Pro-Russian Insurgents claim victory in East Ukraine Referendums . Pro-Russian insurgents claim victory over Ukraine in Ukraine's east .
 Donetsk region to hold referendum on joining Dnipropetrovsk Oblast . The region is in the middle of the Donetsk region .