 RBTH presents a selection of views from leading Russian media on the latest developments in Ukraine . Includes analysis of the increasingly serious losses being incurred by Kiev in eastern Ukraine . Also discusses the United States proposal to offer the country a special ally status .
 Ukraine will not be able to become a member of NATO “even in the case that it declines to accept status as a non-bloc state,’ Vedomosti writes .
 Kiev refuses to recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and the NATO charter prohibits states with territorial claims against other countries from joining the alliance . This is because Kiev refuses.
 Vedomosti cites CNN as reporting that Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has already asked the United States for non-NATO ally status .
 The bill is an attempt by Congress to put pressure on the executive authority . The bill was passed by a House of Representatives .
 Ukraine may introduce licensing for Russian books, newspaper Kommersant reports .
 Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Oleksandr Sych. This applies not only to Russian books, but also to imported books as a whole, he writes .
 Eighty percent of books in Ukraine are produced in Russia, Sych said . Ukrainian books need to be saved from excessive Russian imports, he said .
 Russian publishing houses will not be represented at the Lviv Publishers’ Forum from September 11 to September 14 . Books published in Russia will be specifically indicated as such .
 Kiev is expecting to change several provisions to a 10-year contract for gas transit through Ukraine . Moskovsky Komsomolets reports.
 Russia raised the price for Ukraine from $268.50 to $485.50 per 1,000 cubic meters of gas in April 2014 .
 Several rounds of negotiations have produced no results except mutual lawsuits at the Stockholm arbitration court .
 Naftogaz is demanding $6 billion from Gazprom in overpayment for blue fuel . The Russian gas producer is also demanding $4. billion for gas that was supplied but not paid for .
 Other people consider it flawless confirmation of the collapse of Kiev’s military operation in the east .
 News channels report new losses incurred by the Ukrainian Army during fighting near the city of Lutugino .