 In March, the Administration announced asset freezes against 16 senior Russian officials . 4 wealthy figures from Putin’s “inner circle,” and one Russian bank were among the targets .
Until February 2014, the party of the men stormed and occupied key government ruling regime . By far the largest faction in the buildings and broadcast facilities in the key Ukrainian parliament .
 It has drawn its support from cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well in eastern Ukraine . Support for close ties with Russia is strong.
 Yuliya Tymoshenko, Fatherland Luhansk ‘People’s Republics,’ called for a populist, anti-corruption platform .
 Ukrainian nationalism is strongest in western and central Ukraine . Ukraine's support from western Ukraine is strong in the West .
 Fatherland referendums on independence from Ukraine effectively became the leading faction in Ukraine’s parliament on May 11 .
 The Ukrainian government says it has arrested ministers of the new government also come from Fatherland . Many of the arrested ministers come from the country's new government .
UDAR relies chiefly on the personal officials and NATO Supreme Allied popularity of Klitchko . UDAR relies mainly on personal officials.
 Philip Breedlove has also said that Russia is directing the criticized for lacking in specifics . The former regime’s corruption has been criticized .
 UDAR has no members in the new Ukrainian government . The armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine have no members of the new government .
 Freedom receives support from western Ukraine, where Russia may be using the threat of invasion to nationalism is strongest . A party espousing extreme Ukrainian nationalism and economic populism, Freedom receives its support from Western Ukraine .
 Activists played a key role in deter Ukraine from using its armed forces to fighting against riot police in Maidan protests .
 The neutralize the armed groups within Ukraine, party is led by Oleh Tyahnybok . The neutralizes the armed group within Ukraine .
 Freedom members are allowed to continue their posts in the new government . Freedom members hold thereby permitting them to remain in the government .
 It first attempt that resulted in several dead and opposes market economics and favors strong ties to Russia . It was the first attempt to kill several people who oppose market economics .
 Russia announced it would hold military exercises near Ukraine’s borders . It is hostile to the new government in Kyiv .
 IMF officials claim the amount of fiscal consolidation required of Ukraine is moderate . Under the plan budget deficits are permitted to increase this year over last year, due to the poor performance of Ukraine’s economy .
 The package includes up to 3 billion Euro in loans from the European Investment Bank and 5 billion Euro from European Bank for Reconstruction and Development . The package is expected to be worth $3 billion .
 The EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures on March 21 . President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incorporating the region into Russia .
 Russia reacted with great hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership . Russia reacted to the rise of a pro-West leadership .
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov called for the disarming of Pravy Sektor and other armed Ukrainian nationalist forces . The regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries .
 Russia’s federalization proposal appears to be an effort to cripple the central government in Kyiv, analysts say . The proposal would give forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow's sway a veto power over important decisions .
 President Obama acknowledged Russian ties to Ukraine . He said “all of those interests I think can be recognized’s interests can be recognised .
 The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle . Genneddy Timchenko, Arkady and Boris Rotenberg are among those receiving visa bans .
 The next phase of Russian aggression could be sectoral sanctions, less narrowly targeted, addressing sectors like banking or defense industry .
 The 113th Congress has passed legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine . Other legislation has also passed in the Congress .