 Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy Cory Welt Specialist in European Affairs .
 During Zelensky’s presidency, Ukraine has enacted difficult Affairs economic and governance reforms and renewed talks with Russia on conflict resolution .
 A reshuffling of a six-month-old cabinet that had gained international confidence raised concerns for some . The cabinet was replaced by a new cabinet in March 2020 .
 The emergence in Ukraine of Coronavirus created further difficulties but also led the government to advance key key. Please call 7-.... or visit reforms necessary to unlock international financial support .
 The United States supports Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders and promotes the implementation of domestic reforms .
 Ukraine has been a leading recipient of U.S. foreign and military aid in Europe and Eurasia . Since Ukraine’s independence in 1991, Ukraine's independence was declared in 1991 . Russia's 2014 invasion and occupation of Ukrainian territory has led to Ukraine's rise in
 Nonmilitary aid averaged about $321 million a year from FY2015 to FY2019, plus a total of almost $240 million in humanitarian aid since 2014 . Non military aid averaged $321million a year.
 The House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine . In 2019, relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in U.S. domestic affairs .
 Since 2014, many members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia, and supported increased aid to Ukraine .
 In 2019, during the 116th Congress, the Senate agreed to mark the fifth anniversary of Ukraine's Revolution of Dignity .
 Ukraine has developed a military capable of territorial defense, reversed a decline in economic growth, implemented reforms, and gained formal independence for the Orthodox Church of Ukraine .
 Ukraine continues to grapple with serious Ukraine at a Glance challenges . Ukraine is facing a series of serious challenges.
 Kyiv Ukraine has enacted difficult economic and Ethnicity: 78% Ukrainian, 17% Russian, 0.5% Crimean governance reforms and renewed talks with Tatar Russia on conflict resolution .
 Ukrainian, 68%, Russian (regional a reshuffling of a six-month-old cabinet that status) 30% had gained international confidence but lost Religion . About 75% Orthodox Christian (mostly domestic popularity) raised concerns for some .
 Members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia for its actions . They also supported increased economic and security aid to Ukraine .
 U.S. House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine . In 2019, relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in U. S. domestic affairs .
 Historically, Ukrainians trace their lineage to medieval Kievan Rus, an early Orthodox Christian state . Russians also consider their heritage as a core part of their heritage .
 In December 1991, Ukraine’s leaders joined those of neighboring Russia and Belarus to dissolve the USSR . Since independence, many observers have considered Ukraine to have a ‘hybrid’ political regime, containing both democratic and nondemocratic elements .
 Most prominently, Kuchma came to be suspected of responsibility for the 2000 murder of journalist Georgiy Gongadze .
 In 2004, a popular movement known as the Orange Revolution thwarted the efforts of Kuchma’s team to fraudulently elect a handpicked successor, then-Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych’s reformist opponent, Viktor Yushchenko, was allegedly poisoned during the election campaign . He won the first round, and was elected in a rerun of the fraudulent second round .
 Many observers considered Yanukovych to be a corrupt and authoritarian president . He preferred to preserve power with Russia's support rather than pursue Western-oriented reforms .
 Yanukovych also was reluctant to fulfill a key demand of Western partners, he said . Yanukovych was also unwilling to fulfill the key demand for the release of Yulia Tymoshenko from prison .
 In 2011, Tymoshenko was sentenced to seven years in prison for abuse of power and other charges . Many observers considered the charges to be politically motivated .
 In November 2013, protests erupted over Yanukovych’s decision to postpone concluding an association and free trade agreement with the European Union . The protests erupted in November 2013.
 Yanukovych had agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election . Instead he departed for eastern Ukraine amid government defections .
 Tymoshenko was freed from prison, Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office . Yanukovych left Ukraine for Russia and left for Russia .
 Yanukovych was found guilty of treason and sentenced in absentia to 13 years in prison in 2019 . In 2019, Yanukovych was convicted of treason.
 Ukraine has received a democracy score between 4 and 5 since at least 1999 . Ukraine has had a score of 4 to 5 since 1999 .
 Ukraine has a mixed presidential-parliamentary system, in which the president shares power with a prime minister appointed by Ukraine’s legislature .
 The most recent presidential election was held in March-April 2019, and snap parliamentary elections were held in July 2019 . The most recently presidential election in March 2019 was held.
 The victories of political novice Volodomyr Zelensky and his Servant of the People party appeared to reflect widespread disillusionment with Ukraine’s political establishment .
 International and domestic observers considered the election to be generally free and fair . The election was considered generally free, fair and generally free .
 Many Ukrainians believed Poroshenko had failed to combat corruption . Many believed he had not done enough to restore the country's economic health after almost five years of conflict .
 Zelensky ran as an outsider ostensibly untainted by politics or corruption . He ran as a candidate for President Barack Obama in 2008 .
 A video of him delivering an anti-corruption rant goes viral . His appeal stemmed in part from his starring role in a popular television show, Servant of the People .
 The election outcome suggested that issues of ethnic and linguistic identity mattered less to voters than expected . The election was held on Tuesday .
 Zelensky did not campaign as a nationalist or a populist . Despite his outsider status, he did not seek to be a nationalist .
 Zelensky is a native Russian speaker who also speaks Ukrainian, is of Jewish descent . He supports closer relations with the West and supports closer ties to the West .
 He is from Kryvih Rih in Ukraine’s Dnipropetrovsk region, north of Crimea . He was born in the city of Kryvh Rih .
 The party won 60% of seats, including 43% of the party-list vote and almost two-thirds of majoritarian seats . It is the first party in independent Ukraine to win a majority of seats .
 Volodomyr Zelensky won 30% of the vote in the first round of the election in March 2019 . Many of the party’s leading 3 in the election were in the lead .
 Poroshenko is a wealthy businessman and member of parliament . He supported the Euromaidan protests and won 55% of the popular vote in May 2014 election to succeed Yanukovych .
 Poroshenko held government positions under Ukraine’s two previous presidents, including as foreign minister under Viktor Yushchenko .
 U.S. Policy members are under the age of 40 and include Zelensky associates, anti-corruption activists, and former members of other political parties .
 Another four parties received enough party-list votes to enter parliament . Another four received enough votes to entered parliament .
 These are the eastern Ukrainian-based Opposition Platform–For Life . They are the former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko’s Fatherland . Former President Poroshenko's European Solidarity and Voice are the new party of reformists and professionals .
Fatherland, European Solidarity, and Voice all considered to be proWestern parties . Fatherland, Europe Solidarity and Voice are also considered pro-Western parties.
Independent candidates received most of the seats that were not won by Servant of the People candidates . A few other parties won seats in the majoritarian races .
 Dmytro Razumkov was head of Zelensky’s election campaign . He is a former political consultant and former political adviser .
 Twenty-two members of parliament currently are not affiliated with any party or group or group .
 Ukraine's new parliament held its first session at the end of August 2019 . Ukraine’s new parliament was held by the Ukrainian parliament in Kiev .
 The parliament appointed Oleksiy Honcharuk as prime minister . He was formerly an economic adviser to Zelensky and head of an EU-funded business policy institute .
 Almost all ministers in the Honcharuk cabinet were under the age of 50.8 The first Servant of the People government was in power for six months .
 In March 2020, Honcharuk submitted his resignation after Zelensky expressed dissatisfaction with his cabinet . The government was forced to dismiss the government in March 2020 .
 Zelensky praised the outgoing government for being clean and hardworking . But he expressed a lack of confidence in its ability to address mounting challenges .
 The reshuffling followed a minor political scandal . The reshuffle followed a major political scandal.
 Honcharuk offered to resign, but Zelensky expressed confidence in the prime minister . He called on security agencies to identify those responsible.
 Observers suggest a decline in public opinion ratings influenced Zelensky’s desire to replace the government .
 In one regular poll, approval of the Honcharuk cabinet declined from 51% in October 2019 to 21% in February 2020 . 11 Zelensky’s approval rating, while higher, also declined during his time in office, also dropped .
 The president's approval rating was about 70% or higher from May 2019 inauguration through September 2019 .
 Shmyhal served as head of administration in the western Ukrainian region of Ivano-Frankivsk . He was also deputy prime minister and minister for community and territorial development .
 Shmyhal previously was a local official in the western region of Lviv and entered the private sector in 2015 . He was a member of the local council in the Lviv region of the city .
 From 2017, he worked for DTEK, a major energy conglomerate, including since 2018 as head of a large power plant . He has worked for the company since 2018, and since 2018.
 The cabinet includes several officials with previous government experience . Two former military officials are also in the cabinet . The cabinet also includes several former government officials .
Outgoing Prosecutor General Ruslan Riaboshapka defended his office’s work . He implied that corrupt interests seeking to undermine reforms were behind his removal .
 Some observers expressed concern about Zelensky’s decision to reshuffle the government . The government had gained support from international lenders and donors .
 The Honcharuk government had launched major reforms but was not given sufficient time to achieve results . Observers feared the new cabinet might be less willing to carry out reforms .
 The reshuffle could strengthen oligarchic influences, especially given Shmyhal’s recent tenure at DTEK, which is owned by Ukraine's wealthiest individual .
 Ihor Kolomoysky, who some believe has become more influential since Zelensky’s election. Observers also debated the implications of the reshuffle for another wealthy businessperson .
 Kyiv Post: “These Are the 10 Ministers Ousted in Ukraine’s Cabinet Shakeup,’ March 9, 2020 .
 Ukraine's most popular television station airs Zelensky's shows . Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy Kolomoysky controls the station's shows.
 PrivatBank, Ukraine's largest commercial bank, went missing in 2016 after $5 billion went missing . Many observers had seen Honcharuk as acting against Kolomoysky’s interests . Some believed the government reshuffle would permit Kolomoyssky to retain influence .
 Some observers have expressed concern about the rise of far-right Ukrainian nationalist groups .
 Such groups gained attention during the Euromaidan protests, when activists from the Freedom political party and the Right Sector movement participated in a violent wing of the resistance against the Yanukovych government .
 Some of these groups transformed into volunteer battalions, such as the Azov Battalion, fought against Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine . They were eventually incorporated into Ukraine’s National Guard in the Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 Some groups have established political parties and ties with far-right movements outside Ukraine . Some groups, including Azov, have formed political parties, and ties to far-left movements .
 Azov and other far-right organizations have gained a certain legitimacy in Ukrainian society and government . But they have not been successful electorally .
 Freedom party won less than 5% of the vote and received six majoritarian seats . Right Sector won one majoritarian seat .
 In the 2014 presidential election, the Freedom party’s leader won 1% of the vote . Right Sector's then leader won less than 1%.
 The Freedom party, the Azov-affiliated National Corps, Right Sector, and other far-right parties and movements united in a single bloc . The bloc won 2% of the vote and one majoritarian seat .
 In the 2019 presidential election, the united right-wing candidate won less than 2% of the vote . The candidate won the presidential election in 2019 .
 In September 2019, a house she owns outside Kyiv was the target of an alleged arson attack . She held Kolomoysky responsible for the alleged attack .
 Ukraine’s Ex-Central Banker Blames Oligarch for Attacks,” Guardian, November 12, 2019 .
 Zelensky’s current chief of staff is Andriy Yermak, a former foreign policy aide and media executive . He is a former media executive and foreign policy adviser .
 The Lessons for Other States,’s Foreign Affairs, is published on September 14, 2017 .
 American Extremists Being Co-Opted by Ukraine’s Far-Right,” Bellingcat, February 15, 2019, “Inside the Extremist Group that Dreams of Ruling Ukraine,’ Haaretz, February 23, 2019 .
 Far-right groups and others have been implicated in violent attacks against civil society activists, journalists, and minorities, including members of Roma and lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender communities .
 Human rights NGOs reported more than 50 attacks on activists and human rights defenders in 2018 . Many of the attacks appeared to be related to local affairs, allegedly as reprisals for investigations of corruption .
 Kateryna Handzyuk, an activist and city council employee, was the victim of a severe acid attack in July 2018 . She died of her wounds in November 2018 .
 Vadym Komarov, a local investigative journalist, died of his wounds in June 2019 . Another lethal attack victim was local journalist VadyM Komarov .
 During Poroshenko's presidency, observers expressed concern that authorities did not thoroughly investigate such cases . When prosecutions did occur, perpetrators may have been punished but not always those suspected of ordering the attacks .
 After 2014, Ukraine embarked on an ambitious reform agenda . Ukraine embarked upon an ambitious agenda .
 In 2017, the International Monetary Fund praised key reforms, including a reduction of the fiscal deficit, increase in gas prices, and reform of the banking system .
 During Poroshenko's presidency, observers noted progress in public procurement transparency, decentralization, health care reform, and judicial reform .
 In 2016, the IMF warned that stalled reforms could lead to a halt in loan disbursements to Ukraine .
Kennan Institute, Kennan Institute and UNIAN Information Agency, “Council of Europe Praises Judicial Reform in Ukraine’s Local Governance Reform,’.
 The IMF approved a new short-term loan package in December 2018 . After taking power in 2019, Zelensky and his Servant of the People government unveiled their own reform program .
 Their program included tightening anti-corruption legislation and promoting long-awaited judicial, security, land, and privatization reforms .
 Legislation attempted to advance anti-corruption and rule-of-law reforms . Paved the way for privatization of state assets and the establishment of a land market .
 The IMF commended Ukraine for “impressive progress ... in advancing reforms and continuing with sound economic policies’ In December 2019, it announced an agreement for a new $5. billion three-year loan package .
 At the same time, observers have expressed some concerns that the rapid pace of lawmaking has introduced various substantive and procedural deficiencies .
 Observers have raised concerns about implementation of judicial reforms . Other reforms that face resistance by wealthy businesspeople, corrupt actors, or the public .
 Some observers have expressed disapproval of what they consider the government’s pursuit of politically motivated cases against ex-President Poroshenko .
 The Ukrainian government has agreed to pay $1.4 billion to Ukraine . The money will be spent on the country’s infrastructure .
 Zelensky’s Agenda for Parliament, Government, will be released on September 6, 2019 .
Ukraine Lifts Prosecutorial Immunity for Members of Parliament . UNIAN Information Agency, “Rada Paves Path Toward Cutting Number of Parliament Seats,’ February 4, 2020 .
 Roman Olearchyk, Ilona Sologoub, and Anders Aslund are among the top five 2020 Reform Priorities . The Atlantic Council and Atlantic Council are scheduled for 2020 .
 The emergence in Ukraine of Coronavirus Disease 2019 led to a series of rapid reform measures . Ukraine's March 2020 reshuffling raised some concerns about the government’s reform commitment .
 Within weeks, parliament dismissed two new ministers of health and finance .
 The Ukrainian parliament preliminarily approved legislation to prevent the return of nationalized banks to their former owners . To reach an agreement with the IMF, the Ukrainian parliament will receive greater COVID-19-related funding .
 The parliament also passed land reform legislation, which had been bogged down with more than 4,000 draft amendments . The parliament had also passed a bill that had more than four,000 amendments .
 The Ukrainian government adopted measures similar to those in other European countries, including restricted movement into and within the country, school closures, and mask usage .
 In April 2020, the Ukrainian parliament amended the national budget to establish a $2. billion coronavirus fund . The fund will increase spending on health care and pensions .
 Ukraine is hoping to receive billions of dollars in emergency financing and other assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union .
 In February 2020, protesters violently resisted the arrival of more than 70 Ukrainian and foreign national evacuees from Wuhan, China . They had tested negative for COVID-19 and were to be quarantined in a nearby sanatorium .
 Ukraine’s then-minister of health reportedly joined the evacuees in quarantine to calm public fears .
 Ukrainian Health Minister Joins Coronavirus Evacuees in Quarantine . President of Ukraine, “Address by the Head of State on Counteraction to Coronvirus’s Outbreak,” Forbes, April 13, 2020 .
 Anti-corruption Efforts Combating corruption was to be a central focus of the Ukrainian government after the Revolution of Dignity .
 High levels of corruption allegedly persisted during Poroshenko’s presidency . Many officials resisted anti-corruption measures, but many officials resisted such measures .
 Hromadske International, “Ukrainian Parliament Passes Land Market Law,’s March 31, 2020 . Hromadke International: ‘Ukraineian Parliament passes Land market Law’
 A major focus of anti-corruption reforms has been the establishment of three related institutions . The National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine is an investigative body . The Specialized Anti- Corruption Prosecutor’s Office is the High Anti-corruption Court .
 NABU and the AntiCorruption Prosecutor’s Office were established in 2015 .
 Poroshenko agreed in 2018 to establish the Anti-Corruption Court, after years of delay . The United States, the EU, the IMF and the World Bank called on the government to do so in line with international recommendations .
 Judges were selected via a competitive process that included the participation of international experts . Judges were chosen via a competition that included international experts and judges .
 Various obstacles have impeded the functioning of Ukraine’s anti-corruption institutions . However, their situation appears to have improved under the Servant of the People government .
 NABU repeatedly encountered resistance from within the government, reportedly due to the agency’s investigative activities and independence . NABu repeatedly has encountered resistance.
 In 2017, a NABU operation targeting alleged corrupt officials at the State Migration Service was intercepted and exposed by Ukraine’s security service and the prosecutor general's office . The operation was intercepted by Ukraine's security service.
 NABU came under legal pressure to close dozens of investigations into alleged corruption . Ukraine's Constitutional Court issued a controversial ruling that the underlying basis for the investigations, related to the crime of illicit enrichment, was unconstitutional .
 A new law on illicit enrichment enacted in November 2019 has allowed cases to proceed . The law was enacted after a new law was passed in November .
 The director, Artem Sytnyk, was found guilty of a misdemeanor related to vacation expenses paid by an acquaintance . An appeals court upheld the ruling in December 2019 .
During Poroshenko's presidency, many observers believed that prosecutor Nazar Kholodnytskyi did not exhibit independence necessary for the position .
 concerns emerged that Kholodnytskyi was hindering the progress of NABU-initiated investigations . By 2017, concerns emerged. By 2017,. concerns emerged about Kholdnytskyis.
In 2018, NABU obtained wiretaps that purported to reveal actions indicative of witness tampering and obstruction of justice . In 2018, the FBI obtained the wiretaps.
 No charges were brought against Kholodnytskyi, however, and he remained in his 41-year-old position . No charges have been brought against him .
 During the first few months of the Servant of the People government, the prosecutor general and NABU director said cooperation with the Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office had improved .
 Most of the cases are under the Anti-Corruption Court’s jurisdiction . Most of these cases are not under the anti-Corrupt Court's jurisdiction .
 A fourth anti-corruption institution, the National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption, also was established in 2015 . A fourth Anti-corruption agency was also established in2015 .
 The NAPC’s main task was to establish a public electronic system for the mandatory disclosure and verification of government officials’ assets and incomes . The main task is to establish an electronic system.
 By 2018, up to 1 million officials reportedly had submitted required annual declarations . Up to 1million officials reportedly submitted required declarations .
 The verification process moved slowly, however, and eventually stalled, but eventually stalled .
 Former NAPC employees accused agency officials of corruption and collusion with other government officials to avoid asset and income verifications . Former N APC employees said they had been involved in corruption to avoid tax evasion .
 The Servant of the People government has restructured NAPC and appointed a new director . The new director was appointed by the government's new director of the government .
 Justice Sector Reforms Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms are part of broader justice sector reforms . Justice sector reforms are also part of wider justice sector reform.
 Zelensky's first prosecutor general, Ruslan Riaboshapka, embarked on a reform of the prosecutor general’s office . The reform included a recertification process for central and regional prosecutors .
 Of more than 1,300 central prosecutors, 54% were removed after they declined to be vetted, failed knowledge-based tests, or did not pass interviews designed as “integrity checks .
 As of March 2020, about a quarter of the regional prosecutors who agreed to be vetted reportedly had failed knowledge-based tests .
 Many observers praised the recertification process, but some said integrity checks were arbitrary and nontransparent .
 Riaboshapka said the prosecutor general’s office had opened hundreds of new cases targeting corruption and illegal deforestation .
 Ukraine’s Zelensky Lost the Anti-corruption Movement, says Washington Post .
After the March 2020 government reshuffling, the future of prosecutorial reforms became uncertain . The future of prosecutors in the U.S. is uncertain .
 Iryna Venediktova was a leading member of parliament from Servant of the People . She served as chair of the committee on legal policy .
 Venediktova was appointed acting director of the State Bureau of Investigation . The agency had been the focus of several scandals and was restructured at the time .
 Many criticized Venediktova for appointing as her SBI deputy director a lawyer who previously represented Yanukovych .
 In March 2020, Ukraine’s Constitutional Court rejected several elements of a November 2019 judicial reform law . In March 2019, the court rejected several parts of the law .
 Observers considered the legislation to be a reboot of a Poroshenko-era judicial reform . Many believed to be flawed .
 The Constitutional Court did not appear to invalidate new vetting regulations . Some observers say they are intended to keep control of the hiring process in the hands of the High Council of Justice . The High Court of Justice is in charge of vetting regulations.
 The AntiCorruption Court is to be formed with the involvement of international experts . The judicial hiring commission, like the AntiCorrupt Court, will be formed .
 Ukrainians viewed this as a major achievement in the evolution of Ukraine’s national identity . Many Ukrainians viewed it as a big achievement in Ukraine's national identity.
62 Observers consider the OCU’s development to be a long-term process . Most Ukrainian Orthodox churchgoers in Ukraine had been divided between a Kyiv Patriarchate and another wing of the church subordinated to the ROC .
 In a January 2020 poll, 34% of respondents said they were adherents of the OCU . 14% said they are adherents to the ROC-subordinated wing .
 Another 28% identified as Orthodox but not with a particular church . 56 Olena Makarenko, “Ukrainian Parliament Reboots State Bureau of Investigations, Unblocks Probe into Maidan Massacre,’s December 5, 2019 .
 Ecumenical Patriarchate, “Patriarchal and Synodol Tomos for the Bestowal of the Ecclesiastical Status of Autocephaly to the Orthodox Church in Ukraine,’s.
 As of January 2020, about 5% of the ROC-subordinated parishes in Ukraine had transferred their allegiance formally to the OCU . The Greek Orthodox Church and the Patriarchate of Alexandria have recognized theOCU . Other Orthodox Churches have yet to do so
 Russia opposes the OCU’s autocephaly and initially claimed it would threaten the religious freedom and safety of ROC parishioners .
 Russians traditionally have considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be close ethnic brethren . Many Russians traditionally consider much of the country to be an ethnic province .
 In Ukraine’s last national census, 17% of the population identified as ethnic Russians . The population is mostly concentrated in the south and east of Ukraine .
 In Soviet times, eastern Ukraine became home to a heavy industrial and defense production sector that retained close economic ties to Russia after independence .
 Russia-Ukraine relationship occasionally suffered turbulence, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU . Ukraine's Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, the status of Russia’'s Black Sea fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe .
Ex-President Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia in 2013 . He postponed an Association Agreement to establish closer political and economic ties with the EU . He agreed to substantial financial assistance from Moscow .
 This decision provoked the Euromaidan protests and led to Yanukovych’s removal from power . This decision led to the Yanukovych's removal of power .
 The Kremlin is not happy with Ukraine's Orthodox Church, according to some critics .
 Map information generated using data from the Department of State, Esri, and DeLorme . Map information was created by the State Department .
 Crimea Russia’s invasion of Ukraine occurred soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 . Crimea Russia's invasion occurred after Yanukovych flee to Russia .
 The Russian government covertly deployed forces to Ukraine’s Crimea region . It declared it was incorporating Crimea directly into the Russian Federation in March 2014 .
 Russian government officials cast the Revolution of Dignity as a Western-backed “coup that, among other things, could threaten the security of the ethnic Russian population in Crimea, they say . Moscow firmly opposed the actions .
 Russia has significantly increased its military presence in Crimea and suppressed local dissent . Since 2014, Russia has increased its presence in the Crimea region .
 Ukrainian officials say Russia has deployed more than 31,000 troops to Crimea . Russia has also deployed S-400 surface-to-air missile systems and other advanced weaponry .
 Many states and international organizations have condemned Russia's occupation as a violation of international law . Russia's own commitments under the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in Europe .
 Since 2014, the United Nations General Assembly has voted several times to affirm Ukraine’s territorial integrity . Most recently in December 2019, the Assembly voted to condemn the “temporary occupation’ of Crimea, and reaffirm nonrecognition of its annexation .
 The Ukrainian government and state-owned companies seek to uphold their rights in and around Crimea through international arbitration . The Ukraine government and State-owned firms seek to upholding their rights through arbitration .
 Oschadbank awarded $1. billion in damages from Russia in 2019 . In 2019, the Paris-based International Court of Arbitration awarded state-owned OschAdbank $1 billion .
 Ukrainian state-owned energy company Naftogaz seeks about $8 billion in compensation for its seized assets in the Hague-based Permanent Court of Arbitration . The company is seeking compensation for seized assets .
 In November 2019, the International Court of Justice ruled that it has jurisdiction to hear a case Ukraine filed in 2017 against Russia for its actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . In a separate case, the Ukrainian government seeks to broadly uphold its maritime rights around Crimea under the United Nations Convention on the
 "Situation of Human Rights in the Temporarily Occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol," says OHCHR .
 The United States, Ukraine, Russia and Nuclear Weapons, Brookings, May 2011 . The U.S., Ukraine and Russia are the top three countries in the world .
 Russia Illegally Seizes Assets of Naftogaz in Crimea . Ukrinform, “Naftogaz Continues to Sue Russia for Lost Crimean Assets,’s February 10, 2020 .
Militants forcibly took power in several cities and towns in April 2014 . The so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, or DPR, and the Luhansk People's Republic, have expanded their control in the two regions .
For Russia, the establishment of separatist entities in eastern Ukraine may have served multiple purposes . For Russia, it may have been for Russia, for Russia .
 The Russian government claimed it was seeking to “protect’s relatively pro-Russian populations in these regions .
 Many observers believe Moscow sought to complicate Ukraine’s domestic development and foreign policy and increase Russian leverage in potential negotiations over Ukraine's future trajectory .
 Moscow officially recognizes the areas it controls in eastern Ukraine as Ukrainian territory . Unlike Russia’s policy toward Crimea, Moscow does not recognize Crimea as Ukraine territory .
 Russian government denies military involvement in eastern Ukraine . Many observers assert that the Russian government has deployed troops to fight unofficially .
 The conflict’s intensity has declined since 2015, but fighting continues . The conflict's intensity has dropped since 2015 .
 A Brief History of the Battles of the Donetsk Airport, Institute of Land Warfare, May 2019; and Maj. Maj.
 Intelligence sources indicated separatist forces brought down the plane using a missile supplied by the Russian military . The plane was brought down by separatist forces, sources said .
 The MH17 tragedy helped galvanize EU support for more substantial sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine . The MH 17 tragedy has galvanized EU support.
 In July 2019, procedures were expanded to apply to all residents of Donetsk and Luhansk regions . In July 2018, these procedures were extended to all Residents of the Donetsk andLuhansk region .
Ukrainian government has registered more than 1. million people as IDPs . The Ukrainian government hasregistered more than one million people .
 Government of the Netherlands, “Suspects to Be Prosecuted for the Downing of Flight MH17,” press release, June 19, 2019; Claire Parker, ‘Here’s What We Know About the Four Suspects Charged with Downing flight MH17’
 Russia justified its invasion of Georgia in 2008 in part by asserting a need to defend Russian citizens in Georgia’s South Ossetia region .
 Ukraine’s Policy Towards Internally Displaced Persons,” OSW Centre for Eastern Studies, January 16, 2019 .
 In 2019, about 1. million total crossings occurred per month via five official crossing points . The average of about 1,000 crossings per month occurred via five crossing points.
 Most crossings are by female and elderly residents of nongovernment-controlled areas, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees . Most crossing are by women and elderly, mainly to collect pensions .
 Ukrainian government has taken measures to facilitate transit to and from nongovernment-controlled areas . The Ukrainian government is taking measures to ease transit to the country .
 In 2019, the government repaired the bridge that serves as the sole crossing point in the Luhansk region .96 in 2019, it also issued an order to liberalize the crossing regime by allowing individuals to carry all goods through crossing points .97 in March 2020, the
 Ukrainian government has prohibited cargo traffic to and from nongovernment-controlled areas since 2017 . Since 2017, the government has banned cargo traffic from the country .
 The Minsk agreements were signed in 2014 and 2015 by representatives of Russia, Ukraine, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . They were signed by members of what is known as the Trilateral Contact Group .
 The 2014 agreements included the 12-point Minsk Protocol, signed days after the defeat of Ukrainian government and volunteer forces at the battle of Ilovaisk . A follow-up memorandum outlining measures for a cease-fire and international monitoring mission .
 "The Killer Queues of Ukraine" and "In Symbolic Move" will be released on November 21 .
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy prompt a political resolution to the conflict .
 OSCE monitoring and verification of the cease-fire regime and withdrawal of heavy weapons . OSCE monitors and verification.
 Dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation . The future status of “certain areas’ in Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine applies .
 Amnesty via a law forbidding persecution and punishment of persons “in connection with the events’ that took place in certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Safe access and delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need on the basis of an international mechanism . Safe access to aid is a key part of the international mechanism.
Ukraine's border with Russia has been restored to full Ukrainian control over the border . The new constitution and permanent legislation on the special status of certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Constitutional reform, including on decentralization, and permanent legislation on the special status of certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk, in agreement with representatives of nongovernment-controlled areas .
 Local elections to be held in certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk, in accordance with OSCE standards . Local elections in those areas are in agreement with representatives of those districts .
 The restoration of Ukrainian border control is to be implemented concurrently with measures designed to establish a political settlement to the conflict . The restoration will be followed by the establishment of political settlement.
 The return of Ukraine’s border is to begin immediately after the holding of democratic local elections in the nongovernmentcontrolled areas .
 Ukraine enacts permanent legislation providing special local government status to the nongovernment-controlled areas . It is to conclude after Ukraine enact permanent legislation .
Other measures include amnesty for conflict participants and the restoration of social and economic links across the contact line . Other measures include Amnesty for Conflict participants and restoration ofSocial and economic ties across the line .
 The United Nations Security Council, which includes Russia as a permanent member, has endorsed the Minsk agreements . The U.N. Security Council has also endorsed the agreements .
 Russia and U.S. Policy parties to fully implement package of measures . Russia and the United States have agreed to implement measures .
 The Security Council condemned ongoing cease-fire violations in 2018 . In 2018, a Security Council “presidential statement’s’ called for the implementation of disengagement commitments .
 From 2017 to 2019, U.S. policy on Ukraine conflict was directed mainly through the office of the United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations .
 The signing of Minsk-2, on February 12, 2015, was intended to trigger an expedited timeframe for a “comprehensive political settlement’ to the conflict . The signing was intended for an expedite timeframe .
 Ukraine's full control of its border by the end of 2015. This timeframe included a cease-fire from February 15, 2015, full withdrawal of heavy weapons after 15 days of a cease.
 The U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker is currently in Ukraine . The United States has been in Ukraine since 2009 .
 The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine is an unarmed civilian monitoring mission . The mission was established in 2014 after Russia's occupation of Crimea .
 The SMM is deployed throughout Ukraine but focuses on the nongovernment-controlled areas in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The SMM issues daily and spot monitoring reports on the security situation and facilitates the delivery of humanitarian aid . Donors and nongovernmental organizations direct humanitarian assistance to nongo government areas .
 Among those freed were some of Russia’s most prominent Ukrainian political prisoners and prisoners of war .
 Detainees Ukraine freed included a person of interest in the downing of MH17, whom Dutch prosecutors interviewed before his release . Hromadske International, Hromadke International and Ukrinform also freed .
 Among those freed were Ukrainian servicemen, local residents alleged to have been cooperating with Ukrainian government . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty journalist Stanislav Aseyev was freed by Russian proxy authorities .
Ukrainian authorities released not only fighters but also individuals who had not been involved in the conflict . Ukrainian authorities released a number of individuals who were not involved.
 Released detainees included five members of Ukraine’s Berkut special police force accused of killing protesters during the Revolution of Dignity .
 Some observers criticized Zelensky for accommodating Moscow’s demands to release detainees . Some observers criticize Zelenski for accommodating Russia's demands .
 We will bring All Ukrainian Political Prisoners Home, Kyiv Post, March 12, 2020 .
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy illegal armed formations withdraw from areas and democratic local elections are held .
Before the emergence of the coronavirus pandemic, residents could conduct individual trade and transit across the contact line . Residents could receive pensions and other social benefits .
 Ukraine’s banking system does not operate in the nongovernment-controlled areas . Even when transit is open, cargo traffic is prohibited .
 The Ukrainian and Russian governments each emphasize what they consider to be the other party’s responsibilities for implementing the Minsk agreements . Ukraine and Russia each emphasize their responsibilities.
 Ukrainian officials have emphasized the need for a permanent cease-fire and withdrawal of Russian official and unofficial forces . The need is both on principle and as a necessary condition for a secure environment to hold democratic local elections .
 The Russian government disavows direct responsibility for cease-fire violations and the failure to withdraw heavy weapons . The government, for its part, disavows responsibility for the violations .
 Russia has called on Ukraine to fulfill certain political measures, including a permanent grant of special status to the nongovernment-controlled areas and related constitutional reforms .
 The Ukrainian government has called for an international peacekeeping mission throughout the nongovernment-controlled areas to help enforce a cease-fire . Separate from the Minsk agreements, the Ukrainian government calls for the establishment of an international Peacekeeping mission .
 The U.S. government has expressed support for a peacekeeping mission as a means to establish security conditions necessary to implement Minsk-2’s package of measures . The United States has expressed its support for the mission .
1 Ukraine and Russia Relaunch Talks President Zelensky has sought to invigorate what had been a relatively dormant conflict resolution process in eastern Ukraine . Russian officials have rejected the proposal .
 It remains to be seen whether his efforts can lay the groundwork for discussion on thornier issues, including withdrawal of Russian forces and the legal status of Russian-controlled areas .
 Zelensky and Putin met alongside German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron in December 2019 . It was the first meeting of leaders of the Normandy Four since 2016 .
 The U.S. Department of State has released a new report on Ukraine Negotiations . The report is based on a report by UNIAN Information Agency .
2 Meeting participants addressed more contentious issues related to a political settlement to the conflict . Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy disengagement areas, opening of new crossing points, and creation of an updated demining plan .
 The parties expressed ‘interest’ in the further legal development of special status for the nongovernment-controlled areas . The parties express “interest” in the additional legal development. The parties are also interested in special status.
 The four leaders also said they consider it “necessary’ to incorporate into Ukrainian law the so-called Steinmeier formula . The formula was a previously defunct proposal for establishing a sequence for the holding of local elections in .
Special status is to come into effect on a temporary basis at the close of local elections .
 If international observers conclude elections were held in accordance with international standards and Ukrainian law, the special status is to become permanent . Ukrainian law is to be changed if the election was held according to international standards .
 Russia made acceptance of the Steinmeier formula a precondition of the December 2019 meeting . Russia made accepted of the formula a pre-election preconditions of the meeting .
 Many Ukrainians appear to oppose the formula, as they do special status more generally . Many Ukrainians seem to oppose special status, but more generally, they appear to be opposed .
 The Ukrainian government's initial announcement that it would accept the Steinmeier formula was met with protests .
 Opponents of the formula express concern that Moscow will manipulate the process to entrench its proxy regimes .
 Many are concerned that Russia will refuse to withdraw its forces or restore control of the border to Ukraine after local elections . Many are also concerned that Russian forces will not withdraw their forces or return to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian officials say that Russia should return control of the border before local elections . This would reverse the order stipulated in the Minsk agreements .
 Meeting participants expressed interest in holding another Normandy summit in four months’ time . The date has yet to be set for the summit .
 The Ukrainian and Russian governments have said the next meeting should be held only after implementation of the measures agreed in December 2019 . In addition to uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the Ukraine and Russia have said it will be held after implementation .
Steinmeier Formula is a German Formula Formula . The Formula is based in Germany .
 Russia seeks to establish greater control over maritime regions adjacent to Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The Sea of Azov, the Black Sea, and the Kerch Strait are the waterway that connects the two seas .
 In May 2018, Russian President Putin opened a 12-mile-long bridge over the Kerch Strait linking Russia to occupied Crimea . Putin opened the bridge in May 2018 .
 The bridge was designed to accommodate an existing shipping lane . But it imposed new limits on the size of ships that transit the strait .
 Russia has stepped up its interference with commercial traffic traveling to and from Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov in Mariupol and Berdyansk . Since the bridge’s opening, Russia has increased its interference.
 As Russia Monopolizes Azov Sea, Mariupol Feels Heightened Danger,” Kyiv Post, August 3, 2018.
 Dmitry Gorenburg and Michael Kofman, “Russia and Ukraine Had a Short Naval Battle’s’
 The ships and their crew took them to the town of Kerch, in Crimea, Crimea .
 The U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights considered the 24 Ukrainian sailors to be prisoners of war . Ukraine and its international partners considered the incident to be a major violation of international law . Russia's efforts to control maritime access to eastern Ukraine have escalated .
 On May 25, 2019, the U.N.-established International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea issued an order requiring Russia to release the sailors and ships .
 The Russian government said it did not recognize the tribunal's authority in this matter . The sailors were released as part of a prisoner exchange in September 2019 .
 As part of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was responsible for a large share of the country’s agricultural and industrial production .
 Ukraine's economy has shown signs of stabilization, due in part to international assistance, including $13 billion in IMF loan disbursements . After returning to growth in 2010-2011, the economy stagnated in 2012-2013 and declined after Russia's 2014 invasion .
 In the last two years, observers noted several positive trends in Ukraine’s economy . Ukraine's economy has been improving in recent years .
 Ukraine faces many economic challenges, and the coronavirus pandemic has worsened the country’s economic outlook .
 Some argue that customary international law as reflected in the United Nations Charter on the Law of the Sea, or UNCLOS, also does that .
Ukraine’s Underrated Economy is Poised for a Strong 2020, says Atlantic Council . The Atlantic Council, January 6, 2020, will be held in Ukraine .
 He expressed support for a change in government in Ukraine . Ukraine's stronger currency is part of the U.S. policy .
 The IMF estimates that Ukraine’s GDP could decline by more than 7% in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic . Poverty in Ukraine has declined in recent years .
142 Ukraine is the largest recipient of migrant remittances in Europe, according to the World Bank . About 20% of Ukrainian laborers work in agriculture .
 Russia suspended its own free trade agreement with Ukraine in 2016 . Further restrictions followed in 2014-2015, with Russia suspending its own trade agreement in 2016.
 The value of Ukraine’s merchandise exports declined by 43% from 2013 to 2016, with the value of merchandise exports to Russia declining by 76%. Since 2017, Ukraine's merchandise trade has grown.
 Ukraine’s main exports include cereals, iron and steel, sunflower oil, sun flower oil, iron ore, electrical equipment and parts, and oil seeds .
 In 2019, Ukraine surpassed Russia to become the world’s largest grain exporter . The EU accounted for about 41% of Ukraine's total trade in the country .
 Trade data are from the State Customs Committee of Ukraine, as presented by Global Trade Atlas .
After a severe decline in foreign direct investment in 2014, FDI inflows recovered somewhat . FDI in 2014 was the worst decline in 2014 .
 FDI declined from $56. billion at the end of 2013 to $33. billion in 2016, official statistics show .
 FDI inflows in 2018-2019 were mainly in finance, industry, wholesale and retail trade, and real estate . FDI inflation was mainly in Finance, industry and wholesale trade .
 The top sources of FDI in 2018-2019 were Cyprus, the Netherlands, and Russia . The sector historically has performed below its potential, given low domestic energy prices, subsidies, high consumption and corruption .
 Ukraine’s primary energy mix consists of around 31% natural gas, 31% coal, and 23% nuclear .
 Ukraine currently produces around two-thirds of its energy supply, including two- thirds of its natural gas and 55% of its coal . Ukraine depended on Russian imports for more than half its total consumption .
 Many observers contend that Russia traditionally has used gas price hikes, debt repayments, and cutoffs as leverage in disputes with Ukrainian governments . Many observers say Russia traditionally uses gas price hike, debt repayment, cutoffs to leverage against Ukraine .
After Russia’s invasion, Ukraine's gas usage declined, due to lower industrial production and higher tariffs . The halting of gas supplies to nongovernment-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine has led to higher tariffs.
 Institutions, Governance, and Policy Framework, 2019; BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2019 .
 A Comprehensive Assessment, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, February 2009, was published in 2009 .
Ukraine's plans to get off energy Dependence Needle will be announced January 22, 2020 .
 Ukraine's state-owned energy company, Naftogaz, has been unbundle into state- owned companies . Ukraine's government fulfilled a long-standing commitment to unbundle Ukraine’s energy company . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict with
 The unbundling is intended to align Ukraine's energy system with the EU’s ‘Third Energy Package’ It is an effort to liberalize and increase energy sector competition by separating ownership and control of gas supply and production .
 Gas Transit to Europe Ukraine is a transit state for Russian natural gas exports to Europe . Gas transit to Europe is a Transit state for Russia's natural gas export to Europe.
 Russia has sought to reduce the amount of natural gas it transits through Ukraine . In recent years, Russia has tried to reduce its natural gas flow .
 Most of Russia’s gas exports to Europe transited Ukraine . Before the 2011 opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea, most of Russia's gas exports were to Europe .
 Since the opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline, about 40%-50% of these exports have transited Ukraine . About 40% of those exports have come from Ukraine .
 In 2018, Ukrainian revenues from gas transit totaled $2.65 billion . Nord Stream 2, currently under construction, is a second Baltic Sea pipeline that runs parallel to Nord Stream .
 Nord Stream 2 was scheduled to be completed in early 2020 . The pipeline was scheduled for completion in early 2019 .
 If Nord Stream 2 becomes operational, observers expect it to further reduce gas transit through Ukraine . If Nordstream 2 is operational, it will further reduce the flow of gas to Ukraine .
 Ukraine stopped importing natural gas directly from Russia in 2016 . This would not necessarily increase Ukraine’s vulnerability to energy supply cutoffs .
 Ukraine's dependence for gas transit leads Moscow to be less constrained in its policies toward Ukraine . It could lead to declines in transit revenues, but it could increase Ukraine’s strategic vulnerability .
 Gazprom, Naftogaz and the new Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine concluded a renewal contract for the transit of Russian natural gas to Europe from 2020 to 2024 . The contract provides for transit of at least 65 billion cubic meters of natural gas in 2020, a volume equal to about
 BCM and 40 BCM a year from 2021 to 2024, a volume equal to about 45% of the 2019 volume . BCM, and 40BCM, a year. from 2021- 2024, will be at least 40% of this volume .
 The contract will lead to at least $7. billion in transit revenue over five years, Naftogaz says .
 Gazprom agreed to accept the 2018 ruling of a Swedish arbitration court concerning several trade disputes with Naftogaz . Gazprom also paid the latter $2. billion in damages and interest .
 Options for EU Natural Gas Diversification, coordinated by Michael Ratner, were coordinated by Ratner .
 Will Sanctions Stop It? by Paul Belkin, Michael Ratner, and Cory Welt .
 The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies will open its new chapter in February 2020 .
 In 2019, a new constitutional amendment declared the government responsible for implementing Ukraine’s “strategic course” toward EU and NATO membership .
 The EU is a major provider of foreign aid to Ukraine, totaling more than €13 billion (about $14.2 billion) in loans and €2 billion in grants from 2014 to 2019 .
 During this period, EU member states provided an additional €1. billion in bilateral assistance .
 In April 2020, the EU announced it would provide more than €190 million in emergency support to Ukraine to address the coronavirus pandemic .
 The EU has imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine . The European Commission has proposed another €1.5 billion in macro-financial assistance to help “limit the economic fallout’ of the pandemic.
 The EU also has supported Ukraine against Russia’s maritime aggression near the Kerch Strait . The EU has also supported Ukraine in the past .
 A NATO-Ukraine Commission, established in 1997, provides the framework for cooperation . The Commission was created in 1997 .
 Tony Barber, “Ukraine Reaps Benefits of Trade Deal with EU’s EU,’ is published on September 11, 2018 . Barber: Ukraine Reaps benefits of trade deal with EU .
 Commission Proposes €3 Billion Macro-financial Assistance Package to Support Ten Neighbouring Countries .
 Russia and U.S. Policy participated in the NATO Response Force, a rapid reaction force . Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy participated .
 Ukraine's parliament rejected its non-bloc status after Russia's 2014 invasion . In 2017, Ukraine voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority .
 Ukraine contributes to the Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan and participated in the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan . Ukraine also participated in Operation Active Endeavour and Operation Ocean Shield .
 Ukraine has supported NATO’s maritime Sea Guardian operation . In addition, Ukraine has also supported NATO's maritime SeaGuard operation .
 Many observers contend that closer integration with EU and NATO has not enabled Ukraine to improve its near-term prospects for membership in these organizations .
 The EU is unlikely to consider Ukraine a candidate for membership soon, given Ukraine's domestic challenges, the conflict with Russia, the EU’s own internal challenges, and the lack of support for further enlargement .
 NATO members agreed that Ukraine and Georgia “will become members of NATO, but Ukraine has not been granted a clear path to membership . In 2008, NATO members agree that Ukraine will become a member of the alliance .
 Most observers believe NATO will not move forward with membership as long as Russia occupies Ukrainian territory . The conflict remains unresolved and most observers believe it will not be resolved .
Ukrainian Parliament makes NATO Integration a Priority, according to RFE/RL .
Military Career Transition. Command, Control, Communications and Computers; Cyber Defense, Cyber Defense; Explosive Ordnance Disposal and Counter-Improvised Explosive Devices; Logistics and Standardization; Medical Rehabilitation; and Military Career Transition .
3 U.S.-Ukraine relations with Ukraine are deep and multifaceted . The United States policy does not include occupied Crimea and Russian-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine .
Former National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski justified U.S. engagement with newly independent Ukraine . He argued that a strong Ukraine would not only benefit Ukrainians but also help prevent the rise of a new Russian empire .
 Ukraine's economy is in a free-fall, while Crimea is on the verge of a Russia-abetted ethnic explosion . U.S. policymakers must face the fact that Ukraine is on a brink of disaster, says Peter Bergen .
 Either crisis might be exploited to promote breakup or reintegration of Ukraine in a larger Moscow-dominated framework .
 It is urgent and essential that the U.S. convince the Ukrainian government to adopt long-delayed and badly needed economic reforms . The United States has promised substantial economic assistance to Ukraine .
 Twenty years after Russia's 2014 invasion of Ukraine, U.S. officials came to express support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 In 2019, relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in U.S. domestic political affairs . The United States has a strong relationship with Ukraine .
 House will begin impeachment inquiry related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine . House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced that the House would begin an impeachment inquiry in September .
 We Asked Ukrainians This Important Question,’ Washington Post, February 26, 2020 .
 On October 31, 2019, the House agreed to H.Res.0, which directed certain committees to continue ongoing investigations as part of an impeachment inquiry . The House also agreed to the House to continue its investigation into impeachment .
 The U.S. Policy soliciting the Government of Ukraine to publicly announce investigations that would benefit his reelection, harm the election prospects of a political opponent, and influence the 2020 presidential election .
 President Trump and White House officials acknowledged the President’s interest in Ukrainian investigations but said those interests were tied to legitimate concerns .
 White House officials generally denied that U.S. government acts had been contingent on an announcement of such investigations . The White House said such investigations were not contingent on the announcement .
 Other U.S. officials presented their views during the impeachment inquiry . Other United States officials present their views in the inquiry .
 U.S. officials frequently call attention to Russia’s human rights abuses in occupied Crimea .
 The U.S. Department of State says Russia is "harassment of International Shipping Transiting the Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov’s"
 The Protecting Europe’s Energy Security Act of 2019 established sanctions related to the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline . Since 2018, United States officials reportedly have sought to deter Ukraine from approving the sale to Chinese companies of Motor Sich, a privately-owned Ukrainian company .
 The issue reportedly was a subject of discussion during an August 2019 visit to Ukraine by then-National Security Council Advisor John Bolton .
 U.S. concerns about the sale relate to the transfer of sensitive technologies that could boost Chinese domestic military production and cooperation with Russia .
 U.S. officials have warned Ukraine that the sale could lead China to displace Ukraine as a leading aircraft engine exporter .
 Ukrainian court documents revealed that a Chinese company had acquired majority ownership of Motor Sich . U.S. concerns date back to 2017, when the company was bought by a Chinese firm .
 Ukrainian court froze 41% of the Chinese-owned shares after the Security Service of Ukraine said the company was intending to move Motor Sich’s assets abroad .
 The Ukrainian government has tentatively agreed with two Chinese companies on the purchase of Motor Sich .
 As of April 2020, Ukraine’s Anti-Monopoly Committee reportedly was reviewing the agreement .
 Media reports indicate that U.S. companies recently have explored the possibility of purchasing Motor Sich .
 The U.S. has promoted domestic reforms in Ukraine since Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity .
 During Poroshenko's presidency, the Obama Administration supported a wide range of governance and economic reforms in Ukraine .
 Then-Vice President Joseph Biden led “the Administration’s effort to support a Statements to the Press,” he said .
 In 2015, Biden reportedly told Ukrainian officials the U.S. would withhold a $1 billion loan guarantee if Ukraine’s then-Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin did not resign .
196 Trump Administration officials have continued to support domestic reforms in Ukraine . The prosecutor general's office has been criticized for hindering corruption investigations .
 United States Assistance to Ukraine since February 2014,’s U.S. assistance to Ukraine Since February 2014 .
 The U.S. Department of State has a Diplomatic Academy . The Academy is based in Washington, D.C.
 Ukraine has been a leading recipient of U.S. foreign and military aid in Europe and Eurasia . Since independence, Ukraine has had a long history of conflict with Russia .
 In the 1990s, the U.S. government provided almost $2. billion in total aid to Ukraine . In the 2000s (FY2001 to FY2009), total aid amounted to almost $1. billion ($199 million a year, on average) In the five years before
 Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the United States has provided higher levels of annual assistance to Ukraine . Separate nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance amounted to an average of over $130 million a year in obligated funds .
 Nonmilitary aid averaged about $321 million a year from FY2015 to FY2019 . U.S. government has provided more than $239 million in humanitarian assistance since FY2014 .
 The United States also has provided three $1 billion loan guarantees to Ukraine . The U.S. has also provided $1billion loan guarantees.
 The President's FY2021 nonmilitary aid request for Ukraine was $199 million . The President’s FY 2021 non military aid request was $200 million .
 The Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative provides security assistance to support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . In addition to bilateral foreign military financing ($115 million appropriated annually in FY2019 and FY2020), United States assistance includes the Ukraine Security assistance Initiative .
 FY2014 CTR funds include some assistance provided in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 Issuance of $1 Billion Loan Guarantee to the Government of Ukraine,’s $1 billion loan guarantee .
 The Obama Administration provided nonlethal security assistance to Ukraine . It was due to concerns about potential conflict escalation .
 Also see Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddy, “How Aiding the Ukrainian Military Could Push Putin into a Regional War,’
 National Interest: How long would It Last Against Russia? National Interest.
 The Department of Defense had notified Congress of its intent to obligate a total of $250 million in Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative funds in February 2019 and May 2019 .
 The Office of the DNI provided Congress with a declassified version of the whistleblower complaint . The next day, the White House released a memorandum of a July 25, 2019, telephone conversation between President Trump and President Zelensky .
 The United States and Ukraine host regular joint military exercises in Ukraine . NATO allies and partners participate in the exercises .
 The combat training center is “co-located’ with Ukraine’s International Center for Peacekeeping and Security, a preexisting multinational training center .
 The United States training mission in Ukraine is overseen by U.S. Army Europe’s 7th Army Training Command .
 Military trainers deployed to the JMTG-U and a predecessor mission (Fearless Guardian, which provided training to interior ministry troops) serve on rotational deployments .
 United States interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 regarding December 2015 cyberattacks against Ukrainian power companies . U.S. inter agency teams visited the country in 2016 .
 The U.S. Army has been in Ukraine since 2009 . The U.-S. military has been stationed in Ukraine .
 The U.S. Army's Trident 19 Demonstrates Multinational Proficiency in Ukraine, says Kyle Larsen .
 The United States and Ukraine have held three annual Cybersecurity Dialogues in Kyiv . The U.S. and Ukraine hold three annual Bilateral Cybersecuritydialogues .
 The United States granted Ukraine permanent normal trade relations status in 2006 . From 2014 to 2016, bilateral trade declined in line with an overall decline in Ukraine's trade after Russia's invasion .
 In 2019, the U.S. was Ukraine’s 6th-largest source of merchandise imports and 14th- largest destination for exports . The United States was Ukraine's 6th largest source of imports and the 14th largest destination.
The value of U.S. merchandise exports to Ukraine was $2.35 billion in 2019 . The value of United States merchandise export to Ukraine, mostly coal, motor vehicles, and industrial machinery, was $1.5 billion .
The value of U.S. merchandise imports from Ukraine was $1.30 billion in 2018 . The value of United States merchandise imported from Ukraine, mainly iron and steel, was $2.2 billion .
 In 2017, President Trump and then-President Poroshenko agreed to increase the sale of U.S. coal to Ukraine . It could replace now-halted supplies of coal from the nongovernment-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine .
 In 2019, U.S. coal accounted for almost one-third of Ukraine’s total coal imports . The United States accounted for nearly a third of Ukraine's total coal exports .
 Since 1991, Congress has supported Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty, and democratic trajectory . Congress has also supported Ukraine's independence and sovereignty, according to a report .
Congress supported Ukraine’s democratic transition during the 2004-2005 Orange Revolution . Congress supported Ukraine's democratic transition.
 Congress also has agreed to several resolutions to commemorate the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster . The disaster took place in Soviet Ukraine, which took place at the time . Congress also agreed to support related United States and international assistance .
227 during Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity, Congress supported a peaceful resolution to the conflict . Congress has regularly commemorated the Soviet Ukraine famine of 1932-1933, most recently in 2018 .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, trade restrictions formally continued to apply to Russia and other post-Soviet states . They received conditional normal trade relations in 1992, even though they received conditional trade relations .
 The famine killed almost 4 million Ukrainians, according to current estimates .
 In 1985, Congress established a Commission on the Ukraine Famine . It held hearings with eyewitnesses, published findings and conducted a related oral history project .
 Stalin’s War on Ukraine . Commission on the Ukraine Famine, Investigation of the Ukrainian Famine . Askold Krushelnycky, “How Washington Holodomor Monument Won the Race Against Time,’ Kyiv Post, February 23, 2020 .
 Members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia, and supported increased aid to Ukraine . Since 2014, many members of Congress has condemned Russia's invasion of the Ukraine .
 The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions . It authorized increased nonmilitary and military assistance to Ukraine . It also authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states .
 It also established congressional review of any action the President takes to ease or lift a variety of sanctions .
 Congress has supported the provision of defensive lethal weapons to Ukraine . Since 2014, Congress has been supporting the provision.
 For related resolutions in the Senate, see S.Res. 52 and S.res. 52 in 2014 . For related resolution in the U.S. See S. Resolutions in 2014 and 2015 for related resolutions .
 Some members of Congress have expressed concern about the emergence of far-right movements in Ukraine .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Security Cooperation Enhancement Act will be introduced in May 2019 . It would authorize the provision of more lethal defense articles . The act would enhance U.N. security cooperation, including by authorizing the provision.
 Rep. Khanna Leads Bipartisan Members in Condemning Anti-Semitism in Europe .
4.4 The Ukraine Religious Freedom Support Act was introduced in the House and Senate in December 2019 . It would impose additional sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine and for interfering with freedom of navigation through the Kerch Strait .
 The act would seek to deny U.S. visas to Russian officials if they committed severe violations of religious freedom in occupied Ukrainian territory . It would also seek to denied visas to Russia if they commit particularly severe violations.
 Russia is a country of particular concern for religious freedom . It would require the President to consider such violations for the purposes of making a determination of whether to designate Russia as a country.
 Most U.S. sanctions designations of Russian individuals and entities have been imposed in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . Sanctions related to Russia's Invasion of Ukraine.
 The EOs also establish sanctions against designated Russian government officials and persons who operate in the Russian arms sector, key sectors of the Russian economy .
 In addition, they prohibit U.S. business, trade, or investment in occupied Crimea .
 Among those designated are former government officials and Russian proxy authorities in occupied Crimea and nongovernment-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine .
 Sectoral sanctions imposed in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine apply to certain kinds of transactions with specific entities in Russia’s financial, energy, and defense sectors .
 SSIDES and UFSA, signed into law in 2014, expanded on the actions the Obama Administration took in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 President Obama did not cite SSIDES or UFSA as an authority for designations or other sanctions actions .
 SSIDES and UFSA contain additional sanctions provisions the executive branch could use, including potentially wide-reaching secondary sanctions against foreign individuals and entities that facilitate significant transactions .
 The White House issued a statement on the Ukraine Freedom Support Act . The statement was made by President Obama .
 PEESA provides for a 30-day wind-down period . exceptions for repairs, maintenance, environmental remediation, and safety . National security waiver .
 As of April 2020, PEESA’s impact on completion of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline was uncertain . The pipeline is expected to be completed in April 2020 .
 The company laying the pipeline has suspended its activities . Russia should be able to finish construction of Nord Stream 2 on its own, officials have said .
 Like the United States, the EU has imposed sanctions against Russia for its invasion of Ukraine . The U.S. has imposed the sanctions on Russia for the invasion .
 EU sanctions are similar to U.S. sanctions, but not identical to those in the United States . The EU's sanctions are not identical, but they are similar, although not identical .
 Most EU sanctions are imposed for a defined period of time to incentivize change and provide flexibility to adjust the sanctions as warranted . The EU can also adjust sanctions if it is needed to change the sanctions .
 Other countries have imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine . Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland have also imposed sanctions . Other countries, including Australia and Canada, have imposed restrictions on Russia .
 Ukraine continues to grapple with a number of internal and external challenges . More than six years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and Russia's invasion, Ukraine is still grappling with internal challenges .
 The Curious Voyage of the Akademik Cherskiy will take place on March 31, 2020 .
 The Congressional Research Service is housed inside the Library of Congress . It provides non-partisan advice on issues that may come before Congress .
 EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports available to all Congressional staff .
 Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to the public . The reports are not classified, and members of Congress regularly make reports available .
 Prior to our republication, we redacted phone numbers and email addresses of analysts who produced the reports .
 We have not intentionally made any other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com . We are not intentionally making any other Changes to the report .
 CRS reports, as a work of the U.S. government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States . CRS says the work is not subject for copyright protection .
 The CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party . You may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material .
 CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in connection with CRS' institutional role .