For paragraph 6 of the Autonomous Sanctions Regulations 2011, each person and entity mentioned in an item in Schedule 1 is a designated person or entity for Ukraine . For paragraph 6, the person and person mentioned in the item is a designate person or person for Ukraine.
For paragraph 6 of the Autonomous Sanctions Regulations 2011, each person mentioned in an item in Schedule 1 is a declared person for Ukraine . For paragraph 6, for paragraph 1, the person mentioned is a declaration person for Ukrainian authorities .
 Member of the Federation Council and Chairman of its Committee on Constitutional Law . Member of Federation Council .
 Klishas publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On 1 March 2014 Klisha publicly supported the deployment in Ukraine.
 On 1 March 2014, she publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . She publicly supported the deployment in Ukraine.
 Originator and co-sponsor of legislative proposals in Russia that allow regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities’ agreement .
 As of September 2015, a Member of the Federation Council from Omsk region. As of Sept. 2015, he was a member of the federation Council from the region .
 Senator and Deputy Head of the Federation Council Committee on Constitutional Law since September 2015 . Also Senator and deputy head of Federation Council committee on Constitutional law .
 Former Chairman of the Commonwealth of Independent States Committee of the State Duma . Former chairman of Commonwealth of independent States Committee .
 Actively supported use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea . Actively support use of Russia's armed forces in Ukraine .
 Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea . Organiser of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities are mobilised .
 Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory. Responsible for commanding Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean parliament on 27 February 2014 . In the presence of pro-Russian gunmen, he was elected Prime Minister .
 Also elected Head of the Republic of Crimea by Crimean State Council on 9 October 2014 . Also elected head of the Crimea by Crimea State Council .
 Parliament played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the parliament concerning the referendum against the territorial integrity of Ukraine . Called on voters to cast votes in favour of Crimean Independence .
 Chairman of the Pro-Russian political organization Ukrainian Choice . Ukrainian Choice has tried to undermine democratic processes in Ukraine .
 Medvedchuk also represents Ukraine in the humanitarian subgroup for the Minsk talks group . Medveduk also represents the Ukraine in a humanitarian sub group for the talks group.
 Ukrainian State funds and their illegal transfer outside Ukraine. Subject to criminal proceedings in Ukraine in connection with the embezzlement of Ukrainian state funds .
 Fursenko spoke in support of the integration of Crimea’s education system with that of Russia .
 Gazprom and the Sochi Olympics awarded to them by Putin . Both have made billions of dollars in contracts from Gazprom. Both have been awarded to the Sochi Games .
 SGM Group has won a major tender for the construction of the Kerch bridge that will link Crimea to mainland Russia . The bridge will connect Crimea to Russia's mainland Russia.
 One of the world’s largest independent commodity trading companies involved in the oil and energy markets . Gunvor is one of the largest independent commodities trading companies .
 Timchenko’s activities in the energy sector have been directly linked to Putin . Putin has investments in Gunvor and might have access to Gunvor funds .
 Owner and manager of the Volga Group, one of the largest investment groups in Russia . Volga is one of Russia's biggest investment groups .
 Former First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office. Former First Chief of staff of the presidential Executive Office .
 Crimea's political integration into the Russian Federation is responsible for the integration of Crimea into Russia . Crimea is now part of the Russian federation .
 Chairman of the Board of state-owned Russian Railways until 20 August 2015 . He will be the chairman of the board of the state- owned railways .
 On 18 April 2014, by a Presidential decree, was granted the status of ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary .
 Continues "public and charity work" as a senior figure in several organisations .
 First Deputy Chairman, Federation Council International Affairs Committee . The committee is the first deputy chairman of the Federation Council international affairs committee .
 First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office . Member of the State Commission for the Socio-Economic Development of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 Russian Federation is responsible for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
Head of the Government Commission for the Socio-Economic Development of Crimea . Head of the government commission for the SOCio- economic development of the Crimea .
 Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation during the annexation of Crimea .
 Russian Federation to admit territories of a foreign country without consent of that country or of an international treaty . Initiator of the bill allows the Russian Federation.
 Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation has been in charge since October 2016 . Head of the foreign intelligence service of the Russia's Russian Federation since November 2016 .
 Chairman of the Russian Federation Council Security and Defence Committee . He is the chairman of the Russia Federation Council security and defence committee .
 On 1 March 2014 Ozerov supported the use of the Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine . On 2 March 2014, the Ukrainian government announced that it would support the Russian armed forces .
 Senator and member of the Federation Council Defence and Security Committee since 29 September 2016 . Senator has been in the committee since September 2016.
 The annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation. Responsible for integration of the annexed Crimea into Russia .
 Member of Russian Federation Council Committee on Culture, Science, Information . Member of Russia Federation Council committee .
 On 1 March 2014, Totoonov publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian army has been deployed to Ukraine since March 2014 .
Currently, Deputy Chairman of the Federation Council International Affairs Committee . Currently, Deputy chairman of the federation Council International affairs Committee .
 Actively supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea . Actively backed the use. of Russian armed forces in Ukraine .
Mayor of Sevastopol was elected by popular acclamation on 23 February 2014 . He accepted this 'vote' into office .
 He actively campaigned for Sevastopol to become a separate entity of Russia . He actively campaigning for Sevstopol to be separate entity.
 He was one of the co-signatories of the ‘treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation’ of 18 March 2014 . He was also a co- signatory of the 'Treaty On Crimea's Accession to Russia'
 He was acting ‘governor’ of Sevastopol from 1 to 14 April 2014 . He is a former ‘elected’ Chairman of the SevASTopol Legislative Assembly .
Speaker of Assembly from 22 September 2014 until he stepped down on 22 March 2016 . Was also speaker of the Assembly from September 2014 to March 2016. He was also speaker from 22 Sept 2014 to 22 March 2015 .
 Returned to Russia and is believed to be in several left-wing organisations . Returned from Russia and believed to have been in several 'patriotic' organisations .
 Currently Speaker of the Donetsk People's Republic ""parliament" Currently Speaker for the People's Council . Currently Speaker.
 He is the Donetsk People's Republic's representative in the Contact Group for the Minsk talks . He is also the Donetsk Peoples' Republic's representatives in the contact group .
 Former Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea; Crimean Deputy Prime Minister . Former Chairman of Council of ministers of Crimea .
 Crimean Parliament played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Crimean Parliament concerning the referendum against the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 He lobbied actively for integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation . He lobbied for integration into Russia .
 Became Tatarstan representative in Kazakhstan but was dismissed in March 2015 after a criminal case on suspicion of fraud was launched against him in Crimea in 2015 .
 Tsekov initiated, together with Sergey Aksyonov, the unlawful dismissal of the government of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . The Crimean government was dismissed by the Crimean government .
 Senator and member of the Federation Council International Affairs Committee . Senator and members of Federation Council international affairs committee .
 Ukraine played a role in preventing Ukraine’s authorities from controlling the territory of Crimea .
 Former Commander of Russia’s Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea .
 Chief of Collective Security Treaty Organisation Joint Staff since 10 November 2015 . Chief of the Collective Security Organization Joint Staff .
 Former Commander of Ukrainian Navy, who switched sides to support Russia, switched sides .
 Commander of the Fifth Service of the Federal Security Service of Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is based in Moscow, Russia .
 As a senior FSB officer, he heads a service which oversees intelligence operations and international activity . He heads the FSB's intelligence service, which oversees international activities .
 It is reported that the FSB has been involved in the funding and supporting of separatist activities in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 As a member of the Security Council, he is involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He is also an expert on national security affairs .
 'Donetsk People’s Republic' is unrecognised in Moscow . The 'de facto embassy' was inaugurated on 23 May 2014 .
 Currently, Head of the Sport, Tourism and Youth Affairs Committee in the State Duma . Currently, head of the sport, tourism and youth affairs committee in the state .
 Formerly, permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation and Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russia Federation .
 As a member of the Security Council, he was involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He was also involved in helping to coordinate national security affairs .
 Fradkov became Chairman of the Board of Almaz-Antey concern in November 2016 . In November 2016, he became chairman of the board of Almz- Antey concern .
 President Putin appointed Head of Russia Institute of Strategic Research in January 2017 . He was appointed by decree of President Putin .
 Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation . He is the chief of the general staff of the armed forces .
 First Deputy Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation and General of the Army . First Deputy minister of defence of the Russia Federation and general of the army .
 Russian troops deployed along the border with Ukraine and lack of de-escalation of the situation . Russia is responsible for the massive deployment of Russian troops .
 Former permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . Former member of Russian Federation.
 One of Russia’s permanent representatives on the Contact Group for Ukraine settlement since December 2015 . Russia's permanent representative on the contact group has been in Ukraine since December.
 He was awarded a medal “for the liberation of Crimea” by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . He was given a medal for the support he provided to the purported annexation of Crimea.
 Claimed in interview to have raised over US$7 million to support separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 Former ‘Acting Governor’ of the Ukrainian city of Sevastopol purportedly annexed by Russia .
 Russian Presidential Envoy to the Siberian Federal District since July 2017 . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in charge of the region since 2017 .
Russian Federation is responsible for initiating legislation to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Former Chairman of the State Duma Constitutional Law and Nation Building Committee . Former chairman of the state Duma constitutional law and nation building committee .
 Responsible for facilitating the adoption of legislation on the purported annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation . Responsibility for facilitating legislation.
 The second largest shareholder of Bank Rossiya, which is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation . The bank is considered a bank of senior Russian Federation officials .
 Since the purported annexation of Crimea, Bank Rossiya has opened branches across Crimea and Sevastopol, thereby consolidating their integration into the Russian Federation .
 Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group . In its turn controls television stations which support the Russian government’s policies of destabilisation of Ukraine .
 In his senior position, he holds responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea . He is also in charge of Russia's airborne forces.
 President of Russia appointed him as so-called ‘Minister of Interior of the Republic of Crimea’ by Russia on 5 May 2014 . By accepting his appointment he has undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Former so-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister of the People's Republic of Donetsk’ was responsible for security and law enforcement .
 Berezin has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 One of the self-proclaimed military commanders of Horlivka until November 2014 . The self-styled military commander was one of the first to be named .
 Took control of Security Service of Ukraine’s Office in Donetsk region and seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs district station in the town of Horlivka .
 Bezler declared that he summarily executes Ukrainian military personnel . In an interview published by ‘the Guardian’ on 29 July 2014, he declared that the Ukrainian military had been executed .
 Gubarev is responsible for recruiting people for the armed forces of separatists . Gubararev has been accused of recruiting people.
Pro-Russian forces have taken over the regional government building in Donetsk by pro- Russian forces .
Ukrainian separatist leader has played a prominent role in separatist activities . He was arrested for threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine . He has since been released from prison .
 Acting Head of the Crimea directorate of the Russian Federal Migration Service . The Crimea is Russia's most populous region .
 So-called ‘Supreme Council Chair of the People’s Republic of Luhansk’ until March 2016 . So- called ‘ Supreme Council Chair’ of People's Republic ofLuhansk .
 The self-described “president’ of the so called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ has called on Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine . Russia has called for the deployment of troops to the Ukraine .
 Currently, a member of the People's Council of the Donetsk People’s Republic .
 Responsible for commanding separatists in eastern Ukraine fighting against the Ukrainian government forces .
 Acting Head of the Sevastopol division of the Federal Migration Service until August 2015 . Acting head of the federal Migration Service for the past year .
 Chairman of the so-called ‘Supreme Council’ of the 'Donetsk People’s Republic’ until May 2016 .
 He was responsible for developing policies relating to, and the organisation of, the illegal referendum leading to the proclamation of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ The referendum constituted a breach of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
Head of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ Central Electoral Commission until April 2016 . Head of the 'Donetsk people's Republic' Central Electoral commission until 2016 .
 Malofeev is known to be closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in eastern Ukraine and Crimea . The Ukrainian separatist group has been linked to Ukraine's pro-Russian separatist movement .
 Made a number of public statements supporting the annexation of Crimea and the incorporation of Ukraine into Russia . Also stated in June 2014 that ‘you can’t incorporate the whole of Ukraine in Russia.
 So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister of the Luhansk People’s Republic until January 2016 .
 The Army of the Southeast said that the Ukrainian presidential election cannot take place in the 'People's Republic of Luhansk' due to the 'new' status of the region .
 As former Prosecutor of Crimea, Poklonskaya actively implemented Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea .
 Poklonskaya has been a member of the Russian State Duma since September 2016 . She is currently Deputy Head of the Security and Anti-Corruption Committee .
 Acting Prosecutor of Sevastopol and is actively implementing Russia’s annexation of SevASTopol .
 Spokesperson of the so-called ‘government’ of the ‘People’s Republic of Luhansk’ made declarations justifying, inter alia, the shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages and fighting activities by the illegal armed groups
 He was awarded the medal “for the liberation of Crimea” by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . He provided the support he provided to the purported annexation of Crimea.
 Publicly called for the creation of the Federal Republic of Novorossiya, composed of south-eastern Ukrainian regions .
 Zdriliuk has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has supported policies that undermine territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 The Security Council of the Russian Federation provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs . Until May 2016, the council was a member of Russia's Security Council .
 Ivanov was involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Ivanov has been involved in.
 Former Foreign Minister of the ‘People’s Republic of Donetsk’ replaced Ekaterina Gubareva in August.
 A Transnistria native, who previously served as Deputy Prime Minister on Social Policy, is a Transnistsi native .
 Took part in the seizure of the building of the Luhansk regional office of the Security Service . Recorded a video addressed to Putin and Russia from the occupied building .
 Presidential Envoy to the Southern Federal District of the Russian Federation .
 The Commander of the Southern Military District was appointed in September 2016 . He was appointed as commander of the military district in September 2015 .
 The Commander of the Western Military District was appointed in November 2015 . He was appointed as commander of the West Military District in November 2014 .
 Former Plenipotentiary Representative of Crimea to the President of the Russian Federation .
 Foreign Minister of the self-proclaimed 'Donetsk People's Republic' from February 2016 .
 As of 14 August 2014, he replaced Igor Strelkov/Girkin as the Defence Minister of the Donetsk People's Republic .
 He has reportedly commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April 2014 . He is believed to have been in charge of the Donetsk separatist fighters since 2014 .
 Associated with Vladimir Antyufeyev, who is responsible for separatist activities, is behind separatist activities .
 Former Finance Minister of the so-called 'Donetsk Peoples Republic' and is now a member of its Council .
 Prime Minister of the self-proclaimed 'Luhansk People's Republic' from 25 December 2015 .
 Prior to his appointment he held the position of the Vice-Commander of the Corps of the Republic .
 Led troops in annexation of Crimea and commanded Russian troops in the Donbas . Led troops.
 Gas pipeline construction company owned or controlled by Arkaday Rotenberg . The company is owned by Rotenberg.
 Business Aviation Centre at Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow offers aircraft maintenance services .
 Pulkovo International Airport in Saint Petersburg. Provides management services for corporate aviation at the airport .
 An investment strategy group that is owned or controlled by Gennady Timchenko . The group is owned by the Russian billionaire .
 Crimean Parliament transferred assets of a subsidiary of a Ukrainian state-owned gas company to Chernomorneftegaz .