 Many civilian ‘volunteers’ also moved to the peninsula to finalize a plan that was secretly carried out and successfully completed .
 Russia set up checkpoints in Armyansk and Chongar, the two main road junctions between mainland Ukraine and the Crimean peninsula . The first obvious sign that Crimea was being taken from Ukraine appeared on Friday, February 28 .
 Crimean Parliament elected a pro-Russian prime minister and voted to secede from Ukraine . A “soft” invasion followed Yanukovych’s ouster, the Crimean parliament elected a Pro-Russian PM . The Crimean Parliament also voted to Secede .
 Pro-Russian leaders claimed they needed to protect Crimeans from ‘extremists’ who had seized power in Kiev . They threatened the right to speak Russian in the region .
 On March 16 they organized a referendum in which people were asked if they wanted the autonomous republic join russia .
 Ukraine and West judged the referendum to be illegal, while Russia strongly supported it . Ukraine and the West judged it illegal, but Russia strongly backed it .
 According to local officials, 95.5% of voters in Crimea supported the option of joining Russia . The referendum was carried out without any credible international observer .
 On March 18, Putin made the invasion official by signing a bill incorporating Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Putin had assured that Crimea is ‘Russian holy land’ and opined that in Ukraine, the U.S. and its Western partners crossed the line .
 BBC journalist John Simpson was in Crimea at the time . He wrote that it was the “softest’s invasion in modern times .
Pro-Russian leaders in Crimea organized a referendum that was described as illegal in Kiev and by the West . On March 16, pro-Russian leader in Crimeaorganized a referendum .
Pro-Russian gunmen attacked a small Ukrainian army base in Simferopol, Ukraine . There had been no bloodshed until that day, when one officer was killed .
 Putin argued in April of that year that he had made the final decision on Crimea after opinion polls, secret and undatedshowed that 80% of the inhabitants of the peninsula were in favor of joining Russia .
 Crimea annexation plan ordered it weeks before referendum of self-determination . But a year later, he admitted for the first time that the annexation plan had ordered it .
 Hundreds of heavily armed soldiers displaying no identifying insignia took up position outside a military base in Crimea .
 The Russian president assured that he had made the decision to “bring Crimea back to Russia” on February 23, 2015 . Hours after the Ukrainian leader fled Kiev, the Russian president told a television intervention in March 2015 .
 The commitment of Russia to respect the borders of Ukraine A stream in Russia. He maintains that historically Crimea is part of his country .
 In the 18th century, it was part of the ottoman empireruled by the Khan of the Crimean Tatars .
 Catherine the Great seized the peninsula from the Tatars, annexing it to the Russian Empire . It remained under Ottoman rule until Catherine the great seized it from Tatars .
 In 1954 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev transferred the territory to Kiev . In 1954, an ethnic Russian majority lives in the territory, in which an ethnic majority lives .
 Ukraine's independence in 1991, Kiev kept Crimea, but Russia retained control of a Sevastopol naval base in the region . The Black Sea Fleet is home to the Crimean naval base .
 An agreement that he violated in 2014 and that he has just violated again with the invasion launched at dawn this Thursday . He violated the agreement in 2014, but he has now violated again .
 Russia's commitment to respect Ukraine’s borders A stream in Russia. Russia maintains that historically Crimea is part of his country .
 Since the annexation of Crimea, the peninsula has been a point of antagonism between Russia and the West .
 Putin remains determined to defend the idea that the peninsula belongs to Russia . He warned that allowing Ukraine to join NATO could lead the West to war with Russia for control of the territory .
 We will not usurp what is not ours, but we will not give up our land, he assured last week . We will never usurp our land .
 Several Western leaders harshly condemned the Russian military intervention in Ukraine .
 Emmanuel Macron affirmed that France “will respond without weakness’ to the “act of war’ of Russia in Ukraine’s Ukraine .
 British Prime Minister Boris Johnson assured that the United Kingdom “cannot and will not look the other way’ after the “appalling and barbaric” attack ordered by the Kremlin .
 Volodymyr Zelensky broke diplomatic relations with Moscow in response to the invasion of Ukraine . In Ukraine, he assured that they were giving weapons to everyone who wanted to defend the territory .