 Ukraine was an extremely polarized electorate, and a glance at the electoral map of the election shows this very clearly . Obama's forces overthrew the man whom Obama’s forces ousted .
Around 90% of the people in purple at the far eastern end of Ukraine voted for Viktor Yanukovych . 90% in the red far western end had voted for Yulia Tymoshenko . The red far west end voted for the former Ukrainian president .
 The northwest had favored Germany, the southeast had favored Russia . In between those areas, the voters who were somewhat balanced between the two parties were more balanced .
 The south includes Odessa, the site of the Obama operation’s crucial massacre of coup-opponents, on 2 May 2014 . Crimea, whose residents that had been demonstrating in Kiev against the anti-Yanukovych demonstrators there, were likewise massacred .
 The February 20th massacre of Crimeans caused the residents in Crimea to be terrified of Obama’s people . This is one of the reasons why Crimeans immediately clamored for independence from the new, Obama-controlled, Ukraine .
 Residents in Crimea were always more favorably inclined toward Russia than toward Ukraine, polling had always shown .
 The communist dictator Khrushchev in 1954 had transferred Crimea to Ukraine . Crimea had for hundreds of years been part of Russia, and that self-identification of Crimeans as being Russians not Ukrainians continued right up to the present day .
Crimeans who wanted to rejoin with Russia appear to have soared . This self-identification was indicated on that 2010 election-map by Crimea’s having voted around 75% for Yanukovych .
 Crimean people were clamoring for a Crimean referendum on the issue of rejoining Russia . Therefore, they were clamored for a referendum .
 Putin’s nation, Russia, had its Black Sea Fleet located on Crimea . So he decided to protect Crimeans’ right of self-determination .
 Putin refused to do this by force; he wouldn't do it at all unless the people of Crimea wanted it done . Khruschev had denied to them, which he had denied.
 Putin respected their rights, and was willing to relocate the fleet elsewhere if they didn’t want it to be there . Putin respected the rights of the fleet .
 Obama’s operatives now controlled the Ukrainian police forces on Crimea and ordered them to prevent the referendum from occurring .
 Crimean public outraged at official resistance. Most of the police defected to the side of the Russian government and the Crimean people .
 The referendum vote turned out to be more than 90% in favor of their becoming Russian again . The vote was the first time Russians had voted to become Russian again in a referendum .
Independent polls taken both before and after the plebiscite also showed 90+% support for the change . Independent polls taken before, after and after.
 Nobody anymore even questions whether the plebiscite’s result reflected the authentic will of the Crimean public .
Only 2.8% of Crimeans had a favorable view of the US; over 97% did not . Even a Gallup poll taken shortly after the plebiscite found that only 2.7% of crimeans had an unfavorable view of US .
 They detested America only because of what they saw and heard with their own eyes and ears . They didn't detest the United States because they’d been swayed by propaganda .
 NATO and Bloomberg are referring to what has just been described here – something for which the Crimean public feel immense relief and gratitude . Regarding Crimea, therefore, what NATO and Obama and Bloomberg mean is that Putin invaded Ukraine in 2014.
 Obama and his team, against Russia, are alleged to justify his economic sanctions against Russia . That annexation actually constitutes the central charge by Obama, his team .
 It's the alleged cause of NATO’s war against Russia, surrounding Russia by hostile missiles and troops .
 The independent separatist region of Ukraine is called Donbass . It consists of the two adjoined regions Luhansk and Donetsk . The region had voted 90% for Yanukovych .
 Crimea's decision to separate from Ukraine came more than a month after Crimea's did . They had become terrified mainly by the massacre which had occurred in Odessa on 2 May 2014 .
 Russia had no naval base or any other military facility there . If a plebiscite were to have been held, then the vote to become part of Russia would probably have been higher .
 There has been much publication in the United States alleging that Russia was invading Ukraine and that the fighters for independence were Russian soldiers .
 The reason for the speculation was that the people fighting for independence were winning. The reason was that they were winning, says the author .
 By the end of June 2014, it was clear to any honest reporter that Obama's forces were losing, despite American assistance .
 Many Russian men joined the Donbass freedom-fighters, out of principle to help the people of Donbass survive . No Russian troops were fighting there .
 Putin feared that if he didn’t speed up the victory that the locals were already winning, then the residents of Donbass would end up freezing to death through the coming winter .
 There is no indication that after early September, at the latest, any remained in Ukraine .
 The impact of the participation by Russian state forces on Donbass was crushing and decisive . It saved the Donbass people from unimaginable death out in the cold of a Ukrainian winter .
 A Ukrainian general admitted that no Russian soldiers were involved in the war . By January of 2015, even a Ukrainian general had admitted no Russian troops were involved .
 Anyone after that time who has alleged anything like Putin invaded Ukraine has been either lying or else blatantly ignorant . Anyone after the time has been lying or other blatantly ignorant, anyone has been blatantly ignorant.
 Bloomberg editorial represents the opinion of the former Mayor of Wall Street, Michael Bloomberg . On the same day, 9 July 2016, when one of Bloomberg’s ‘news’ stories reported that Putin invaded Ukraine, a Bloomberg editorial was published .
NATO Needs to Stand Strong Against Putin. It called for NATO to strengthen its deployment of four battalions to the Baltic nations .
 Germany should conduct more joint exercises in Europe, especially in the Baltic Sea . It should see that Germany begins to participate more fully .
 The actual surprise has been that Obama is willing to carry his brinksmanship this far this far . The actual Surprise is that Obama has been able to carry on his brinkmanship .