 It is not at all clear what President Vladimir Putin's ultimate goals are in the current crisis over Ukraine .
 His ambitions might be limited to securing Crimea and the Donbass for Russia and getting West to accept this state of affairs .
 Or he might want to gain control over more of Ukraine, if not all of it . Or he may want to get control of more of the Ukraine .
 Western governments will not be able to agree on how to respond to the threat of Russia . Or he might aim at nothing less than undermining NATO and the European Union .
Two seemingly contradictory propositions appear to underpin Putin's policies toward Ukraine and toward the West as a whole . But whatever his actual foreign policy goals may be, it appears to underpin his policies toward the Ukraine .
 The U.S. and European governments are determined not just to weaken Russia through the expansion of NATO and the EU and the promotion of "color revolutions" in former Soviet republics such as Ukraine, but also to impose crippling sanctions on and promote a "color revolution" inside Russia itself
 Many Western countries are dependent on Russia for energy supplies . There are economic problems in Western states, particularly in Europe, which Moscow can exploit in order to strengthen Russia .
 Both of these propositions cannot be true simultaneously. Logically, of course, both of them cannot betrue simultaneously .
 If the West really is in a position to weaken Russia or topple the Putin regime, then the West must not be weak . The West should not beweak, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 If the West is weak, then it cannot be in a position to weaken Russia, much less topple Putin . The West can't topple Putin if it's weak, it cannot weaken Russia.
 Putin sees the contradiction in these two propositions. It does not appear that Putin sees it as a contradiction .
 Some might ask how Putin can possibly think that the West seeks to weaken Russia, much less overthrow him .
 The United States tried soon after coming into office to "reset" relations with Russia . President Barack Obama's administration has tried to do so so far .
 Many EU governments have welcomed cooperation with Russia in recent years, over natural gas in particular . And many EU governments are also welcoming cooperation over the issue .
 Putin apparently does not even acknowledge the possibility that these popular uprisings may actually have been popular . His statements indicate utter certainty that they were orchestrated by the West .
 Putin may not agree with the EU's expansion of the EU . The expansion of NATO may not be as threatening to Russia as it is to Russia .
 The Putin regime does not want to see in Russia or former Soviet states it regards as belonging to the Russian sphere of influence . Accession to the EU requires the adoption of EU standards regarding democracy, rule of law and human rights .
 For the EU to have negotiated even an association agreement with Yanukovych, then, was seen by Moscow as threatening to draw Ukraine out of the Russian orbit and into the Western one .
 Putin lobbied hard to persuade Yanukovych not to sign it in 2013, and to join Putin's Eurasian Union scheme instead . Putin lobbied for Yanukovych to not sign it, but to join the EU instead .
 Putin may have believed that he had won the contest for influence in Ukraine . When Yanukovych complied, Putin might have thought that he'd won .
 Putin saw all this as the result of a Western-backed plot, Putin says . Yanukovych fled from Kiev in early 2014 and pro-EU demonstrations arose in Ukraine .
 Obama's early attempts to improve U.S.-Russian relations were seen by Moscow as a ploy to better position Washington to back Putin's domestic opponents .
 Putin may prefer to have openly confrontational relations with the West in order to whip up Russian nationalist support for him . Putin may be trying to discredit anyone calling for democracy and better ties to the West .
 Russia allowing relations with the West to improve, by contrast, could serve to support democratic forces in Russia . Russia's relations with West could help the country's democracy .
 Putin does not want to resolve Ukraine crisis with the West, but to keep it boiling, though not boiling over . It may be, then, that Putin doesn't want the crisis to be resolved with West .
 West attempting to forestall further Russian advances in Ukraine and elsewhere through imposing economic sanctions while negotiating cease-fires .
 Putin is branding his domestic opponents as Western agents, continuing to push forward in Ukraine, exploiting differences within the West and threatening worse to come if the West does not stop opposing Moscow .
 The crisis between the West and Russia over Ukraine and beyond will not end until there is a realization in Moscow that the West is not trying to overthrow Putin, and that Russian expansion into Ukraine does not serve to strengthen Moscow .
 Putin is not likely to experience any such epiphany until after his long reign comes to an end . But since Putin's reign ends, any such realization may not occur until after he's gone .