 The invasion caused Europe's largest refugee crisis since World War II . More than 7.7 million Ukrainians fled the country and a third of the population displaced .
In 2014, Russia invaded and annexed Crimea, and Russian-backed separatists seized part of the Donbas region of south-eastern Ukraine . The invasion also caused global food shortages .
 In 2021, Russia began a large military build-up along its border with Ukraine, amassing up to 190,000 troops and their equipment . Russia is expected to build up to 200,000 more troops and equipment .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin espoused irredentist views in televised address shortly before invasion . He falsely claimed Ukraine was governed by neo-Nazis who persecuted the ethnic Russian minority .
 On 21 February 2022, Russia recognised the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk people's Republic . The Donetsk statelets are self-proclaimed breakaway statelets controlled by pro-Russian separatists .
The invasion began on the morning of 24 February, when Putin announced a "special military operation" to "demilitarise and denazify" Ukraine . The Federation Council of Russia authorised the use of military force, and Russian troops overtly entered both territories .
 Minutes later, missiles and airstrikes hit across Ukraine, including the capital Kyiv .
 Zelenskyy enacted martial law and a general mobilisation of all male citizens between 18 and 60 . All men between 18 to 60 were banned from leaving the country .
 At the start of the invasion, Russian attacks were launched on a northern front from Belarus towards Kyiv . A north-eastern front towards Kharkiv, a southern front from Crimea, and a south-Eastern front from Luhansk and Donetsk .
 Russian troops retreated from Kyiv Oblast by 3 April. Amidst heavy losses and strong Ukrainian resistance, Russian troops retreat from Ukraine .
 The United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the invasion and demanding a full withdrawal of Russian forces . The U.N. General Assembly also demanded a full withdraw of Russian troops .
 The International Court of Justice ordered Russia to suspend military operations and the Council of Europe expelled Russia . Russia was ordered to suspend its military operations .
 The International Criminal Court has opened an investigation into crimes against humanity in Ukraine since 2013 . The investigation includes war crimes in the 2022 invasion of the country .
 Russia–Ukraine relations, Orange Revolution, Revolution of Dignity, and Russo-Ukrainian War. Russia– Ukraine relations,Orange Revolution, and Russian imperialism .
 Russian leaders claimed Western powers pledged that NATO would not expand eastward . This is disputed by Russian leaders .
 Crimea at bottom and two self-proclaimed separatist republics in Donbas at right . Following the Euromaidan protests and a revolution resulting in the removal of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, Pro-Russian unrest erupted in parts of Ukraine .
 Russian soldiers without insignia took control of strategic positions and infrastructure in the Ukrainian territory of Crimea, and seized the Crimean Parliament .
 Russia organized a controversial referendum, whose outcome was for Crimea to join Russia . Russia organized the controversial referendum .
 The Minsk agreements signed in September 2014 and February 2015 were a bid to stop the fighting . The ceasefires repeatedly failed, but ceasefires failed .
 Normandy Format members France, Germany, and Ukraine saw Minsk as an agreement between Russia and Ukraine . Russia insisted Ukraine should negotiate directly with the two separatist republics .
 The annexation of Crimea led to a new wave of Russian nationalism, with much of the Russian neo-imperial movement aspiring to annex more Ukrainian land .
 U.S. paratroopers of 2nd Battalion, 503rd Infantry Regiment depart Italy's Aviano Air Base for Latvia, 23 February 2022 .
 Thousands of U.S. troops were deployed to Eastern Europe amid Russia's military build-up .
 In March and April 2021, Russia began a major military build-up near the Russo-Ukrainian border . Russia began the build- up near the Russian border in March.
 A second build-up followed from October 2021 to February 2022, in both Russia and Belarus . A second building-up was followed by October 2021 in Russia, Belarus and Russia .
 Russian government repeatedly denied having plans to invade or attack Ukraine . Members of the Russian government have repeatedly denied plans to attack or invade Ukraine .
 Putin's chief national security adviser, Nikolai Patrushev, believed that the West had been in an undeclared war with Russia for years . Putin's top security adviser believed the West was in a undeclaring war with the Russia .
 Sources say the decision to invade Ukraine was made by Putin and a small group of war hawks in Putin's inner circle . The U.S. released intelligence that indicated otherwise, and continued to accurately predict invasion events .
 The intelligence also said that the Russians had a list of key sites, and of individuals to be killed or neutralised .
 Ukrainian deputy prime minister Olha Stefanishyna and NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg spoke to media about the prospect of a Russian invasion . Disinformation in the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis.
 In the months before the invasion, Russian officials accused Ukraine of Russophobia, inciting tensions, and repressing Russian speakers in Ukraine .
 Commentators and Western officials described these attempts to justify war . Commentators described these as attempts to justifying war .
 Putin's claims about "de-Nazification" have been described as absurd, and Russian claims of genocide were widely rejected as baseless .
 Lavrov and Putin were criticized by U.S. Ambassador Deborah Lipstadt for their weaponization of nazism and of the holocaust . Lipstadt said Lavrov's use of referring to Hitler's mother as Jewish was caustic by Lavrov in its direct inferences .
 Lipstadt criticized the two Russian leaders for their weaponization of the term nazism for their own self-interest . Lipstadt also criticized the Russian leaders.
 Zelenskyy, who is Jewish, rebuked Putin's allegations, noting that his grandfather served in the Soviet army fighting Nazis . Zelenkyy is also Jewish .
 The U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum and Yad Vashem condemned this use of Holocaust history and allusion to Nazi ideology in propaganda . The United States Holocaust Memorial museum and Yad vashem condemned the use of the Holocaust history in propaganda.
 Vladimir Putin and his long-time confidant Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu are close friends . Putin is also a longtime confidant of Defence Minister.
 During the second build-up, Russia demanded that the U.S. and NATO enter into a legally binding arrangement preventing Ukraine from ever joining NATO . Russia also demanded the United States and NATO remove multinational forces from Eastern European member states .
 NATO members in Central and Eastern Europe joined the alliance because they preferred the safety and economic opportunities offered by NATO and the EU . Their governments sought protection from Russian irredentism .
 A formal treaty would contravene the treaty's "open door" policy, despite NATO's unenthusiastic response to Ukrainian requests to join . Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Scholz made efforts to prevent the war in February .
 Macron met with Putin but failed to convince him not to go forward with the attack . He met with the Russian leader but did not convince him to go ahead with the attacks .
 Scholz warned Putin about heavy sanctions that would be imposed should the invasion happen . ScholZ warned Putin of heavy sanctions if the invasion happened .
 Scholz also pleaded with Zelensky to renounce the aspiration to join NATO and declare neutrality . Zelenski refused it, however ScholZ also pleaded to renounces the aspiration .
 Timeline of Donbas Fighting in Donbas escalated after 17 February 2022 . Timeline of the war began in February 2012 .
 Ukraine and Donbas each accused the other of firing across the line of conflict . Ukraine, Donbas both accused each of firing in the conflict .
 Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics ordered all civilians to leave their capitals on 18 February . Ukrainian media described a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas .
 The Russian government intensified a disinformation campaign intended to mute public criticism . On 19 February both separatist republics declared full mobilisation .
 Russian state media promoted fabricated videos that purported to show Ukrainian forces attacking Russians in Donbas . Evidence showed that the purported attacks, explosions, and evacuations were staged by Russia .
 Russian forces killed five Ukrainian "saboteurs" that had crossed into Russian territory . One Ukrainian serviceman was captured and destroyed two armoured vehicles .
 Ukraine denied this, and warned that Russia sought a pretext for an invasion . Ukraine denied it, and said Russia sought an invasion.
 The Russian government recognised the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics . Escalation Putin's address to the nation on 21 February .
 Several members of the UN Security Council condemned the 21 February intervention in Donbas . None voiced support for the intervention .
 Video footage shot in the early morning showed Russian armed forces and tanks moving in the Donbas region .
 The Federation Council authorised the use of military force outside Russia .
 Ukraine's parliament proclaimed a 30-day national state of emergency . Zelenskyy called up army reservists; and Ukraine's Parliament proclaimed the emergency .
On 23 February, Zelenskyy gave a speech in Russian, appealing to Russian citizens to prevent war . Ukraine's Security Service denied reports of Chinese military espionage on eve of invasion .
 He refuted Russian claims of neo-Nazis in the Ukrainian government . He said he had no intention of attacking Donbas .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said separatist leaders in Donetsk and Luhansk had sent Putin a letter saying that Ukrainian shelling had caused civilian deaths and appealing for military support from Russia . Putin said on 23 February that separatist leaders had sent him a letter .
 Half an hour into the emergency meeting, Putin announces the start of military operations in Ukraine . Putin announced the start.
 Ukrainian representative, Sergiy Kyslytsya, called on Russian representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to "do everything possible to stop the war" or relinquish his position as president of the UN Security Council . He refused .
 Putin said he had no plans to occupy Ukrainian territory . He said he supported the right of the Ukrainian people to self-determination .
 Putin said that Russia sought "demilitarisation and denazification of Ukraine" of Ukraine . Putin said Russia sought demilitary and denazification of Ukraine .
 explosions reported in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odessa, and the Donbas region . Within minutes of Putin's announcement, explosions were reported .
 An alleged leaked report from within the FSB claimed that the intelligence agency was not warned of Putin's plan to invade Ukraine . The FSB said it was not aware of the plan.
 Immediately following the attack, Zelenskyy declared martial law in Ukraine .
 The same evening, he ordered a general mobilisation of all Ukrainian males between 18 and 60 years old who were prohibited from leaving the country . The same night, he also ordered the mobilisation.
 Russian troops entered Ukraine from the north in Belarus . From the north-east in Russia, from the east in the DPR and the Luhansk People's Republic; from the south in Crimea .
 Russian equipment and vehicles were marked with a white Z military symbol . It is believed to be a measure to prevent friendly fire .
 For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . For a chronicle of the Russian invasion, see timeline of the 2012 invasion .
Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022 will take place in Ukraine in February 2022 .
 Kyiv offensive, Northeastern Ukraine offensive, Eastern Ukraine offensive and Southern Ukraine offensive . This section needs to be updated .
 Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 The invasion began on 24 February, with infantry divisions and armoured and air support in Eastern Ukraine, and dozens of missile attacks across both Eastern Ukraine and Western Ukraine . Military control around Kyiv on 2 April 2022 .
 The main infantry and tank attacks were launched in four spearhead incursions . The northern front launched towards Kyiv, a southern front originating in Crimea, a south-eastern front launched at the cities of Luhansk and Donbas .
 Dozens of missile strikes across Ukraine reached as far west as Lviv . Wagner Group mercenaries and Chechen forces reportedly made several attempts to assassinate Volodymyr Zelenskyy .
 The "first stage" of the invasion was conducted on four fronts including one towards western Kyiv from Belarus .
 A second axis deployed towards eastern Kyiv from Russia by the Central Military District . The 41st Combined Arms Army and 2nd Guards combined Arms Army were deployed to the east .
 A third axis deployed towards Kharkiv by the Western Military District . The 1st Guards Tank Army and 20th Combined Arms Army are deployed to Kharkov .
 The north-eastern front, including the Central Military District, was similarly withdrawn for resupply and redeployment to south-easter Ukraine . The north and east-east front were similarly withdrawn.
General Alexander Dvornikov was placed in charge of military operations during the invasion . By 8 April, General Alexander DVornikova was in charge.
 Former U.S. ambassador to NATO says Russia has repositioned its troops to initiate a new assault on Eastern Ukraine . Russia would be limited to 150,000 to 190,000 troops for the invasion .
 For Lute, this contrasted sharply with the vast size of the Ukrainian conscription of all-male Ukrainian citizens between 16 and 60 years of age . The vast number of men in Ukraine is more than 50 years old .
Delegates of the USA and 40 allied nations met at Ramstein Air Base in Germany to discuss forming a coalition to provide economic support and military supplies and refitting to Ukraine .
 The U.S. Director of National Intelligence Avril Haines said no short term resolution to the invasion should be expected . Russian forces improved their focus on protecting their supply lines by advancing more slowly, and more methodically .
 Ukraine's reliance on Western-supplied equipment constrained it, as Western countries feared that Ukraine would use it to strike targets in Russia . Ukraine has been criticized for its reliance on western equipment .
 Military experts disagree on the future of the conflict . Some have suggested trading territory for peace . Others believe Ukraine can sustain their resistance to the Russian invasion .
 Colonel General Gennady Zhidko had been put in charge of Russian forces during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, replacing Army General Dvornikov .
 By 30 May, disparities between Russian and Ukrainian artillery were apparent . The disparity between the two countries was apparent .
 Putin indicated that Russian would expand its invasion front to include new cities in Ukraine . Putin ordered a missile strike against Kyiv on 6 June after not directly attacking the city for several weeks .
 invasion began on 24 February, launched out of Belarus to target Kyiv, and from the northeast against the city of Kharkiv . Invasion of Ukraine 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Phase 1 from 24 February to 7 April 2022 .
 The southeastern front was conducted as two separate spearheads, from Crimea and the southeast against Luhansk and Donetsk . The southeast front was held as two different spearheads .
 Russian efforts to capture Kyiv included a probative spearhead on 24 February, from Belarus south along the west bank of the Dnipro River, apparently to encircle the city from the west .
Russia apparently tried to rapidly seize Kyiv, with Spetsnaz infiltrating into the city supported by airborne operations . These were likely intended to encircle Kyiv from the north-east and east .
 Russian forces advancing on Kyiv from Belarus gained control of the ghost towns of Chernobyl and Pripyat . Russian forces attempted to seize two key airfields near Kyiv, launching an airborne assault on Antonov Airport .
 As of 5 March, a large Russian convoy, reportedly 64 kilometres long, had made little progress toward Kyiv . The convoy was reportedly 64km long .
 Russian forces continue to advance on Kyiv from the northwest, capturing Bucha, Hostomel, and Vorzel by 5 March . Irpin remained contested as of 9 March, though Irpin was still contested by 9 March .
 Ukrainian forces began a counter-offensive to repel Russian forces on 16 March .
 Ukrainian counter-offensive retook several towns to the east and west of Kyiv . Russian forces switched their strategy to indiscriminate bombing and siege warfare .
 Ukraine says it has recaptured the entire region around Kyiv, including Irpin, Bucha, and Hostomel . Ukraine said it had uncovered evidence of war crimes in Bucha .
 NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said Russian troops should be redeployed and concentrating his forces on Eastern Ukraine . Kyiv was generally left free from attack apart from isolated missile strikes .
 One did occur during the 28 April visit of UN Secretary-General António Guterres to discuss with Zelenskyy the survivors of Mariupol .
 Russian forces advanced into Chernihiv Oblast on 24 February and besieged its administrative capital . Russian forces also occupied the administrative capital of Sumy Oblast .
 A separate advance into Sumy Oblast attacked the city of Sumy just 35 kilometres from the Russo-Ukrainian border . The city is just 35km from the Russian border .
 Russian forces reached Brovary, an eastern suburb of Kyiv, on 4 March . The Pentagon confirmed on 6 April that the Russian army had left Chernihiv Oblast, but Sumy Oblast remained contested .
 On 7 April, Sumy Oblast said that Russian troops were gone, but left behind rigged explosives and other hazards .
 Siege of Mariupol, 2022 bombing of Odessa, Battle of Kherson and Battle of Enerhodar See also included . Russian forces took control of the North Crimean Canal, allowing Crimea to obtain water from the Dnieper .
 On 26 February, the siege of Mariupol began as the attack moved east towards the city, linking to Donbas .
 Russian units from the DPR moves on Mariupol and were defeated near Pavlopil . On 25 February, Russian units were defeated by Russian units.
 The Russian Navy reportedly began an amphibious assault on the coast of the Sea of Azov 70 kilometres west of Mariupol .
 The Russian 22nd Army Corps approached the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant on 26 February and besieged Enerhodar to take control of it . A U.S. defence official said that Russian forces might be deploying thousands of marines from this beachhead .
 A fire began, but the International Atomic Energy Agency subsequently said that essential equipment was undamaged .
 A third Russian attack group from Crimea moved northwest and captured bridges over the Dnieper . The nuclear power plant fell under Russian control but despite the fires it recorded no radiation leaks .
 Russian troops won a battle at Kherson the first major city to fall to Russian forces in the invasion . On 2 March, Russian forces won the battle at the city's first major town .
 Russian troops moved on Mykolaiv and attacked it two days later, but were repelled by Ukrainian forces . Ukrainian forces repelled the attack two days earlier .
 Ukrainian forces initiated counter-offensive on Horlivka, controlled by the DPR since 2014 . Also on 2 March, Ukrainian forces launched counter- offensive on Hor Livka .
 Ukrainian government said more than 2,500 had died after renewed missile attacks on 14 March in Mariupol .
 Mariupol was completely encircled and fighting reached the city centre, hampering efforts to evacuate civilians . By 18 March, the city had been completely encorcled by fighting .
 Putin told Emmanuel Macron in a phone call on 29 March that the bombardment of Mariupol would only end when the Ukrainians surrendered . On 1 April Russian troops refused safe passage to 50 buses sent by the United Nations.
 Russia expanded its attack on Southern Ukraine further west, with bombardment and strikes against Odessa, Mykolaiv, and the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant .
 Russian troops attempted to capture Kharkiv, less than 35 kilometres from the Russian border, and met strong Ukrainian resistance . In the east, Russian troops tried to captureKharkiv.
 The Millerovo air base was attacked by Ukrainian military forces with OTR-21 Tochka missiles . The missiles destroyed several Russian Air Force planes and started a fire .
 DPR forces had almost completely surrounded the city of Volnovakha . On 1 March, Denis Pushilin, head of the DPR, announced that the city had been surrounded .
 Russian forces were repelled from Sievierodonetsk during an attack on the city . On 25 March, the Russian defence ministry said it would seek to occupy major cities in Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia reported a helicopter strike against an oil supply depot near the border in Belgorod . Ukraine confirmed Izium was under Russian control on 31 March .
 Ukrainian officials advise residents to evacuate to western Ukraine within 2–3 days . Russian invasion troops and tank divisions around Sloviansk and Kramatorsk prompted Ukrainian government officials to advise residents near the eastern border of Ukraine to evacuate .
 All troops and divisions in south-eastern Ukraine will unite under General Aleksandr Dvornikov, who was placed in charge of combined military operations . The offensive will take place from 7 April to 10 June 2022 .
 Russian progress on the south-eastern front appeared to be impeded by troops continuing to hold out in an abandoned steel mill .
 A Russian missile attack on Kramatorsk railway station in the city of Kramatork took place on 8 April, reportedly killing at least 52 and injuring 87 to 300 .
 On 11 April, Zelenskyy said that Ukraine expected a major new Russian offensive in the east . The Ukrainian government is expected to announce a new offensive in April .
 Russia is preparing a retraction, resupply, and redeployment of infantry and tank divisions to the south-eastern Ukraine front . American officials said that Russia had withdrawn or been repulsed elsewhere in Ukraine .
 Military satellites photographed extensive Russian convoys of infantry and mechanised units deploying south from Kharkiv to Izium on 11 April . On 14 April, Ukrainian troops reportedly blew up a bridge between Kharksiv and Izium used by Russian forces to redeploy troops to Iz
 Second phase of reinforced invasion of Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv regions has intensified with expanded invasion forces occupying of Donbas . Mariupol almost entirely overtaken by Russian forces.
After the fall of Mariupol, Russia has intensified offensives in Luhansk and Donetsk . Russia has concentrated missile attacks and intense artillery fire on Sievierodonetsk .
 Russian forces were reported entering the city of Lyman on 23 May, fully capturing the city by 26 May .
 On 30 May, Reuters reported that Russian troops had breached the outskirts of Sievierodonetsk .
 Sievierodonetsk is on the brink of capitulation to Russian occupation . Over 80 percent of the city is in the hands of Russian troops .
 Ukrainian forces reportedly began a counter-attack in Sievierodonetsk on 3 June .
 By 4 June, Ukrainian government sources claimed 20% or more of the city had been recaptured . By 4June, Ukrainian sources claimed that 20% had been captured .
 Russian invasion troops began intensifying their attack upon the neighboring city of Lysychansk . The Ukrainian defense of Severodonetsk is faultering .
 Russian troops continued to tighten their grip on Severodonetsk by capturing surrounding villages and hamlets . Most recently the village of Metelkine was captured .
 Russia's Brigadier General Rustam Minnekayev said that Russia planned to extend its Mykolayiv–Odessa front after the siege of Mariupol further west . The region of Transnistria on the Ukrainian border with Moldova.
 Ukraine from Odessa to Transnistria would transform it into a landlocked nation without any practical access to the Black Sea .
 On 24 April, Russia resumed its missile strikes on Odessa, destroying military facilities . On 27 April, Ukrainian sources indicated that explosions had destroyed two Russian broadcast towers in Transnistria .
 At the end of April, Russia renewed missile attacks on runways in Odessa, destroying some of them .
 Russian forces continue to fire missiles and drop bombs on key cities of Dnipro and Zaporizhzhia Oblast . Russian occupation of the city continues to continue .
 On 10 April, Russian missiles destroyed the Dnipro International Airport . The airport was destroyed by Russian missiles .
 Russian forces intensified their attack on the Azovstal iron and steel works in Mariupol . Ukrainian defence forces that remained there remained there .
 Ukrainian soldiers have vowed to ignore the renewed ultimatum to surrender and to fight to the last soul . Ukrainian prime minister Denys Shmyhal said that the Ukrainian soldiers had vowed to ignored the renewed Ultimatum .
 Russian troops allowed civilians to leave under UN protection. On 30 April, Russian troops let civilians leave underUN protection .
 Zelenskyy authorised the commander of the besieged steel factory to surrender as necessary under the pressure of increased Russian attacks . Russia used thermobaric bombs against the remaining Ukrainian soldiers .
 Reports of dissent within Ukrainian troops at Azovstal were reported by Ukrainskaya Pravda on 8 May . The commander of the Ukrainian Marines assigned to defend the bunkers made an unauthorised acquisition of tanks, munitions, and personnel .
 The remaining soldiers spoke of a weakened defensive position in Azovstal as a result, which allowed progress to advancing Russian lines of attack .
 The Mariupol garrison had "fulfilled its combat mission" and that final evacuations from the Azovstal steel factory had begun . On 16 May, the Ukrainian General staff announced that the Mariupl garrison had ""fulfilled their combat mission""
 Ukrainian personnel from Azovstal, Russian and DPR forces fully controlled all areas of Mariupol .
 Some prominent Russian lawmakers called on the government to deny prisoner exchanges for members of the Azov Regiment .
 Russian forces conducted multiple cruise missile attacks on a military training facility in Yavoriv, Lviv Oblast, close to the Polish border .
 Local governor Maksym Kozytskyy reported that at least 35 people had been killed . The governor said that the death toll was 35 .
 Ukrainian military officials say missiles were likely air-launched cruise missiles flying over the Black Sea . On 18 March, Russia expanded the attack to Lviv .
 Russians fired long range missiles targeting military training facility near Lviv, U.S. defense officials say .
 Russian forces attacked the Chuhuiv air base, which housed Bayraktar TB2 drones . On 24 February, Russian troops attacked the air base .
 On 27 February, Russia reportedly fired 9K720 Iskander missiles from Belarus at the civilian Zhytomyr Airport . The missiles were reportedly fired from Belarus .
 Many Ukrainian air defence facilities were destroyed or damaged in the first days of the invasion by Russian air strikes .
 In the opening days of the conflict, Russia fired many cruise and ballistic missiles at the principal Ukrainian ground-based early warning radars . The Ukrainian Air Force was blinded to their air activity .
 Russia and the U.S. established a deconfliction line to avoid any misunderstanding that could cause an unintentional escalation . Russia lost at least ten aircraft on 5 March .
 The General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine reported that 88 Russian aircraft had been destroyed since the war began . On 6 March, the General Staff said that 88Russian aircraft were destroyed .
 An anonymous senior U.S. defence official told Reuters on 7 March that Russia still had the ""vast majority" of its fighter jets and helicopters available to fly . However, an anonymous senior United States defence official said on March 7.
 British military observer Justin Bronk counted the Russian aircraft losses at 15 fixed-wing aircraft and 35 helicopters . But he noted that the true total was certainly higher .
 Local governor Maksym Kozytskyy reported that at least 35 people had been killed in the attacks . The attacks were carried out in Ukraine .
 The Economist blames Russia's inability to suppress Ukraine's surface-to-air missile batteries and lack of precision-guided bombs for the poor performance of the air force .
 Ukrainian SAM sites force planes to fly low, making them vulnerable to surface-to-air missiles . Lack of training and flight hours for Russian pilots renders them inexperienced for the type of close ground support missions typical of modern air forces .
 Russian air force had over its Ukrainian counterpart. Western commentators noted the qualitative and quantative advantages the Russian air Force had over the Ukrainian counterpart .
Russian Black Sea flagship Moskva sunk on 14 April 2022, reportedly after being hit by two Ukrainian Neptune anti-ship missiles . The Black Sea only has access through the Turkish-held Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits .
 On 28 February, Turkey invoked the 1936 Montreux Convention and sealed off the straits to Russian warships not registered to Black Sea home bases and not returning to their ports of origin .
 This prevented the passage of four Russian naval vessels through the Turkish Straits . This prevented them from entering the Turkish straits .
 The State Border Guard Service of Ukraine announced that an attack on Snake Island by Russian Navy ships had begun .
 The guided missile cruiser Moskva and patrol boat Vasily Bykov bombarded the island with their deck guns .
Russia stated on 26 February that U.S. drones supplied intelligence to the Ukrainian navy to help target Russian warships in the Black Sea . The United States denied that the United States had supplied intelligence .
 Ukrainian frigate Hetman Sahaidachny was scuttled in Mykolaiv to prevent its capture by Russian forces .
 Russian Armed Forces captured about a dozen Ukrainian ships in Berdiansk, Russian source RT reported . The Polnocny-class landing ship Yuri Olefirenko.
 Ukrainian officials said a Russian landing ship docked in Berdiansk was destroyed by a Ukrainian rocket attack . UN International Maritime Organization sought to create a safe sea corridor for commercial vessels to leave Ukrainian ports in 2022 .
 Russia established a sea corridor 80 miles long and 3 miles wide through its Maritime Exclusion Zone . The corridor is for the transit of merchant vessels from the edge of Ukrainian territorial waters south-east of Odesa .
 Ukraine closed its ports at MARSEC level 3, with sea mines laid in port approaches . The Russian cruiser Moskva was hit on 13 April by two Ukrainian Neptune anti-ship cruise missiles, setting the ship on fire .
 The Russian Defence Ministry confirmed the warship had suffered serious damage due to a munition explosion caused by a fire . The entire crew of the Russian warship has been evacuated .
 Russian Ministry of Defence said Moskva had sunk while under tow in rough weather . Later on the same day, the Russian ministry of Defence stated that MoskVA had sunk .
In early May, Ukrainian forces launched counterattacks on Snake Island . On 15 April, Reuters reported that Russia launched an apparent retaliatory missile strike against the missile factory Luch Design Bureau in Kyiv .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense claimed to have repelled these counterattacks . The Russian ministry of Defense said the counterattacks were launched .
 Ukraine released footage of a Russian Serna-class landing craft located in the Black Sea being destroyed by a Ukrainian drone .
 Russia is continuing to test its RS-28 Sarmat long-range intercontinental ballistic missiles to upgrade its nuclear arsenal . Putin said other nations should be more wary of Russia's nuclear arsenal in 2022 .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov stated that further support of Ukraine could cause tensions which could potentially lead to a World War III scenario involving Russia's full arsenal of weapons .
 Putin announced in Russia's main legislative assembly that Russia would respond to any military provocation from outside of Ukraine with prompt peremptory action possible only with Russia's unique arsenal of nuclear weapons .
 Putin's assertion of nuclear potency is contrary to the peaceful resolution of the current conflict in Ukraine, the Pentagon says . Pentagon Press secretary John Kirby says .
 Andrei Kelin tried to walkback earlier Russian comments about the use of nuclear arms . He said that Russian presently had no plans for using them unless Russian sovereignty was found to be in peril .
 Japan's Prime Minister Fumio Kishida stated that Japan would support further international discussion about Russia and its nuclear arms threats during the invasion of Ukraine . The meeting will take place next August .
Ukravtodor says civilians dismantled or altered road signs, constructed makeshift barriers, and blocked roadways . Ukraine's transportation agency, Ukravtod, says it has been called to help Ukrainian authorities .
 Social media reports showed spontaneous street protests against Russian forces in occupied settlements . The protests often evolve into verbal altercations and physical standoffs with Russian troops .
 By the beginning of April, Ukrainian civilians began to organise as guerrillas, mostly in the wooded north and east of the country .
People physically blocked Russian military vehicles, sometimes forcing them to retreat . Ukrainian military announced plans to launch a large-scale guerrilla campaign to complement its conventional defence .
 The Russian soldiers' response to unarmed civilian resistance varied from reluctance to engage the protesters to firing into the air or directly into crowds . The Russian army's response to the unarmed civilians' resistance varied.
 Ukrainian media reported forced disappearances, mock executions, hostage-taking, extrajudicial killing, and sexual violence perpetrated by the Russian military . There have been mass detentions of Ukrainian protesters .
 Ukrainian President Zelensky indicated that Ukraine had 700,000 servicemembers on active duty combatting the Russian invasion . In response, Russian forces began destroying mobile phone network equipment, searching door-to-door for smartphones and computers .
 Foreign military support foreign military support Foreign military sales and aid . For a more comprehensive list, see List of foreign aid to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian War .
 Since 2014, the UK, US, EU, and NATO have provided mostly non-lethal military aid to Ukraine . Russia Ukraine Countries have supplied Ukraine with military equipment during the 2022 invasion .
 The United States began to sell weapons including Javelin anti-tank missiles starting in 2018 . Ukraine agreed to purchase TB2 combat drones from Turkey in 2019 .
Russia built up equipment and troops on Ukraine's borders in January 2022 . Russia built up troops and equipment and equipment in January 2012 .
 The United States worked with other NATO member states to transfer US-produced weapons to Ukraine . The U.S. worked with the other NATO members to transfer the weapons .
 The UK also began to supply Ukraine with NLAW and Javelin anti-tank weapons . The UK has also begun to supply the country with anti- tank weapons .
 After the invasion, NATO member states including Germany agreed to supply weapons, but NATO as an organisation did not .
On 26 February, U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken announced $350 million in lethal military assistance . NATO and its members also refused to send troops into Ukraine .
 The next day the EU stated that it would purchase €450 million in lethal assistance and an additional €50 million in non-lethal supplies for Ukraine . Poland handling distribution of the supplies .
 NATO member states supplied more than 17,000 anti-tank weapons to Ukraine during the first week of the invasion . By mid-March, the number was estimated to be more than 20,000 .
 The European Union committed to €1.5 billion to support the Ukrainian Armed Forces and the protection of the Ukrainian civilian population . As of 11 April, Ukraine had been provided with approximately 25,000 anti-air and 60,000 weapon systems by the United States and its allies .
 Romania announced a planned reform to the government decree that regulates the export of military weapons and national defence products . Russia reportedly received anti-tank missiles and RPGs from Iran, supplied through undercover networks via Iraq .
 The Ministry of Defense developed the draft decree which states that the reason behind this decision was Russia's aggression against Ukraine . The draft decree states that Russia’s aggression against the Ukraine was the reason for this decision .
On 26 April, the United States convened a conference in which representatives of more than 40 countries met at the Ramstein Air Base to discuss military support for Ukraine . On 28 April, President Biden asked Congress for an additional $33 billion to assist Ukraine, including $20 billion to provide weapons
 Ukraine's PM Denys Shmyhal announced that Ukraine had received more than $12 billion worth of weapons and financial aid from Western countries since the start of Russia's invasion on 24 February .
 On 10 May, the House passed legislation that would provide $40 billion in new aid to Ukraine . The House passed the bill on 10 May .
French Foreign Minister Catherine Colonna announced the provision to Ukraine of additional CAESAR self-propelled howitzer systems . The legislation was approved by the Senate, Biden signed the legislation on 21 May .
 The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Valery Zaluzhny said that the first batch was already on the front lines fighting the invader .
 On 10 June the AFU demonstrated the combat systems to representatives from the press . By that date the Ukrainian gunners had possession of 18 CAESAR units . The U.S. will be supplying HIMARS multiple launch rocket system to Ukraine .
On 5 June Spain offered to donate to Ukraine 40 surplus Leopard 2 German-built tanks . Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Colin Kahl stated that the United States would be able to send more systems as the fighting evolves .
 The official says the Russians had transformed the war into an artillery duel focused on the southeast of the country . The official said the Russian war had been transformed into an army-style battle .
 Ukrainian supply of Soviet-era ammunition had been exhausted, says Deutsche Welle correspondent . All they had as a dwindling supply obtained from friendly ex-Soviet countries .
 NATO and EU have taken a strict policy of "no boots on the ground" in support against the Russian invasion of Ukraine . Ukraine has actively sought volunteers from other countries .
 Ukraine temporarily lifted visa requirements for foreign volunteers who wished to join the fight against Russian forces . On 1 March, Ukraine temporarily lifts visa requirements.
 As of 6 March, approximately 20,000 foreign nationals from 52 countries have volunteered to fight . Ukraine's foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba stated that as of 6March, approximately 15,000 people have volunteered .
 Russian Defence Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov warned mercenaries are not entitled to protection under the Geneva Conventions . captured foreign fighters would not be considered prisoners of war, but prosecuted as criminals . Most of these volunteers joined the newly created International Legion of Territorial Defense of Ukraine .
 Moscow announced 16,000 volunteers from the Middle East were ready to join other pro-Russian foreign fighters alongside the Donbas separatists on 11 March . Shortly thereafter, Moscow announced that 16,00 volunteers from Middle East would join other foreign fighters .
 A video uploaded online showed armed Central African paramilitaries calling to arms to fight in Ukraine with Russian troops .
 On 5 May, a United States official confirmed that U.S. gave “a range of intelligence’ to assist in the sinking of the Russian cruiser Moskva .
 Both Russian and Ukrainian sources are widely considered to inflate casualty numbers in opposing forces . Both sources downplay their own losses for the sake of morale .
 Russian news outlets have largely stopped reporting the Russian death toll . Both sides tend to be quieter about their own military fatalities .
 Russia and Ukraine admitted to suffering "significant" and "considerable" losses, respectively . The two countries have both admitted to having suffered losses .
Ukrainian and Russian claims of Russian fatalities are not verified by independent monitors . The number of civilian and military deaths is impossible to determine with precision given the fog of war .
 The Ukrainian Minister of Defense told CNN that he believed tens of thousands of Ukrainians had died . He said he "hoped" that the true death toll was below 100,000 .
 Casualties of the Russo-Ukrainian War § Prisoners of War, and War crimes in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . Treatment of prisoners of war Official statistics have varied .
 Ukraine's ambassador to the US says a platoon of the 74th Guards Motor Rifle Brigade surrendered . They were unaware that they had been brought to Ukraine and tasked with killing Ukrainians .
 The first large prisoner exchange took place on 24 March . 10 Russian and 10 Ukrainian soldiers, as well as 11 Russian and 19 Ukrainian civilian sailors, were exchanged .
 Ukrainian government working towards having Russian POWs work to help revive the Ukrainian economy . On 1 April 86 Ukrainian servicemen were exchanged for an unknown number of Russian troops .
Human rights organisations call on Ukrainian government to uphold the rights of Russian prisoners of war under the Third Geneva Convention . They also want to stop circulating videos of captured soldiers being humiliated or intimidated .
 The UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine expressed worries about the treatment of Ukrainian prisoners of war held by forces of Russia and the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics .
 Videos showing Ukrainian war prisoners being forced to sing pro-Russian songs or carrying bruises attracted concerns about their treatment .
 Russia built up military forces along the Ukrainian border . Many neighbouring governments and aid organisations prepared for a mass displacement event .
In the first week of the invasion, the UN reported over a million refugees had fled Ukraine . This subsequently rose to over 7. million by 15 June . In December 2021, Ukrainian defence minister estimated that an invasion could force three to five million people to flee their homes .
 Most refugees were women, children, the elderly, or people with disabilities . Most refugees are women, kids, elderly, and people with disability .
 By 20 March, a total of ten million Ukrainians had fled their homes, making it the fastest-growing refugee crisis in the contemporary era . The crisis is the fastest growing refugee crisis.
 Most male Ukrainian nationals aged 18 to 60 were denied exit from Ukraine as part of mandatory conscription . If they were responsible for the financial support of three or more children, single fathers, or were the parent/guardian of children with disabilities .
 There were 3,315,711 refugees in Poland, 901,696 in Romania, 594,664 in Hungary, 461,742 in Moldova, 415,402 in Slovakia, 27,308 in Belarus . Russia reported it had received over 800,104
 As of 23 March, over 300,000 refugees had arrived in the Czech Republic .
 Turkey has been another significant destination, registering more than 58,000 Ukrainian refugees as of 22 March . Turkey has also registered more than 60,000 Ukrainians as of 25 April .
 The EU invoked the Temporary Protection Directive for the first time in its history . Ukraine has accused Russia of forcibly moving civilians to "filtration centers" in Russian-held territory .
 As of 8 April, Russia claimed to have evacuated about 121,000 Mariupol residents to Russia .
 Thousands were dispatched to various centers in Russia and Ukraine, from which people were sent to economically depressed regions .
 By 22 March, it was estimated that between 50,000 and 70,000 high-tech workers had left the country . That could be up to 100,000 more might follow, according to an estimate .
 Fears arose over the effect of this flight of talent on Russian economic development . Fears arise over the impact of thisFlight of talent.
 Some joined the Russian resistance to the Putin regime and sought to help Ukraine . Some faced discrimination for being Russian .
Almost four million Russians have left the country, according to data from the FSB . This figure does not distinguish between emigres and travellers for business or tourism .
 During the 2020/21 international wheat marketing season, it ranked as the sixth-largest wheat exporter . It accounted for nine percent of world wheat trade .
 The country is also a major global exporter of maize, barley and rapeseed . It is also the world's largest producer of rapeseed and maize .
 In 2020/21, it accounted for 12 percent of global trade in maize and barley . It accounted for 14 percent of world rapeseed exports .
 The country accounts for about 50 percent of world exports in 2020/2021 . Its trade share is even greater in the sunflower oil sector .
Disruptions to the grain and oilseed sectors of Ukraine were thought inevitable . Disruptions were thought imminent .
 On the eve of the invasion, an estimated 6 million tons of wheat had been readied for export . An estimated 15million tons of corn had beenReadied for exports .
 According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, this would cause further loss of life and increase humanitarian needs .
 Russian Federation is a major exporter of potash, ammonia, urea and other soil nutrients . Economic sanctions could jeopardise the food security of many countries .
 Rising natural gas prices are pushing agricultural fertiliser prices higher, contributing to increasing food prices globally . Rising naturalGas prices are also pushing agricultural fertilizer prices higher .
For example Eritrea sourced 47% of its wheat imports in 2021 from Ukraine . For example, the country sourced 47%.
 More than 30 nations depend on Ukraine and Russia for over 30% of their wheat import needs . Many of them are located in North Africa, and in Western and Central Asia .
 A Russian missile attack on Kyiv Dam on the Dnieper River was blocked by Ukrainian defences . Ukrainian defences blocked the attack .
 A breach could have triggered flooding of parts of Kyiv, damaged downstream dams, and threatened the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant . A breach of a dam could have caused flooding and damage to downstream dams .
 Russian forces blew up the dam on the North Crimean Canal which Ukraine had erected to block water flow to agricultural lands in Crimea seized by Russia in 2014 .
 Russia cut civilian water service as part of the Siege of Mariupol . The Ukrainian Defence Ministry accused Russia of stealing hundreds of thousands of tonnes of grain from grain elevators .
 Substantial quantities of farm equipment, combine harvesters and tractors have also been looted from farms and dealerships and transported to Russia, as far away as Chechnya .
 Theft of grain from occupied regions of Ukraine has potential to intensify food crises . U.N. World Food Programme warns this could worsen Ukrainian food crisis .
 Russia claimed it had started exporting last year's grain from Kherson to Russia . On 30 May, Russia claimed that it was exporting sunflower seeds .
Several African leaders said the western expansion of NATO contributed to the war . Russian soldiers were picking strawberries in Kherson Oblast .
 He blamed EU sanctions on Russian banks and products for worsening the situation . He also blamed European sanctions on Russia's banks.
 Several Russian soldiers, captured by Ukrainian forces, claimed that Russian officers killed their wounded .
 There were also claims that Russian soldiers have killed their commanding officers, and sometimes themselves .
 Some mothers of conscripted Russian soldiers have tried to get them out of Ukraine and returned to Russia . Some mothers have returned to the country.
 A number of mothers have approached the Soldiers' Mothers Committee for advice . The committee has been asked for advice from mothers .
 Human rights lawyers and activists are claiming that Russian professional soldiers, also known as contract soldiers, are seeking legal advice so that they do not have to fight in Ukraine .
 Some have sought legal advice to get out of the army . But they have been told they are in for the length of their contracts .
 The pro-Russia militias raised in Donetsk and Luhansk have videos showing that they lack even basic protective armor and have old equipment .
 Russian soldiers and whole units have refused to obey their commanders' orders and have engaged in armed stand-offs with them .
 Ukraine has a significant fertility tourism service industry which was severely impacted . Other impact Ukraine has been severely impacted by the country's economic crisis .
 At the start of the invasion, surrogate mothers were displaced and distressed, requiring evacuation .
 The first Russian passports have been handed out to citizens in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia Region . Exact numbers are thought to be high, with many showing up on the coast near Odessa .
 UN General Assembly Resolution ES-11/1 on 2 March 2022 condemns the invasion of Ukraine and demands a complete withdrawal of Russian troops . Government and intergovernmental reactions to the 2022 Russian invasion.
 The invasion received widespread international condemnation from governments and intergovernmental organisations . New sanctions imposed on Russia triggered widespread economic effects on Russia and world economies .
 The European Union financed and delivered military equipment to Ukraine . The EU funded and delivered the equipment to the Ukraine .
Non-government reactions to invasion included widespread boycotts of Russia and Belarus . The bloc also implemented various economic sanctions, including a ban on Russian aircraft using EU airspace .
 Many Indians, Africans and Middle Easterners working and studying in Ukraine have reported racism at the hands of Ukrainian and other Eastern European countries .
 There were also immediate worldwide protests against the invasion and daily protests in Russia itself .
Public figures, both cultural and political, released statements against the war . As well as the demonstrations, petitions and open letters were published .
 The protests were met with widespread repression by the Russian authorities . The demonstrations were met by widespread repression.
 At least 14,906 people were detained from 24 February to 13 March 2022, according to OVD-Info . According to the report, at least 14.906 were detained .
 The Russian government cracked down on other forms of opposition to the war, including censorship measures and repression against people who signed anti-war petitions .
In some parts of Ukraine that were newly occupied by Russian armed forces, protests against the occupiers took place . As well as the protests, there were also reported instances of anti-Russian sentiment and discrimination against the Russian diaspora .
 In March 2022, 98% of Ukrainians – including 82% of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine – said they did not believe that any part of Ukraine was rightfully part of Russia . In March 2012, 98%, said they didn't believe any of Ukraine's parts of Russia was part of the
 Social media users showed sympathy for Russian narratives due to distrust of U.S. foreign policy . In China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Serbia and the Arab regions, many social media users show sympathy for Russia .
 Many in Russia do not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences . Many respondents in Russia don't want to be asked about negative consequences for their country .
 He warned that the war in Ukraine was becoming like the Spanish Civil War . He also warned that new and more powerful weapons were being tested .
 Russian state-controlled media systematically downplays both civilian and military losses, and denounces reports of attacks on civilians as ""fake"" or blames Ukrainian forces . Disinformation in the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis, Media portrayal of the Ukrainian crisis, and Russian information war
 Putin and Konstantin Ernst are chief of Russia's main state-controlled TV station Channel One . Ernst is chief of the state-run Channel One.
 Social media users shared real-time information about the invasion . Depictions of earlier events or other misinformation, sometimes deliberate, also shared .
Putin introduced prison sentences of up to 15 years for publishing "fake news" about Russian military operations . Many outlets tagged these misleading videos and images as false content, other sites did not .
 Roskomnadzor also restricted access to Facebook after it refused to stop fact-checking posts by state-owned Zvezda, RIA Novosti, Lenta.ru, and Gazeta.Ru .
 Pro-Kremlin television pundits like Vladimir Solovyov and Russian state-controlled channels like Russia-24, Russia-1, and Channel One follow the government narrative .
Echo of Moscow closed down, and Roskomnadzor blocked access to BBC News Russian, Voice of America, RFE/RL, Deutsche Welle, and Meduza, as well as Facebook and Twitter .
 A Moscow court demanded that Russian-language Wikipedia remove information about the invasion . The Wikimedia Foundation fined the Wikimedia Foundation 5 million rubles for refusing to comply .
Pro-government Turkish media blamed NATO and the United States for the war . State outlets in Serbia and Iran repeated Russian propaganda, as did RT Actualidad in Latin America .
South Africa's African National Congress endorsed the denazification narrative . Vietnam told reporters not to say "invasion" and to minimise coverage .
 Some Indonesian social media users and academics also spread Russian propaganda . Some criticised the greater emphasis on events in Ukraine than on those in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Iraq, Libya, Syria, and Yemen .
 US president Joe Biden's statements and a short question and answer session on 24 February 2022 . Western countries and others imposed limited sanctions on Russia when it recognised Donbas as an independent nation .
 When the attack began, many other countries applied sanctions intended to cripple Russian economy .
 The sanctions targeted individuals, banks, businesses, monetary exchanges, bank transfers, exports and imports .
 The sanctions cut major Russian banks from SWIFT, the global messaging network for international payments . The sanctions left some limited accessibility to ensure the continued ability to pay for gas shipments .
 Sanctions also included asset freezes on the Russian Central Bank, which holds $630 billion in foreign-exchange reserves . Sanctions include asset freezes and freezing the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline .
By 1 March, total Russian assets frozen by sanctions amounted to $1 trillion . The conflict posed a substantial economic risk both regionally and internationally .
 The IMF could help other countries affected, she said, in addition to the $2.2 billion loan package for Ukraine . She said the IMF could also help others affected .
 World Bank Group president David Malpass warns of far-reaching economic and social effects . Bank preparing options for significant economic and fiscal support to Ukraine and the region .
 The Russian ruble fell to record lows, and Russians rushed to exchange currency . Russia's currency fell to a record low .
 Stock exchanges in Moscow and Saint Petersburg closed until at least 18 March . It's the longest closure in Russia's history .
 S&P Global Ratings downgraded the Russian government credit rating to "junk" Russian government debt was downgraded on 26 February .
 S&P Global placed Russia under "selective default" on its foreign debt for insisting on payments in rubles . The National Bank of Ukraine suspended currency markets .
 The central bank also limited cash withdrawals to 100,000 hryvnia a day and prohibited foreign currency withdrawals by the public .
 The PFTS Ukraine Stock Exchange on 24 February suspended trading due to the emergency . On 24 March, Joe Biden's administration issued an executive order, which barred the sale of Russian gold reserves in the international market .
 In April 2022, Russia supplied 45% of EU's natural gas imports, earning $900 million a day . In April 2012, Russia provided 45 percent of the EU's gas imports .
 Russia is the world's largest exporter of natural gas, grains, and fertilisers . It is also one of the largest suppliers of crude oil, coal, steel, and metals .
 In May 2022, the European Commission proposed a ban on oil imports from Russia .
 Moscow is now looking to capitalise on alternative trade routes due to sanctions imposed on Russia . President Putin spoke to investors at an economic forum in June .
 He further claimed that they would hurt those imposing them more than Russia . He also claimed that Russia would hurt the country more than the Russians .
 The Russian invasion of Ukraine was an act of aggression that violated the Charter of the United Nations . Legality of the 2022 Russian invasion, War crimes in the 2022 Russia invasion of the Ukraine, and Universal jurisdiction investigations of war crimes in Ukraine .
 Russia accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and waging war in violation of international law . In addition, Russia was accused of waging war on densely populated areas .
 Russian forces used cluster munitions, repudiated by most states because of their immediate and long-term danger to civilians . They fired other wide-area explosives like air-dropped bombs, missiles and heavy artillery shells .
 As of 25 March, the attacks had resulted in at least 1,035 civilian deaths and 1,650 civilian injuries . The attacks had taken place in March .
 Russian forces accused of forcibly deporting thousands of civilians to Russia, sexual assaults, and deliberately killing Ukrainian civilians .
 Russia withdrew from the statute in 2016 and does not recognise ICC authority . Thirty-nine member states officially referred the matter to the ICC . Ukraine accepted ICC jurisdiction in 2014 and Russia withdrew in 2016 .
 ICC prosecutor Karim Ahmad Khan opened a full investigation into past and present allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide committed in Ukraine by any person from 21 November 2013 on .
 The International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine is an independent committee of three human rights experts . The ICC also set up an online portal for people with evidence to contact investigators .
 In the first month of the invasion, the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine documented arbitrary detentions . 21 journalists and civil society activists, and 24 public officials and civil servants were detained .
 They expressed concern about reports and videos of ill-treatment, torture, and public humiliation of civilians and prisoners of war in Ukraine . They also expressed concerns about reports of torture and torture of civilians .
Nearly 60 UN human rights monitors have been monitoring human rights violations by all parties since 2014 . They have been working with all parties to monitor human rights abuses .
Ukraine filed a lawsuit at the International Court of Justice accusing Russia of violating the 1948 Genocide Convention . Both Ukraine and Russia had signed the Convention, with false claims of genocide as a pretext for invasion .
 The International Association of Genocide Scholars supported Ukraine's request that the ICJ direct Russia to halt its offensive in Ukraine . The ICJ said Russia should stop its offensive.
 The ICJ ordered Russia to "immediately suspend the military operations" on a 13-2 vote . Russian and Chinese judges in opposition .
Under international criminal law's principle of universal jurisdiction,investigations were opened in Estonia, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland . The order is binding, but the ICJ has no means of enforcement .
 Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko also stated that Belarusian troops could take part in the invasion if needed . Belarusian territory was used to launch missiles into Ukraine, he said .
 Ukrainian officials have claimed Belarusian troops have entered Ukraine . Ukrainian officials claim Belarusian forces have entered the country .
 The BBC says the figures include wounded soldiers, while others interpret them as only those killed . The BBC also says that the figures are meant to be referring to those killed.
Minsk‑1 and Minsk‑2 give a real chance to peacefully restore the territorial integrity of Ukraine by coming to an agreement directly with the DPR and LPR with Russia, Germany and France as mediators .
 Russian Defence Ministry. Photographs taken by Sandra Rodriguez Chillida and Prina Shah .
 The air strikes were conducted from Belarus, using Russian ballistic missile launchers . The strikes were carried out by Russian ballistic missiles .
 Audio emerges appearing to be of Ukrainian fighters defending island from Russian warship . It is believed to be the first time Ukrainian fighters have been heard defending island .
Ukraine not to reveal its own military death toll until war ends .
 Over a week into the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the war has raged on, spurring the most serious humanitarian crisis in Europe since the Balkans in the 1990s .
Following independence in 1991, Ukraine's economic development was hamstrung by corruption, capital flight and a lack of reforms . Ukraine's economy was hampered by corruption and capital flight .
 Multiple factors driving low morale among Russian forces in Ukraine, yahoo.com says . "Multiple factors driving high morale among Russia's forces"
 Protests held in Russian occupied Ukrainian cities Kherson, Energodar and Berdyansk .
 icc-cpi.int. The site was launched for provision of information. Additional Referrals from Japan and North Macedonia .