 Russia has acquired classical forms masterminded by the Kremlin using three vertical levers . Russian occupation of some districts of the Ukrainian Donetsk and Luhansk regions over the last three and a half years has acquired a classical form .
 The first vertical is the occupation army represented by the permanent contingent of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation . The second vertical includes two army corps.
 More than a half of ordinary soldiers are contracted Russian soldiers and mercenaries . Also, the main commanding and headquarter positions in those corps are held by the regular Russian officers .
 The second vertical is the occupation administration headed by the self-proclaimed 'heads of the DPR and the LPR' The third is the 'bodies' of civil administration of quasi-state formations .
 The 'branch of power' political and ideological management has so far been monopolized by Vladislav Surkov – assistant of Russian President Vladimir Putin . Global social and economic processes in the occupied part of Donbas are managed by the representatives of the Russian government .
 'Specials' are mainly traitors who breached the oath given to the Ukrainian people . They are conscripted by the Russian special services and various collaborators .
 Akhmetov and Yefremov have lost comprehensive control over them due to certain situation in the gangsters' enclaves of the cleptocratic dictatorship . The so called 'people's republics' in fact are, and which are based on the Ak
 Alexander Kozakov, a former resident of Riga, is his personal image-maker . Kozakov is a former Riga resident . He is also a former photographer and photographer .
 Kozakov officially holds the position of 'the advisor to the head of the DPR' Kozakov is a member of Vladislav Surkov's pool of political technologists . Kozakov also holds the role of advisor to head of DPR and is member of the pool of
 The assistant to Russian President Vladimir Putin and curator of Russia-occupied part of Donbas . The latter is the assistant to the Russian President Putin .
 Zakharchenko's well-known 'advisor' is the Russian fascist writer Zakhar Prilepin . Another ZakhARChenko's 'advisors' is ZakharPrilepin.
 Zakharchenko is Surkov's distant relative . 41-year-old was born in Donetsk . He graduated from a local school and a Donetsk Technical College .
 In 2006, he was the CEO at the 'Trading House 'Continent' LLC, affiliated with Donetsk billionaire Rinat Akhmetov .
 Eugene Zhilin was among the 'titushky' mercenary gangs in December 2013 . He then headed the branch of his radically pro-Russian organization 'Oplot' in Donetsk .
 He took an active part in capturing government buildings and armed clashes with the Ukrainian Army .
 Zakharchenko led the group of 'Oplot' militants to seize the Donetsk city council in April 2014 . He was the leader of the group that seized the city council .
 Donetsk's leader seemed to be a sort of 'moderator' between different clans . After that, he tried to gain control of all military and political processes among the Donetsk collaborationists .
 Akhmetov's business in Russia-occupied Donbas was 'nationalized' and his humanitarian fund 'We Shall Help' was forced out . He also radically reduced his ties with the Russian-occupied region .
 The 'head of the DPR' runs a protection racket in Donetsk and adjoining cities . It includes food smuggling, abduction of Russian humanitarian aid and petrol trade .
 He formally commands the whole 'army' of the quasi-republic, which is de facto a limited contingent of Russian troops on the occupied territory .
 Russian Defense Ministry chief has direct links to top leadership . He is accountable only to them and to the representatives of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 The Kononov's influence is ensured by the fact that he is firmly embedded in the command chain of the Russian military . The Kon onov is a key figure in Russia's military.
 Russian Federation control over budget flows from Russian Federation for development of local army structures . They are actual decisive force in the occupied part of the Donbas .
 The leadership of the 'operational command' 'Donetsk' includes Russian officers only .
 The main command and staff positions in the 'corps' are also occupied by Russian military personnel .
 The 'DPR' army' is staffed with contractors and mercenaries from Russia by more than half . The army is staffed by contractors, mercenaries and mercenaries.
 Unlike Igor Girkin, his predecessor in office, he is a native of Luhansk after all .
 Kononov spent his pre-war adult life in the town of Sloviansk, where he worked as a coach in Judo Federation of Donetsk region .
 Girkin's sabotage group arrived to Sloviansk in April 2014 . He immediately joined its ranks, first as a chief of the checkpoint, then a company leader, and later – a whole brigade commander .
Lieutenant General of DPR is the first recipient of the 'Gold Star Medal of the Hero of DPR' and other fake awards . Now he is the 'Lieutenant general of DPR', first winner of the Gold Star Medal for 'Hero of DPR'.
 He constantly fights an internal struggle in the collaborationist's environment with variable success . In addition, he constantly fights a struggle in his environment .
 In September 2015 he compelled the 'Speaker of the People's Council' Andrey Purgin to leave office .
 Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov over his foul enemy Volodin . This became a kind of victory of Pushilin's curator in the Kremlin, Putin's deputy .
 Pushilin is seen in Moscow as a major contender to replace Alexander Zakharchenko . The 36-year-old is seen as a key contender for the post in Moscow .
 'The head of DPR' forced Pushilin's relative Elena Nikitina to resign from the 'information minister' office . In particular, 'the head of the DPR' was forced to resign .
 Pushilin, as well as Zakharchenko, earlier largely guided by Rinat Akhmetov, now fully depends on Surkov .
 In the spring of 2014, as a 'co-chairman of the provisional government of DPR', he was engaged in financial support for all separatist actions .
 Pushilin has received his organizational and financial experience in the financial pyramid of MMM-2011 . In 2013, he and other pro-Russian forces organized protests against the shale gas extraction on Donbas territory .
 He has been managing the actual FSB representation office in the occupied territory of Donetsk for a long time . He has managed the office since December 2015 .
 Sergei Lukashevich was heading 'DPR State Security Ministry' for only nine months . For example, he was heading the ministry for just nine months.
 Under Pavlenko, this office actually was able to take control over the whole 'power' block of 'DPR' with the exception of military, of course .
 Donetsk security and military officials conduct a permanent conflict to control budget flows from Russia . Modern Donetsk security officials conduct an ongoing conflict with Russia .
 Pavlenko also has a decisive influence on the 'head of Organized Crime Department' Sergei Tishchenko and 'Interior Minister of DPR' Alexei Dikiy . The Interior Ministry of DPR is the head of the Organized crime Department .
 Security and Interior 'ministers' are having some conflicts from time to time . However, the security and interior 'minister' have some conflicts .
 The Pavlenko's personal data is quite contradictory, since he does not appear in public . He has no official biography nor even official photo .
 For a long time 'MGB head' was considered a former 'people's mayor' of Sloviansk, KGB and SBU retiree Vladimir Nikolayevich Pavlenko . He was also a former people's mayor of Slovakia .
 Igor Girkin arrested the first 'people's mayor' Vyacheslav Ponomariov . He held the 'mayoral' chair for less than a month, since Girkin's arrest .
 After the liberation of Sloviansk by Ukrainian Army Pavlenko escaped in an unknown direction . The Ukrainian Army escaped in a unknown direction.
 'The head of the MGB of DPR' Pavlenko is a citizen of Russia and an officer of the FSB of the Russian Federation . But these Pavlenkos differ in patronymic, therefore, he says .
 He is the key person, coordinating the local collaborationists of the administration in Russia-occupied Donbas . He is also a key person in the Russian-occupied region .
 Alexander Zakharchenko has been acting minister for more than 1,5 years . He had created the office himself as then leading economic strategist . He remains in the status of 'acting minister' for over 1, 5 years .
 Granovsky has no public conflicts, preferring to resolve the issues behind the scenes . Granovsky is a well-known author and author of the book, "The New York City Book of the Year"
 He has decisive influence on all processes in 'DPR' in industry, trade and 'foreign trade' activities . He has a decisive influence in all processes.
 43-year-old Granovsky played several important roles during the last three years . Currently all this group is actively involved in the process of 'nationalization' of Ukrainian enterprises in the Russia-occupied territory of Donbas .
 From May to November 2014 he was the first 'Minister of Fuel and Energy of DPR' He retired because of his disagreement with the contemporary idea of the 'nationalization' of Akhmetov's industrial assets .
 Donetsk Mayor Oleksandr Lukyanchenko tied directly to Akhmetov . The party cell was headed by Bobkov, a close companion of Boris Kolesnikov .
 During the Revolution of Dignity Granovsky coordinated 'titushky' gangs in Donetsk, and drove them to the Mariinsky Park in Kyiv .
 He now is in charge of all those 'nationalized' factories, predominantly owned by the oligarchs Rinat Akhmetov and Viktor Nusenkis . That means he now is responsible for all those factories, mostly owned by oligarchs.
 In particular it refers to the Nusenkis' PJSC 'Donetsksteel' and 'Yenakiieve Iron and Steel Works' and its Makiivka branch .
 There is also 'International Accounting Bank' there, used to transfer money from Russian government to puppet 'states' of 'DPR' and 'LPR' to form budgets .
 This kind of cover is used by Kremlin to avoid further sanctions from the West .
 Volodymyr Pashkov, 56, was born in Bratsk, Irkutsk region, Russia .
 Pashkov was appointed Vice Governor of the Irkutsk region in 2008 . But in 2008 he was appointed vice governor of the region . He was later appointed First Vice Governor.
 Pashkov left for Moscow and took over 40% of the shares of the IT company 'Expertek' It began to win tenders for contracts with the state corporation 'Rosneft' and its branches throughout Russia .
Rumours that Pashkov is a creature of the fled Ukrainian oligarch Serhiy Kurchenko are inadequate .
 'Minister' Timofeyev as a militant nicknamed 'Sasha Tashkent' runs large scale corporate raids and organisation of smuggling and sale of counterfeit alcohol and cigarettes as a head of armed gang .
 Alexander Zakharchenko is the relative of Timofeev's first wife . He has overtaken the 'Amstor' supermarket chain, and then presented it to Alexander Zakarchenko .
 Ukrainian fugitive oligarch Sergey Kurchenko stole gasoline supplied to the occupied Donbas from Russia . For himself personally he 'nationalized' Zasyadko and Kiselyov mines, brought bankruptcy and encroached on state enterprise 'Makiivvuhillia'
 Timofeyev took control over depots with tobacco, alcohol and jewellery, smuggled coal, fuel and lubricants, etc. Also took control of depots in Russia with tobacco and alcohol .
 Tymofeyev was listed as the 'Chief of Staff' in 2014 . For these purposes he used the armed militants of the 'Oplot' brigade, where he used them .
 Konstantin Kuleshov has long been running the 'state' enterprise 'Markets of Donbass' He administered the contents of the first humanitarian convoys from Russia in 2014 .
 In reality it was sold in stores controlled by 'DPR' warlords . They supposedly sent the humanitarian aid to 'military commandants'
Violent conflicts with representatives of the Russian GRU and the FSB and their entire structure in the occupied Donbas . That was cause of violent conflicts with Russian GRu and the Russian FSB .
 'Security officials' have weakened the influence of 'Minister of Revenues and Duties' But they cannot remove him from the game completely due to the Zakharchenko's relentless support of his protege .
 His nickname 'Tashkent' he gained due to the studying in TashKent Higher Combined Arms Command School in 1989-1991 .
 He finished his military education in 1993 at a similar school in Blagoveshchensk, Russian Far East . He was also a student at the same school.
 One of the iconic traitors to Ukraine, and an example of collaborationism among the officials of the law enforcement system .
 In the spring of 2014, he quickly switched sides to pro-Russian militants . His main base was just a base of his Department .
 He was one of the organizers and curators of attacks on government buildings . He was captured by the regional prosecutor's office in particular .
 Dikiy was issued a passport in April 2014 with nominal place of residence in Yevpatoria in Russia-occupied Crimea .
 His authority covers not only all the local 'policemen', 'Migration Service' and 'Traffic Police' He actively issues 'DPR passports' and car licence plates with separatist symbols .
 Dikiy's 'office' is the Organized Crime Department, 'Berkut' riot police unit, a 'quick response' special unit . But the backbone of the office are the Organised Crime Department .
 'Deputy Minister' Oleg Makarchenko controls 'Internal Troops of the DPR' He also controls 'internal Troops' of the Donetsk region .
 All the illegal formations are directly involved in combat operations and guard duty at checkpoints . All these illegal formations have been linked to combat operations .
 They are actively used during the organization of various parades in Donetsk . Also used in Donetsk.
 Dikiy has a permanent conflict of interests with the 'State Security Ministry' He was repeatedly lowered in status to 'Acting Minister', and in 2015 even held under short-term arrest .
 The 'head of the Interior Ministry of the DPR' again got rid of the 'acting' status . However, recently the ' head of the interior ministry' was removed from the acting role .
 Dikiy was sentenced in absentia by the Ukrainian court in Toretsk to 12 years in prison . On the other side, he was sentenced to 12 year in prison for his crimes .
 'Acting Minister of Industry and Trade of the DPR' Aleksey Granovsky works in conjunction with another unofficial Akhmetov's ally, ' acting minister of industry and trade of the DPRK'
 Trapeznikov has a fierce backstage confrontation with Alexander Timofeev – ' Deputy Head of the Government' and 'Minister of Revenues and Duties'
 Trapeznikov even shot Leshchenko in his leg with his own pistol . Their relations spoiled so much that one day Trapezkov even shot him in the leg in his own gun .
 The 'vice PM' has some influence on 'the head of the secretariat of the administration' Olena Filippova . Also the ' vice PM' also has influence on the 'head of thesecretariat'
 Trapeznikov was the head of the 'Ukoopzovnishtorg' Trading House . In the pre-war period, Trapezkov was the chief of the trading house .
 He was the leader of the fan-club of Donetsk 'Shakhtar' football team, belonging to Rinat Akhmetov . Before that he worked as deputy head of the Petrovskoy District Council of Donetsk .
 He started working as FC Shakhtar manager back in 2001, while studying in the Donetsk State Academy of Civil Engineering and Architecture . He has been in charge of the club since 2001 .
 Former chief organizer and financier of Kharkiv 'Oplot' and his Donetsk branch . Has serious impact on 'head of the DPR' Alexander Zakharchenko .
 Zakharchenko has been named as a possible replacement for the former Ukrainian president . Bobkov himself and 'Vice Premier of the DPR – Minister of Revenues and Duties' Timofeev are mentioned from time to time as possible replacement .
 Previously Timofeyev was Zakharchenko's 'chief of stuff' while the latter commanded the 'Oplot' militants in Donetsk . The former commander of the Donetsk militant group is now the head of the ' Oplot' group .
 Also one of the links connecting 'the leaders of the DPR' with the criminal world, the oligarch Rinat Akhmetov and Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov . Also a links connecting the leaders of 'the DPR' and the Russian government .
 The whole biography of the 57-year-old Bobkov is connected with Budonivskyi District of Donetsk city . Bobkov's biography is connected to the city of Donetsk .
 He became the Akhmetov's supervisor of Donetsk mayor Alexander Lukyanchenko . He was also the mayor of Donetsk, Donetsk .
In 2010, Bobkov was promoted to a deputy in the regional party organization . In 2010, Boris Kolesnikov made him a deputy.
 He runs the export of counterfeit alcohol and scrap metal from Russia-occupied territory . Also he runs export of fake alcohol, scrap metal and counterfeit alcohol .
 One of the few members of the 'government of the DPR' still in office since the first day of its existence . The government has been in office for two years .
 She has bypassed all personnel perturbations, cleansing and arrests for more than three years . She has been bypassing all personnel percurbations and arrests for three years.
 From the very beginning, she has been issuing normative acts on behalf of the fake 'Ministry of Finance' She organized the collection of material aid for the militants .
 Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Kozak is responsible for all budgets and intergovernmental relations in Russia . She has a direct connection with the economic curators of the 'DPR' in the Russian government .
 38-year-old 'Vice Prime Minister of the DPR' Matyuschenko has orders and medals from her chief, Alexander Zakharchenko . She is connected with Deputy Minister of Economic Development of the Russian Federation Sergey Nazarov . Also connected with Russia's Deputy
 Her alleged merits include introducing at least some rules in the process of budgeting and cash operations in the 'young republic' She is accused of inventing some system of budget classification .
 The only experience in this field the 'head of the Ministry of Finance' ever had has been gained back in 2002-2008 .
 She was listed then as the chief specialist of the budget department of financial board in the Yasynuvata Town Council . She was also listed as the Chief Specialist of the Budget Department of Financial Board .
 It seems that all these accomplishments on the 'budget of the DPR' she was awarded for, has been made under strict control of her 'mentors' from Moscow .
 In reality, the daily paper work of the 'Ministry of Finance of the DPR' is in the deep crisis .
 Even the basic mechanism of the reception of documents has not been established, causing unprecedented delays in consideration of elementary issues .
 Matyuschenko shows off in new and expensive fashion clothes with exquisite accessories . There is a clear timetable for taking bribes .
 At the same time the absolute majority of the population of the Russia-occupied territory lives in extreme poverty .
 He is known as a militant field commander 'Frantsuz' in the Donetsk region . He is also the secretary of the executive committee of the separatist organization 'Donetsk Republic'
 Alexander Zakharchenko's personal 'special task expert' ly, ly, 'the head of the Dnieper', acts as a hammer against his domestic among other collaborationists .
 Commission adopted a resolution banning Khodakovsky from holding any office in the puppet state .
 Zavdoveev was responsible for the 'nationalization' of markets in occupied territory . Another 'interim commission', headed by ZavDoveev, was responsible.
 Zakharchenko has overtook control over more than two dozen markets . He has been in charge of more than 2 dozen markets since his 'work' has taken over .
 The 'Minister of Revenues and Duties of DPR' Alexander Timofeyev and his business partner Konstantin Kuleshov also raided small businesses, but in their own favour .
 Currently Zavdoveev as a head of this 'interim commission' is replaced by the head of the 'Donetsk Republic' parliamentary fraction Alexander Kostenko . This rotation was controlled by Timofeev-Kuleshov duet .
 Previously, the 'Legion' was part of the militant 'Oplot' brigade under Zakharchenko's command . It carried out reconnaissance-sabotage and assault missions .
 'Frenchman' worked in 'Unitech' company, producing and selling children's playgrounds and fitness equipment . In 2014, he became a militant, working in a company selling and producing children's equipment .
 He was a sales manager in several firms in Makiivka that were retailing building materials, plumbing and electrical appliances, or computer and office equipment .
 Zavdoveev is a key element in the confrontation between Zakharchenko and 'speaker of the parliament' Denis Pushilin .
 Zavdoveev is pushing him back in the 'parliament' by taking control over former head of the 'Donetsk Republic' Anatoly Koval's group of MPs .
 Alexander Zakharchenko has been a member of the inner circle since 2014 . He has been in the Alexander Zakarchenko's inner circle for four years . He is one of the most prominent figures in Russia's history .
 His influence among the collaborationists is weakened due to the sharp and constant conflict with his former subordinate and current 'vice-premier of the DPR' Dmitry Trapeznikov .
Both Leshchenko and Trapeznikov are commonly listed among those dependent from the Donetsk oligarch Rinat Akhmetov . Noteworthy, that both are common among those who are dependent on the oligarch .
 His brightest career success was the chair of the director of the economic issues of the 'Zhdanovska' mine . The mine is owned by businessmen Oleksandr Rotov and Anatoly Diachenko .
 The main consumer of the mine's coal was 'DTEK Trading Ltd' of the same Rinat Akhmetov . The mine's main consumer was the same company as the same mine .
 Dubovsky headed 'the Coal and Energy Ministry of the DPR' in 2015-2016 . Now he has returned to his chair in 'Zhdanovska' mine . The coal has been actively sold in free regions .
 Leshchenko is trying to retain his influence in Zakharchenko's 'administration' by pulling his men to Donetsk . The 44-year-old is now trying to keep his influence on the Donetsk region .
 The current head of the 'administration of the Kalininsky district of Donetsk' Vasily Tkachuk is a former deputy minister of Revenues and Duties of DPR' Alexander Zakharov . Zharov is the first deputy minister and 'first deputy minister
 He controls the production of counterfeit vodka and its trading in 'DPR', 'LPR' and Ukraine .
 Chertkov has strong influence on other crime bosses, running businesses in Russia-occupied territory and taking part in massive smuggling schemes to Russia, Ukraine and from there . Chertakov has been involved in huge smuggling schemes in Russia and Ukraine .
 At the time he was the member of the Vasily Sorokin gang, who controlled Petrovsky district of Donetsk . He was also a member of a gang that controlled the city .
 MP Chertkov is blank since 1988, when he retired from the position of digitally programmed worktables on Petrovsky repair-mechanical plant, till 1997 . He became the director of ' Petrovske' private enterprise .
 During this period he is mentioned in many criminal cases and different police files . During this time he has been mentioned in several criminal cases .
 Leading positions in this unit were occupied by Pysarchuk brothers, Ruslan and Andriy .
 Chertkovs were well-known in Donetsk in 1990s as 'Philia' and 'Pisar' They were known in Donetsk as personal killers, experts in murders and terror .
 Chertkov currenly lives in Kyiv, and visits 'DPR' from time to time . There is an unconfirmed information that Chertov curreny lives in the city .
 As his secretary, she controls contacts of other collaborationists with their leader . She controls the contacts of others with their leaders .
 Maksim Leshchenko is the most influential 'vice-premier of the DPR' Dmitry Trapeznikov . She is successfully manoeuvring between different centres in Zakharchenko's 'administrtion'
 48 years old 'Chief of the Secretariat of the head of DPR' was introduced into Zakharchenko's inner circle by Russian FSB Lieutenant General Vladimir Antiufeyev .
 FSB official Antiufeyev was 'State Security Minister' of self-proclaimed 'Transnistrian Republic' on Moldovan territory for 20 years . He was a member of FSB's 'State security Minister' on the Moldovan territories .
 Filippovs family managed to buy 5-room apartment in Moscow, villa in Moscow region . They even opened the bank account on Cyprus .
 Long-time partner of Donetsk 'Orthodox oligarch' Victor Nusenkis . His industrial assets on Russia-occupied territory were 'nationalized' in March, 2017 .
Business involves both small illegal mines and seized state mines . Their business involves both illegal mines, seizing state mines and mining .
In 2012 he fell into disfavour due to the conflict over the control over the 'Makiivvuhillia' state enterprise with the most powerful party member Yuri Ivaniushchenko, and the latter won the battle .
 Orlov is not seen in public, which is understandable, due to his past and current unofficial control over lots of enterprises beyond both sides of the frontline . The 47-year-old has not been seen in the public for decades .
 Also controls Horlivka chemical plant, 'Energotrans' transportation company and 'Energocaital' metal plant . Also controls 'Europe' hotel in Crimea .
Since the end of 2016 the illegal coal businesses of Orlov's commercial structures are under the investigation by the Prosecutor's office of Donetsk region .
 'Europrombank,' named 'problematic' by National Bank of Ukraine in 2015, still working, after changing his legal address from Donetsk to Kyiv .
Alexander Zakharchenko lost all his positions in the puppet state . He declared himself and his organisation 'Donbas Patriotic Forces' in opposition to Alexander Zakharhenko .
 Denis Pushilin left far behind 'the speaker of the parliament' and other collaborationists . Still he was mentioned in media and internet almost as often as often, as 'head of the DPR'
 Khodakovsky, 44, is perhaps the most famous traitor to the oath to the Ukrainian people . He is a former member of the Ukrainian parliament.
 Prior to Russian aggression, he was the head of the Special Operations Center 'A' of SBU Office in Donetsk region .
 During the events at the Kyiv Maidan, he participated in the assault on the House of Trade Unions – the headquarters of the opposition to the Yanukovych regime .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in Donbas since 2008 . He has been involved in the conflict with Russia since then . Putin's government has been criticized for its actions in Ukraine .
 Also one of the key 'assets' of Donetsk billionaire Rinat Akhmetov on Russia-occupied territory . Also a key ' assets' of the Donetsk billionaire .
 Khodakovsky controlled the western frontiers of the 'DPR' For a long time, he had his share in smuggling of grocery goods and drugs across the frontline .
 Khodakovsky' militants escorted and secured humanitarian goods of Akhmetov's fund 'Pomozhem' 'We will help' and alternative supplies of petrol from Ukraine and its trading in the 'DPR', in particular, in particular .
 He is playing the main propaganda and deceptive role, regularly reporting 'republic's' view of the fighting on briefings . He is also playing a main propaganda role, reporting 'rejects' view on briefings.
 Russian generals are in charge of the war in Donbas . He is acting strictly according to instructions, received from Russian generals .
 It gives him good contacts in the Russian Defense Ministry and the GRU of the General Staff of the Russia's Armed Forces . It also gives him access to Russia's Defense Ministry .
 Vladimir Kononov is considered as a 'spare' in case of a possible rotation of 'Defense Minister of DPR' Vladimir Kon onov . He is considered to be a 'Spare'
 The 'Deputy Commander of the 1st Army Corps of DPR' is considered to be local . He was born and raised in Donetsk, where he also resided for the past 20 years .
 General Yepishev graduated from Donetsk High Political And Military School of Engineers and Signal Corps . He was sent to the town of Kungur in Perm region .
 Basurin retired from the Russian Army in 1997, then returned to Donetsk . He first began to work as a history and physical education teacher, then worked in polyethylene production companies .
 He became the 'political officer of the 'Kalmius' battalion, which was quickly reformatted into 'Separate Artillery Brigade' of militant forces . Subsequently he became the "political officer" of the battalion . He was later the ' political officer of
 In particular, this unit took an active part in the bloody battles for Saur-Mohyla .
Since the battle for Debaltseve in January and February of 2015, this character is also the unofficial press secretary of the 'DPR Forces' The character is telling lies about 'ISIS militants in the service of the Kyiv junta,' 'sacrificing of Donbas
Basurin has friendly relations with the infamous Kremlin propagandist Graham Phillips . Basurin is constantly hindering the OSCE mission with their duties in Russia-occupied territory .
 Since October 2016, he rules the 'capital of the DPR' in the status of 'acting mayor' He is bothered exclusively with Donetsk communal problems .
Kulemzin has been 'mayor' since October 2014 to October 2016 . He is currently in charge of the entire social bloc in the 'administration of the head of the DPR' He retains a significant influence on the Donetsk municipality and KuleMzin himself .
 The 43-year-old Kulemzin has always been working in Donetsk Regional State Administration .
 In 2007, he became the Head of the Department of Foreign Economic Relations and European Integration of Donetsk Region State Administration . Since 2011, he has been Deputy head of the Main Department for Regional Development, Investments and Foreign Economic relations .
Under Yanukovych regime this association was supposed to facilitate border cooperation between Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and the Voronezh and Rostov regions of Russia . Despite this European name, under the Yanukovych regime, this association is supposed to help border cooperation .
 Under his leadership the enterprise decreased 14 pre-war tram routes to alleged 9, and 19 trolleybus routes – to alleged 11 . Under his management the enterprise had decreased 14pre- war tram routes .
Alexander Zakharchenko lives in the occupied Donetsk, performing almost all his liturgies in the territory of the 'DPR' He welcomes all leading militants and local collaborationists, including Alexander Zakharhenko .
 The occupation administration supports all dioceses of the Moscow Patriarchate Church in the territory under its control .
 Metropolitan Illarion goes to Ukraine-controlled Mariupol . He incites the people with there the propaganda slogans of the Kremlin and the Moscow Patriarchate during worships .
 One of the most passionate supporters of the so-called 'Russian world' among the highest clergy of the Ukrainian Church .
 Moscow Patriarch Cyril strictly follows all instructions of Moscow Patriarch. He forces the subordinate clergy to hold prayers for Russia, her power and the army .
 Roman Shukalo was born in 1951 in the village of Rudne near Lviv . All of his life he lived in Donbas, Donbas .
Kherson was appointed head of Kherson diocese in 1996 . He was finally transferred to Donetsk in 1996. Then he was appointed to the Donetsk diocese .
In 2000, the head of the Donetsk diocese Illarion was given the rank of Metropolitan . In 2000, he made friends with Viktor Yanukovych .
 Since October 2015, Metropolitan Illarion transferred all Ukrainian Church's internal financial issues in 'DNR'-controlled territory to using Russian rubles . The move has set new prices for rituals and the sale of church stuff .
 Some clerics said that 'raising tariffs' during the war was burdensome for parishioners . This caused indignation of some clerics, who said that raising tariffs during the War was burdensOME for parishionsers .
 Metropolitan declared those clerics as 'saboteurs' and began to threaten them with pushing them off the diocese with negative characteristics .