 Ukrainian politician Volodymyr Rybak is a Ukrainian politician defending the flag of Ukraine . His interview was given nine days after the Russian-armed militants seized his overall control .
 The men's savagely mutilated bodies were found in a stream near Sloviansk on 19 April .
 Volodymyr Rybak, 42, was seized and beaten on 17 April . He tried to remove the flag of the self-proclaimed ‘Donetsk people’s republic’ which had hung over the Council building .
 Rybak was stopped as he tried to enter the building, pushed and beaten . He was forced into a car and taken away by masked men in camouflage gear .
 Bezler played a prominent role in Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea . He and Girkin were involved in seizing control in the Donetsk oblast .
 SBU believe that Rybak was tortured to death in Sloviansk . It was Girkin, who ordered that he be brought to their headquarters .
Young Maidan activists set off from Kharkiv to Sloviansk on 16 or 17 April . They were hoping to gather information about the militants who had seized the city .
 Yuri Popravka’s body was found, together with and in the same horrific state as that of Volodymyr Rybak .
 Yuri Dyakovsky’s body was found nine days later, also thrown into a river . His body was also found in a river.
 There was a great deal of pretence about the seizure of Sloviansk on 12 April 2014, including a supposed ‘people’s mayor’, Vyacheslav Ponomaryov .
 Two thirds of the men had arrived with him from Crimea, he said . He claimed that all the men were 'volunteers' and two thirds of them Ukrainians .
 The men did indeed have combat experience, according to the interviewer . But he claimed, most unconvincingly, that ‘many, now already already already Ukraine, fought in the Russian armed forces – in Chechnya, Central Asia.
 There are people who fought in Iraq and Yugoslavia as part of the Ukrainian armed forces .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda is loyal to the Russian regime and knew not to ask inconvenient questions . His attempts to claim that their weapons are taken from the seized police building are even less plausible .
 Girkin kept to the Kremlin’s script that the earlier interview remains on the Komsomolskaya Pravda site, unlike another interview given in January 2016 .
 On the later occasion, Girkin openly admitted to ordering extrajudicial killings in Donbas .
 KP's confession to war crimes led to KP removing the interview, though copies have been retained . The interview was removed, but copies of the interview were retained .
 No measures were taken by Russian authorities despite a formal demand from St. Petersburg . No measures taken by the Russian authorities.
 Petersburg lawyer, Arkady Chaplygin, says criminal proceedings be initiated against Girkin .
 He claimed that they had a ‘military court’ and imposed the legislation introduced by Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin in 1941 . He claimed the legislation was imposed by Joseph Stalin .
 A lot was made of this admission, although his aide Igor Druz had informed the BBC of killings back in August 2014 .
 There is a huge amount of evidence against Girkin himself, including ‘death sentences’ with his signature . The militants fled in early July 2014 .
 In same interview, Girkin also admitted that his men had provoked the conflict in Donbas .
 During the months that Sloviansk was under militant control, it was hard to keep up with abductions and hostage-taking . There were a large number of cases of torture and killing as well as extrajudicial executions .
 Hostages were held in the basement there, as well as in the central police building, and in both places were subjected to torture . In both places, torture was carried out by police officers .
 Four members of the Evangelical Church of the Transfiguration in Sloviansk abducted and tortured to death . At least one mass grave was found after the militants fled, among others .
 The Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union has worked with the UK-based European Human Rights Advocacy Centre on cases before the European Court of Human Rights . Several civilians were abducted and tortured in Sloviansk while it was under militant control .
 ECHR says Russia can be said to have jurisdiction over Sloviansk during the period of its occupation . They explain that one of the key issues for ECHR will be whether Russia can have jurisdiction.
 Russia has put together proof of direct involvement by Russia in the planning of the invasion of the East of Ukraine in the Spring of 2014 .
 Russia has consistently used people like Girkin, who just happened to have ‘left’ Russian military intelligence shortly before the invasion of Crimea .
 Russia has claimed that they also ‘resigned’ from the military before ‘volunteering’ for Donbas .
 The fighters are always ‘volunteers’, never mercenaries, and never mercenaries . There is total denial of Russia’s role in paying and training fighters .
 The video footage shows Russian military hardware and men being taken into Ukraine and the military deaths, including of close on an entire paratrooper regiment from Pskov . Such denials are hollow against the weight of evidence of Russia’s direct complicity in the downing of MH17
 Russian historian Boris Sokolov has followed the admissions of Girkin and others involved in the fighting in Donbas . The Russian historian has also admitted that he has been involved in fighting .
 Ukraine’s new government is trying to force Ukraine to resort to force .
 He believes that the Kremlin assumed that Ukraine had been so weakened, that a limited contingent of heavily armed spetsnaz fighters would be sufficient . He believes the Kremlin believed that the military had been weakened under the regime of President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Girkin has acknowledged that his unit passed into Donbas via Russia . It could not have done had they not been waging the offensive at the Kremlin’s orders .
 Ukraine did fight back and Girkin’s men were, in July, forced to retreat from Sloviansk .
 It was soon after this that Russia brought in military forces, and its first military losses were reported . Russia's first military loss was reported in the early 1990s .
 As many as 32,000 Russian ‘volunteers’ and military servicemen were killed in Donbas in 2014-2015 . Sokolov has made his own estimates, based on demographic data .
 He estimates that no more than two thousand of that number were military men . No more than 2,000 are military men, he says .
 Valentina Melnykova, Head of the Union of Russian Soldiers’ Mothers Committees, gave the figure in April 2017 . This figure is not far off that given in March 2017 by MelnyKova .
 She estimated that no less than 1500 Russian military servicemen had died in Donbas . This was the first war she was aware of where the families of young men killed were not approaching the committees for help .
 The reasons have been reported here, and seemingly include some degree of bribery for silence .