 This description contains information not contained in the original broadcast . This description is not included in the first broadcast .
 In journalistic coverage of Ukraine, there is a tendency to differentiate between “neo-Nazi’s militia combatants and “mainstream,” “centrist” and ‘mainstream’ “Centrist’
Recent events in that unfortunate country illustrate that such a dichotomy is essentially false . Recent events in the U.S. illustrate that this is essentially true .
 Both parties like Svoboda and Pravy Sektor incorporate fascist heirs to the OUN/B Nazis of Stephan Bandera .
 Roman Svarych, OUN/B World War II leader Jaroslav Stetsko’s personal secretary, Poroshenko is also advised by Oleh Makhnitsky . Former Justice Minister from Svoboda.
 Poroshenko advocated providing veterans’ entitlements to members of the UPA – the combat wing of the OUN/B and a military ally of the Third Reich .
 The recent combat in Eastern Ukraine has minimized electoral participation by the Russian ethnic minority . In effect, it has realized an ethnic cleansing dynamic, according to reports .
 An investigation of Maidan shootings earlier in the year has omitted any substantive investigation of the shooters of policemen . A former government security officer, Dmytro Sadovnyk, was photographed holding a rifle .
 Supposedly, he was using the rifle in the sniper attacks on the Maidan demonstrators .
 “evidence’ was unearthed during the ‘investigation’ presided over by the Justice Minister of the provisional government, Oleh Makhnitsky .
 President Vladimir V Putin used an international meeting of Russia experts to sell Moscow's view that American meddling has sparked most of the world’s recent crises, including those in Ukraine and the Middle East .
 Mr Putin specifically denied trying to restore the Russian Empire . Mr Putin, however, specifically denied attempting to restore it .
 The West staged a coup to oust the president last February, pushing the country into chaos and civil war . He argued Russia was compelled to intervene in Ukraine because that country was in the midst of a “civilized dialogue’s political future .
 Putin's comments on Russia's leader have sparked a debate in Washington . Putin's remarks have been widely criticized in the United States .
Deputies in Kiev voted down pro­pos­als to rec­og­nize a World War II-era Ukrain­ian par­ti­san group as national heroes .
Ukrainian Insur­gent Army's strugs for Ukraine was tainted by its col­lab­o­ra­tion with the Nazis . Svo­boda nation­alist party sup­port­ers ral­lied ear­lier in the cap­
 masked men attacked and threw smoke grenades at lines of police out­side par­lia­ment as law­mak­ers met inside . Later, masked men attack and throw smoke grenades in front of police .
 At least 14 peo­ple were killed in fight between pro-Russian sep­a­ratists and gov­ern­ment forces in east Ukraine .
 A cease-fire has been in place since early Sep­tem­ber but vio­la­tions are reported daily . The cease-fires have been held since early September .
 Svo­boda said its mem­bers were not respon­si­ble for the unrest in Kiev . Police said the unrest was orches­trated by a small group of peo­ple at the rally .
 The unrest over­shad­owed the pas­sage of laws the gov­ern­ment hopes will con­tain the gal­lop­ing cor­rup­tion that has long hin­dered Ukraine’s scle­rotic e
 Petro Poroshenko urged lawmakers to keep up the fight against cor­rup­tion, a prob­lem that he equated with terrorism, he said .
 Other approved pro­vi­sions included laws to stem money-laundering and to increase cor­po­rate transparency . Other approved laws include laws to stop money laundering and increase transparency .
 Par­lia­ment also approved a new defense min­is­ter — for­mer National Guard head Stepan Poltorak — a press­ing pri­or­ity con­sid­ering the clashes with pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in its
 Historians blame the UIA and other Ukrainian fascist forces for the extermination of thousands of Poles and Jews during World War II . These right-wing Ukrainian paramilitaries sided with the German Nazis in their fight against the Soviet Union's Red Army .
 Svoboda and the Right Sektor have elevated UIA leader Stepan Bandera to the level of a Ukrainian national hero . The two have elevated the UIA's leader to a national hero.
 In FTR #779, we noted the dominant presence of Svoboda and Pravy Sektor ministers in the interim government .
 This may well have affected the investigation of the sniper deaths that took place during the demonstrations that brought about the fall of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Oleh Makhnitsky is from Svoboda and has been central to the ‘investigation’ of the sniper attacks . He is also from the city of Svobododa .
 The ascent of Swoboda, Pravy Sektor and the other OUN/B-related elements in Ukraine has had the effect of elminating much of the pro-Russian voting bloc .
 Ukraine’s next par­lia­ment will be pro-Western and strongly nation­alist . It won’t be to Russia's liking, and it won't be to Russian's liking .
 Can­di­date lists show how per­sonal favourites backed by old school powerbrokers are set to make way for peo­ple who made their names in Kiev’s ‘Maidan’ rev­o­lu­tion last win­ter
 Already a war widow at 35, she is a can­di­date for Prime Min­is­ter Arseny Yatseniuk's party .
 Mikhailo Pogrebinsky: We will see peo­ple with a mil­i­tary back-ground, though they will not have polit ­i­cal and juridi­cal knowl­edge .
 The make-up of the new assem­bly will reflect months of war and a con­fronta­tion with Rus­sia that has cre­ated a Cold War-style cri­sis between Moscow and the West around Ukraine .
 The Maidan rev­o­lu­tion drove out Moscow-backed pres­i­dent Vik­tor Yanukovich in Feb­ru­ary .
Rus­sia annexed Crimea in March and pro-Moscow sep­a­ratist rebel­lions in Ukraine’s east . Krem­lin alarm at his oust­ing and the prospect of a pro­nounced shift west­wards by Kiev led to
 The new par­lia­ment will shrink to 424, according to cen­tral elec­tion author­i­ties . The num­ber of seats occu­pied in the new par ­lia ­ment will be 424 .
 The oth­ers – and Savchenko’s if as expected she is elected – will remain vacant . Savchenko is expected to be elected to the House of Representatives .
 Poroshenko will have to work hard to win sup­port for his plan to bring peace in the east . Other pro-Europe par­ties fear a sell-out to Rus­sia and the separatists .
 Pro-Western Poroshenko called the elec­tion to secure fur­ther legit­i­macy . Rus­sia denounced as a fas­cist coup to jus­tify its back­ing of the separatists .
 rebels threaten to hold their own elec­tions in early Novem­ber . Peo­ple still dying every day in the east despite the cease­fire and anti-Russian feel high in the capital .
Ukraini­ans are expressing their frustration with the slow pace of reforms to improve liv­ing standards . Ukrainians are also expressing increas­ing disen­chantment with the pace of reform .
 Mustafa Nayem is a jour­nalist and Maidan activist who is run­ning for the Poroshenko bloc . He is running for the Petrooshenko bloc.
 The Com­mu­nists, who usu­ally backed him, might lose all rep­re­sen­sen’sta­tion for the first time since inde­pen­dence in 1991 .
 All other par­ties are seeking the vote of the Maidan – the local name for Kiev's Indepen­dence Square . Tens of thou­sands protested against Yanukovich and which com­mands moral author­ity in polit­i­cal life .
 New assem­bly is likely to be hos­tile to Moscow . Savchenko, Chornovil, Mam­chur, Mam ­chur are among those enlisting war vets .
 There might be com­pe­ti­tion to see who can be the best nation­alist and biggest enemy of Rus­sia, Pogre­bin­sky said .
 Poroshenko is hoping for a man­date to pur­sue the peace plan for the east which he reluc­tantly accepted after bat­tle­field defeats in which hun­dreds of Ukrainian sol­diers may have died .
 Poroshenko, a 49-year-old con­fec­tionery tycoon, may not find it easy to win sup­port for his plan and his deal­ings with Putin .
 On the Maidan, stalls are selling toi­let paper printed with Putin’s image .
 At inter­na­tional foot­ball matches an obscene chant about Putin is now as much a fix­ture as the singing of the Ukraine's national anthem .
 Some sup­port­ers of the old elite have come under attack while out cam­paigning . Some sup-port­s of the former elite have been under attack .
 Sev­eral have been seized, pelted with eggs and dumped in rub­bish bins . Sev ­eral have also been seized.
 Both have sharply crit­i­cised parts of Poroshenko’s peace plan . Both say his pro­posal for giv­ing lim­ited self-rule to the sep­a­ratists for a pro­vi­sional period will only encour­age
 Over 75% of voters sup­ported Ukraine’s ‘course towards Europe,’ says Poroshenko .
Ukrainian Pres. Petro Poroshenko claimed a landl­side vic­tory for pro-western par­ties in the country's key par­lia­men­tary elections .
 More than half of the votes went to pro-government par­ties, Poroshenko says . More than 75 per cent of votes sup­ported the country’s course towards Europe, he says .
 President's newly formed party, the Poroshenko Bloc, stands to get 23 per cent, according to exit poll . Prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk’s National Front with 21 per cent .
 The pro-European Samopomich party, led by the mayor of the west­ern city of Lviv, came in third with 13% .
 Yulia Tymoshenko’s Pro-western Father­land party managed to just meet the 5-per-cent hurdle for stay in the leg­is­la­ture by get­ting 5. per cent, accorded to the national exit poll
 Yat­senyuk and many other promi­nent fig­ures left the Father­land party in August . The party was held in August.
 Among those who failed to get in are the Com­mu­nists with 2. per cent and the nation­al­ist Right Sec­tor party with 2 per cent .
 Dmytro Yarosh won a direct seat in his native Dnipropetro­vsk region . He accorded to Svy­atoslav Oliynyk, a deputy regional governor .
 More than 3,600 peo­ple have been killed in a con­flict with pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in the east . Poroshenko has said he hopes that the snap elec­tion will bring more sta­bility to the crisis-
 The pres­i­dent showed up dressed in fatigues in a polling sta­tion in Kram­a­torsk, a city in the east­ern Donetsk region . The city was recap­tured by gov­ern­
 Poroshenko said he aimed to pro­tect the right to vote of the more than 10,000 sol­diers in the region . He said that he aims to pro ­tect the right to vote.
 Observers doubt that a new gov­ern­ment will be formed as early as next week . Pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in the east will be able to end the fight­ing with pro-Russian seats .
84,000 police offi­cers were on duty through­out Ukraine to ensure a peace­ful vote, the Inte­rior Ministry said .
 Vot­ing did not take place in the dis­tricts con­trolled by the sep­a­ratists . Lead­ers have vowed to ignore Sunday’s polls because they con­sider Ukraine a neigh­bouring state .
 Turnout in Donetsk and Luhansk regions was much lower than elsewhere­where . Just 31 per cent of Donetsk and 27 per cent in LuHansk, according to offi­cial figures .
 Some 1.83 mil­lion vot­ers were reg­is­tered in both regions . Only a frac­tion of their com­bined peace­time pop­u­la­lions of almost 7 million were found .
 German-Foreign-Policy.com provides more depth on the Ukrainian government's political makeup .
 Yatsenyuk’s party has Andriy Biletsky, founder of the Azov Battalion, as an adviser .
 Poroshenko has Svoboda member Oleg Makhnitsky as an adviser, as well as Roman Svarych, the personal secretary to Jaroslav Stetsko .
 The election campaign, ending this week in today's pro-Western Ukraine, is characterized by extremist nationalism .
 The party of the politician is set to become second in Sunday's elections . The politician had promoted himself using videos of his violations of human rights .
 Considering the civil war’s nationalist upsurge, other parties have begun accepting militiamen into their ranks .
 The commander of the fascist Asov Battalion is a member of the ‘military council’ of Prime Minister Arseniy Jazenjuk's party .
 Last week, Asov Battalion militia members participated in the violent attacks on the Ukrainian parliament .
 During the election campaign, it was alleged that Kiev’s troops had used internationally banned cluster munitions in the Donetsk region .
 New social cuts are anticipated to pay for essential supplies of Russian gas . Social cuts are expected to be paid for by the winner of the elections .
 Berlin and the EU are refusing to give Kiev additional material assistance . Ukraine joined the EU this year, and has joined the European Union .
 Radoslaw Sikorski admitted that he had completely invented the serious allegations he made against the Russian president . Former Polish foreign minister said he had invented the allegations .
 The election campaign in today's pro-Western Ukraine has been shaped, to a growing extent, by extremist nationalism .
 Opinion polls predict the victory of the “Petro Poroshenko Bloc’s’ top candidate, Vitali Klitschko . The CDU-affiliated Konrad Adenauer Foundation had been systematically groomed by the foundation .
 Lyashko seems to attract a significant number of potentially fascist voters . He has violated the human rights of alleged pro-Russian separatists .
 Most recently, in a TV talk show, he presented a prisoner – whom he claimed was Russian soldier .
 Lyashko also announced that, in the future, he will have captured separatists summarily executed .
 Svoboda may also lose votes to the ‘Right Sector,’ which hardly has a chance of winning seats in the Rada .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk's party is campaigning with well-known rightwing extremists . He had been put in power by the West, but is now campaigning with extremists .
 The "People's Front" has also established a "Military Council" to profit from the country's nationalist war frenzy . The “People’s Front” has also set up a ‘Military Council’
 The ‘Military Council’ also includes Asov Battalion commander Andriy Biletsky . The “ military Council” also includes asov battalion commander and asov Battalion chief .
 His Asov Battalion had participated in the violent attacks on the Ukrainian parliament . His battalion had been involved in the violence against the parliament .
 Majority of deputies rejected motion for declaring October 14 an official holiday . These attacks began October 14, when the majority of the deputies rejected the motion .
 The Ukrainian Insurgent Army was founded October 14, 1942 . It had also committed massacres on more then 90,000 Christian and Jewish Poles .
 During the election campaign, there were also serious allegations raised against the government .
 Kiev government forces, particularly fascist militias, are committing serious human rights violations in the civil war in eastern Ukraine . Western human rights organizations, including those by western human rights groups, have reported violations .
 It has been reported that government units have used internationally banned cluster munitions in the Donetsk region . It has also been reported.
 The Ukraine has not joined the treaty even after the pro-western coup in Kiev . The Ukraine is not a member of the U.S.
There is strong evidence of Kiev’s government forces using cluster munitions in attacks in early October . At the time, the ceasefire was already in effect .
 HRW says at least six people have been killed and dozens wounded by these internationally banned munitions . At least dozens have been wounded by the munitions .
 The real number of victims is probably higher, according to the human rights organization . The human rights group says there are probably more victims.
 For the period following the elections, there are already indications of new social cutbacks . For the time following the election results, there is already indications.
 This year’s economic performance will shrink by up to ten percent, correspondents report . This year's economic performance is expected to shrink by 10 percent .
 The budget could reach a deficit of more than seven percent of the gross domestic product . The budget is estimated to be more than 7 percent of gross domestic products .
 In addition, inflation is running at around twelve percent . Costs of energy have also been rising, according to experts .
 No one expects the U.S. $17 billion in IMF bailouts to suffice . No one expect the United States to pay up to 2016 .
 The German government is only willing to participate in limited financing . The government will only participate inlimited financing .
 EU Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger's entourage. At best, a limited share of the costs for Russian gas deliveries to Ukraine could be covered .
 The fact that no final agreement has been reached with Russia on the supply of natural gas is advantageous to President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk .
 The absolutely essential agreement and, with it, also, also the debate on more cuts, are postponed until after elections . The debate on the more cuts is also postponed until afterwards .
 The Kiev Escalation Strategy, The Free World, A Fatal Taboo Violation, The Europeanization of Ukraine, Crisis of Legitimacy, “Fascist Freedom Fighters’, The Restoration of the Oligarchs, Second-Class Stakeholders, Ukrainian Patriots
 Rechter Politiker Ljaschko: Der Mann, der die Ukraine aufhetzt.de 22.10.2014 .
Pierre Omidyar was the per­son in charge of push­ing the lus­tra­tion laws . It turns out one of the key fig­ures in the Poroshenko admin­is­tra ­tion .
 Zal­ishchuk used her Omidyar-funded outfit, “Chesno,’to orga­nize a round­table with lead­ers of pro-EU and neo-fascist par­ties .
 Lyashko’s cam­paign posters fea­tured him impal­ing a Jew­ish oli­garch on a Ukrain­ian trident .
 The fas­cist UPA par­tic­i­pated in the Holo­caust, and were respon­si­ble for killing tens of thou­sandsof Jews and eth­nic Poles in their bid to cre­ate an eth­ni
 Many UPA mem­bers filled the ranks of the Nazi SS “Gali­cia’sion” Divi­sion . UPA Mem­bers fill the ranks.
Ukrainian Inte­rior Min­is­ter Arsen Avakov appointed chief of Research Affairs in Kyiv oblast party ATO . Deputy bat­tal­ion com­man­der “Azov’s Vadim Troyan.
Police chief of Kiev region “said the head of the Inte­rior Ministry. And today, the deci­sion of the min­is­ter.
 Vadim Troyan assured that the Ukraini­ans will not let such a respon­si­si-ble posi­tion .
 "I think that this case is that God has given me," he said . "I will not fail, he said," he added . "He said. I think this case was that God had given me"
 Omidyar “played a big role in getting the protest up and running’ in November 2013, according to the Financial Times .
 The Poroshenko Bloc is named after Ukraine’s pro-Western president, Petro Poroshenko . The Bloc owns a national TV station and other prized assets .
 He came to power this year thanks to the revolution originally organized by Zalishchuk’s Omidyar-funded NGOs . He has rewarded her with a seat in the Rada .
 The commander of the Donbas Battalion, Taras Konstanchuk, stated that if the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko surrenders a single kilometer of Ukrainian land in negotiations with the “DNR” and “LNR’s”
 The soldiers feel that the deputies of the Verkhovna Rada are adopting incorrect or useless laws . They will come and set fire to tyres before the parliament building, he said .
 There's only one way you'll leave here, and that’s feet first, says Konstanchuk .
 Petro Poroshenko repealed the law on Tuesday, October 4, on the special status of Donbas .
 The shelling of a high school in Ukraine’s rebel stronghold of Donetsk has chilled even the battle-hardened.
 The cease-fire agreed upon in September has only really existed on paper . The killing of two teenagers as they were playing soccer after lunch is a stark reminder that the cease-fires agreed on September have only ever existed .
 Vladimir Voropayev is chief of the children’s trauma unit at the regional hospital in Donetsk . He is also chief of a children's trauma unit.
 Alexander Yeliseyev, the father of one victim, 18-year-old Andrei, walked by in shock as he gathered belongings left behind when his body was removed .
 Government officials have failed to produce cast-iron evidence of such claims in the past . Independent rights groups say there’s evidence that government artillery has hit homes in eastern Ukraine .
 Residents of stricken areas have frequently complained that rebels deploy artillery near homes . Residents have often complained about the return fire of artillery .