 "Putin's Way" purported to be a biography of Russia's President, Vladimir Putin .
 The film examines troubling episodes in Putin’s past, from alleged money-laundering activities and ties to organized crime to a secret personal fortune said to be in the billions .
 This documentary opens by describing the corruption that pervaded post-Soviet Russia . It was the period of privatization of the former Soviet Government’s assets .
 This film ignores the role that the United States and especially Lawrence Summers and his protege Andrei Shleifer played in planning and largely overseeing that entire process .
 Harvard's Yeltsin brought a team in to plan and oversee the process . He figured that Harvard would know how to set up capitalism . YeltsIn brought that team in, to plan, oversee and oversee.
 This FRONTLINE documentary ignores all of that history, and pretends that Yeltsin established Russia's crony-capitalism with no help or guidance from the U.S., the World Bank, and Harvard’s economists . The documentary is based on
 Putin is instead portrayed as having been, and as now being, just a continuation of Soviet-era corruption, not at all as functioning in what was, to a significant extent, a U.S.-headed transition into capitalism .
 Both Yeltsin and Putin refused to allow those bombings to be officially investigated . The possibility exists that the Russian Government itself had bombed the apartment buildings .
 The first of those incidents was done by the Obama Administration in order to enable Ukraine to be used as a base for NATO nuclear missiles aimed against Russia . The second of them was done to get the EU to hike its economic sanctions against Russia. The first was done in
 The documentary ignores these Ukrainian incidents and pretends that whereas Putin uses false-flag tactics, Obama and the United States do not .
 A series of bombings took place in Russia and in the Dagestani town of Buynaksk .
 On 4 September 1999, 62 people died in an apartment building housing families of Russian soldiers .
 Khattab initially claimed responsibility for the bombings, but later denied responsibility . The group has since denied responsibility.
Anonymous caller said he belonged to a group called the Liberation Army of Dagestan . This was followed by an anonymous caller who said he belongs to the group . The group is known as the Liberation army.
 The fact that the Chechen separatist movement was supported by the Saudis wasn’t even mentioned in the PBS documentary . It certainly is relevant to deciding whether Putin waged the second Chechen War solely in order to win election to the Presidency .
 The Soviet Union saved the corrupt division of property that took place after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Both Russian and Chechnyan, by starting a new war, cost thousands of innocent lives, both Russian andChechnyan .
 Putin, of course, had no interest in democracy . He brought to power someone from the security services .
 Boris Yeltsin's first act as president was to grant him immunity from prosecution . His first act was to granted his predecessor, Boris Yeltingin, immunity from prosecuted .
 President Barack Obama has protected from criminal prosecution the megabank chiefs who grew rich from mortgage-backed-securites frauds that brought down America’s economy in 2008 . Obama's Administration covered up much else besides.
 The pretense is instead put forth that Putin is evil in ways that today’s American Presidents are not .
 Russia’s richest man, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, is interviewed . He says all he was really trying to do was to fight against corruption and against dictatorship, and for capitalism and democracy .
 Blair from UK and Schroeder from Germany described as corrupt for having supported Putin’s policies .
 He’s been doing this with Western leaders, sometimes with charm, often with threats . He's good at persuading people and intimidating them, and he's been doing it with West leaders, he says .
 If you are on a list of possible people who might be approached to be a member of the Duma, for example, you have to pay for your seat . If you're on the list, you must pay for the seat .
 Once you're in there, then you can turn around and charge businessmen to have line items in the budget .
 Putin described as being like an unpopular Middle Eastern tyrant . Then, Putin was described as an unpopular Mideast tyrant .
 The Arab Spring surged out of Tunisia into Tahrir Square and on to Tripoli . The Arab spring surged into Tunisia and into Tripoli .
 For Putin, these mass demonstrations must have been worrying for him . The mass demonstrations overthrowing powerful dictators must be worrying .
 It was the first stage of his coming to understanding that he could never quit the post because Gadhafi could be waiting for him . It was also the first time he knew he could not leave the post .
 In 2011, when Vladimir Putin announced he would run again for Russia's presidency, the response was mass demonstrations in Moscow's streets . Police had to be put down by police.
 This documentary assumes, unquestioningly, the U.S.-propaganda line, that Russia invaded Crimea in 2014 . The economic sanctions against Russia are punishment for that, and also punishment for Russia’s supposed guilt in the shooting down of the MH17 airliner .
 We think we're trying to calm things down, but in fact, what we're doing is stoking things. And we think we’re trying to Calm things down. We’s trying to keep things calm, but what we”re doing is Stoking things
 We're giving Mr Putin the impression that we’re not to be taken seriously, and he continues to push us harder and harder, and that’s extremely dangerous, says Mr Putin . We’ve given him the impression we”re not
 In July 2014, one violent act would transform the political landscape . But then in July 2014.
 Malaysian passenger plane MH17 was shot down over eastern Ukraine by what was widely believed to have been a Russian-supplied weapon .
 I demand Russia fully cooperate with the criminal investigation into the downing of MH17 . I demand that Russia fully cooperates with the investigation into MH17.
 We’re opposing Russia aggression against Ukraine, which is a threat to the world, as we saw in the shooting down of MH17 . We're opposed to Russia aggression, we’s opposition to Ukraine, it's a threat, we say .
 Russia didn't ‘invade’ Crimea, but instead there was a coup on 22 February 2014, which installed a new Ukrainian Government . Crimeans immediately demonstrated against that coup-Government, and they held a referendum on rejoining Russia . 96% voted to rejoin Russia,
 Gallup polls taken in Crimea both before and after that referendum showed similar majorities wanting to rejoin Russia .
 Crimea rejoining Russia was not illegal, it was instead the coup that precipitated Crimea’s rejoining the country .
 This documentary doesn't even mention that coup, at all, nor the ethnic cleansing that has followed it .
 Russia's accepting Crimea back into Russia was legal, and it was also essential for Russian national security . Russia’s acceptance of Crimea into Russia is legal, but it was essential for Russia's national security.
 The coup and the Obama-demanded ethnic cleansing of Ukraine’s Donbass region were violent U.S.-backed actions to impose upon all of Ukraine a far-right, rabidly anti-Russian, Government, which authentically constitutes a national security threat against Russia .