 The European Union reacted with incredulity when Russia annexed Crimea in the winter of 2014 . The EU reacted to the annexation of Crimea in 2014 .
 The EU imposed sanctions on Russia’s financial, energy, and defense sectors in the aftermath of the annexation and escalation of the war in Donbass, Ukraine .
 The EU vowed to reduce its reliance on Russian oil and gas in the same set of reactionary moves . The EU also vowed to cut reliance on Russia in the future .
 Russian oil exports to Europe have risen to record levels in the last two years . In the past two years, Russia's oil exports have been at record levels .
 As of now, the EU imports 69% of its natural gas, 37% of which comes from Russian reserves .
 Ukraine and Belarus are already feeling the effects of increased use . In fact, some other European countries’ economies are already experiencing the effects .
 The Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia underneath the Gulf of Finland to Germany has raised concerns from some of Germany’s allies that their access to gas supplies will be even more tied to the political whims of President Putin .
 Ukraine is the ally most at risk of political overreach from Russia . However, Ukraine is also at risk from Russia, according to CNN .
 Gazprom is building pipelines specifically to circumvent and isolate Kiev, both geopolitically and economically . Gazprom, the state-owned Russian oil giant and parent company of the Nord Stream 2 project, is building the pipelines to circumvent Kiev .
 One example of this strategy is the nearly-finished TurkStream channel . One example is the almost-finished channel .
 The TurkStream pipeline is 81% complete as of early September . This Gazprom project will attempt to link Russia to Southern Europe through the Black Sea and Turkey .
 Once completed, the pipeline will form a new southern stream of oil that will bypass Ukraine entirely . The pipeline is expected to be completed in 2015 .
 On the surface, the pipeline, as well as its northern counterpart, ensures that Russian oil will continue to flow into Europe no matter the outcome of the ongoing war in Donbass .
 Gazprom understands that Russian oil is much cheaper than any other possible gas source for the EU . Demand for the oil is highly resistant to any sort of political shock, according to Gazprom .
 Nord Stream 2 and TurkStream are a part of Putin's grand strategy to weaken the legitimate Ukrainian state, expand Russia’s influence in the former Soviet bloc, and divide the EU into a handful of self-interested states .
 Russia has long focused on extending its influence in the former Soviet republic, Ukraine .
 Moscow has weaponized Ukraine’s dependence on Russian gas to exert influence and sway politicians to its side within Ukraine . Russia has also withheld oil in times of crisis in Ukraine .
 This strategy took a sizable step forward in the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution and resulting election of President Petro Poroshenko . This strategy is a step forward.
 Poroshenko signed a political and economic agreement with the EU in June of that year . He called for a referendum on possible NATO membership for Ukraine .
 Russia staged a military intervention to seize Crimea and prop up other pro-Russian separatist movements in the Donbass region . At this point, Russia staged the military intervention.
 Crimea annexed and the war in Donbass is locked in a stalemate . Russia has pivoted to punish its former ally economically by building the two new pipelines to Europe .
 Russia could effectively shut down Ukraine from the inside out by holding up the oil supply, while still meeting commitments to other European states west of Ukraine . Once they are completed, Russia, at some loss of profits, could effectively close down Ukraine .
 Former members of Soviet bloc will become more vulnerable to Russian geopolitical influence . Other former members of the Soviet bloc also will become vulnerable to Russia .
 Poland and the Baltic states faced with a choice to either deal with Russia’s political motivations in exchange for cheaper oil or diversify their sources of oil at a higher cost . Poland and Baltic states are faced with either dealing with Russia's political motivations.
 It now imports 76% of its oil from Russia, down from 96% in 2012, but is paying about $2.50 more per barrel . It is now importing 76% from Russia and paying $1.50 per barrel.
 The competitiveness of Russia’s oil leaves many countries questioning how to suppress unfair Russian influence and keep gas spending low .
 The EU is grappling with its relationship with Moscow as it grapples with Russia . Finding other alternatives to Russian gas and oil should be one of the key research fields for the EU .
 Each member state of the EU has its own opinion on the import of Russian oil at this point in time .
 If Germany decides to act without the consent of its Eastern European allies, then the rift in the EU could widen . Germany's largest power, Germany, is the largest in the world .
 The President of Russia knows that a divided Europe cannot pose a direct threat to Moscow . The President knows that he can't pose a threat to Russia .
 Russia ensures its own security without having to fight any wars . By sowing discord and making some money off of that discord, Russia ensures it doesn't have to fight wars .
 Moscow's disinformation programs prior to important elections also contribute to this overall strategy . Moscow’s disinformation program prior to the 2016 elections also contributes to this strategy .
 Europe must come to a full decision as to how it wishes to deal with Russia on the topic of oil . Europe must now decide how it wants to handle the issue .
Anything less will further endanger the EU and give Russia more influence over the former Soviet bloc . Anything less will give Russia a more influence in the EU .