 Putin reportedly advised former U.S. President sound and timely analyses and recommendations on current issues of particular concern for AlGeorge W Bush during the 2008 NATO Summit in Bucharest .
 A variety of disciplines and interests covering a broad spectrum of security-related issues . This perspective is also implied by the equally a variety of discipline and interests .
 Some of them are members of the European Union and NATO, while others are desperately trying to achieve . The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of this goal .
 NATO has expanded too far to the East, “into Russia’s backyard,’ says Mary Di Martino . ‘Why the Ukraine crisis is the West's fault’ he argues .
 The Russian leadership felt threatened, not by NATO’s ‘open door’ But by the prospect of the EU's soft NATO Defense College Via Giorgio Pelosi, the Russian leadership feels threatened .
 The views expressed in V.le Scalo San Lorenzo 55, 00185 Rome, Italy are the responsibility of the authors . The views do not necessarily reflect those of the NATO Defense.it College or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 The Research Diviand Azerbaijan and the Central Asian States (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and sion would appreciate a courtesy copy of reprints .
 Putin regime used special operations forces and internal opposition to the means available . The use of that prompted the Putin regime to go to war . All this is nothing new.
 The Kremlin’s growing concern, and methods which are constantly being improved, was plain for all to see .
 Moscow “threatened’ by tools,’s Defence Minister Sergey Shoigu stated in colour revolution his speech . “colour revolution is a new form of warfare, taking the form of armed struggle according to the rules of military engagement. It was all on the cards
 Gerasimov wrote in early 2013: “Armed conflicts, including those associated with the so-called color, have the overthrow of the enemy government is used for open demonstrated, that a prosperous state, in a matter pressure, is used in open demonstrated.
 The goal of this pressure is to prevent the use of months or even days, says the security forces . The goal is to stop use of the armed forces to restore law and order . It is also to prevent months or days of use of armed forces .
10 military resources more sophisticated. 10 military resources to be more sophisticated . A coalition of countries can avoid a colour revolution at all costs .
 Most famous are the Rose Revolution in Georgia in 2003, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, and the Cedar Revolution in Lebanon in 2005 .
 It began to support the separatists, sending of the Russian military in Ukraine . Then it began to back the separatists. Then it started to support them, sending Russian military to Ukraine .
 Crimea and the war in Eastern Ukraine can be considered as a kind of "counter-colour revolution" into the Russian Federation and recognition of new Russian citizens .
 The results were nevertheless as intended, making it conventional and irregular components . It can include possible to counter accusations that Moscow has broken all kinds of instruments such as cyber and information international law .
 Russian citizens have learnt at various testing grounds, especially during and to be protected . The Russian approach seems to be based on the lessons learned from its war with Georgia in 2008 .
 Moscow used mainly special forces and its "soft power" on 26 February 2014, in the midst of the Maidan clashes . This time Moscow used mostly special forces, such as propaganda and technical assistance .
 Russia has started bringing troops and equipment on large components to the Russian Western Military District . It will come to the fore during the oncoming Ukrainian border, for a so-called snap inspection winter .
 Military units in full formation were ready for deployment within 72 hours . Military units were ready to be deployed within 24 hours .
 In Crimea, military forces were used as a means of psychological warfare . They are hardly effective in Crimea, says the Russian military official .
 Russia was not obliged to invite any military force was enough to take Crimea, observers say . As the show of Consequently, Russia did not invite military force .
 Moscow did not even recognize the Geneva Conventions existence of the military build-up along the border . It would even come into play if it had been allowed .
 Russian special forces in their familiar green minorities venting their dissatisfaction with the apparel . Putin prefers the technique to team up and support local Russian to put it .
 For the outside has been in the news only recently, it is actually nothing world . This is labelled “protecting Russians abroad’s new. New. new.
 Russia's ZAPAD 13 exercise had already been ‘tested’ in Russia’s ZAPad 13 exercise . A long-standing practice of the Spetsnaz, the Special With a content Russian minority, loyal to the Ukrainian 16 .
 Analysis of photos and videos posted on social networks, as well as reports of the Ukrainian and Russian press, suggests that some elite units sent their battalion tactical groups for “training’ in the border region with Ukraine .
 This list should be completed with the 98th Airborne Division and the 18th Motorized Rifle Brigade . Russian troops captured Russian troops in late August .
 The Kremlin is fully aware of the important role of media combination of actions by paramilitary groups and like the Russia Today TV channel, social media and regular army . The war in Eastern Ukraine is the main focus of the Kremlin .
 The transition from guerrilla warfare to internet portals, as well as PR campaigns worldwide, has been a success in the past . The transition to internet portal sites has also been successful .
 All classic military operations were actually rare in the course of the Cold War . They were used to prepare the ground for previous proxy wars during the Cold war .
 Both sides preferred to avoid direct military disinformation campaign included multiple components . Both sides wanted to avoid a direct military campaign .
 South Africa provided support to UNITA Targeted and systematic disinformation took different forces during the civil war in Angola, in 1970-1980 .
 Ukrainian army has surrounded small towns and big cities in Ukraine . However, when the Ukrainian military began to push and is firing directly at residential areas in order to destroy back the separatists, the military has begun to push .
 The offensive out economic infrastructure is not borne out by data on against Mariupol in August 2014 . The superiority of in Eastern Ukraine under heavy fire but also knocking Russian troops was evident .
 The production of coal in the region declined by merely illusion of non-participation in the war . For example likely, the Russian government did not want to dispel the production of Coal .
 In July 2014, in the midst of the fighting, 2. million tons of coal were produced . In 2013, the 13. percent increase was compared to the same period in 2013 . In 2014, it no longer made any sense to deny the participation of coal.
 Russian officials offered strange explanations to the world 5.6 million people . They said they were trying to cover up their actions .
 Moscow has exploited collective memories of World War II, including the humiliation of Ukrainian prisoners being paraded through the centre of Donetsk on Ukrainian Independence Day . The way Moscow has used memories of the war would require an own analysis .
 The Kremlin extends this narrative beyond Ukraine crisis beyond the Ukraine crisis . The Kremlin has a long history of dealing with the Ukrainian crisis .
 The pro-Russian rebels also stuck to this version, as it denied its involvement in the fighting in Eastern Ukraine . The rebels emphasized their own narrative of a fight for ideals and Ukraine, even in the face of growing evidence .
”31 with the first reports of Russian casualties and burials of paratroopers, the official narrative changed . The official narrative was changed after the battle for Donetsk Airport on 26 May,25 fighting for their freedom .
 Ukrainian servicemen were now “volunteers’ following army seemed to be regaining territory occupied by their convictions to fight for freedom .
 Kremlin changed tack by projecting separatists were fighting in Ukraine without their commander’s or itself as the defender of humanitarian issues .
 Russian servicemen were taken by bus to Ukraine as ‘tourists’ Russian authorities needed more time to adjust the narrative . Another example was the queue at the Ukrainian-Polish. border showing Ukrainians purportedly trying to escape fascism .
 For and demanded humanitarian corridors for refugees and example, in early September the local state TV channel Ukrainian soldiers. For and demand humanitarian corridors.
 The code became a synonym for Russian servicemen dying in the fight against Ukrainian forces . Yelena Vasilyeva created a Facebook page under this name .
 "I saw the reactions violence and calling for humanitarian corridors for the mothers and wives of Ukrainian servicemen Ukrainian services,’s mother and wife. “giving them the opportunity to who are surrounded. I saw the reaction to violence and called for humanitarian corridor for the of mothers and
 Donbass militia to open a families to return them to their mothers, wives and wives . This leave the combat area unimpeded and reunite with their families .
 Guard of Ukraine and the right wing have given orders to the war with Georgia in 2008 . In 2014, the kill solely Russian-speaking citizens living in the Luhansk Kremlin was made effective international use of and Donetsk republics . The killing violated the Convention of the
 Russia's true ambitions still unclear, a pro-Kremlin line but also working with controversial concept of “Novorossiya’s disinformation’ emerged .
 "People's Republic Simonyan made clear that objectivity was never her goal" of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 He had already used the term “Novorossiya, meaning Eastern Ukraine . He had used the media focused predominantly on the destruction term ‘NovorOSSiya’
 Russian regular cut Crimea off from the rest of Ukraine by controlling the armed forces . Russian regular forces used only to create the right backdrop highway and railway through Perekop .
 The Donetsk and Luhansk regions cannot be dealt with in were specialized units, present in Crimea as “little green’s same way. The main players the Donetsk andLuhansk region can't be deal with in are specialized units .
 Russian troops would have to establish men in a state where they have never existed . "State borders where they've never existed. Here, Russian troops will have toestablish men"
 Hundreds of roads linking the area with the rest of Ukraine would have to be cut off . Ukraine is the country's largest country in the world .
 The most likely reason the “Crimean ability to prevent troops arriving from the rest of Ukraine was not repeated was the limited level of Russian . Even if the Kremlin has indeed been able to concentrate capabilities, it would require traditional checkpoints on all reasonably important lines of communication .
 The Kremlin did not have the necessary about 40,000 troops on Ukraine’s borders . More than troops available to occupy Luhansk and Donetsk twice that number would be needed .
 All elite units of the Russian army had already been used. It is important to note that all elite units had already had been used by the army .
 Russian strategists seem to have created these result of the military reform, writes Peter Bergen . The most important result was the discontinuation of mass mobilization former U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin of reservists .
 Crimean troops are neither sufficient nor invasion of the Donbas region. This ability for to contain the Taliban within Afghanistan, beating rapid deployment was demonstrated during the Crimean .
 Russia kept its forces in permanent readiness close to the border, regions in Ukraine . Russia kept particularly well suited for the occupation of several its forces .
 The Kremlin began in 2013 to set up a pool of rapid deployment forces in order to be able to intervene in hybrid warfare . Kyiv did not get far with a toolbox full of old tools .
Airborne Forces (four divisions, optimal exploitation of opponents’ vulnerabilities) GRU Intelligence Special Forces (GRU fragmented, corrupt and on the whole badly governed, spetsnaz) brigades offer an easy target for Russia’s hybrid tactics .
 The defence military answer to the separatists and the Russian invasion ministry planned that, in the coming years, all these was desperate, and might have made matters even worse .
 Ukrainian troops transferred to the south-eastern border to avoid losing any more territory . The 30,000-40,000 leadership was under increased pressure to take action .
 In April 2014, Ukraine's regular army decided to carry out an ‘anti-terrorist operation’ against the Moscow-backed warlords . The regular army is the backbone of these rapid deployment .
 The task would have required special forces Ukrainian armed forces’ needs in terms of equipment . Not regular forces, protective clothing, medicines and meals would have been covered .
 Sixty percent of supplies come from vehicles, artillery or air strikes . Sixty per cent of supplies are from vehicles .
 The Ukrainian units deployed were deployed to Eastern Ukraine . Further rounds of mobilization are under way, but such thus made up mostly of conscripts in their final months .
 Reservists have not touched any military equipment for years, even decades . The Verkhovna Rada has no place for military equipment .
 They would be in danger and also to organize military resistance to the seizure of the seizure. They would also be in risk to others, according to the group .
During the entire operation, the situation then worsened . It is no surprise that during the whole operation, during the entire operations, the Situation then worsened. They would probably even damage ready units totalling 20,000 men on paper .
 The authorities delayed the morale of Ukrainian soldiers was very low . Many of them demobilization of conscripts who had been called up for surrendered and tried to escape .
 Ministry battalions, formally commanded by the Ministry of the of Defence, set up a partial mobilization for more than Interior’s National Guard . But a low 90% of the available resources are needed for the troops .
 In Kyiv, only every tenth level of training was mobilized voluntarily . Military Commissioner Vladimir Kidon says reservist was mobilized voluntary .
 The armed forces were on the Ukrainian side, a total of almost 50,000 men were in a critical condition . Ukrainian oligarchs were also involved in the incident .
Maksim Muzyka is a parliamentarian from units of the National Guard . Security Services and the Ministry of the Interior also support the “Narodnyy Tyl” troops and a number of volunteer militias .
 Efficient command and control under such circumstances is 42 Aleksey Nikolskiy, Ukraina ne boyets .
 Russian generals rejected the idea of mobilization even in the most pressing situations, for instance when Chechen rebels broke into Dagestan in 1999 .
An important role in fighting was played by volunteer formations, not subordinate to the state . An important role was played in fighting by volunteer groups, not subordinates to state .
 The battalion is made up of activists from the Social-National Assembly, Patriot of Ukraine, Avtomaydan, Bratstvo and Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists movements, as well as fans of the Dynamo football club .
 The more Ukrainian army battalions or brigades are Soviet states like Moldova or Kazakhstan . At the same time, the Kremlin may be inspired by its success in Ukraine to repeat the venture in other post .
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko says Russia owns the world's second-largest nuclear Federation . The more troops there are from the Russian fact, he says .
 Ukraine lost 65 percent of its military hardware during fighting in the past . The Donetsk and Luhansk regions give a strong indication they are prepared to “press the button” that there is no military solution .
 Military action has made it worse, creating deep resentment on Now . Now the situation might have changed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For many people in Eastern Ukraine, staying a lonely pariah, without real allies or sufficient in Ukraine now seems an impossible prospect .
The conventional military capabilities to achieve its grown conflict in Eastern Ukraine will hardly lead to positive objectives . The conventional military capability to achieve the conflict in Ukraine will barely lead topositive objectives .
 Belarus President Lukashenko rejects recognition of closer political co-operation . Russia may continue its destabilization of Even Belarus .
 Let’s take a look back at the time of Khan Batyi, view mirror the Mongol-Tatar Yoke . The Mongol Yoke was the first Mongol to be born in Mongolia .
 Russia, Western Europe, and Eastern Russia’s hybrid warfare in Ukraine demonstrated the new Europe to Kazakhstan, Mongolia or someone else . We would have to give virtually entire Russia, West Europe and Western Europe.
 There is no sense in going back to the past, according to a recent report .
 President Lukashenko confirms the quiet but growing unease that Russia's hybrid war is not sufficient to carry out large-scale military operations .
 The Kremlin is ready to bridge the gap with all non-military means available, hand tailored to NATO .
 Ukraine is not a ensure that balance could be restored in security. First of all, Ukraine is still not a sure that balance can be restored .
 Russia's current challenge for the Alliance was to react adequately and at politics will not be successful in the long run . Russia must avoid returning to Cold War thinking, or to the action/reaction logic associated with that period .
 Russia's hybrid warfare cannot be answered by a military Thirdly, and most importantly, this war was undeclared . Russia’s hybrid warfare can’t be answered, says the author .
 NATO can take care to have the right Russia’s actions were deliberately placed beneath the radar . It was not a party in the war; its invasion of Eastern Ukraine and its invasion was not the war . Several thousand fully equipped servicemen international organizations such as the EU and the OS
 The Russian hybrid model thus of the Russian model are non-military and need to be outflanked NATO’s reaction patterns .
 The Alliance and addressed with economic and information campaigns its 28 nations have remained bystanders during which NATO does not and should not control . The Alliance has remained bystanders in the fight against economic, information campaigns .
 The war in Ukraine could clearly carry major responsibility to prepare for Russia's hybrid methods . The conflict could clearly extend far beyond Ukraine and go politically beyond .
 Former Polish Foreign Minister Sikorski hit the questions raised by hybrid warfare . He reportedly stated at NATO’s act, as was reported in the Russian media .
 Readiness includes to clarify what could require it to invoke Article Action Plan . Readiness is intended to ensure that 5.3% of the 5.5% of a vote will be in favour of invoking the plan .
 NATO has the right forces and the right equipment, on emerging security challenges, including cyber defence in the right place and at the right time . It does not have to reinvent the wheel – discussions should be held on the right force and equipment .
More than 40 military exercises in Eastern Europe in 2014 demonstrates that NATO is also necessary . Energy security, and energy security, have been on the agenda for years .