Fighting in the Donbas region continues with huge loss of life, well over 2 Russia million internally displaced persons, and massive damage to infrastructure . The fighting in eastern Ukraine continues.
 The population remained loyal to the Ukrainian state and Russian incitements to rebellion were rebuffed . On the other hand, in the neighboring Kharkiv region, the population remained loyalty to the Ukraine state .
 This paper delves deeper into the mindset of the residents of eastern Ukraine to ascertain why support for Russia differs between these two regions .
 It focuses on the identities, memories, and narratives of the main groups of residents inhabiting the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast .
 It compares the attributes of these main groups to each other to illustrate their differences . Then it compares these attributes to each others to illustrate the differences .
 It characterizes the geopolitical narratives promoted by Russia to generate support for its actions to re-construct the Russian geostrategic area of control . It shows where and with which group these emotive narratives were successful and where and why they failed .
 A reasonable assumption is that the invasion of Ukraine was exigent because of the success of the Euromaidan popular movement that resisted the pro-Russian President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych .
 Putin and the Russian elite generally saw the Euromaidan as a revolution sponsored by Western powers to wrest Ukraine away from the inherent domain of Russian influence . The Euromsaidan has come to be called the “Near Abroad’s’.
 The tight geographical nexus between those two factors meant that the change of regimes in Kyiv would not be taken lightly in these regions . The tight geographic nexus between the two factors means that the changes in Kyv would not have been taken lightly .
 A confrontation developed, curated from Russia, with a deluge of political narratives, spurring protests and seizures of public buildings .
 President Putin deemed it his obligation to protect the Russian-speaking people in Ukraine who he claimed were threatened by Euromaidan .
 Southeastern Ukraine is an arc from Odesa through Kherson, Dnipro, the Donbas, and Kharkiv . Russian speakers a majority, he said, was Soviet Russia’s “gift to Ukraine, a gift that he wanted to reclaim
 He takes up the activation of Novorossiya; focuses on localized power struggles . He also discusses the divergence of the Donbas, the function of filibusters from Russia, the amplification of the amplification, and then the abandoning of Novarossiya and “saving of the don
 The Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic became Russia's protectorates, maintaining a war of attrition with Ukraine that continues to this writing .
 Toal: Crimea had a powerful affective appeal to ordinary Russians . Toal also summarized why the takeover of Crimea was easy compared to eastern Ukraine . Crimea was a storied sacred place in Russian history .
 As a peninsula, it was geographically separate and distinct – by virtue of its ethnic Russian majority – from other parts of Ukraine . The peninsula was located in Ukraine's eastern part .
 Russian forces deployed there already. It was also home to strategic Russian military bases with Russian forces there already .
 Ukrainian forces on the peninsula were not ready and ordered not to fight . Finally, the Ukrainian forces were not prepared to fight, they were ordered to stop .
 By contrast, southeastern Ukraine was a much larger space that had no uniformly clear physical dividing line from the rest of Ukraine .
 It had many distinctive places forged by tsarist and Soviet power, but no oblasts where ethnic Russians were a majority .
 As a result, it was a more challenging terrain for the operationalization of an assisted secessionist project .
 The prevalence of regional over national identity rather than the use of Russian language influenced how receptive the population was to the Kremlin’s affective geopolitical discourse .
 The Donbas will be tested by comparing the Donbas with the neighboring Kharkiv Oblast . In both cases, Russian speakers prevailed but identities differed .
 Loyalty to Ukraine could affect the number of supporters, views of local decision-makers and police, and the outcome of the rebellion .
 As will be seen, national or regional identities of groups of people, shaped by their collective memories and narratives, was decisive in mobilizing people .
In order to operationalize this study, a conceptual framework is provided . In order to operate, the study will need to be operationalized .
 NATO's eastward expansion to shore up Ukraine’s independence. The external normative power of the U.S. as manifested in NATO's expansion . The United States is trying to contain any Russian attempts to assert control over Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian power elite that set Ukraine’s geopolitical culture was intrinsically Soviet .
After Ukrainian independence, presidents Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid. Kuchma converged on cautious Ukrainian nation-building .
 First, both identified Russia as the ‘other’ against whom the inhabitants of Ukraine might define themselves as Ukrainian . Second, both identify Russia as a “Other’s” against whom Ukraine inhabitants may define themselves .
 Second, both promoted a sense of nationhood based on inclusive criteria of citizenship . Both promoted the idea of citizenship based on citizenship .
 His decision to not sign an association agreement with the EU in November 2013 triggered the Euromaidan uprising . It triggered the anti-Euromaidans and pro-Russian protesters in Crimea and southeastern Ukraine .
 economic factors played an important role in regional turmoil . Economic factors played a key role in the region's economic turmoil .
 The use of the Russian language and preference for Russian media, particularly in Crimea and southeastern Ukraine, would make the population more receptive to the Russian discourse, says the author .
 The “antidote,’s Ukrainian national consciousness, coexisted and slowly grew in southeastern Ukraine, in particular among the younger generation . The ‘antidotes’ coexist and slowly grow in the southeastern Ukraine .
 Definitions of languages and dialects are often key discursive battlefields in national and regional identity narratives and identities of resistance .
 National and regional narratives are very powerful tools in the formation of identity because of their emotive appeal . National and Regional narratives are a powerful tool in the form of identity .
National or regional identity formation is a process that involves inputs into the human consciousness and may produce nested identities . As Paasi reminds us, national or regional identities are often nested identities.
 Social institutions such as culture, media, and administration are crucial in these processes . Culture, media and administration is crucial in this process .
History is a specific form of narrative that develops social identity, cohesion, and purpose . History is a special form of narratives that develop social identity and cohesion . The history of the world is a particular form of history that develops a particular purpose .
 It plays a major role in the formation of national, ethnic, religious, and regional identities . It also plays a key role in forming a regional identity .
 Kappeler described how the legacies of the imperial past and competing memories play out today geopolitically between Ukraine and Russia .
Since 1995, Ukrainian history textbooks portrayed Russia as an oppressive and aggressive enemy . Karina Korostelina demonstrated that in Ukraine, since 1995, history textbooks for students not only differentiated Russia from Ukraine, but also portrayed it as an oppressor .
 She cautioned that perceptions complicate international relations between Russia and Ukraine and contribute to ethnic tensions within Ukraine .
 Rodgers indicated that certain regions corrected for this stance by having their own regional histories emphasizing friendly relations with Russians .
 Political narrative is also a powerful tool for motivating political action . Political narrative can also be used to motivate political action, says CNN.com .
Public political narratives are artificial constructs, making selective use of different EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY and ECONOMICS . Public political narratives can be used to create a desirable account .
 In the analysis of public political narratives, these elements – or narrative parts – are identified and interrogated .
 Applying the narrative analysis approach to Russia’s stance on Ukraine in 2014 facilitates clarification of those elements that particularly motivate Russian actions .
 National and regional identity in Ukraine can be tested by asking about one’s territorial identity .
 The perception of homeland varies considerably among residents of Ukraine . Residents identify with former USSR through contemporary Ukraine to its specific regions .
 38% identified themselves most of all with Ukraine . 25% did so with the USSR, 21% with the “region where I live,” 11% with “ region where I was born,’ and 2% with Russia .
In western and central Ukraine the national identity of being Ukrainian was strongly developed . In southern and eastern Ukraine, this was not the case . The national identity is strongly developed in the south and eastern .
 A large influx of Russians and others into industrial cities in the late nineteenth–early twentieth centuries was conducive to the emergence of a Russian-speaking proletarian culture in those regions .
Political scientists Michael Keating and Zimmermann-Steinhart suggested strong regional identities . Places or areas perceived to be different, as the social psychologists Moles and Rohmer postulated, or have a historic resonance .
In Crimea and the Donbas, permanent residents identified themselves through interaction with natural features, historic, political, and socioeconomic attributes .
 Territorial-political identity also varies by regions and over time in conjunction with political narratives .
 In neighboring Kharkiv Oblast, residents identified themselves as less with the USSR and their region in 1994 than the Donbas residents in 1994 . Residents identified themselves even less with Russia and the USSR than in 1994.
 A year later their identification with the USSR or with their region declined to 19% and 13% . A year after they were identified, their identification was at 13% and 19% .
 In the Donbas, much more so than in Kharkiv Oblast, the natural environments, populations, and socio-economic conditions differed from adjacent parts of Ukraine . In the donbas, the environment, population, and economic conditions differed.
 The population consisted of several different groups with distinctive collective memories . As will be discussed below, the population will also be discussed .
 Leaders within those groups developed competing narratives within their region . One group tended to support loyalty to Kyiv, another threatened separatism with a broader Russian identity .
 The deciding factor in taking sides is dependent on the feeling of identity, political conviction, and motivation for a cause .
 For Putin, these would be crucial in deciding whether or not to intervene in different regions of Ukraine . Putin would also be crucial to deciding whether to intervene.
 The timing was also crucial, inasmuch as the common Soviet identity since the demise of the Soviet Union was increasingly replaced by a Ukrainian civic identity .
 The issues of regional identity, developed through memories and narratives, will now be addressed for the Donbas oblasts . Kharkiv Oblast will be addressed by comparison, by comparison. The issues will now include ethnic, linguistic, historic, and socioeconomic variables .
 First, relevant geographic, demographic, and socioeconomic information will be presented to identify major groups in each region .
 Each group’s collective memories and narratives will be assessed. Second, each group's collective memories are assessed .
Social identities and political preferences will be examined by some surveys . Third, their social identities will be determined by some survey results .
 The Russian government is trying to re-construct this geostrategic area for Russian control . It is also trying to build on existing narratives on existing ones in the area .
Donbas The Donbas forms a belt of industrial cities and coal-mining towns that straddle Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 This urban cluster evolved in the late nineteenth and much of the twentieth century . It forms the demographic and economic nucleus of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . It was formed in the early nineteenth and early twentieth century.
 Donetsk and Luhansk are administrative centers that also serve as foci for the Donbas identity . Donetsk is Donetsk's two largest cities, Donetsk andLuhansk, are administrative center for Donbas .
 The oblasts that include the Donbas are not uniform or historically. But they are not geographically or historically . The Donbas have been known for their distinctive architecture and architecture .
 The northern half of Luhansk Oblast is predominantly rural and was settled by Ukrainian Cossacks and peasants in the seventeenth century .
 The southern part of Donetsk Oblast is also mainly rural EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY and ECONOMICS 35 . It was sparsely settled until colonization in the eighteenth century .
 The coal mines and factories that opened in the nineteenth century did not attract local peasantry . Instead drew workers from central Russia .
 It is based on a sense of belonging to a community forged through the industrialization of the Donbas since the 1860s . The Donbas are based on the community's history of industrialization .
 The Donbas identity was formed in the 1930s when official propaganda imagined the Donbas as a leading industrial-proletarian region .
During the Soviet period, managers of all-Union enterprises and strategic institutions were directly responsible to Moscow .
After Ukraine's independence, the Donbas elites found it difficult to reorient their respect and loyalty from Moscow to Kyiv .
 Regional elites did this by drawing on collective memories and developing narratives to generate loyalty of their subordinates and support for political action .
 The oligarchs who gained control of the enterprises developed a strong patron-client relationship with workers reminiscent of feudalism .
 Population Russian-speaking Ukrainians formed the majority in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . The majority of Ukrainians were in Donetsk.
 There were many mixed Russian-Ukrainian families, particularly in the cities of Moscow .
 By contrast, there was a major difference between urban and rural populations in terms of ethnic make-up .
 Linguistic Russification of Ukrainians was particularly strong in urban areas . The majority considered their mother tongue to be Russian .
 Data on language of instruction in schools allow us to gain some insights into ethno-linguistic trends since 2001 census .
 By 2013–2014, the population of Ukrainian population had exceeded the share of the population whose mother tongue was Ukrainian . By 2013-2014 it probably exceeded the population's share of Ukrainian .
 Some Russian-speaking parents were willing to send their children to schools with Ukrainian language of instruction . Others were angered by this change, making it a wedge issue during the Ukrainian presidential elections of 2010 .
 The victory of Yanukovych put a stop to this trend and even reversed it slightly, leaving the Russian language of instruction as the majority in the secondary schools of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
Mother tongue of Ukrainians in Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv oblasts in 2001 . Mother tongue of Ukrainian in Donetsk and Luhans in Donetsk .
Change in the share of secondary school students taught in Ukrainian and Russian in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, in percent .
 It was prevalent in the belt of industrial cities that form the Donbas core . It was used to the advantage of theDonbas elite .
 A competing “Ukrainian Donbas’ identity narrative was inspired by local Ukrainian dissidents . It was developed by formerly suppressed scholars, and promoted by Ukrainian activists and some teachers .
 It had supporters in the region’s centers of education and in the rural areas . It has also had supporters.
 It competed as an alternate historical memory aligned with Ukraine proper . It competed in an alternate history of Ukraine proper.
 The Novorossiya geopolitical narrative relating to the idea of a Russian Imperial region was infused from Russia . The idea of an Imperial region in Russia was infused by Russia .
 Novorossiya, formally comprising DNR and LNR, failed to gain traction in southeastern Ukraine . Advocates of Ukrainian Donbas have for the most part had to seek safety outside the DNR.
 By the 1970s, coal production had peaked and began to decline . By the 1980s, it had peaked, but it had begun to decline.
 In the post-Soviet 1990s, the region became a rustbelt, dependent on subsidies . In the 1990s the reality changed as the region become a rust belt, dependent upon subsidies .
Living in a heavily polluted environment, workers began to experience more social and health issues . Living in a heavy polluted environment.
 Kyiv's economy has declined in recent years . The government has promised to reinvigorate the economy . The country's economy is in decline .
Ukrainian officials say Ukrainian schooling is forced Ukrainization . They resented the push for Ukrainian schooling .
 In return, most Donbas voters supported Yanukovych as their native son who would restore the Donbas to its former glory .
 The second aspect of the Soviet Donbas narrative is the emphasis on its multinational character, the Russian language as the mode of communication, and the historic presence of ethnic Russians in the region .
 History teachers in Luhansk were not happy with the new official history books from Kyiv .
Cleavage tactics were used to generate emotional response and maximize voter turnout . Cleavage tactics used to create emotional responses and maximize turnout .
 economic factors played an important role in the political campaigns . Economic factors played a key role in election campaigns .
Workers dependent on employment in industries exporting to Russia were convinced their jobs were at stake . Workers dependent on export jobs were convinced they were at risk .
 After Euromaidan there were economic factors that were conducive to the recruitment of rebels . After Eurmaidan, there wereEconomic factors that could be conducive to rebels' recruitment .
 Zhukov demonstrated the loss of jobs in machine-building industries with exports to Russia was the leading factor in explaining the level of rebel activity in the Donbas .
 Kyiv government stopped paying salaries of state-owned mines under rebel control . Many miners joined the DNR and LNR fighters to earn some money .
 The Ukrainian Donbas narrative drew on the Zaporozhian Cossack heritage of its easternmost territory . The Kalmius Palanka is the Kalmian Palanka .
 The Donbas are proud of their local Ukrainian cultural and political achievers . Their adherents see the Donbas as an integral part of Ukraine .
 Displaced from the DNR and LNR, some of them are fighting for its liberation . Some of them have been fighting for the liberation of the country .
 Historically, Novorossiya was an Imperial Russian marchland facing the Ottoman Empire . Historically, it was a Russian marchlands facing the Empire .
 Kharkiv Oblast also borders the Russian Federation . Located adjacent to the Donbas, Kharkv Oblast is located in the Russian Republic .
 Russian intervention of March 2014 did not succeed in the city of Kharkiv or its surrounding areas . Yet the Russian intervention in March 2014 didn't succeed.
There was a substantial difference in the population and the main identity narrative in Kharkiv Oblast that produced a different outcome .
 Kharkiv has a large agricultural countryside served by a number of outlying cities . It is dominated by the metropolis of Kharkov and its cluster of towns and satellite cities .
 Kharkiv's story began with the seventeenth century Ukrainian colonization of Muscovy’s steppe frontier . Like the Donbas, Kharkov's story begins with Ukrainian colonization.
 The Ukrainian Cossacks were invited to serve on the Belgorod defense line and beyond with freehold privileges and the retention of their traditional regimental organization . As renowned warriors.
 Sloboda Ukraine emerged as a refuge for Ukrainian Cossacks and peasants from war with Poland . Kharkiv became its central fortified town .
 The legal status of the Cossack regiments provided the basis for the formation of their distinct “Sloboda Ukraine’s regional identity . The dominant identity in the region to this day.
 The ethnic composition of Kharkiv Oblast was significantly different from that of the Donbas . Russian language was dominant, but the population was much more diverse .
Kharkiv Oblast Ukrainians formed clear majorities in both urban and rural areas . KharkivOblast Ukrainians were more than half of the Ukrainian population .
 The difference in linguistic Russification is the difference in the degree of linguisticRussification . The difference is more telling.
 The language of instruction in secondary schools of Kharkiv Oblast also differed from that of the Donbas .
 Ukrainian language of instruction made small gains in the Donbas . In Kharkiv Oblast it surpassed the share of students taught in Russian .
Ukrainian language of instruction in Donbas was increased to match the share of Ukrainian speakers in the Donbas . In Kharkiv Oblast this objective was attained with relative ease .
 There are three competing narratives in Kharkiv Oblast . The Kharksiv narratives are similar to those of the Donbas .
 The main overarching narrative, the “Sloboda Ukraine,’ is inclusive and regional in nature, says the author . The "Slobodia Ukraine" is inclusive, regional and inclusive in nature .
 Change in the share of secondary school students taught in Ukrainian and Russian in Kharkiv Oblast, in percent .
 41 Soviet Union and tends to be pro-Russian, but not as much as the Soviet Donbas narrative .
 Ukrainian-Russian cooperation in colonization, defense, and regional development . Its leitmotif is Ukrainian- Russian cooperation in defense, colonization and defense .
 This narrative accepts the historic Ukrainian Cossack colonization of the Muscovite steppe frontier . This narrative accepted the historic Ukraine Cossacks' colonization.
 The Ukrainian Cossacks, together with the Russian streltsy, fended off the Crimean Tatar raids . It notes that the Ukrainian COSSacks, along with the Russians, fend off the raids .
 It credits both Ukrainians and Russians with the transformation of the land and the development of cities, culture, science, and industry that followed .
 The Sloboda Ukraine narrative is an outreach policy for cross-border cooperation and the construction of regional identity . They adopted the Slobodia Ukraine narrative as an outreachpolicy for cross border cooperation .
 Russia-Ukraine border projects proved to be different on either side of the border . The objectives and interpretations of the regional projects were different .
 The Euromaidan and its aftermath brought this cross-border effort to a stop, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The Euromsaidan, its aftermath have brought thisCross-border efforts to a halt .
 Those nostalgic for the Soviet Union, notably the remaining Communists, Soviet war veterans, and members of small pro-Russia organizations, remember Kharkiv as part of the Soviet heartland .
 In keeping with the Soviet narrative, it is silent on the Holocaust, denies the Holodomor, and denounces Ukrainian nationalism .
 Supporters of the Ukrainian Kharkiv narrative include some university faculty, students, human rights groups, and like-minded civic organizations .
 42 I STEBELSKY points to Ukrainian cultural and political actors in the nineteenth–twentieth century . It highlights the cultural Ukrainian revival of the 1920s in Kharkiv .
 It laments the historic injustices committed by Imperial Russia and the Soviet Union . It also laments  the imposition of serfdom, the Russification of the Ukrainian society, the Soviet collectivization of peasantry .
 Political implications of narratives in Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast Narratives propagated in the Donbas. Narratives shaped attitudes of the people regarding Euromaidan and the governance of Ukraine .
 Some questions would shed light on the political preferences of residents in the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast .
 Regional identity, as we have seen, was supported by dominant narratives in the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast . Korostelina had the highest salience in Ukraine .
 The second-most common choice was “federal’s, with this choice ranging from the highest of 42% in Luhansk, 38% in Donetsk, to 32% in Kharkiv oblasts, reflecting regional narratives .
 lowest support for federalism was in Kherson Oblast . By comparison, only 7% of support for the federalism in the state .
 This choice ranged from 33% in Kherson to 23% in Kharkiv to 12% in Luhansk and 11% in Donetsk oblasts . This choice range from 33%, to 23%, in Kharksiv and 11%, in Donetsk .
 Kudelia assessed the separatist movement in the Donbas that emerged in response to the violent regime change in Kyiv .
 Donbas respondents to the KIIS survey had the most negative opinion of the Euromaidan . He noted that the Donbas people had a most negative view of the EU .
 KIIS survey provides other insights into the attitudes of respondents by oblasts .
 It demonstrates the relationship between the human geography of the regions, their prevalent narratives, and political attitudes . It also demonstrates the relationships between the regions and the political landscape .
 The armed capture of administrative buildings was more or less opposed by 72% in Donetsk and 58% in Luhansk oblasts . 72% of Donetsk's administrative buildings were captured by armed forces .
Only 18% in Donetsk Oblast and 24% in Luhansk Oblast more or less supported such actions . Only 18% of Donetsk's residents support such actions.
 Those who opposed Euromaidan and questioned the legitimacy of the provisional government did not necessarily desire to separate from Ukraine and join Russia .
 Only 30% in Luhansk Oblast and 28% in Donetsk Oblast were clearly or somewhat in favor of secession . Kharkiv Oblast came in third with only 16% in support, while Kharkov Oblast was in third .
 For Russian speakers who don't speak Ukrainian, the promotion of Ukrainian language was a major grievance . Ukrainian language is a major problem for Russian speakers .
 3–4% of Ukrainian speakers thought their rights were constrained by Russian speakers . 40% of Russian speakers in Donetsk Oblast, 30% in Luhansk Oblast and 25% in Kharkiv Oblast thought they were constrained .
 In the event of an incursion of Russian troops into southeastern Ukraine, the largest share of respondents would stay at home and not interfere . The largest share would stay in the country, according to the survey .
 Two-thirds of Donetsk Oblast residents wanted to remain in Ukraine. It confirmed that two-thirds wanted to stay in Ukraine . It confirmed the decision to move to Ukraine .
 The majority in Donetsk Oblast wanted more prerogatives of self-administration, says the poll . The largest number of people wanted to stay in Ukraine, the poll says .
 Susceptibility to political narratives pitching geopolitical discourses could be gaged by how much listeners trusted Russian and Ukrainian mass media .
 This shift also occurred, more or less, in all the regions of Ukraine, but in different ways . This shift occurred in Ukraine.
 In Kharkiv, as in central and western Ukraine, the shift was even more dramatic . The shift was also more dramatic in central Ukraine .
 Residents of southern and eastern Ukraine saw Novorossiya for what it was – an Imperial Russian political narrative . Residents of south and east Ukraine saw it as a political narrative.
 Even fewer among ethnic Ukrainians and ethnic Russians considered it a basis for separatism .
 Respondents in Odesa Oblast came second, with 45% choosing Russian technology and 31% self-expression . Respondents also chose Russian technology.
 The remainder of respondents in those oblasts chose either don’t know or refused to answer .
 It had the highest share of urban population and the highest proportion of Russian-speaking Ukrainians . It also had the most share of ethnic Russians, and the most proportion of Russians .
 Its Russian-speaking residents also manifested the strongest resistance to the introduction of Ukrainian in schools . Its residents also showed strong resistance to Ukrainian introduction in schools.
 Residents of the Donbas were divided between two narratives . The dominant Soviet Donbas narrative and the opposing but growing Ukrainian Donbas narratives were seen .
 With the eruption of the anti-Euromaidan rebellion in the Donbas, this division led to protests and counter-protests by both groups . With the outbreak of the uprising, both groups were involved in counter- Protests .
 The more aggressive stance of the first group, supported by disgruntled former Yanukovych servicemen and led by Russian mercenaries, culminated in their victory in major cities against the supporters of a Ukrainian Donbas narrative . The first group was supported by former former servicemen.
 Novorossiya was to have superseded the Soviet Donbas and other regional narratives of southeastern Ukraine to form a pro-Russian Ukraine .
 Russia tried to unify its client rebel entities of the DNR and the LNR into a union called “Novorossiya’s” The union is a springboard for expansion beyond the Donbas .
 The Novorossiya concept is being imparted as an overarching concept in the DNR and the LNR through Russian affective geopolitics of sustained war, military service, and Russian-like iconography .
 The two existing separatist entities have yet to merge or attract any adherents in the other areas of the former Imperial Novorossiya . But the utility of the NovorOSSiya narrative has been seriously limited, as even the existing separatist entity has yet to merged or attract adherents .
 The competing narratives approach provides a good understanding of the interplay between leading actors and their subject populations . The competition is a good way to understand the inter play between actors and subject populations.
 It offers an appreciation of the relative strengths and weaknesses of pre-existing national and regional narratives, and their internalization by targeted populations . It also offers a appreciation of their uses in geopolitics for making and unmaking identities and regions .
 The narrative analysis and appreciation of associated social and demographic structures also explain the greater openness of the Donbas population to Russian intervention than that of Kharkiv Oblast .
 In Kharkiv Oblast, by contrast, the elites who supported the dominant Sloboda Ukraine narrative were neutral with regard to Ukrainization . In Kharksiv Ob last, the elite were neutral in regard to Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian Kharkiv supporters are opposed to Russian intervention . They balanced the two ideologically competing Soviet/pro-Russian and Ukrainian /pro-European narratives .
 The narratives-based analysis, combined with the extensive survey research conducted in southeastern Ukraine, also points to the daunting task Kyiv faces in holding together the country's disparate regions .
 After the revolution, the Bolsheviks added large sections of the historical South of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine .
 Potyomkin and Catherine the Great won a series of well-known wars . They were won by Potymkin andatherine the Great in a series.
 The center of that territory was Novorossiysk, so the region is called Novorosiya . The region is known as NovorOSSiya .
 It emerged in opposition three days after the government of Ukraine signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk . The treaty recognized the borders of the Ukrainian People's Republic that would include those industrial areas .
 Donetsk–Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic was disbanded on March 20 . The newly formed Ukrainian Soviet Republic, with its capital in Kharkiv, replaced it .
 The Congress of Ukrainian Intelligentsia, the Memorial, the Prosvita 5. The Association of the Victims of Political Repressions and the Association of Victims of political Repression are among the group's most prominent members .
 Ukrainian Helsinki Association was formed in 1989 and headed by Professor Petro Cheremsky . It was to instill pride in Ukrainian heritage .
 A secret organization by the same name existed in Kharkiv since 1926 . It was purged with a show trial in 1930, then purged.
 In the rest of the southeastern Ukraine this opinion ranged from 24% in Mykolaiv to 43% in Kharkiv . In the other parts of the country, opinion ranges from 24%, to 43%, in the rest.
 53% of respondents in Donetsk and 50% in Luhansk oblasts believed the acting president and new government were illegitimate . 53% in Donetsk believed the new government was illegitimate .
 Disclosure statement no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author . The author says no potential conflicts of interest were reported .
 Freedom and Terror in the Donbas — A Ukrainian-Russian Borderland, 1870s-1990s. The Donbas is a Ukrainian- Russian Borderland .
17.17. 17.17 . 17. 17 . 17 . 18 . 17%. 17 . 9. 17%.