 A call for a return to Yalta-Potsdam diplomacy has become for the Russians . A slogan for restoring Russia's lost great power status and equality with the United States.
 Russia intends to be accepted again as a great power by bringing the other former Soviet republics back under its control . Russia would have a veto, to be the principal instruments for governing European affairs .
 In Russia, we are traversing a long, difficult, and dangerous period with no easy solutions . In our relations with Russia, our relations are difficult and dangerous, says Russian diplomat .
 Ukraine must continue to withstand a long war of attrition. Under the circumstances, we must maintain robust sanctions against Russia, NATO, and enable Ukraine to withstand the war .
 He noted the continuity between the first two Soviet objectives and Czarist aims in the First World War . He noted that the first Soviet objectives were similar to that of the first World War.
 The Soviet Union had to accept that the third goal, a preponderant voice in the organization of the rest of Europe, was not attainable . The U.S. would not be withdrawing from the continent .
 The Conference was to decide on the structure of the administration of Germany and Austria . The task was to determine the distribution of German reparations and the location of Poland's boundaries .
 The Potsdam Conference initiated the division of the continent . In an atmosphere of increasing suspicion and acrimony, the conference began .
 U.S. Secretary of State, James Byrnes, proposed to divide Germany into two economic units . Stalin accepted, and Stalin accepted .
 Stalin suggested that the German liquid assets should be split between the parties along a line running from the Adriatic to the Baltic, the border of the zone of nascent Soviet control .
 The three summits established a basis for dealing with major international issues during the Cold War . The Soviet Union negotiated on an equal standing with the West, and especially the United States .
 The Russians complain that since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia is no longer treated as an equal . The U.S. acts unilaterally .
 Yalta-Potsdam has become a symbol for Russia's lost great power status and equality with the U.S. At least since the return to power of President Putin in 2012, it has become for the Russians .
 The aim of current Russian policy is to recover its great power status . The aim is to bring the other former Soviet republics back under effective Russian control .
 The continuity between these goals and the Soviet Union’s wartime aims, may not be coincidental .
 The Eurasian Economic Union replaced the Customs Union on 1 January 2015 . The chief instrument for establishing Russian dominance is the Eurasian economic Union .
 Ukrainian membership in the EEU was essential to the success of the organization . For Russia, Ukrainian membership was essential for its success in the EU .
 The overthrow of President Yanukovych of Ukraine in February 2014 launched President Putin on his campaign to subjugate Ukraine . Ukraine's new government to sign the EU Association Agreement and apply for membership in NATO .
 Russia launched the secessionist movement in Donetsk-Luhansk for the purpose of giving Moscow-controlled areas a veto over the domestic and foreign policies of the central government .
 The current security architecture was spelled out by President Medvedev in 2008 .
 Russia did not accept the primacy of the U.S. in the international system . Russia has not accepted the primancy of the United States in the world .
The Union would co-ordinate energy, military, political, and strategic matters . The Union would be co-ordinated with energy and military, military and political matters .
 In October 2014 Foreign Minister Lavrov stated that this agreement would be based on a system of indivisible security . No country would strengthen its security at the expense of others .
 Such provisions could prevent the EU from acting independent of Moscow in important areas . Such provisions would also prevent the European Union from acting independently of Moscow .
 East European countries would be free to decide whether or not they wished to join the Eurasian Economic Union . For several reasons, the West has largely ignored the Russian proposal, although the EU has offered to negotiate free trade .
 The present lull in the fighting in the Donbas does not mean a change in Russian policy, says Russian official .
 Putin has evidently not given up his aim of rendering Ukraine ungovernable so as to keep it out of NATO and the EU . He wants to bring it into the Eurasian Economic Union .
Medvedev proposals could invite Russian moves against Baltic States and Moldova . If the West accepts the Medvedev proposal, a Western abandonment of Ukraine could invite Russia's moves against the Baltic States, Moldova.
 Western acceptance of Medvedev proposals can lead to the unravelling of NATO, hamstringing the EU and excluding North America from Europe .