 The Legal Aspects of Crimea’s Independence Referendum of 2014 . With the Subsequent Annexation of the Peninsula by Russia by Russia .
 Crimeans, Ukraine, Russia, Crimea’s Tatar minority, and the international community, are among those involved .
 Russia’s annexation of the peninsula can be considered legal under international law . It presents a host of legal opinions on the issue, trying to answer whether Russia's annexation is legal .
 Virtually all Western analysts declare the 2014 referendum illegal under international law . Most admit that there is no legal precedent to support or overturn such a verdict .
 Crimea's independence from Ukraine was no more or no less legal than Ukraine’s own independence from the Soviet Union twenty-three years prior . This admission brings us to the ultimate answer – without a clear legal precedent in international law .
Gunmen seized the parliament building of Crimea in Simferopol, the capital of the then still autonomous republic of Ukraine, and raised a Russian flag .
 A series of events culminating in the still-simmering war in the East of the country began in Ukraine . Russia's invasion and annexation of this Ukrainian territory by Russia led to a series of incidents .
In this thesis, I examine the volatile history of the Crimean peninsula, the numerous transfers of power it has experienced, the similar precedents of territorial changes around the world . Whether the annexation of Crimea by Russia truly represented the will of the Crimea population, and whether such annexation can be legal
 “land transfers’ do in fact have a precedent in recent history and they may be legal in international norms. My hypothesis is that such ‘land transfer’s’ are legal in the world .
 Many land-grab in history has been carried out “in the name of the people’s people,” and this particular transfer does not easily pass the test of legality under any norms .
 In order to comprehend the legality of what has transpired in Crimea, we must examine the legal history of events that led to the Russian takeover .
 During the two decades prior to 2014, the peninsula has experienced an arduous struggle for a degree of autonomy from Ukraine .
 Several legal precedents have shed light on 1 political opinions of the Crimean population .
 The history surrounding the sovereignty status of this region indicates that the 2 eruption of this conflict should not have been a surprise to anyone who has studied the motivations of the people living there . I find that the history surrounding this region is not surprising .
 Crimea has been a “pot ready to boil’1 and “a political tinderbox’2 for quite some time now, ever since Ukraine became independent, to be exact . In fact, Crimea, as a prescient analysis suggested, has been
 History is replete with examples of both successes and failures of regions trying to gain independence either diplomatically or, more often than not, by force .
 There have been examples of countries breaking up without much violence . On the other hand, there have been other examples of nations breaking up .
For example, Czechoslovakia broke in two through a “Velvet Divorce’s” in 1993 without conflict . For example, the country broke in in 1993 with no conflict .
 Norway and Sweden parted ways in 1905 without any violence, albeit after a period of saber-rattling on both sides . Sweden and Norway parted way in 1905, but there was no violence .
 The purpose of this thesis is to examine the legal aspects of the Crimean Peninsula’s annexation by Russia in March of 2014 . Russia annexed the Crimea in March 2014 .
 Ukrainian conflict is still ongoing in Ukraine . It may be useful to examine both sides of the issue in order to understand the motivations of participants .
 The Crimean Peninsula has an area of 10,000 square miles (roughly the size of the state of Massachusetts) It occupies a commanding position on the Black Sea .
 Russia came to possession of the peninsula in 1783, after a series of wars with the Ottoman Empire . The Crimean Khanate had heretofore been a nominal vassal .
 The naval base of Sevastopol was established on the southwestern shore of Crimea . The Russian naval base was to be fought over in several wars since then .
 Russians have invested too much blood and history to give it up easily. This city, and naval base within it, has held a particularly sensitive significance to the Russians .
Under the Russian rule in the ninteenth century, a steady stream of new settlers arrived on the peninsula . They slowly displaced the Tatar population .
 Crimea was one of the last strongholds of the anti-Bolshevik forces before they were defeated in 1920 . In the Russian Civil War of 1917-1920, Crimea was the last stronghold of the Anti-Bolshevik forces .
 World War Two saw some of the bloodiest battles on the Eastern Front taking place in 5 Crimea .
 Sevastopol endured a bloody siege in 1941-1942, during which the city was virtually destroyed . The city was almost destroyed by the siege .
Following liberation of the peninsula in 1944, the Soviet government accused the Tatar population of having collaborated with the Nazis, and deported the entire population to Central Asia .
 The Crimean Autonomous Republic existed until 1945, when its status was changed to a mere oblast . It was known as the Crimean Aut autonomous Republic .
 These two identities are the key to understanding the divide between the East and the West of the country .
 Both sides of the conflict are right in their own way (or at least have a valid point) But that is not the real source of tension .
 Both sides claim to be “true’s Ukrainians, with Westerners often calling the eastern half of Ukraine “Russian’ – which is simplistic and incorrect . Both sides say they are ‘true” Ukrainians, while Westerners call eastern half
 Easterners are tied to Russia by centuries of common history and identity, but they are not ‘Russians’ They are Russian-speaking Ukrainians with historic ties to Moscow .
 By 2001, ethnic Russians comprised only 17.3% of Ukraine’s population, according to the Ukrainian Census . A significant proportion of those resided in Crimea, that percentage has dwindled with the separation of the peninsula .
 Ukrainian is widely spoken, and architecture is often Baroque . In the West, Greek Catholic churches predominate, Ukrainian is generally spoken .
 In the east, Russian Orthodoxy dominates religious life, onion-domed churches and log huts . Most people speak either Russian or Ukrainian dialects similar to Russian .
 An oft-quoted perception in the West of the country is that the East is so proRussian because it has been settled by ethnic Russians under Imperial Russian .
 The Eastern, or Left-Bank, Ukraine as it was historically known as the country’s biggest river, Dnieper, which flows south, roughly divides the land along linguistic and political preferences . The Eastern river began drifting into the Muscovite orbit in the mid-
 The transfer of Crimea to Ukraine was to commemorate the three hundredth anniversary of the union of the core Ukrainian land with Russia . Nikita Khrushchev arranged the transfer of the peninsula from the Russian Federation to Ukraine .
 Both were part of the Soviet Union at the time, but it meant little, in practical terms . Since both were in the USSR, it means little.
 For average Crimeans, nothing changed, apart from Ukrainian becoming mandatory in the school curriculum overnight . For average crimeans,nothing changed, except for Ukrainian.
 The transfer was obviously not done with the acquiescence of Crimea’s population, this being the Soviet Union, run as a one-party dictatorship .
 Putin pointed out in March of 2014, that the people who lived there did not factor much into this act .
 The city had a republican subordination, not regional, and was not transferred together with the Crimean region . The city was not a part of the Crimea region of Ukraine and not part of Ukraine .
 The decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of Russia from October 29, 1948 separated Sevastopol in a single administrative center and classified it as a city of republican subordination .
 In reality, the city and the naval base within it remained what was called a “closed city’s” The Ministry of Defense administered the city .
 The regional government in Simferopol did not fall under the authority of Ukraine's communist leadership in Kiev .
 The transfer of the peninsula created several problems that would come to the fore later on .
Military base with strictly controlled territory and population, subject more to the command of the navy than civilian authorities . It was what they called a ‘closed city’
 The question of whether it fell under the authority of Ukraine’s Soviet government was left in a limbo . Because it did not fall under the power of the regional government, the question is still unanswered .
Several legal events stand out that shaped the political arena for the current crisis . Between the end of the Soviet rule in Ukraine and the return of the Crimean Peninsula to Moscow’s control, several legal events.
 The peninsula’s quickie declaration of independence and a similarly fast absorption into Russia in 2014 appears as a clear-cut case of a land-grab .
 The 2014 Crimean referendum was preceded by two others, in 1991 and 1994, in which a clear majority of the peninsula's residents voted for greater autonomy from Ukraine . The Kiev government has chosen to ignore the 2014 referendum .
 In the last years of USSR's existence, ethnic conflicts were breaking out throughout the country . In some cases, civil wars would eventually cost thousands of lives .
Ukraine was spared such tragedy at the time, but did not escape separatist sentiment . Ukraine was spared the tragedy at that time .
 Crimea's majority of Crimea's population never identified itself as Ukrainian . The drive began to organize a referendum and vote on an autonomy from Kiev .
 As a result of the referendum, the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine recognized the peninsula as being an autonomous republic .
 Europe-Asia Studies 47, no. 11 claims that had Crimeans desired independence from the start, they should have used this instrument to achieve it .
 The Soviet government proposed a referendum on whether the country should be kept whole . The referendum would be held in the summer of 2014 .
 This referendum was to affirm the existence of USSR less than a year before it ceased to exist . The referendum, held on March 17, 1991, was held in Moscow .
 It was probably the only truly democratic vote in the history of a state known from its creation to be undemocratic .
In those areas of USSR where the vote was held, the clear majority voted to stay with the union . In those areas, the majority of those in the USSR voted to remain with the Union .
 The Breakup of the USSR Entirely contradicts the above, Ukraine’s population voted to become independent of USSR on 1 December 1991 .
 In every region of the country, including Crimea, the overwhelming majority cast their ballot in favor of independence .
 The vote seemed to go against the established views of the Crimean population . This vote has been a source of puzzle for political analysts ever since .
 Crimea voted for independence from Moscow, but had no business to vote for a 'reattachment' later on . It has also presented a powerful argument to the opponents of Crimea’s autonomy .
 The Western part of the country would prefer immediate independence from Moscow’s control . These regions were forcibly attached to USSR during World War II and had no prior history of living under the Kremlin rule .
 The support for independence in the Eastern regions of the country was more puzzling . But the pro-Russian sentiment ran high in the Crimea region, including Crimea .
 Support for independence was strongest in the western provinces, where Ukrainian nationalism has its deepest roots . support for independence is strongest in western provinces .
 In the more Russified districts in the east, support for independence was based more on economic calculation than on nationalism . There is more food available in Ukraine than in Russia, than on Russia, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Europe-Asia Studies 52, no. 283. Public Opinion, Voting and Legislative Behaviour, was published .
 polling in Ukraine did not indicate an overwhelming desire in the population to secede from the Soviet Union . Only 20% favored independence, with only 20% favoring independence .
 Ukrainian independence came about not because of Ukrainian nationalism and a cohesive popular consciousness and struggle leading to revolution, but because of the unexpectedly swift economic and political collapse of the USSR, the specter of Soviet revanchism as exemplified by the August 1991 coup attempt .
 The clear majority in all twenty-five constituent regions of the country, including Crimea, voted to go with an independent Ukraine . In Crimea the majority margin was the smallest of 20-five, with the largest margin in Crimea .
 The vote would haunt all future attempts by Crimeans to distance themselves from Kiev with some measure of autonomy .
 Crimea was the least supportive of Ukrainian independence, a majority, 54%, voted in favor . Crimea is the least supported of Ukraine's independence, 54% of the vote was in favor.
 In 1991, the Soviet Union dissolved into fifteen newly independent nations, and with its dissolution communism and the Cold War came to the end . In Sevastopol, the “Russian Hero City on the peninsula,’s support for Ukrainian independence was even higher – 57%.
 The treatment of 8 Lawrence A Howard was published in New English Review, March 2015 . The treatment includes the Historical, Legal, and Political Contexts of the Russian Annexation of Crimea .
 Sevastopol in Russian Historical Mythology,” Journal of Contemporary History,’s 35: 371. 15 by the native governments varied considerably .
 Russia was hardly alone in questioning the newly-independent Ukraine's borders .
 In March of 1992, the “Republican Movement of Crimea’s” collected over 200,000 signatures in support of an independence referendum . The referendum was held in Crimea in March 1992 .
 17 politicians chose to pursue a negotiated compromise, a Bill on the Separation of Powers between Ukraine and Crimea, to be approved by parliaments on both sides . The Bill effectively granted these parliament equal status .
 Crimea’s Verkhovna Rada quickly approved it before submitting to the Parliament of Ukraine .
 Agreeing to grant Crimean politicians more power would surely put the peninsula on the path of outright independence . But ignoring the wishes of hundreds of thousands of independenceminded Crimeans living there was risking another sectarian conflict .
 Politicians witnessed the current ethnic wars throughout the former Soviet Union, such as Karabakh and Transdnistria . Thousands of people were killed or displaced in the past .
 Crimeans were emboldened by Ukraine’s conciliatory approach to the Bill . Crimeans saw it as a green light on the path to outright independence .
 Ukrainian side believed that granting generous autonomy to the peninsula was a compromise that would prevent Crimea’s alienation and separation . On the other hand, the Ukrainian side thought that granting the peninsula generous autonomy would prevent the separation .
 The Ukrainian Center for Independent Political Research, 1996, is based in Kyiv . It was founded in 1996 .
 Ukrainian constitution declared the country's borders to be inviolable . Any talk of independence was contrary to Ukrainian constitution .
 Ukraine monitored the developing situation closely, and declared the proposed vote to be illegal . Ukraine monitors the situation closely and declares the proposal to beillegal .
 The Crimean Supreme Soviet adopted a declaration of independence in early May 1992 . It was subject to approval through referendum .
 The Bill on the Separation of Powers was renamed ‘On the Status of Autonomous Republic of Crimea’ to make it sound less ambiguous . The Bill was renamed to “On the status of Aut autonomous Republic of Crimean”
 Crimeans consoled themselves with a policy of generous autonomy granted by the central government . The rest of Ukraine chose 15 The Crimea, 12, while the rest of the country chose 15 .
 Both sides chose to exercise sober judgment. In the end, both sides chose a variation on the status quo to act on extremist impulses .
 In the long run, this simply meant putting the issue on the back burner, and pushing the problem further away into the future . However, in the long-run, this just meant putting it on the front burner . This simply meant pushing the issue further away from
 The Tatars’ Position Caught in the middle of two countries’ territorial dispute was the Tatar minority, which inhabited Crimea for centuries .
 Theirs was a difficult situation, because they were a minority within the region’s population . Theirs had a history of conflict with both Ukraine and Russia .
 The Tatars saw their ancestral land steadily settled by the newcomers from both Russia and abroad . Their majority status eroded to the point of being a minority .
 Tatar population rounded up en masse and resettled in Central Asia on the orders of Stalin . Accused of collaboration with the invading Germans in 1944 .
 Khrushchev eventually issued amnesty to many victims of Stalin’s terror . Tatars were not included in this policy .
 The Soviet Union started breaking up in the late eighties . They were not able to return to their historic homeland until the Soviet Union broke up .
 Tatars tended to side with independent Ukraine, if only by default . Tatars have a history of conflicts with both the Russian government and ethnic Russians .
 The Mejlis was quick to announce that it would not recognize any legislature separating the peninsula from Kiev's authority .
 The widening gap should not have come as a surprise to those who cared to monitor this situation, says John Sutter .
 The election of secessionist Yuri Meshkov in the presidential election in Crimea demonstrated the erosion of popular support for Ukrainian independence .
 Crimea's complex history and politics make it the region most likely to secede from Ukraine . Crimea’s complex history makes it most likely the region to secedes from Ukraine.
 The idea was revived two years later when pro-Russian official Yuriy Meshkov was elected President of Crimea .
Crimeans went to the polls to decide the political future of their land . Kiev warned that the Ukrainian government would not recognize the results of any such vote .
 The option to vote for actual sovereignty was dropped from the ballot shortly before the referendum . Facing the threat that no independence of Crimea would ever be recognized by Ukraine, the option was dropped .
 Ukraine's drive to de facto separate itself from Ukraine was obvious . But the drive to separate itself was obvious, it was obvious.
 The Ukrainian government saw the referendum for what it was – a vote on de facto, if not de jure, independence . The referendum was held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 Crimea was on the path to formal sovereignty, the Kiev powers stepped in just two weeks later . The Kiev powers simply overturned the results of the referendum by fiat .
 Crimean peninsula abolished both the peninsula’s constitution and the post of the Crimean president .
 Meshkov fled to Russia after local authorities were powerless to do something about it . Meshkov subsequently fled to the country .
 The Crimean legislature had no choice but to write a new constitution, more amenable to Kiev . The Ukrainian government ratified the new constitution in 1998 .
 The issue of independence was not voted on, it created confusion in the later interpretation of the 2014 vote .
 The Ukrainian government turned the issue into a political time bomb. Nevertheless, at the time, this act of the Ukrainian governmentturned the issue of the Ukraine government into aPolitical time bomb .
 All of the above referendums are used by both sides of the conflict 23 as justification of their actions . The results of these referendum are contradictory .
Crimeans looked to Russia where life was not as bad and the economic decline of the nineties reversed during Putin’s presidency . Ukrainian living standards steadily declined throughout the two decades .
 At the same time, among the older generation, there remained a nostalgia for the Soviet past .
 On the peninsula, antiUkrainian sentiments reached the point where even speaking Ukrainian in public was unacceptable .
 Despite this pro-Russian sentiment, political drive to re-join Russia lay dormant . Despite this, pro-Russia sentiment remains dormant .
 The electoral history of Crimea during 20-three years as part of Ukraine shows that political forces demanding outright independence had minimal success . The electoral record of Crimea in the past shows that the country's political forces had little success .
 Pro-independence parties and candidates never scored more than a few percent of the vote in the region . Their influence on the politics of the peninsula was always marginal .
 Political elements demanding unification with Russia had even less electoral success, even though there is zero evidence of Ukrainian government tampering with the vote .
Political developments on the peninsula in the two decades prior to independence suggest strong pro-Russian bias . No significant legal drive to reunite with Russia .
 The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe notes that “neither secessionism, nor integration with the Russian Federation, was prevalent on the agenda of the Crimean population, or widely supported, prior to Russian military intervention’s military intervention .
 No one was willing to risk violence to advance the Crimean cause, and nobody believed Russia would actively and strongly back them up .
 Crimean Tatars had to choose between the two sides, and tentatively chose to support Ukraine . As for the Crimean Tatar, they had to choice between two sides .
 The city was effectively subordinate to the Soviet, Ministry of Defense, with little interference from the local civilian authorities .
 The two countries signed a Friendship Treaty in 1997, dividing the fleet and leasing the naval base to Russia for 20 years . The issue of what to do with them was debated until 1997, when the two nations signed the Friendship Treaty .
 The U.S. territory is part of Cuba in name only, but for all practical purposes, it is a United States territory . It also enjoyed the status similar to that of Guantanamo, which was part of the Guantanamo area .
 The treaty allowed Russia to keep up to 25,000 troops there . It would play a role in the 2014 Russian takeover of the country .
 The document was more of an ‘executive agreement’ between the leaders of the four nations . It does not specify how to enforce it .
 One party could violate the provisions, which Russia did in 2014, without anyone else being required to respond . Russia did the same thing in 2014 .
 In the most extreme case, it promised that the parties would seek UN mediation .
 The document stated that the signatories agreed to recognize the existing borders of Ukraine in return for Ukraine giving up its nuclear stockpile . The document was signed by the signatory .
 Respect Ukrainian independence and sovereignty within its existing borders . Respect Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty in the country's borders .
 Refrain from using economic pressure on Ukraine in order to influence its politics . Use of economic pressure to influence Ukraine's politics will not be allowed to happen .
 Consult with one another if questions arise regarding these commitments . Consult with another if you have questions about these commitments.
 There are several problems with this strange and contradictory document . There are many problems with the document .
 It was not supposed to be ratified by any of the signatories, meaning it does not obligate them to do anything about it . It does not require any signatories to ratify it .
 It does not specify the “assurances’ it provides, yet clearly states that they fall short of providing military intervention to ensure the integrity of Ukraine’s borders .
 The very fact of Ukraine ever being a nuclear power in the first place is questionable . The fact that Ukraine ever was a nuclear plant is questionable.
 Ukraine had nuclear silos on its territory, but authorities had neither operational control over them, nor the capability to launch missiles inside those silos .
 Russian military personnel answerable to Moscow did not take orders from the newly minted Kiev government .
 The newly independent Ukraine seeking friendship with the West would be extremely difficult for the newly independent country .
 The West did not only want a nuclear Ukraine, but did everything to bring her into the non-proliferation fold. Evidently, the West not only did not want a nuke Ukraine.
 Ukraine was never a nuclear power because it never had operational control over the nuclear weapons stationed on its territory . However, Ukraine never possessed operational control of its nuclear weapons .
 The START I Treaty is set to be ratified by Ukraine soon to follow . It's imperative was how best to pressure Ukraine into prompt ratification of the treaty .
 Russia signed the agreement and then broke it. Yet all this does not change the fact that Russia signed it and then broken it .
 Ukraine was a nation with substantial cultural, linguistic, and religious differences between East and West . After over two decades of independence, Ukraine remained deeply divided . The Economic Split created differences in the politics of the two halves.
 Not only had the two parts spoken different languages, they also voted differently . The two parts spoke different languages .
 Monuments to Lenin and the Red Army remained, Soviet holidays still celebrated . The Red Army still celebrated Soviet holidays .
Monuments to the anti-Soviet resistance were being built, and ultra-nationalist rallies held . Monuments to anti- Soviet resistance were built .
 extreme voices on both sides were calling for splitting the country . Some extreme voices are calling for the split .
 The economic crisis has contributed to growing regionalism and polarization, according to the new Rada . That the economic crisis is clear from the preliminary composition of the Rada.
 The results of the referenda held in both Eastern Ukraine (on integration in the CIS economic union) and in Crimea flow largely from the population's discontent with current economic conditions and the Ukrainian leadership’s inaction .
 The East/West split is the economic division, not unlike the one facing the U.S. in the run-up to the Civil War . Half the country has a predominantly agricultural economy which favored free trade with Europe, and the other half with a predominantly industrial economy demanding protectionism
 The coal-rich Eastern Ukraine began industrializing in the nineteenth century and more rapidly in the 1930s . The economy of the Western part, as part of Poland, remained predominantly agricultural .
 The industrial pro-Russian East of the country has been effectively subsidizing the agricultural anti-Russian West . Because of this discrepancy, the industrialized regions contributed disproportionally to the country's GDP since independence .
 Ukraine is heavily dependent on Russia for its supply of natural gas . The oft-repeated stereotype is that Ukraine, like much of Europe, is heavily reliant on Russia .
 Ukraine does in fact produce some gas and oil of its own. What is rarely mentioned is the fact that Ukraine produces some gas.
 The problem is that much of the energy supplied by Russia is in fact used for industrial purposes by the factories in the East, which then sell their products back to Russia .
 Kravchuk and his Kiev-based colleagues have been difficult to move against powerful regional economic interests . Russia has traditionally enjoyed a close relationship with the neighboring Russian provinces .
In late 2013, probably hoping to repeat the success of the 2004 Orange Revolution, which had resulted in a pro-Western president, Victor Yushchenko . Crowds of protesters came together on the Independence Square of Ukraine’s capital, Kiev .
 The president of Ukraine, Victor Yanukovich, was deeply unpopular with the people, yet democratically elected . He was a leader by this time deeply unpopular.
 East Ukraine is suffering from energy dependence on Russia . The country's energy dependence is a major problem . It would be a perfect solution if one does not mind millions of people losing their livelihood .
 The president's alleged Russian sympathies triggered the reaction of some Ukrainians who saw this as betrayal and contrary to Ukraine's economic interests . The president’s alleged Russia sympathies trigger the reaction.
 An initially peaceful protest soon turned violent, with both the protesters and the government accusing each other of using snipers .
 Yanukovich fled the country in February 2014, after the discontent welled up and casualties grew . The Parliamentary majority voted for his removal (bypassing the constitutional impeachment procedures)
 The Rada influenced the parliament to overturn the 2012 Law on Regional Languages . It had granted Russian, together with other minority languages, regional status in the areas where such languages were in use .
 Tale of Two Nations for Country Locked in Struggle over Whether to Face East or West,’ The Guardian.
 The Russian-speaking eastern and southern areas of the country erupted in a series of violent protests against the new government .
 acting President Oleksandr Turchynov vetoed the action just five days later, but it was too late . The acting President was mindful of the danger of the brewing conflict .
 In Crimea, a cascade of events culminated in the outright declaration of independence from Ukraine .
 The full content of the ballots was publicized just ten days before the actual referendum . Details had been discussed earlier, but details had been revealed earlier .
 The ballot did not offer the choice of staying part of Ukraine without an autonomy. Notably, the ballot didn't offer an autonomy option .
 The vote simply restored what the people had already voted for two decades prior . From the Crimean point of view, the second option did not question Ukraine’s sovereignty over the peninsula .
 The 2014 referendum clearly allowed the voters a choice to remain part of Ukraine . The West believes that the 2014 referendum allowed the vote to remain in Ukraine .
 The original version of the 1992 constitution granted the ‘Crimean Autonomous Republic’ such options as the right to establish diplomatic relations with other countries . Some observers questioned whether voting for the second option meant remaining with Ukraine .
 The referendum was meaningless, because it did not offer voters any real choice in remaining with Ukraine . If so, 37 the referendum would be meaningless .
 97.5% of voters that Russia initially claimed opted for secession did not accurately reflect voter turnout . In addition, there is evidence that the 97. 5% of Russian voters that initially claimed to have voted for secession were not accurate .
 Besides irregularities such as 123% turnout in Sevastopol, a sizeable Crimean Tatar minority boycotted the vote .
 Tatar minority leaders were quick to side with Ukraine . Earlier, the City Council had declared the city to be independent of Ukraine in a joint resolution .
 The "republic" appealed to become part of the Russian Federation on March 17 . On March 17, the “republic’s” appeal was rejected .
38 switching loyalty would boost the region financially, according to a study . Russia's per capita income in Russia is three times higher than Ukraine's in Ukraine .
 There was also a security concern about Ukraine trying to reattach the peninsula by force if Crimeans did not immediately appeal to Russian protection . Still, behind the application were not only the ethnic or economic reasons .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions in Eastern Ukraine declared their independence, but never applied to join Russia . Had they not, they surely would have experienced the fate of the region in Ukraine .
 In the case of the Donbas regions, the Kiev government responded with force . The result was a stillongoing war that devastated the area and cost thousands of lives .
 Most available media sources suggest that the vast majority of people living in Crimea itself are supportive of the Russian annexation . The majority of Crimea residents live in Crimea.
 An anonymous telephone survey conducted in January of 2015 by a Ukrainian political scientist . The survey found that “Eighty-two percent of 37 Anne Peters. Peters’s survey was conducted by a German market research group GfK .
 January 20, 1991, Referendum to become 1991 autonomous republic . February 20, 1992, Crimean Autonomous republic Autonomous Republic allowed 12, 1991 created independence from Ukraine .
 Crimea’s independence and subsequent annexation by Russia was a case of conquest, pure and simple, a blatant violation of international norms . Crimea's independence was a cases of conquest and pure andsimple, says the author .
Pro-Russian elements have always had a strong presence in Ukrainian politics since independence . They were never dominant enough to split the country, at least until recently .
 referendums of 1991 and 1994 in Crimea demanded greater autonomy from Kiev, rather than outright independence . It is worth noting that the referendum of 1991-1994 in Crimea demand greater autonomy .
 Crimea willingly joined Ukraine in becoming independent from the Soviet Union . This fact means that Crimea voluntarily joined Ukraine. This is a fact that Crimea willingly joins Ukraine .
 Fiona Hill argued that Putin’s current policies toward Ukraine were really a continuation of those of Boris Yeltsin, who had proclaimed the right of Russia to influence the internal politics of the former Soviet republics .
 When the Soviet Union was falling apart because of sovereignty aspirations of its various ethnic groups, it let a very dangerous genie out of the bottle – ethnic nationalism .
 Many honest folk feel it hard to deny the Sudetens self-determination, if they want to belong to the Reich . Many honest people feel ithard to deny their own self- determination, but many are proud of their efforts .
 In politics, as in physics, you come to a point where you cannot go on splitting things . In physics, in politics, you can't go on split things, in physics .
 Past Russian Policies Provide Mr Putin’s Playbook in Ukraine,’.
 The-limits-of-selfdetermination-for-racial-minorities/c2011/FADE7319-76D1-46FF-94CE-A171AAB3A9B5. The- limits- of-self determination-forracial-
Sovereignty trumps people’s aspirations, even if they have become part of that state only recently and against their will .
 Crimea should belong to Ukraine in the first place. It is not all that clear why Crimea should be in Ukraine's first place .
 The substantial majority of the population is ethnically, linguistically, and religiously Russian . The majority of Russia's population is ethnic and linguistically .
 The majority of Moscow's population probably prefers to be ruled from Moscow rather than Kiev . The most of its population is in Moscow .
 In 1954, the first secretary of the Central Committee detached Crimea from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic and gave it to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist republic .
 He did not consult the Crimeans, but it did not much matter, as everyone was ruled from the Kremlin anyway . He didn't consult the crimeans but it didn't much matter .
 From that moment on, official internal Soviet borders included Crimea in Ukraine . From that time, Crimea was on the Ukrainian mainland .
 All Ukraine has for its claim of title to Crimea is a dead dictator’s whim. Thus, all Ukraine has to do is for it to claim the Crimea title .
 Even a democratic vote is not enough to reverse the decision of a bygone authoritarian government, says the author .
 The 42 Lea Brilmayer, “Why the Crimean Referendum Is Illegal,” The Guardian says .
 Russia's recent actions regarding it’s ‘near abroad’ could not be predicted . Not that Russia's actions regarding its “ near abroad” could not been predicted .
 The Ukraine crisis has been dubbed the Ukraine crisis in Ukraine . The conflict has been described as "the Ukraine crisis"
 The United States has Treated Russia like a Loser since the End of the Cold War, says Washington Post .
 The incident may have very well set the legal confusion in motion toward Crimea . Kosovo was the province of Kosovo, populated mainly by Kosovar Albanians, from effective Serbian control in 1999 to independence in 2008 .
 The separation was achieved only after a prolonged bombing of Serbia by NATO air forces .
 The action did not receive UN approval; it was effectively carried out at gunpoint by Western governments . The action didn't get UN approval .
 Kosovo Force was largely guaranteed through the presence of the Kosovo Force on its territory . The region’s early years of independence were largely guaranteed by Kosovo Force . Kosovo Force is NATO and EU troops on the territory .
 NATO did not have UN authorization for the intervention, nor for a while did it have any kind of justification under international law for its actions . NATO did.
 Only later was a justification named, stating that the action was “illegal but legitimate” because of its urgent humanitarian purpose . The action was later described as ‘illegal and legitimate’
 The UN Charter allows humanitarian military interventions without UN authorization in cases of urgent and mass human rights violations . This led to the creation of an exception to the use-of-force restrictions under the UN Charter .
 Pushing the United States and Russia Apart, the U.S. and Russia are on the verge of an alliance .
 Kosovo's general elections are scheduled for November 17 this year . Kosovo is scheduled to be held in Kosovo's capital Kosovo on November 17 .
 With more than 300,000 non-Albanian citizens expelled from the province their outcome may be practically annulled .
 But we favour fair elections with the participation of all the groups of the population living in this area . But we prefer fair elections.
 Kosovo "precedent" valid in the case of Crimea, as well as in other cases of regions striving for independence . The question remains, whether it is even a precedent, is the Kosovo “precedENT’s’S’ Kosovo ‘preced
 The answer, again, depends on how you look at it, and who does the looking .
 There are literally hundreds of regions, tribes, and ethnic and religious groups on the planet aspiring to sovereign statehood . The question looms large, but there is no clear-cut solution to it .
If the international community intends to keep the floodgates of secessionist movements closed, it would do well to learn from South Ossetia .
 The international community must move away from black-and-white conceptions of statehood . The choice is not between independence and territorial integrity, says the author .
 The Western States tried to argue that Kosovo is a special case and does not count as a precedent . The Western states tried to argued that Kosovo was a special cases and did not have a precedent.
 But this is a fragile and dangerous argument, both politically and legally . The argument is politically and legal, but it is fragile, and dangerous .
 Russia’s ability to exploit the legal ambiguities shared by Crimea and Kosovo arises in large part because of the inherent tension between two oft conflicting principles that have been at the heart of the international legal systems since 1945 .
 Lawrence A Howard of The New English Review compares the Russian intervention in Crimea to U.S. interventions in both Kosovo and Bosnia . He argues that the latter two involved much more tampering with the local politics and elections by outside force .
 The best authority on whether a group or province within an existing state has a right under international law to self-determine it is the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice .
 The court evaded the issue of whether the right of self-determination confers upon a population of an existing state the right to secede . In that opinion, the court evades the issue.
International law did not generally prohibit declarations of independence . It however found that international law didn't generally prohibit declaration of independence.
 The parallels with Kosovo are inescapable. No matter how one looks at the Crimean situation, the parallels with the Kosovo situation are there .
 Putin and his diplomats have managed to turn the tables on the West and come up with a convincing legal explanation .
 In the case of the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the split was accomplished without consent of the people of either country . No referendum of any kind on this issue was ever held .
 A much more bloody and drawn out affair was the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early nineteen nineties . The breakup of the country was the most bloody affair in Yugoslavia .
 The partitioning of India in the last days of the British rule was the bloodiest breakup of them all . The creation of Pakistan (which itself would later get partitioned to give birth to Bangladesh) involved borders drawn at at neckbreaking speed .
 An Empirical Critique of the Theoretical Literature,’s ‘Theoretical literature’ is published in the New York City-based book, ‘Global, Local, Political 27, no. .
 The Legal Aspects One could find a list of peaceful land transfers throughout recent history . Some peaceful, some not, yet conducted with the will of the majority of people living on that land .
 Ukraine became independent from USSR in 1991 . It was the most telling example of independence in the world .
 Russian possession came into Russian possession because majority wanted so . As far as the will of the people actually living there is concerned, it came into the Russian possession .
 The U.N. does not have authority to draw nations’ borders, it says .
 People have no right to “renew’s contract with the constitution, nor do they have the right to redefine national boundaries . People can’t ‘renew' their contract with their constitution, or redefine their national boundaries.
 To begin with, for a secession to be legal, the laws of the mother country must allow it . The laws of a mother country should allow it.
 John Balouziyeh argues that “the Ukrainian Constitution does not contemplate the secession of territories,’ he says .
 The United States constitution neither allows nor prohibits secession, therefore making the legal aspect of that issue moot . America’s own Revolutionary and Civil War experience proves that a drive for independence can be a bloody affair without a guarantee of success .
 Ukraine's territorial integrity was met with government's disapproval and hostility . Ukraine's government acted again and again against the wishes of those who questioned it .
 A right to unilateral secession can be defined as a right of a minority-people to separate a part of the territory of the parent State . People's right to selfdetermination is the basis of that people’s right toSelfdetermination .
 In modern international law unilateral secession of “substates’ is neither prohibited nor allowed . However, as it follows from the Declaration on Principles on Principles of International Law, the Kosovo Advisory Opinion and the Quebec case are not prohibited .
 The author claims that none of the above apply in Crimea’s case, but this is debatable .
 Crimea was conquered by the Russian Empire in the 1700s, just as the rest of the world was being colonized by European powers .
 Ukraine became part of an independent state in 1991 . Its territory is inhabited by ‘a certain people’ whose land was transferred from Russia to Ukraine in 1954 .
 These ‘people’ have no history of being part of Ukraine before 1954 and repeatedly displayed their displeasure with being such . These “ people’s’ are not part of the Ukraine, they say .
 Ukraine's language laws are mandated by the Ukrainian government . "Human rights" depends on the language laws mandated by Ukrainian government.
 Jure Vidmar of the European Journal Cyprus argues that it actually has more in common with Cyprus . Unlike many comparing the Crimea situation to that of Kosovo, Vidmar says it is more common than Kosovo .
 The problem is not so much with a territory demanding independence, but with an outside power assisting with independence, says the author .
 The international law itself is actually neither here nor there of the subject . The international Law itself is not here or there.
 Most countries are reluctant to do not to damage relations with the parent state and for fear of their own secessionist movements . It falls on the other countries to recognize a newly independent land as a “nation’s ‘nation'
 Groups seeking independence usually present self-determination as an absolute entitlement . Groups seekingindependence usually present themselves as anabsolute entitlement .
 States countering secession usually present territorial integrity as an absolute entitlement of states . Conversely, states countering secession often present territorial Integrity as anabsolute entitlement .
International law is actually neutral on the question of unilateral secession . As follows from the General Assembly’s Declaration on Principles of International Law .
 The Supreme Court of Canada ruled that a vote in favor simply compels the two sides to “negotiate’s future status of the country . independence for separatists is not guaranteed, the court said .
 The Canadian Parliament then adopted a “clarity bill’s” further constraining future referenda . The bill was passed by the Canadian Parliament .
 Even if every single person in the land voted to secede, it would still be illegal . Thus, even if every one in theLand voted to break away, it could still beillegal .
Under international law, any geographically cohesive group could vote on independence . If that were the case, then under international law. If that was the case,. then under International law, the region could vote for independence .
 Cubans living in Miami could vote to separate from the United States . That would mean the Basques should be free from Spain and France, and the Kurds would have an independent nation .
 Russia ought to be holding a referendum to determine the future of Chechnya . If a referendum were the right way to decide these issues, Russia should hold a referendum .
 "Clear Breaches of International Law in Crimea,’s International Bar Association. Clear Breached of International law in Crimea .
 Countries can acquire territory by discovering uninhabited land, signing a treaty, or occupying an area peacefully over a long period of time . Khrushchev’s transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 was part of a treaty .
 The legal methods for resolving questions of sovereignty are founded on widely recognized principles of international law . The legal method for resolving issues of sovereignty is based on internationally recognized principles.
 These do not include, and have never included, a simple referendum of people living in a contested territory .
 The Kurds have lived in a de facto independent nation since 1991 . Brilmayer says the fact that the Kurds have been in the country since 1991 seems of no concern to him .
 The legitimacy of International Policy Ukraine’s current authorities itself is in question . However, the legitimacy of international policy is inquestion .
 The International Bar Association is holding a conference in Crimea on February 20 .
 ‘There can be no international legal effect of any independence or merger declaration that might arise from a referendum’ ‘Apples and oranges’ is taking place days after the violation of President Obama’s Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity, says Benjamin J Rhodes .
 Opinio Juris: Crimea, Ukraine and Russia: Self-Determination, Intervention and International Law .
 New Kiev government “lacks legitimacy’93 Samuel Charap,’s new government. By contrast, the new Kiev government is ‘not here nor there’ Neither here or there, says Charap .
Under international law, a secession is neither a right nor necessarily illegal . Under international law. Under International law, it is not illegal to secession .
 New countries would be born with all their borders in dispute, and endless frontier conflicts would ensue .
 Secession is neither a right nor necessarily a breach under international law. Secession isn't a right or a breach of international law, it's not a breach.
 René Värk, Diplomaatia successful or fails, is treated as a fact,e. It is treated by the same way as secession is a fact .
 The success depends on political recognition by States . If the seceding State gains enough international recognition, it gains gradually legitimacy and statehood .
 Any action by the Security Council would be compromised by Russian interests . Any action would be compromising by Russia's interests, according to a report .
 The Mills of International Law Grind Slowly but They Do Grind . International Law Studies 91: 425 .
 Resolution Declares Crimea Referendum Invalid,” Global Legal Monitor, April 2, 2014 .
 Crimean Annexation and Lessons on the Boundaries of Self-Defense. The Michigan Journal of International Law.
 Annexation and Recognition – The Legal Battles Ahead, March 16, 2014 .
 Revisiting Self-Determination in Light of the 2014 Events in Ukraine,” Brown Journal of World Affairs .
 There is no legal precedent in international law supporting unilateral secession, although 3.5% of the world's population is currently in the region .
 referendum not having an option of staying within Ukraine without an autonomy . This does not address the issue of the referendum not being able to stay in Ukraine without autonomy .
 The overwhelming majority chose independence, but few voters would choose such an option anyway . The fact that the overwhelming majority of voters chose independence makes this point somewhat, if not entirely .
 The first to go were the former members of the Warsaw Pact . Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were soon to follow .
 The Soviets had acquired the West as a result of the Second World War . This eliminated the ‘buffer zone’ between Moscow and the West .
 Russia would not object to these countries becoming democracies, inasmuch as, Russia itself insisted it was on the road to democracy . That Russia was not in doubt.
 Moscow raised a specter of historic threats the West had posed over the centuries . However, facing a phalanx of nations whose military posture was not in tune with Moscow raised the issue .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, already in NATO, are only three neutral nations between Russia and the West . Moldova, Belarus and Ukraine are the only two neutral nations in NATO .
 Moldova was kept in check by the separatist enclave of Transnistria . It housed a contingent of Russian troops, posed to protect it in case the frozen conflict were to flare up .
 This unsettled dispute effectively kept the otherwise pro-Western Moldova from joining NATO . The alliance would not accept new members with unsettled borders .
 Belarus was kept in Moscow's orbit by Putin’s support of its pro-Russian dictator, Lukashenko . Belarus is now the last dictatorship in Europe, many commentators say .
 Ukraine, the biggest of the three, was left as the only viable battleground up for grabs . Ukraine is the biggest battleground in the race for the presidency .
 Since its independence in 1991, the politics of Ukraine has been characterized by the struggle between eastern and western halves voting to elect the central government representing their respective interests .
 The to-and-fro between pro-Russian and pro-Western parties continued for the first two decades after independence . Neither side managed to seize lasting control over the country’s politics .
 Ukrainians took to the streets of Kiev in late 2013 in protests against the pro-Russian president Yanukovich over his refusal to sign an association agreement with the European Union .
 The original protest, which started over the issue of police brutality, soon evolved into a revolt against a corrupt administration . The protest started over police brutality .
 Both the West and the pro-Western Ukrainians soon saw this protest as an opportunity to replace the Russian administration with a pro- Western one .
 A new “Orange 70 Revolution’ was too much for the Kremlin, but it in itself might not have been enough to cause Russia’s soon violent involvement in Ukraine .
 Putin fears a U.S. plan for an American naval base in Crimea . Putin could never risk to entertain the possibility of which he could never entertain .
 The steady advance of NATO deployments in the last twenty five years closer to Russia’s borders is indisputable .
 NATO has enlarged from 16 to 20 members since the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Plans for more to join have been made for more members .
Twenty-five years ago, Kremlin had troops stationed on the Elbe in the middle of Europe . Today the NATO borders have shifted four hundred miles to the East, some sixty miles away from St. St. Petersburg .
 Such strategic imbalance cannot but make a lot of people in Russia and its political establishment nervous . Russia's political establishment is nervous about such imbalance .
 The so-called flexible frontline American bases with up to five thousand men in each . Up to 5,000 men are on the ground in each.
 NATO has put its frontline forces on our borders, and we do not react to these actions at all . It turns out that NATO has been put on its borders . We continue to fulfil the treaty obligations and do not respond to these Actions at all.
 NATO expansion does not have any relation with the modernisation of the Alliance itself or with ensuring security in Europe . I think it is obvious that NATO expansion doesn't have any connection with the alliance itself .
 "It represents a serious provocation that reduces the level of mutual trust," he says . "On the contrary, it represents aserious provocation," he adds .
 I would like to quote the speech of NATO General Secretary Mr Woerner in Brussels on 17 May 1990 .
After two inconclusive wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. public is weary of “foreign entanglements,” and support for any new foreign involvement is low .
 Americans have long born the lion’s share of NATO defense spending . Europeans have long been asking Europeans to increase their financial commitment to security . The current economic recession is only apt to grow louder in the near future .
 Putin's policies follow in the footsteps of his Soviet and Imperial Russian predecessors . Not to allow unfriendly powers to emerge on the borders or maintain a buffer zone between them and Russia .
 In the case of East Ukraine, he is attempting to salvage whatever minimum “buffer’ he can . He is trying to salvage what he can, he says .
 At the other extreme is the possibility of Putin ordering his troops to invade and take over the whole of Ukraine .
 In the end, his rule depends on his popularity at home, and this popularity at the moment depends on the country's foreign policy .
 It’s likely that he will stand pat and support the insurgency in the Eastern Ukraine for as long as possible, while not resorting to open aggression .
After a century of border changes, the demarcation line between the West and Russia may end up where it was a hundred years ago – between Minsk and Pinsk . Minsk is now a city in the Russian city of Pinsk.
 All of them have one serious limitation – they presume a compromise is possible . All of the candidates have a serious limitation - they presume it's possible .
 The West and Russia are threatening each other with the everexpanding list of economic sanctions . It is far from certain that both sides can trust each other to agree on some kind of middle ground .
 The much touted idea of bringing Ukraine into NATO is not feasible for a very simple reason . NATO has a strict rule not to accept new members with unsettled borders .
 Ukraine's army is reconquering the peninsula by force . The only way for Ukraine to join NATO is to acceding to the loss of Crimea, and thus consenting to Russia’s actions .
 Kiev government to mount successful invasion of Crimea and take it back by force . One is for Kiev government, after securing foreign military aid, to mount a successful invasion .
 Ukrainian military struggles to contain the separatist rebellion in the east of the country . It is doubtful any action will be taken against Crimea .
 If it does happen, it would lead to an outright war between Russia and Ukraine . A war the latter side is unlikely to win, and a war that can only lead to a greater partitioning of Ukraine . If it happens, it could lead to the greater partition of
 The second option is that Ukraine accepts the loss of Crimea as a fait accompli, recognizes it as part of Russia, and moves on . The second is that most of the rest of the world accepts that Crimea is part of the Russia .
 Some argue that the European opinion has in fact moved on . However, this is also very unlikely because countries do not part with their constituent lands easily .
 Kiev is not likely to budge, whatever the real situation on the ground . The world opinion behind it is behind it .
 A somewhat more likely scenario is both sides accepting the status quo, and accepting the situation as is without any diplomatic recognition .
 Both sides stop fighting, the ceasefire holds, and Ukraine will be effectively partitioned . Both sides stopped fighting, and the ceasefire is in place .
 Crimea is bound to be seen by the international community as part of Ukraine in all but a name for decades to come . In this case, Crimea has been seen as a part of the country for decades .
 disputed national borders sometimes take decades to settle . If the past is any indication, disputed borders sometimes took decades to settled .
 Six decades after the Korean War, that country continues to be divided . The Korean War has left the country divided .
 Such an outcome may be the lesser evil for everyone as long as peace holds. Such an end may be a lesser evil.
 The most likely scenario is the conflict in Ukraine continuing for years. A more dangerous, but also the most likely, is the Ukraine conflict .
 Separatist conflicts have a tendency to simmer for decades, not just years . Separatists have been fighting each other for decades .
 Russia's own protracted struggle with Muslim insurgency in Caucasus is a good example . Russia’s own protracted fight with Muslim insurgents in Caucasus was a good examples .
 The fear of losing more land is a good reason for Ukraine not to give up fighting . New independent entities are threatening to destroy the country completely .
 Crimea will probably escape the carnage, but the two enclaves in the east of the country, Luhansk and Donetsk, will continue to suffer from the protracted conflict .
 The difference between the last two outcomes effectively means the difference between peace and war . The difference is effectively the difference in the war.
 Either way, Ukraine is bound to be a divided country for years to come . The country has been divided for years .
 The EU is not a military alliance, and cannot protect Ukraine in case of war . There is an option of bringing Ukraine into the EU, but the EU cannot protect it.
 If Russia becomes hostile to the West, Ukraine will probably fall back into Moscow’s orbit . The task of propping up Ukraine against a hostile and xenophobic Russia will be beyond the military and financial capabilities of the Western alliance .
 A RussianUkrainian conflict arising from a crisis in Crimea would endanger Russia’s already difficult reforms . It would destroy the weak remaining chances for the survival of independent Ukraine . Russia would push Russia on the path of reexpansion in defense of an illegitimate secessionist movement .
 Putin might send in his troops to protect separatists if they get embroiled in a war with Russian separatists .
 If the U.S. does not come to help it would destroy the American credibility to the extent from which it would never recover .
 A security pact has been in place since the end of the Second World War .
 The most viable solution, Allison believes, is to find a compromise for Ukraine becoming a neutral state . The most feasible solution, she says, would be to find an agreement on Ukraine becoming neutral state.
 Crimea became independent from Ukraine after the dissolution of the USSR . The region's political history could explain its independence, says the author .
 The emphasis was made on the elections and referendums, as well as various legal agreements made by various powers .
 The Ukrainian conflict does not seem to be over, but the extensive media coverage can give a relatively accurate picture of various parties’ opinions and political aspirations .
 Given the uncertainty of the still-ongoing war in Ukraine, it would be impossible to predict the course of the future events .
Research does exist to give a glimpse of public opinion in various parts of the country, which allows us to understand how different actors of this drama see the conflict .
 The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, March 18, 2014, is the center for science and international affairs .
 Dept. of National Defence Canada, Operational Research and Analysis, Directorate of Strategic Analysis, 1994 . Department of Defence Canada: "National Defence Canada"
 Frankreich, Deutschland und die Ukraine im Vergleich, edited by Yves Bizeul.7-258. 7-258 .