 The award-winning award winner is a graduate of the U.S. Army's Advanced Military Studies Program .
 In 2014, Russia unleashed a new form of warfare, the likes of which had yet to be seen on the international stage . The likes of Russia and Russia have been seen in 2014 .
 The form of warfare, called hybrid warfare or new generation warfare, is a whole-of-government approach to war . It links the elements of national power and small-scale tactical action .
 Russian hybrid warfare is a whole-of-government approach to warfare . It seeks to operate covertly or through the use of partisan forces, but is more than capable and willing to operate overtly .
 Russian hybrid warfare synergizes conventional, unconventional, information, and cyber operations into an effective effects package . To do so, Russian hybrid Warfare synergizes with conventional and unconventional information and cyber attacks .
 Russia uses the Russian Identity, ethnicity, language, religion, geography, and history to build consensus and justify its provocations .
 The idea of hybrid warfare germinated in the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 . The annexation of Crimea and the seizure of the Donbas are the two most visible campaigns .
 Hybrid warfare, as demonstrated by Russia in Ukraine, is a powerful tool for an era of limited war . It is arguably the modern Russian way of warfare .
 The opinions and conclusions are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College or any other government agency .
 Pair use use determination or copyright permission has been obtained for the inclusion of pictures, maps, graphics, and any other works incorporated into this manuscript .
 The 21st Century Russian Way of Warfare, by MAJ Amos C Fox, United States Army, U.S. Army, has 73 pages . It is the first time the U.N. Army has published a book on Russian warfare .
 In 2014, Russia unleashed a new form of warfare, the likes of which had yet to be seen on the international stage . The likes of Russia and Russia have been seen in recent years .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War’s ""Battle of the Bulge” is the result of the Russo- Ukrainian war . The battle was fought in the early 1950s in Russia .
 The operation was conducted by Russian intelligence working in conjunction with disaffected Russian partisans in Montenegro . The operation captured the essence of modem Russian hybrid warfare .
 Montenegro is not unique, but instead is the most recent hybrid conflict propagated by the Russian government .
 Russia’s operations in Eastern Europe and its Near Abroad since 2008 signal an evolving approach to the contemporary conduct of war . Russia's operations in eastern Europe and near Abroad have been in place since 2008 .
 Lt. Lt. John Sutter spoke on the specter of Russian hybrid operations in Eastern Europe . Sutter said the Russian hybrid operation has been a success in Europe .
 John Murray: 1 unconventional forces, conventional forces, cyber operations, electronic operations, and partisan forces to achieve military objectives aligned with political aims . Murray: Army Modernization in Review of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2017 .
 Russia’s actions have gone beyond the exclusive use of military force and have steadily increased the employment of the other instruments of national power in the pursuit of political objectives .
 Russia's actions indicate a temporal component which seeks to operate within the international community's reaction time . Russia’s actions indicate that it is seeking to operate in a temporal part of the world's response time .
 Russian actions embody restraint through the employment of covert methods to achieve its political and military objectives . Simultaneously, Russian action embody restraint, according to the Russian government .
 Russia’s actions unique is the role that conventional forces and conventional combat play within its hybrid model of warfare . However, what makes Russia's actionsunique is the way conventional forces play within the hybrid model.
Conventional Russian operations in Ukraine demonstrate the return of high-intensity combat operations . Russian hybrid warfare is characterized by a rapid sensor-to-shooter fire support structure, the use of offensive field artillery and multiple-launch rockets, in conjunction with robust combined arms formations .
 The byproduct of Russian hybrid warfare is the reemergence of siege warfare . It is an attrition-based operational and tactical approach to battle .
 Russia’s conventional warfighting capability, reinvigorated by large capital investment since 2003, has not been seen on European battlefields since the end of the Cold War . Russia has not seen a ground combat force with capability not seen on Europe since 2003 .
 The T-72B3, T-80, and MT-LB family of infantry fighting vehicles and personnel carriers . T-14 Armata is the first Russian ground combat platform to be added to the Russian army .
 Tucked within the $640 billion modernization effort are hidden improvements in cyber, electronic, and drone capabilities . All of which work in tandem with the conventional and unconventional forces of Russia’s military .
 Russian hybrid warfare is deeply rooted in its geopolitical history, military history, its ethnic composition, and its trial with Communism during the twentieth century . However, Russian Hybrid warfare is deep rooted in the geopolitical history of Russia .
 Russian expert Bettina Renz suggests strong military power has always been central to Russia’s self-perception . Renz: Strong military power is central to each of the major Russian polities throughout its history .
 Russia’s hybrid warfare is inherently rooted in its national means and its ability to keep money flowing into its economic system. What is more is more, Russia's hybrid warfare has its own national means .
 Russian hybrid warfare is influenced by contemporary technology as well as by the conflicts of the late twentieth century and early twenty-first century, to include Afghanistan and Iraq, and revolutions that overturned the political order of the Middle East .
 Russia is not the sole proprietor of hybrid warfare. Nonetheless it is imperative to understand that Russia's hybrid warfare is not only a part of the conflict .
 Russian actions have many implications for Europe and the U.S., but for nations and polities over .
 The Russian model of hybrid warfare illuminates several critical innovations to warfare . The U.S. was committed to operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, and throughout many other parts of the world .
 The most powerful implication is not necessarily in Russia, but in providing the world with a modern approach to warfare that merges the instruments of national power .
 The approach is called "Russian Hybrid Warfare and Its Relevance to the U.S. Army’s Infantry,” Infantry 105, no. 13 .
 Information Age technology can cover a wide variety of items, but for purposes of discussion herein .
 Information Age technology includes improvements to information and communications technology, nascent and improved cyber and electronic capabilities, and improved anti-area/area-denial capabilities .
 hybrid warfare is a bourgeoning theory of warfare that exploits adversarial vulnerabilities . In short, hybrid warfare can be used to exploit vulnerabilities .
 Many of the peculiarities of hybrid warfare described herein are inextricably linked to Russia’s social, political, and economic conditions .
 Russia's success could embolden other nations or polities to institute a similar approach . Russia’s success, coupled with the international community's inability or unwillingness to meaningfully deter its aggression, could emboldened other nations .
 Russian hybrid warfare possesses the potential to reshape the face of modern war in such a way to make war perpetual, in the shadows . In doing so, Russia is capable of escalating to full-scale combat.
 The Russo-Ukrainian War, predominately fought between April 2014 to March 2015, is the most noticeable example of hybrid warfare . The Russian War is most noticeable.
 Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the Russian General Staff, must be evaluated . He is the chief of Russia's most senior military staff .
 Gerasimov’s thoughts, known as the “Gerasimov Doctrine,’ form the intellectual foundation of Russia's approach to hybrid warfare . Gerasimov's thoughts form theellectual foundation of the ‘Ger asimov Doctrine’
 The Gerasimov Doctrine describes the evolving character of war in relation to evolving technology, international policy, strategy, and international relations .
 It reflects Russian experience, education, and adaptation following post-Soviet conflicts with Transnistria, Chechnya, and Georgia . It also reflects Russian experiences, education and adaptation .
 Russian hybrid warfare, as illustrated by the war in eastern Ukraine, is the embodiment of Information Age warfare .
 Many of the war’s operations lurk in the shadows of unconventional operations, or in the zeros and ones of the digital domain .
 The physical battlefields of the Russo-Ukrainian War resemble 4 those of World War I’s Western Front, more so than one would expect .
 Hybrid warfare has one foot in the past, with its ability to wage conventional war . Hybrid warfare is one foot into the future, and it has a future in the future .
 The hybrid way of war is a whole-of-government approach to war that seeks to integrate all the instruments of national power through campaigns . The distance between strategic and tactical levels of war are condensed to the point that the operational level is razor-thin .
 Hybrid warfare, as practiced by Russia in Ukraine, can be best understood by examining the ideas and theories of such preeminent theorists as Sun Tzu and Carl von Clausewitz .
 These theories define modern hybrid warfare as a theory of warfare which is distinct from other theories of warfare . Collectively, these theories define hybrid warfare.
 This theory is unique due to its distinctive packaging of the components of force . It employs those components in relation to the domains of war and the levels of war .
 The potential influence of hybrid warfare on modern conflict is vast, yet fundamentally dependent on the observer’s analytical perspective, or at which level of conflict they choose to focus attention .
At the strategic level, the hybrid theory of warfare can be seen as the employment of information operations and diplomacy in conjunction with cyber and electronic operations to weaken an opponent .
 Russian hacking into U.S. political parties during the 2016 presidential campaign is an example of this idea . Russian hacking in 2016 was an example.
 Several U.S. intelligence agencies assess that Russia used cyber and electronic forces to locate information which could be used to influence the United States election .
 The U.S. political process and political institutions were used to discredit the US political process, and politically weaken the United States. Then they used various means of media to distribute that information .
 Operationally, the hybrid theory of warfare can be seen as the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose in pursuit of strategic objectives .
 In hybrid warfare, tactical actions are more than just the combination of offensive, defense, and stability operations . In hybrid Warfare, tactical action is more than a combination of defensive, defense and stability operation .
 In several key respects, these actions include cyber and electronic operations targeting an opponent's movement of troops .
 Many of the operational cyber and electronic operations prey on the same targets as operational fires, but with different means . In fact, many of the cyber operations prey to the same target as the fires .
 hybrid operational level operations are not solely found in the cyber and information domains, but also found on the ground and in the area .
 The battalion tactical group, or BTG, is the sole Russian land formation present in Ukraine . BTG is the only Russian land group present in the Ukraine .
 The BTG, while a tactical formation, is also capable of achieving operational effects and employing operational capabilities normally found at echelons far above a tactical battalion . It is also able to achieve operational effects.
Tactically, hybrid warfare represents a return to high-intensity combat operations in which armor, infantry, and artillery fight for local dominance of significant terrain .
In the hybrid theory of warfare, tactical action is a continuance of a campaign in the event that information, cyber, electronic, and unconventional operations are unsuccessful in achieving the operational and strategic objectives . In the hybrid concept of warfare.
 The absence of tactical conventional action during the annexation of 9 Robert R Leonhard, “From Operational Art to Grand Strategy,’ in Rethinking the Principles of War, ed. In Rethink the principles of War.
 Other tactical actions, such as guerrilla warfare, are also related to hybrid operations . While not discussed within this monograph, other tactical actions are also linked to hybrid ops .
To gain a better appreciation for hybrid warfare, it is imperative to analyze the theoretical underpinnings of hybrid warfare .
 hybrid warfare represents a whole-of-government approach to war, which is fought in multiple domains. Viewed collectively, hybrid warfare is a whole of-government approaches to war .
 Operationally and tactically, the concept represents the rebirth of siege warfare . Operationally, and tactally, the idea is to fight back against the enemy .
 The Russian flavor of hybrid warfare represents the return of attrition-based battle in which victory goes to the side that can exact the highest toll in men and materiel .
 Hybrid Warfare and Its Theoretical Underpinnings Contemporary United States Army and Joint definitions, in relation to military terminology, are used within this work .
 The definition of hybrid warfare is a major point of contention. Nevertheless, the definition of Hybrid warfare is still a major issue of contention .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine illustrate the linkage of information operations, cyber operations, and the instruments of national power with the U.S. Army’s definition of hybrid threat .
 Recent TRADOC G-2 publications have attempted to further illuminate the character of hybrid warfare and the participants therein .
 Russia’s capital investment in its conventional military capabilities, coupled with its conventional combat during the war demonstrate, conventional military strength is a major component to hybrid warfare .
 Many modern nation-states are using hybrid warfare, melding the instruments of national power with the use of force, in one or more of its manifestations, in pursuit of interests .
 Throwing terrorist and criminal actions into the definition moves the idea of hybrid warfare away from a specific theory of warfare . The definition is a catch-all term, rendering it useless .
 Hoffman’s definition increases, rather than reduce, problems by adding abstract, intangible features to the definition . These components of Hoffman's definition increase, instead of reducing problems .
 These actions can be more broadly encompassed in a more inclusive term . The actions can also be more widely encompassed .
 defense analyst and military theorist Robert Leonhard offers a different definition of hybrid warfare . However, defense analysts and military theorists offer different definitions .
 The Rise of Hybrid Wars was published in December 2007 . It was published by the Potomac Institute for Policy Studies .
 Hybrid operations are characterized by undeclared action, that combines conventional and unconventional military operations, while coupling military and non-military actions . The distance between strategy and tactics has been significantly reduced, and where information is critically important .
 Leonhard's definition best describes the unique attributes of the Russian brand of hybrid warfare . Leonhard’s definition best describe the unique attribute of the hybrid warfare.
 Leonhard’s definition has more far-reaching applicability than other definitions analyzed . It makes it usable beyond the borders of Russia or its Near Abroad .
 The connection between a theory of action and the context of war cannot be underestimated . The theory of war can be seen as an example of war .
 The two concepts are reciprocal and cannot exist exclusive of one another . The concepts are not exclusive of each other .
Before analyzing Russian hybrid operations in Ukraine, hybrid theory of warfare must be defined . The context of war should be defined, and the context of warfare should also be defined.
 Russia's hybrid warfare and the implications of hybrid warfare disaggregated from Russia’s application thereof . Only then can logical deductions be made of Russia”s hybrid warfare .
 Contemporary hybrid warfare is a theory of action that is built upon the Information Age definition of force .
 Components of Force implies the physical act of force to inflict compliance through subjugation . 9 the approach is the creation of multiple assailable or vulnerable flanks which can be attacked or turned for exploitation .
 The aim of hybrid warfare is to use operations in one domain to set up actions in another domain . The aim is to create favorable asymmetry at the time and place of one’s choosing .
 Contemporary hybrid warfare is a theory of warfare that is a result of an era of limited war in which nuclear weapons serve as the governor to prevent nations from driving headlong into war .
 hybrid warfare is a derivative of the Clausewitzian notion that war is a continuation of politics by other means . What is more is more, hybrid Warfare is a derivatives of hybrid warfare .
 The theory is sensitive to the political tempests associated with the overt use of military force . hybrid warfare seeks to operate on the margins, in the shadows, and in such a way that fosters deniability of action for the perpetrator .
 contemporary hybrid warfare seeks to employ rugged ground forces for conventional operations that are capable of operating dispersed, conducting effective integrated reconnaissance .
 Understanding the context of war is essential to understanding the evolution of theories of warfare, of which Russia’s hybrid warfare is one of the most recent .
 Sun Tzu is indirectly making that war’s goal is victory and the path to victory is through attaining a relative position of advantage . The aggressor has created the conditions which will facilitate victory with the minimal amount of impact to its means .
 Clausewitz defines war as a duel, a contest of wills, and an act of force to compel the enemy to conform to one’s will .
 Clausewitz’s definition of war is underwritten by two ideas . War is an extension of the pursuit of human interest, expressed through political objectives, he says .
 Clausewitz defines the use of force only in the physical sense, but technological advancement has pushed it into other domains, including the information, cyber, and electromagnetic domains .
War is the pursuit of political objectives and the pursuit is conducted through the use of force, which is applied in all available domains .
 Hybrid warfare’s proclivity to operate in multiple domains provides the aggressor, or purveyor of the theory, both direct and indirect ways to unlock or achieve their respective political objectives .
 Liddell Hart suggests, “effective results in war have rarely been attained unless the approach has had such indirectness as to ensure the opponent’s unreadiness to meet 18.
 Liddell Hart's ideas suggest the indirect approach, employing force against an opponent at the time and location of one’s own choosing, is the acme of strategy in war and has often yielded the best results .
 The indirect approach is more successful because it allows an attacking force to achieve a relative position of advantage in relation to their enemy . It allows the attacker to dictate the terms and tempo of battle, thus preserving combat power, resources, and fighting spirit .
 Liddell Hart suggests leveraging an opponent’s momentum against them to enhance one's own operations . Hart suggests using an opponent's momentum to enhance his own operations.
 momentum now extends beyond the tangible world and can be found in multiple, intangible domains, such as cyber, and electronic domains .
 The idea of “operations’ have shifted too, says author . Information Age technology and the contemporary operating environment have shifted, he says .
 These ideas lay the foundation for operations in the hybrid theory of warfare . But the real key in war is to be found in sequencing operations .
 Theorist Robert Leonhard suggests that the best path to victory in war is through the sequencing of operations . He posits that the ordering of events in time, space, and purpose is the order of events .
 History says that war is instead resolved in multiple, discrete engagements, battles, and campaigns . He suggests that the key to mastering the concept of sequence it to discard the idea that war will be won in a single powerful, decisive operation .
 The imperative is not seeking decisive battles of annihilation, but in planning sequenced operations that apply pressure continually until the enemy has been depleted .
 Leonhard posits, “Warfare consists of a series of activities—preparation, movement, and opposition—that recur until an end point is reached.’
 The U.S. military is developing plans to preserve combat power to enable sequenced action . It's not the result of thinking clearly about the potential order of events, but it's the result.
 Victory is a result of employing force in all its forms and in all their domains, says John Sutter .
Russian actions in Crimea and Donbas demonstrate power of sequence. Hybrid warfare, as Russian action in Crimea, and to a lesser degree in the Donbas, demonstrates power of sequences .
Russian idea of ‘victory’ in terms of the continued existence of the people’s republics in Donetsk and Luhansk, coupled with a weakened Kiev, then Russian actions in Ukraine, gain far more value .
 McMaster, former director of the U.S. Army Capabilities Integration Center and current National Security Advisor, posits that prevailing threats seek to evade capabilities, disrupts advantages, and emulate successful advantages or capabilities .
 McMaster’s remarks make the case for hybrid warfare as a viable threat doctrine moving forward .
 His remarks indirectly acknowledge the influence of Sun Tzu, Clausewitz, Liddell Hart, and Leonhard .
 Russian hybrid warfare condenses theories into a contemporary theory of warfare . It is focused on covert action, neutralizing advantages, and capitalizing on vulnerabilities through indirect approaches .
Moving beyond military theory, it is instructive to identify the manner of wars in which the world is engaged . It is instructives to identify how wars are engaged .
 Clausewitz suggests that if left unchecked, the use of force will escalate to the point of absolute war .
History suggests that absolute, or total war, is an anomaly . Most wars have been limited in ends, if not scope, according to history . However, history suggests that total war is not an anomaly.
 Following the near-total warfare of the Second World War, the pendulum slowly swung back to those of limited aims .
 Nuclear weapon proliferation became the regulating force that eroded the political will to conduct large scale, interstate wars in the intervening years .
 Nuclear weapons are one of the most effective methods to defeat an enemy force . Nuclear weapons can also be used to defeat enemy forces in the war .
 nuclear weapons' potential progress has forced war to remain in the realm of limited conflict . Nuclear weapons’ potential progress have forced the use of force to focused application, seeking to not provoke retribution .
 Historian Ronald Wright builds upon such an idea, warning that “progress has an internal logic that can lead beyond reason to catastrophe.’
 Wright discusses weaponry’s evolution, from the bow and arrow to the cannon, from stone arrowhead to the high explosive shell . Wright discusses the evolution of weaponry, from high explosive shells to nuclear weapons .
 The progress trap embodied by nuclear weapons has served as modern governor to total war . It is the primary reason the international community finds itself in yet another period of limited war .
 nuclear progress traps have forced adversaries to seek other methods and areas to advance their interests . The use of force moving beyond the physical domain and into more intangible domains such as cyber, electronic, information and space .
 This has driven the primacy of the indirect approach as the primary conduit to accomplish one’s ends . This idea has also driven thePrimacy of indirect approach to accomplish the ends .
 The specter of nuclear engagement is critical to Russian strategy and hybrid warfare . Russian strategy, hybrid warfare are critical to Russia's strategy and strategy .
 The nuclear component is an inseparable part of Russian operational art, says Dmitry Adamsky . Adamsky: It serves to embolden Russian aggression through its deterrence to adversarial counteraction .
 Technological innovation, coupled with the ideas of Sun Tzu, Carl von Clausewitz, Liddell Hart, and Robert Leonhard, is at the epicenter of modern hybrid warfare .
 The ideas of Liddell Hart, Sun Tzu, and Clausewitz demonstrate that war is a continuation of politics by other 29 men .
 The use of force no longer resides in only the physical domain, but in multiple domains .
 Deception is a central component to a successful war and applying force indirectly is vital to deceiving an opponent as to the true objective of one’s aims .
 One must not destroy itself in pursuing victory and one must not lose the advantage in the information domain . One must also not destroy oneself in pursuing a victory .
 Nuclear weapons have placed parameters on the willingness of nations to engage in total wars . Nuclear weapons are focused on the incremental pursuit of limited political and military objectives .
 The aforementioned characteristics serve to energize modern hybrid warfare and give it form . The characteristics of hybrid warfare are similar to those of modern warfare .
 Land War Air War War Tactically-focused. I / Combined Arms Warfare Command ineer & Control Strategy of Strategy of strategy of Strategy. Attrition Attrition Annihilation Annihilation Unconditional Victory .
 Joint Warfare Mission Command Command Command Marine Corps Strategy of Attrition Decisive Victory Perpetual War Condenses Multithe space . The Strategy of Annihilation Exploit technology to achieve advantages and to increase complexity for ones adversaries .
 To gain a better understanding of hybrid warfare, one must be grounded in the fundamentals of strategy . Russian Hybrid Warfare’s Strategic Context is a guide to hybrid warfare .
 There is no clear or universally accepted definition of the term. One problem with strategy is that there is noclear or universallyaccepted definition of term .
 Carl von Clausewitz defined strategy as the use of engagement to 16 achieve the objectives of war .
 The Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, teaches Lykke's model as its primary method for understanding and applying strategy .
Lykke’s model is quite simplistic, stating that strategy is the balanced application of ends, ways, and means to accomplish or achieve policy aims . Lykke's model is very simplistic, saying it is the balance of ends.
 Neither of those discussions on strategy provide the granular insight to understand how and why nations approach war in the way they do .
 A more detailed understanding of strategy will facilitate a better appreciation of the concept of hybrid warfare . A moreDetailed understanding of strategies will facilitate better appreciation for the utility of the hybrid warfare.
 Historian Lawrence Freedman provides an enhanced model for understanding strategy .
 A History, Freedman writes that the purpose of strategy is to transition from short-term, trivial thinking, to long-term and essential thinking .
The final condition arises when opposed interests intersect and resolution is required . The final condition is when opposed interest intersects .
 Freedman contends strategy must be amoiphous and agile, taking shape from the starting conditions .
 Strategy must be inherently tied to a political act, which is focused on extracting more from a situation than the stalling conditions would suggest is achievable . Strategy must also be inherently linked to political acts, which are aimed at extracting more.
 Strategy is a study of the relationship between time, positions, means, and different interests . Strategy is the study of how time and positions work together .
 Freedman's discussion of strategy provides the most useful tool in understanding the strategic context for Russia’s employment of hybrid warfare . Freedman: Russia is employing hybrid warfare in a strategic context .
 This utility is at odds with a useful version of applied strategy . However, this utility could be useful for the future .
 Lykke’s theory of strategy largely focuses on strategy . In light of this, the continued discussion of strategy mostly focuses around Lykkes’ theory of Strategy .
Russian security thinking assumes that the nation is surrounded by enemies and therefore must maintain a territorial buffer to protect Russian sovereignty . Russian security thinking.
 Russia is seeking to reshape the global balance of power and to tip the balance in its favor . Russia is also seeking to bring about a new era of geopolitics .
 The Russians believe they must counter the power and influence that was lost with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, a study notes .
 An Operational Approach to Deterrence is published by the U.S. Army War College .
 The Russian military is emboldened by its nuclear capabilities and its integrated air defense system throughout eastern Europe . It must be viewed in relation to the contemporary era of limited conflict .
 Russia developed a whole-of-government approach to warfare hybrid warfare to accomplish its political and strategic aims . In light of Russian security thinking, the country has developed a multiple domain approach .
 Russian hybrid warfare reflects experienced gained from its post-Soviet military conflicts . It also reflects its observation of American capabilities development and American intervention throughout the world since the fall of Soviet Union .
 Russian actions in Ukraine demonstrate Russia’s applied theory of hybrid warfare . The annexation of Crimea and the Donbas clearly demonstrate Russia's applied theory.
 Russia acted so cavalierly with Ukraine one must understand the intersecting histories of the two countries . But to gain a deeper appreciation for Russia, one must also understand the history of Ukraine .
 Russia has never fully accepted Ukrainian independence, and instead views it as a subordinate state . Russia has not fully accepted Ukraine's independence .
 Russia gained its independence following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Russia has continued to try and exert influence over the country .
 Many ethnic Russians are located within Ukraine, primarily located in the Donbas Region and Crimea . Also located in Ukraine, most of them are located in Crimea .
 Crimea has traditionally been part of the Russian empire . It was given to Ukraine for political puiposes in 1954 by Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev .
 The Donbas’ ethnic diversity was created by Joseph Stalin following World War II . He relocated thousands of Russian citizens to the area in order to create an enclave in the region which enabled social and political manipulation of Kiev .
 Russia acquired its strategic objective of Crimea with a minimal amount of kinetic activity . Russia’s strategic objectives laid the foundation for its annexation of Crimea, which immediately preceded the Russo-Ukrainian War .
 Both conflicts, the annexation of Crimea and the Russo-Ukrainian War, were a result of disagreements over the political direction of Ukraine . Both conflicts were the result of disputes over Ukraine's political direction .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, who was seen by the Ukrainian people as a Russian puppet, opted for closer ties with Russia . The citizens in western and central Ukraine advocated for closer relations with the European Union .
 Most citizens in eastern Ukraine, specifically the Donbas Region, and Crimea, supported Yanukovych’s position . Most citizens of eastern Ukraine supported Yanukovych's position .
 The Euromaidan movement, known as the Euromaida movement, led to the ousting of Yanukovych as president in February 2014 . This situation created political turmoil in Ukraine, leading to the overthrow of Yanukovych . In February 2014, Yanukovych was ousted as president, and
 Yanukovych fled to Russia and was replaced as president by Yulia Tymoshenko, a far more Western learning politician .
 Russia used the political situation in Kiev to agitate ethnic Russians . Russia alleges the western learning government in Kiev was unresponsive to and unrepresentative of ethnic Russians in Ukraine .
 Russia used a variety of means to wage information operations, from television to the Internet, to unconventional forces on the ground spreading the message .
 Information operations were successful in further exacerbating the political situation . Russia used as pretense to annex Crimea under the guise of seeking to protect ethnic Russians .
 Economics played a large role in the situation with Ukraine and Crimea . The situation in Ukraine has been described as the worst in the country's history .
As the Euromaidan movement gained steam, Russia forgave $15 billion in Ukrainian debt to help Yanukovych .
 Russia eliminated the discounted rate at which it sold natural gas to Ukraine from GazProm . Yulia Tymoshenko was put in office fearing that Ukraine would not remain within its sphere of influence .
 GazProm incrementally increased its rates to Ukraine by 40 percent in March 2014 and another ten percent by April 2014 . In addition, GazProm increased its rate to Ukraine.
 Russia cut all GazProm sales to Ukraine under the condition that it repay over $2 billion in previous debts . Shortly thereafter, Russia cut the sales under the conditions that it repaid the debts .
Unconventional operations were the primary method employed to seize Crimea . Unconventional operation was the primary way to seize the Crimea .
 The annexation occurred during pre-planned Russian military exercises in the area . However, the annexation also occurred during the annexation .
 On February 27, 2014, a company of Russian infantry seized the Crimean parliament and cabinet ministers’ headquarters in Simferopol .
 45 GazProm is a natural gas company headquartered in Moscow . The company is based in Moscow, Russia .
 It provides the majority of natural gas to the countries surrounding Russia . It provides most of the country's natural gas .
 GazProm is an independent company, but the Russian government owns a majority state in its shares . The company is owned by the government.
 Russian forces and local partisans seized the state television company and primary telephone and internet service providers in February 2014 . The seizure allowed Russia to control the flow of information within the peninsula .
 The Russian navy surrounded the Ukrainian fleet at Novoozeme, on the western bank of the peninsula .
Ukrainian naval vessel was sunk by the Ukrainian navy . The Ukrainian navy then sank the vessel, essentially sealing off the Ukrainian fleet at their naval base .
 The isolation of the Ukrainian fleet at Novoozerne allowed Russia’s fleet at Sevastopol to dominate the Black Sea . The isolation allowed Russia's fleet to dominate.
 Russian forces continued their consolidation of media outlets in Simferopol, Russia, on March 6 .
 Russian forces seized control of the only natural gas pipeline and distribution center that supplied Crimea . Ukraine denies Ukraine the ability to influence the situation in Crimea through the manipulation of natural gas in the peninsula .
 Ukraine officially ceded Crimea and withdrew its 25,000 soldiers from the peninsula . By March 20, 2014, Ukraine officiallyceded Crimea.
 Hybrid Warfare in the Russo-Ukrainian War Russian operations in Ukraine’s Donbas region ushered in a new approach to war . The likes of which had not yet been seen on the battlefield .
 A recent study suggests that Russia’s approach to hybrid warfare is “a truly synchronized whole-of-government approach to warfare” The lines between war and peace have become blurred .
 Russia’s operational approach synergized information, cyber warfare, electronic warfare, unconventional and conventional operations in all the domains of war . Russia's operational approach combined information and cyber warfare to achieve their military and political objectives while simultaneously maintaining deniability .
 In the doctrine, Gerasimov outlines an invigorated approach to warfare, leveraging history, technology, and the realities of the contemporary operating environment .
 Information Age technology has reduced the distance between forces and those who control the forces . Gerasimov says modern wars are no longer declared because of the technology .
Technology has increased the nonmilitary means for achieving political and strategic goals . Technology has largely surpassed common weaponry in terms of utility in that environment .
 The Information Age has created a much larger information space than previously existed in the past . This space is largely nascent, ill-defined, and not well understood, says the author .
Information space creates an arena in which asymmetric advantages can be attained . Information space is an arena for asymmetric advantage .
 Russian military means, largely consisting of concealed operations through the use of unconventional forces, supplement the non-military means of waging war . The goal is plausible deniability for political leaders.
 The use of conventional forces, when employed, integrate technology, specifically drones and cyber capabilities, to enhance their effectiveness on battlefield .
 Peacekeeping is a guise and pretense for the commitment for the employment of military means . Peacekeeping can leverage information asymmetry and political or ethnic schisms in a given environment .
 The use of unmarked conventional forces is another 50 Leonhard and Philips, Little Green Men, 18 .
Gerasimov harkens to Russia’s past which provides a guide for military operations . Gerasimov also provides an overview of Russia's military history and military history .
 Gerasimov says modern operations must focus on rupturing the enemy’s front . He says Russia must conduct deep operations through the depth of the entirety of their being .
 Gerasimov states modern deep operations are the framework for contemporary operations . But the approach must seek to leverage the capabilities of modem technology, he says .
 Understanding Soviet doctrine of yore makes Russian hybrid warfare more digestible . understanding Soviet doctrine makes Russian hybrids more digestable .
 Understanding the doctrinal environment in which many of Russia’s central military leaders of today grew up grew up . Understanding the doctrine of Russia's military leaders grew up assists in explaining the evolution of Russian doctrine .
 It assists in understanding how Information Age technology, such as drones, cyber and electronic capabilities, and untethered communications, is interwoven with previous Russian doctrine .
Gerasimov’s doctrine bears a striking resemblance to Soviet Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky and Brig. Brig. Gerasimov's doctrine is similar to that of the Soviet Marshal Tukkachevski .
 Tukhachevsky’s concept, known as deep operations, was predicated on the idea that modern industrialized states were too vigorous to be defeated in a single, decisive battle .
 Tukhachevsky contended that modern industrialized nations possessed the ability to rapidly move forces around the battlefield to stave off defeat .
 Tukhachevsky advocated for a tactical and operational doctrine in which Soviet forces launched deep penetrating attacks on the enemy . The doctrine is called Russian New Generation Warfare .
 New Challenges Demand Rethinking Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations,’ trans.
 Isserson's work expanded on that of Tukhachevsky by addressing the idea of sequenced action to generate cumulative effects . Isserson’s work expanded.
 Understanding the context of hybrid warfare, the contemporary character of war, and Russia's political interests provide the stage setter for analyzing Russia's operations in Ukraine from March 2014 forward .
 Russia has operated in the past twenty-first century and into the 20th century . Russia has been involved in many of the country's most recent operations . Russia is now the world's most successful country in the world .
 Ukraine was not the first instance of Russian hybrid warfare, but its conflict with Georgia in 2008 was the emergence of Russia’s contemporary hybrid warfare .
 Russia’s recent wars have shown that they are not fearful of waging a conventional, land-based war . Russia's recent wars show that they aren't afraid of waging conventional war .
Russia learned from its military shortcomings in Georgia and adjusted its strategy, operational approach, and tactics . Russia learned from Georgia's military shortcomings and adjusted strategy and tactics.
 Russia learned that conscript soldiers were unreliable and their deaths brought social and political instability . Russia needed professional soldiers in its combat formations .
 Russia learned that getting stuck in an overt stalemate, without plausible deniability, created unnecessary political pressure . Russia learned it was a mistake to get stuck in a stalemate .
 It must obscure their actions to the highest possible degree and conduct operations to destabilize its opponent well before the commitment of ground forces .
 Russia learned that in order to not get bogged down, they must devise methods of fighting that disaggregates strike capabilities from strategic and operational headquarters . Russia must devise ways of fighting to avoid getting bogging down .
In order to develop an almost instantaneous system of target identification for outbound fires. Simultaneously, they must increase the speed in their sensor-toshooter system . They must increase their speed in the system, in order to improve their accuracy .
 Russo-Ukrainian War Case Study is a study of the Russian hybrid warfare . There are many ways in which to approach the Russian war and its connection with hybrid warfare.
 Russia’s actions in the Donbas shed light on many nascent technologies in the cyber and electro-magnetic fields . For example, Russia's actions in Russia's Donbas sheds light on some nascent technologies .
 Russia’s actions in the Donbas reveal innovative methods for manipulating public opinion and swaying the support of a given populace .
 Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine demonstrate the manifestation of mechanized combined arms warfare on a contemporary battlefield by a world power .
 Many of the topics associated with Russia’s hybrid warfare in the Donbas quickly lead to problems with information classification .
 The focus herein is on the implications that can be drawn from examining open-source information regarding the campaign in the Donbas . The campaign is largely from the time period between March 2014 to March 2015 .
 Before beginning the analysis, a brief discussion on terminology is needed .
 The term “partisan’ is used throughout the case study to define the Russian partners operating in Ukraine . This term is used instead of proxy or separatist, which is the term most often found in other analysis of the war .
 The term ‘partisan’ is used because it best defines the role of Russia’s complicit partners in the Donbas . The term is used to describe Russia's complicit partners.
 Political theorist Carl Schmitt offers a granular and definitive construct in his definition of the partisan . Schmitt's definition of partisan politics is based on his theory of the party .
 Schmitt argues that a partisan is an irregular fighter who works in conjunction with a regular force to achieve a similar political purpose . Schmitt: A partisan is a partisan who works together to achieve the same political purpose.
 Schmitt also states that partisans are telluric 61, mobile, and political in nature . All of which are characteristics that precisely describe the forces supporting Russia in the Donbas .
 Disorganizing the enemy provided a window for tactical exploitation, which is the foundation for operational and strategic success . Disorganize the enemy provides a window to tactical exploitation .
 The conflict’s initial stage was focused on achieving this aim through information operations employed to shape political and social conditions, and cyber and electronic operations employed .
 The partisans were organized at the battalion level in a similar fashion to the Russia ground forces . The partisans are organized at a similar level to the Russian ground forces.
 Russian military analyst Phillip Karber states that the partisans had over 31,000 troops at their disposal, while the Russians had 12,000 in the Donbas . Karber says the partisans have more than 30,000 of them in the region .
 Russia employed partisans and unconventional forces, coupled with information operations to manufacture the crisis in the Donbas . Russia, under the guise of supporting the interests of ethnic Russians isolated in theDonbas.
 The crisis focused on the plight of underrepresented ethnic Russians . The solution was a breakaway, semi-autonomous region in the Donbas which was loyal to Russia .
 The Novorossiya movement was short-lived and floundered after a few months . However, the continued existence of the DPR and the LPR serves to advance Russian policy in the region .
 The Donbas, not Kiev, was the strategic objective supporting the policy of maintaining a weak, politically isolated Ukraine . However, a differing point of view argues that the Donbas was not Kiev .
 The continued existence of the DPR and LPR perpetuates Russian policy and strategy in the region . The continued presence of the two agencies perpetuates Russia's policies and strategy, says the author .
 frozen conflict in the Donbas allows Russia to manipulate Kiev through social, military, information, and diplomatic means . To put it another way, frozen conflict is a way to manipulate the country, say experts .
 Russian information operations are a critical component of their hybrid theory of warfare and serve as a primary link between strategy and tactics . Russian information operation is a key part of the hybrid theory.
 The goal of Russian information operations in the Donbas was to shape the battlefield, but to also influence Kiev in a way that undercut the Ukrainian government’s standing with the Ukrainian population .
 The goal was to discredit the government by making it look incompetent and unable to adequately address the calamity in the region .
 Russia sought to accomplish this through seizing terrain in the Donbas, then denying Ukraine the ability to retake the terrain . Russia sought this through initially seizing terrain, then denied Ukraine the access to the area .
 Ukrainian armed forces attempted to counter Russian aggression in the region . In addition, they sought to advance their information operations objectives through the slow and steady bleeding of the Ukraine armed forces .
 Russia possessed the ability to swiftly defeat anything the Ukrainians put into the field, but a strategy of annihilation did not support the Russian information operations strategy . The Russians’ use of physical force focused on a strategy.
 Russia's approach allowed Russia to discredit the government in Kiev, but to demoralize Ukrainian troops and deter voluntary participation in the Ukrainian armed forces due to the way they were being destroyed on the battlefield .
 This line of thinking led to siege warfare being a defining feature of Russia’s operational approach and associated tactical actions .
 Russia’s operational approach was deeply rooted in multi-domain battle . Russia”s operational approaches were deeply rooted into multi- domain battle .
 The Russians viewed the airports at Donetsk and Luhansk as military objectives, in addition to the ground transportation infrastructure at Ilovaisk and Debal’tseve . The airports are also considered military objectives .
 The airports served as air lines of communication for Russia and their partisan supporters in the Donbas . Ilovaisk and Debal’tseve were critical ground lines of communications for Russia .
 Media outlets and distribution centers in Donetsk, Luhansk, Ilovaisk, and Debal’tseve were also primary objectives of Russia and partisan forces .
 Destruction of Ukrainian forces was focused on those forces which presented a direct threat to the preservation of Russian territorial acquisitions .
Modern war shrinks the space between the strategic and tactical levels of war . The Gerasimov Doctrine demands that operational art be exercised at unconventional levels of command .
 Russian forces exercised operational art within the Southern Military District, the 49th Army, and at BTG-level . Russian forces are seeking to obscure their true involvement in Ukraine .
 The Southern Military District in Rostov-on-Don is the theater army headquarters . It is commanded by Colonel General Alexadr Galkin .
 The Russian 49th Army in Stravropol serves as the primary operational headquarters . See Appendix 2, Russian Elements of Operational Art and Appendix 3, Russian Operational Approach for more detail .
 Russia Forges Tradition and Technology through Toughness , 92. 30 for the Donbas campaign .
 Russia has continually rotated forces drawn from all its military districts, including forces from as far as away as the Eastern Military District’s Vladivostok and the Kuril Islands-based units .
 Russia divested itself of deploying brigade or army headquarters into the Ukrainian theater . Instead developed BTGs to serve as a dual-hatted headquarters and fighting formation . The BTGs are capable of both operational art and tactical action .
 Russia is seeking to not overwhelm the entire Ukrainian military, nor consume the entirety of the nation, but only achieve the limited objective of temporary physical dominance . This formation and its associated doctrine is fundamentally tied to the nature of limited war .
 The phase consisted of unconventional covert actions and the establishment of the DPR and LPR in April 2014 . The phase included covert actions. The phase was the first phase of the LPR.
 The second phase bled into the third phase, which consisted of major battles between Ukrainian forces and those of Russia and their partisan supporters . The third phase consisted of a series of battles between Ukraine and Russia .
 The final phase, which is ongoing, is essentially a stalemate with forces from both sides dug into defense positions along the entirety of the front .
 The first phase of the Russo-Ukrainian War began covertly with Russian forces and their partisan allies seizing government buildings across the Donbas . Russian forces seized government buildings in Donbas in the first phase .
 These operations came on the heels of Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March 2014 . The operations came in the wake of the Crimea annexation .
 The goal was to destabilize the government of Ukraine in the hopes of getting a leader or government friendlier to Moscow in power . They did so through the mobilization of partisans, working with unconventional forces .
 Russian forces employed information and cyber operations seeking to influence public opinion in the region for the purpose of garnering support for their cause .
 The Russians manipulated Ukrainian supplies of gas and oil to put financial and diplomatic pressure on the government in Kiev, says the author . The author says hybrid warfare is a whole-of-government approach.
 The Russians relied heavily on partisan forces to assist with the annexation of the Donbas, using them as the face of the movement .
 Little direct combat occurred during the first phase of combat . Only traditional combat was sporadic and limited uses of physical force .
 In most cases, Russian and partisan forces established road blocks, checkpoints, and blockades to prevent or inhibit Ukrainian forces from retaking seized infrastructure . In some cases, road blocks and checkpoints were established by Russian andpartisan forces .
 At the height of the Russian and partisan advance in April 2014, they had taken nearly all territory within the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts and key political infrastructure in the region .
 The city of Mariupol served as an important objective due to its position on the Black Sea and its ports . It would allow it to augment the Russian Navy’s Black Sea Fleet based in Sevastopol, Crimea .
 Avdeevka, southwest of Debal’tseve and Schastye served as lucrative objectives due to the power infrastructure in those cities . Also served as a lucrative objectives.
 Ukrainian forces reacquired almost all territory outside the borders of the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces . By July 2014 they had completely reclaimed Kramatorsk and Sloviansk .
Countering the actions of the Russians and their partisan collaborators led to the second phase of the Russo-Ukrainian War . Countering the action of the Russian and their partisans led to a second phase.
 This phase, highlighted by Ukrainian anti-terrorist operations 74 Thomas, Russia Military Strategy, 394 . This phase is highlighted by Ukraine's anti-terrorism operations .
 This phase focused primarily on covert Russian and partisan activity . Ukrainian government readied its armored forces to retake the lost territory .
 The battle of Zelenopillya, discussed later, is the transition point between the second and third phase . The battle will be discussed later .
 The third phase saw Ukrainian forces gaining momentum against Russian and partisan forces in the Donbas . Ukrainian forces gained momentum against the Russian andpartisan forces .
 Ukraine's Ministry of Internal Affairs were a more soft-handed approach to dealing with the problem . These operations were run by Ukraine’s Ministry ofInternal Affairs .
 In many cases these soft-handed techniques backfired as partisans would arrive, often at the behest of covert Russian ground forces, and would surround the Ukrainian forces .
 The dynamic of conflict during this phase of the war shaped how the conflict continued to unfold in subsequent phases of the conflict . The conflict continued in other phases of war .
 Appendix 2 and 3 discuss the role of the elements of operational art and Russia’s operational approach in Ukraine .
 Appendix 4 provides further detail on the timeline associated with the Russo-Ukrainian War . It includes highlighting battles not formally discussed or mentioned in the subsequent case study .
 A Portent of Future Battles One of the first major battles of the conflict was the first battle of the Donetsk Airport .
 The airport changed hands three times during the Russo-Ukrainian War . The first of which came on the immediate heels of the DPR and LPR seizure of power in the Donbas .
 The second battle of Donetsk Airport was one of the largest battles of the conflict to date . The other two battles for Donetsk Airport were far larger engagements .
 Ukrainian forces, supported by fixed wing and rotary wing air support, launched a swift counterattack . The airport was returned to Ukrainian control on May 27, 2014 .
 The airport remained in the hands of Ukrainian forces until the Minsk Protocol, which served as the precursor to the second battle of Donetsk Airport . Donetsk Airport was the first airport in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 The summer of 2014 saw small skirmishes between Ukrainian, Russian and partisan forces along the perimeter of the airport .
 The first battle of Donetsk Airport resulted in the death of approximately forty partisans and the wounding of dozens more . The battle took place in the city's Donetsk airport .
 Vostok Battalion was a Russian formation composed largely of Chechen fighters provide to Moscow . The battalion was formed by Chechen president Ramzan Kadyrov .
 The Russian Reconnaissance-Strike Model Emerges . The early battles of the Russo-Ukrainian War demonstrated Russian advancement in cyber and electronic warfare .
 Ukrainian forces were destroyed without being able to get into the fight to counter Russian aggression . Few battles better exemplify the utility of these capabilities than the battle of Zelenopillya .
 Zelenopillya demonstrated that the absence of joint operations is not a vulnerability, but can in fact serve to enhance the lethality of one’s force .
 The attack was a concerted Russian attempt to offset Ukrainian success . It became the impetus for the transition to full-scale conventional warfare .
 The battle ushered in the transition from the second phase of the war to the third phase . The battle also ushered in a transition from second phase to third phase.
 At approximately 0430 hours outside Zelenopillya in the Luhansk oblast, Russian and partisan reconnaissance forces, in conjunction with reconnaissance 84 Leonhard and Philips, Little Green Men, 42 .
 Russian forces then launched cyber and electronic attacks on the Ukrainian brigades . The attacks disrupted their ability to communicate, disrupting their communication .
 Ukrainian soldiers used their cellular phones to receive situation reports and issue orders . With their communications systems disrupted, Ukrainian soldiers were able to use their cell phones .
Russian cyber forces illuminated the electromagnetic spectrum which enabled Russian cyber forces to precisely identify the location of Ukrainian forces .
 Russian forces, organized into the BTG and in conjunction with partisans from the LPR, then launched a massive rocket attack on the Ukrainian brigades . The attack consisted of upwards of forty salvos of multiple launch rockets .
 Russian forces employed the BM-21 Grad and the 9A52-4 Tornado . Both employed a mixture of DPICM and thermobaric warheads on Ukrainian forces .
 High-explosive munitions were also employed from conventional self-propelled tube artillery . High-Explosive weapons were also used from conventional Self- Propelled tubes .
 One survivor of the attack mentioned that it came in with such surprise and with such ferocity that almost no one was able to get away from their vehicles and move to cover .
 Reports vary, but the attack left approximately thirty Ukrainian soldiers dead . Another several hundred injured, and destroyed well over two battalions’ worth of vehicles and equipment .
 The 9A52-4 Tornado is also a 122mm, mounted multiple-launch rocket system with a similar range . It is also the same range as a similar rocket system .
 The Tornado an upgrade to the BM-21 Grad and is replacing it in the Russian arsenal . The Tornado is an upgrade.
 The battle of Zelenopillya succeeded in stymieing Ukrainian success and tipping the initiative back to the Russians and their partisan allies .
 A series of themes in respect to Russian hybrid operations emerged at Zelenopillya . The themes include hybrid operations and hybrid operations .
Historians Macgregor Knox and Williamson Murray say the themes demonstrated innovation in relation to doctrine, organization, tactics, and technology . They say they are the primary indicators of a revolution in military affairs .
 Russian reconnaissance was not conducted through ground reconnaissance units like that of U.S. Army cavalry formations . Instead, it was an aggregation of drones, Spetsnaz, GRU, partisans, and cyber capabilities .
 Zelenopillya demonstrated that Russian forces were extremely effective in the employment of tactical level cyber and electronic attacks . The Russian forces also demonstrated that they were very effective in using conventional targeting processes .
 The battle of Zelenopillya demonstrated that not fighting as a joint force, something on which the U.S. military prides itself, was ironically, an advantage because it increased the speed between reconnaissance and the weapon system .
 The battle demonstrated that Russian forces were unconcerned with the employment of precision weaponry . The battle also demonstrated their preference for area fire coverage, according to CNN .
 The attack illustrated the Russian’s appetite for employing a variety of munitions, to include DPICM, thermobaric munitions, white phosphorous, and high-explosive munitions .
 The attack highlighted a shift in attitudes towards the latitude provided to soldiers and tactical formations .
 In Russia’s Soviet past, control was highly centralized, but as the battle at Zelenopillya highlights, not only has been pushed down to lower levels of command, which is guided by 91 Ibid.
 Ukrainian forces were successful at pushing back Russian and partisan forces to the boundaries of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . Despite Russian efforts to confound Ukrainian counteraction, Ukrainian forces successfully pushed back .
 Ukrainian success in these early operations triggered a transition in the war . Russia became far more aggressive in response to the Ukrainian success .
 As a result, Russia unleashed conventional warfighting capabilities, techniques, and force structures not recently seen on modern battlefields .
 The Russian army became more overt in its presence and began to funnel more armored and mechanized combat systems into the Donbas . The T-80 and T-90 main battle tanks are among the most important tanks .
 Ukraine launched an armored raid into the Donbas in response to the battle of Zelenopillya . Ukraine launched the raid to thwart Russian initiative, weaken DPR and LPR partisan forces .
 Analyst Phillip Karber called the raid the longest armored raid in history . The Ukrainian 95th Air Assault Brigade, under command of Colonel Mykhailo Zabrodski, penetrated the Russian front and wreaked havoc .
 The raid resulted in a two hundred-mile excursion through Russian and partisan held territory . Zabrodski’s 95th Brigade scored a number of tactical successes .
 Zumbrowski’s 95th Brigade fought conventional ground combat with Russian and partisan forces at Bakhmat, Debal’tseve and Saur-Mogila .
 The 95th Brigade, being an Air Assault brigade, was 94 Thomas, Russia Military Strategy, 394. 40 significantly augmented with tanks, mechanized infantry, and self-propelled artillery to support the operation .
 Zabrodski led the brigade through a contested river crossing on Highway 21 along the Mius River, outside Krasnyi Luch .
 95th Brigade fought its way through Krasnyi Luch in route to Luhansk . Following the successful river crossing.
 First, it was to assist the encircled Ukrainian unit and prevent its destruction . First, the mission was to protect the Ukrainian unit from destruction .
 The 95th Brigade was to regain control of the aiiport from Russian and partisan forces . Second, the 95th brigade was to recapture control of aiipsort from the Russian forces .
 Zabrodski’s brigade penetrated the Russian defensive perimeter, reached the airport, and made contact with the beleaguered Ukrainian forces defending the airport .
 Ukrainian forces conducted joint operations, employing their air force in conjunction with the 95th Brigade to attack the Russian defenders .
 The unified action of the Ukrainian ai med forces loosened the grip Russian forces maintained around the airport . The trapped formation was able to extricate themselves .
 As part of this effort, Russian forces employed air defense missiles to deny Ukrainian forces resupply at the airport . The effort was to disrupt their ability to conduct joint operations .
 Ukrainian air force lost two aircraft, an An-26 on July 14 and a Su-25 on July 16 .
 Zabrodski’s 95th Brigade culminated on July 23 .
 The force withdrew from the Luhansk airport, returning to the relative safety of Kramatorsk . Later that day the force withdrew.
 Zabrodski’s raid succeeded in arresting Russian offensive action, but only briefly . The raid failed to arrest Russian forces in the Russian capital .
 The raid also succeeded in relieving the isolated Ukrainian force at Luhansk airport . The mission failed to wrest the facility from Russian control .
Russian Siege Warfare Fighting continued through the month of August . Approximately four thousand Russian and partisan forces killed more than one thousand Ukrainian soldiers during the fighting .
 The battle of Ilovaisk, and its large number of casualties, led to the Minsk Protocol on September 5, 2014 . The battle was the first time the two sides had been involved in the conflict .
 The battle also signaled the end of the Ukrainian government’s anti-terrorist operations and a transition to full-scale conventional war . The Ukrainian government's anti-terrorism operations were also ended .
 Ilovaisk, located in the Donetsk oblast, is a major artery along Highway 21 that links the DPR capital of Donetsk with Russia . It is a critical line of communication for Russian and partisan forces in the Donbas .
 Ukrainian volunteer battalions quietly began to infiltrate Ilovaisk on August 7, 2014, to retake the city . The battle began to take place in August 2014, with the help of volunteers .
 Ukrainian forces continue to feed battalions into the fight, reaching a maximum of seven to eight battalions . During the early stages of the operation, Ukrainian forces continued to feed battalionalions into fight .
 A major Russian counterattack was launched into Ilovaisk on August 27, 2014 . A major counter attack was launched by Russian military forces .
 The counterattack force consisted of several BTGs equipped with T-72B3s and T-80 tanks, BMP-2 and B MP-3 infantry fighting vehicles, plus self-propelled artillery and BM-21 Grad rockets .
 The BTGs were tasked to regain control of the situation and create a zone of dominance . The BTG were tasked with creating an area of dominance for the BTGs .
 Ukrainian forces encircled within Ilovaisk, Ukraine . The cumulative effects of the synchronized operation culminated with Ukrainian troops encircling within the city .
 Ukrainian forces attempted breakouts on multiple occasions, but by August 28, 2014, the Ukrainian government asked Moscow for peace in Ilovaisk . The government asked for the lives of the Ukrainian forces there to be spared .
 Putin agreed a corridor would be provided to allow Ukrainian forces to withdraw from the city . Ukrainian forces would be allowed to retain their weapons and equipment .
 The withdrawal began on the morning of August 28, 2014, but Russian forces began engaging the withdrawing Ukrainians . They destroyed over 60-eight tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and other vehicles .
 The slaughter along the corridor lasted until September 1, 2014, and directly led to the Minsk Protocol cease-fire agreement between Russia and Ukraine on September 5, 2014 .
 The battle of Ilovaisk, the deadliest battle of the RussoUkrainian War, resulted in over one thousand Ukrainian soldiers, both professional and volunteers, killed in action . The town remains firmly in control of Russian and DPR forces .
 Second battle of Donetsk Airport began on September 28, 2014, shortly after the ceasefire of the Minsk Protocol . The second battle began in September 2014 .
 Russian and partisan forces took advantage of the Minsk Protocol to quietly seed Spetsnaz, GRU, and BTGs into the area surrounding Donetsk and the airport .
 Donetsk airport was one of the most modern airports in Europe . Prior to the Russo-Ukrainian War, the airport was a major airport in Russia .
 Russian and Ukrainian forces jockeyed for control of Donetsk Airport . The first battle of the airport was held in the early hours of the morning . The second battle was held at Donetsk Airport in a bid to keep control of the facility .
 The Ukrainian 98th Airborne Brigade was defending the airport . BTGs from the Southern and Western Military Districts launched coordinated attacks .
 BTG saw its role expanded at the airport, as they conducted combined arms action throughout the battle . The BTG was a proof-of-concept for both the formation and its emergent doctrine .
 Analyst Phillip Karber reaffirms that the battle signified a reemergence of conventional ground combat to the modem battlefield . Many analysts, theorists, and pundits thought it was a thing of the past .
Karber clearly states the battle of Donetsk airport was decided by tanks .
 Russian and partisan forces employed global-positioning systems and radio-equipped drone aircraft to saturate the area in order to identify the location of Ukrainian forces .
 The Russian artillery and rockets employed a mix of high-explosives, thermobarics, and top-attack, bomblet munitions .
 Russian BTGs also used their self-propelled artillery in a direct fire mode, often out to range of six thousand meters, to suppress or disrupt Ukrainian forces .
 Russian forces launched tanks, BMPs, and anti-armor platforms to destroy the remaining Ukrainian armor and mechanized vehicles . With Ukrainian forces pinned down, Russian forces brought in their infantry to clear any remaining enemy .
 Russians were reported to be employing the T-73B, T-80, and T-90 . All of which were outfitted with reactive armor that could defeat all but tandem-warhead antiarmor capabilities .
 The Ukrainians possessed only modest anti armor capabilities . None of which were tandem warhead, making their infantry all but defenseless against Russian and partisan armor .
 Shortly after the resumption of hostilities, the Vostok Battalion reemerged .
 The battalion, composed almost entirely of Chechens, is reported to have not taken prisoners, unlike their Russian and DPR-counterparts . Instead they tortured Ukrainian soldiers they encountered on the battlefield .
 The Vostok Battalion was also rumored to have slit the throats of several helpless Ukrainian soldiers at the Donetsk Airport .
 By October 5, Russia and their DPR allies had established a foothold at the airport by establishing positions within the airport perimeter fence .
 Both parties jockey for control of the airport, but the relative balance of power maintained equilibrium . Both parties were in control of airport .
 Russian assault on December 5 portended things to come, as Ukrainian forces lost their stronghold in the old terminal . The advance resulted in Ukrainian forces losing their stronghold.
 On January 17, Ukrainian forces launched a last-ditch counteroffensive, but by January 19, the attack faltered . The attack was launched by Ukrainian forces.
 Ukrainian counterattack on January 19 had momentum and appeared as though it might expel Russian forces from the airport . Russian reinforcements had been dispatched and additional BTGs arrived in the nick of time, thus stemming the tide of the Ukrainian counteroffensive .
 Russian and partisan forces continued to capitalize on the shifting momentum by sustaining pressure on Ukrainians . Russian andpartisan forces continue to capitalize.
 The airport officially fell against the Russians and DPR partisans in the latter part of the day . By January 22, the Ukrainians could no longer hold out .
 The impact of the airport changing hands was largely symbolic because it had been rendered useless by the time it fell to the Russians .
 The runways and terminals were destroyed and the air traffic control tower razed . The air trafficcontrol tower was razed.
 BTG's versatility emerged as a result of the second battle of Donetsk Airport, as well as the importance of combined arms battle . BTG won the first battle of the BTG at Donetsk Airport in 2012 .
 Ukrainians walked away from the airport with an information victory in their own right . Conversely, the Ukrainians walk away with a information victory.
 Ukrainian soldiers' action earned them the moniker, the “cyborgs’ of Donetsk airport . The battle for the airport demonstrated Ukrainian soldiers’ willingness to fight on in the face of overwhelming odds .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War’s ‘Battle of the Bulge’ is another fight for critical infrastructure and lines of communication in the Donbas .
 Debal’tseve was critical to Russia’s forces, the partisans, and the Novorossiya movement . He was critical of Russia's forces and the partisans .
 Debal’tseve was a critical line of communication because it linked the Donbas with Russia . Highway M04 runs directly from the city to Russia’s Rostov oblast .
 The city had been retaken from partisan forces in July 2014, who had initially seized control during the chaos of April 2014 .
 The value of the city drove the battle of Debal’tseve, which began on January 14, 2015 .
 Russian and partisan casualty numbers are not clearly defined, but it appears that they lost approximately 60 soldiers .
 Debal’tseve was the last territorial piece needed to complete the goal of a unified Novorossiya . Debal's goal was to complete a unifiedNovorossia .
 At the time, the northern portion of Debal’tseve was the only surrounding area under control by Ukrainian forces .
 Russia and its partisans sought to complete the encirclement of the bulge, severing the city from Ukrainian controlled territory . The city was once part of Ukraine, but it is now part of Russia's territory .
 Ukrainian government became aware of the vise closing around the Debal’tseve . Eight thousand soldiers were sent in to defend the city against fifteen thousand soldiers .
 The Ukrainian army’s 128th Mechanized Brigade and the volunteer “Donbas’ Battalion made up the preponderance of the defense at Debal’tseve .
 Similar to Luhansk and Donetsk aiiports, Russian and partisan forces encircled the city and conducted a siege instead of attempting urban warfare .
 Russian drones swarmed the area to identify Ukrainian positions . BTGs launched salvos of artillery and BM-21 Grad rocket fire to destroy those positions .
 Russian forces also purposely targeted buildings and city infrastructure in their strikes to deny Ukrainian forces protection from the weather . The weather had turned quite bad, with sub-zero temperatures and continual snowfall .
 The attacks on the city were an integral component of Russian information operations . Debal’s government was unable to adequately support them .
 Russian forces seeded Highway M03 with mines and artillery and rocket fire support, making it a death trap for anyone attempting to enter or flee the city . The road is the main Ukrainian artery leading to safe territory .
 The result of these actions was the death of 6,000 civilians, while an additional 8,000 fled the city . The result was the result of the actions.
 Debal’tseve had a population of 25,000. In looking at those numbers, it is critical to remember that Debal's population was 25,00 .
 The siege of the city and the attacks on Ukrainian defenses around the city continued into February . The Minsk 11 agreement on February 12, 2015, led to the Minsk agreement .
 The agreement did nothing to stop the fighting or siege of Debal’tseve and the fighting raged on as Russia launched another BTG from the Southern Military District .
 By February 17, Russian and partisan forces launched a full-scale assault into the city of Moscow . By February 18, the city had been overrun by Russian andpartisan forces .
 The city of Debal’tseve fell to Russia, the DPR, and the LPR on February 18 . The city was the first to fall to Russia .
 The governments in Kiev and Moscow came to an agreement to establish a corridor to allow the Ukrainian forces to peacefully withdrawal from Debal’tseve .
 Russian and partisan forces failed to honor the agreement, and ruthlessly attacked retreating Ukrainian forces . Many soldiers were forced to abandon their vehicles and escape on foot through wooded areas .
 Debal’tseve battle showcases the usefulness of the BTG organization . The second battle of Donetsk Airport was the defining feature of the battle of the airport .
 The battle demonstrates the linkage between drones, information collection, targeting, targeting and offensive use of artillery and rocket fire to soften the defense . The supporting armored strike to infest the objective.
 The use of the BTG, its organization, and equipment demonstrate the utility of conventional warfare within hybrid warfare, as it relates to the execution of limited wars . The BTG's use of its organization and equipment demonstrates the utility for conventional warfare in hybrid warfare .
 The BTG is ideally suited to operate in a multi-domain environment . BTG, as the battle of Debal’tseve illustrates, is ideal for multi- domain environments .
 The battle is yet another example of the role of the siege on the modern battlefield . The Russo-Ukrainian War trend is continuing .
 Of the six battles analyzed herein, all but two were sieges, the exceptions were Zabrodski’s Raid and the Battle of Zelenopillya . The exception was Zabroski”s Raid.
 The Russians multi-domain capability packaged within the BTG, and when necessary, supported with fires or air defense . The Ukrainian military district capitalized on the Ukrainian’s willingness to act .
 This concept goes back to Liddell Hart's concept of ju-jitsu, or using an opponent’s momentum against them .
 The Russians learned that Ukrainian forces quickly committed forces when an area was threatened, intentionally provoked a fight by threatening an area .
 The intention is to isolate the responders, and then slowly erode their capabilities and personnel over time, thus exhausting their ability to resist physically and morally .
 The siege also benefited Russia from an informational and diplomatic standpoint . Russia also benefited from the siege, as well as an informational standpoint .
 The compounding situation, for the civilians and soldiers in Debal’tseve, drove diplomacy between the two nations .
 The diplomacy, embodied in the Minsk II Protocol, facilitated Russia’s continued pursuit of its policy objectives . The diplomacy was part of the M Belarus II Protocol .
 Reflections on the Russo-Ukrainian War are critical to understand that definitions matter . To conclude the analysis, it is critical to understanding that definitionsmatter .
 The battle of Debal’tseve was the last major battle of the Russo-Ukrainian War . The battle was the first major battle between the two sides of the war .
 Many experts suggest that the conflict is now a ‘frozen conflict’ and point to the Russian venture into the Donbas as a strategic failure .
 That point of view fails to understand the political and strategic goals of Russia, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The People's Republics in Donetsk and Luhansk were initially supposed to be united into Novorossiya . They are Russian “allies’s Republics, and serve as a counterbalance to Kiev .
 The DPR and LPR, coupled with the annexation of Crimea, serve to exert Russian dominance in Eastern Europe . They show a willingness to fight both covertly and overtly to attain political and strategic objectives .
 Russia is certainly winning in the traditional sense of the word, according to the Russian media . Russia is not victorious in a traditional sense, but it's certainly winning, says CNN .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine have stopped NATO’s advance to its periphery and has weakened Kiev politically . Russia’'s actions has stopped NATO's advance to the periphery and weakened Kiev.
 The Russo-Ukrainian War brought modern hybrid warfare to the fore as a revised theory of action that incorporates Information Age technology, to operate in multiple domains .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War embodies Gerasimov’s idea of compressing the levels of war . The Russian War is the result of a war that has been described as the most intense in history .
 Armor 128, no. 51 possesses operational fires and air defense, and operates both tactically and operationally by synchronizing tactical actions in time, space, and puipose .
 The BTG, disaggregated from a headquarters on the Ukrainian battlefield, serves the theater headquarters in Russia’s Rustov oblast .
 The Russian BTG’s performance and participation at the battles of Donetsk airport, Luhansk aiiport, and the strategically vital cities of Ilovaisk and Debal’tseve demonstrate this feature .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War, highlighted by cross-domain hybrid warfare, brings forth the idea of systems warfare in which national systems meet on physical and non-physical battlefields in the pursuit of primacy .
 In systems war, the diversified capabilities located throughout domains and levels of war create systems so robust that they all but neuter the traditional idea of centers of gravity .
Open, adaptive systems, such as the militaries of contemporary nation-states, are fundamentally focused on survival . They serve no purpose if unable to fight, says the author .
Open and adaptive systems possess the capability and intent to reallocate or reposition internal critical capabilities or vulnerabilities when those are threatened with destruction . Open and adaptive system possess the ability to reposition or reallocation or repposition internal critical capability or vulnerabilities .
In future battles, in which hybrid warfare is employed in multi-domain fashion, center of gravity analysis will likely be an exercise that is largely academic and not germane to defeating the adversary's system .
 Defeat of the adversary’s system will likely involve slowly hacking away at its capabilities to the point at which the system has suffered irreparable damage and collapses .
Multi-domain battlefields of the future will likely be epitomized by attrition warfare. Put another way, hybrid, multi- domain battlefields may be dominated by attrition Warfare .
 The Russian hybrid warfare model provides the operational artist many valuable lessons. Impact of Hybrid Warfare for War Today and Tomorrow is a Russian model .
 Most nation-states are still inclined to invest in powerful conventional capabilities, according to the U.S. State Department . 52 countries lend legitimacy to the government, and defending their borders if threatened .
 Russia’s reinvestment in conventional capabilities largely seeks to adjust the balance of power in Europe back towards Moscow .
 Europe's divestiture of conventional forces since the fall of the Soviet Union . This action capitalizes on Europe’s divestiture.
 The BTGs show that conventional capability is a key part of hybrid warfare . The BTGs show that the BTGs have a key role in hybrid warfare.
 The Russian version of hybrid warfare demonstrates an evolution in warfare in which there is not a center of gravity . The Russian hybrid warfare is a hybrid warfare.
 Russia has woven its political and military objectives together and is utilizing all the instruments of national power to pursue those objectives . Russia has a strong military presence in the region and is using all the tools to pursue its objectives .
 Russia is blending the use of force into a multi-domain approach that uses conventional, unconventional, cyber, information, and electronic warfare . Russia is trying to overwhelm an opponent's capacity to handle the quantity of presented dilemmas .
 Russia has reorganized their ground forces into robust, highly integrated combined arms formations . Russia has brought vast amounts of firepower to bear in time and space to pulverize the opponent .
 It is critical to remember that the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war are interconnected . It is important to remember the strategic and operational levels are interconnected and actions or innovations in one level influence the other levels .
 These innovations do not occur in isolation and are often direct responses to conditions from the battlefield or from threat analysis .
 Russia has a penchant for studying history, analyzing forms and methods of warfare . In addition, it is critical to acknowledge Russia’s penchant for study history .
 The point is that as other nation-states or up-and-coming polities look to solve their problems, they will likely pursue innovation in a similar manner .
 Hiding beneath the veneer of hybridity are powerful conventional capabilities, as Russia demonstrated in Ukraine in 2014 .
 Analysts suggest Russia has reorganized its tactical formations, specifically, their battalion and brigade level organizations to generate forces that can punch well above their relative echelon . Russia is known for its ability to punch wellabove its relative echellon .
 Russia reorganized its ground combat formations . Russia recognized the importance of tactical dispersion and the efficacy of maneuver warfare . Russia also recognized the increased lethality of modern weaponry .
 The U.S. Army Armored Brigade Combat Teams are capable of operating along comparable ranges, to include up to 40 kilometers . They have developed BTGs that are equitable to United States Army armored brigade Combat Teams . The BTGs can operate along a range of 40 kilometers.
 The Russian BTGs routinely use their self-propelled artillery in a direct-lay role . The BTGs have a direct, frontal fire capability that extends to up to 6,000 meters .
 The BTG’s infantry fighting vehicles, predominately the BMP3, possess inherent firepower capabilities that exceed that of the U.S. Army's Bradley Fighting Vehicle . The M1A2 Abrams tank is almost equal to the M1a2 Abrams tanks .
 The US Army’s ABCT, Stryker Brigade Combat Team and Infantry Brigade Combat team are at an extreme tactical disadvantage .
The presence of nuclear weapons is perhaps the first critical component for modern hybrid warfare . The presence of nukes is a key component for hybrid warfare, say experts .
 Nuclear weapons provide insurance against a massive ground response to an incremental, limited war . The U.S. military says it has no plans for a ground response .
 The offensive nation that possesses nuclear weapons knows that the adversary or its allies will not likely commit large ground forces to a conflict for fear of the aggressor employing those weapons against ground forces .
 Russia's possession of nuclear weapons emboldens leaders to take offensive action . Even the threat of nuclear employment forces potential adversaries to a standstill .
 Leonhard suggests, “Victory in warfare is linked inextricably with positive control of sequence’s sequence. Leonhard says, ‘Victory is linked with positive Control of sequence'
 Modern technology, integrating contemporary limited war, and Leonhard’s musings on sequence, indicate that sequencing contemporary operations is no longer solely dependent on the ability for fuel and food to maintain pace .
 Russian operations in Ukraine demonstrate how operations can be sequenced in time, space, and puipose in multiple domains . Russian operations demonstrate how Operations in Ukraine are sequenced.
 Sequence no longer rests on the ability to continue with the physical employment of force . Instead on layering operations in depth through the use of information, cyber, electronic, unconventional forces, and unconventional forces .
 The U.S. military has not had to account for this situation in decades and largely lacks the experience and requisite knowledge to plan accordingly .
 operational and tactical planners have not had to plan for operations in contested environments in which air superiority or domain dominance is not guaranteed . Operational and tactical planning must also have to prepare for operations.
 The idea of sequenced operations to defeat integrated defensive networks must be a component of thinking in relation to hybrid wars of the future .
 The theater's physical terrain and the theater’s physical terrain are key to its success . The answer to the question of which approach to take hinges upon the immediacy of the situation .
 Both cases warrant the need for a rugged, multi-domain advanced guard formation .
 Coinciding with operating below the threshold of NATO retribution of that of the international community, is the idea of not operating as a joint force .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War illustrates the efficacy of non-joint operations in relation to hybrid warfare . It minimizes an aggressor's footprint, increasing the ability to deny involvement in combat operations .
 The absence of joint operations is not to say that operations in the air domain are not being conducted . hybrid warfare demonstrates quite the contrary .
 To make up for the absence of joint air power or army aviation, hybrid threats will increasingly rely on drone aircraft .
 These drones will continue to serve as reconnaissance platforms and will likely become equipped with firepower as hybrid threats continue to evolve . The drones will likely be equipped with more firepower as hybrids continue to develop .
 The use of armed drones is a policy of deniability, according to the U.S. State Department . Drones are being exported to proxy or partisan forces .
 These armed drones will work in tandem with proxy, partisan, and unconventional forces for information collection and targeting purposes . The drones will be armed with armed drones to work with proxy and partisan forces for strategic objectives .
 BTG’s viability on the hybrid battlefield will likely give rise to similar formations and force design adjustments for those nations or polities seeking to conduct offensive hybrid campaigns or operations .
 BTG’s capability to operate dispersed, while leveraging operational firepower and air defense capabilities, or physically concentrate its combat power at a time and place of its choosing makes it ideally suited to the ever-evolving hybrid operational environment .
 Russia has seen the importance of the BTG as a result of its action in the Russo-Ukrainian War . Russia is looking to increase the number of BTGs in the Russian army .
 The hybrid warfare paradigm is a theory of warfare, an offset strategy, and a tool to exploit an adversary’s vulnerabilities, to include internal political, social, and economic divisions .
 Hybrid warfare is a theory of war that embraces strategist Everett Dolman’s concept of strategy . ‘Strategy, in its simplest form, is a plan for attaining continuing advantage,’ Dolman says .
 Hybrid warfare is a theory of warfare for periods of limited warfare in which nations seek to impose their political will without destroying political institutions of their adversaries .
 Hybrid warfare is a theory of warfare for the Information Age . It seeks to operate in multiple domains to find methods to achieve a relative position of advantage .
 Hybrid warfare is a theory of war that seeks to win without fight in the physical sense of the word . Hybrid warfare seeks to apply force in all domains and with all the instruments of national power to weaken political institutions .
 Russia is trying to further advance their interests and pursue their political and strategic agenda . This is unsuccessful, hybrid warfare, at least as embodied by Russia, initiates a conventional line of operations . Russia is attempting to pursue its political, strategic agenda.
 The concept of hybrid warfare is built upon the idea of perpetual conflict . The concept is less important than maintaining a position of perpetual advantage .
 Russia’s Novorossiya movement in the Donbas reflects this idea by carving out a polity that is sympathetic, if not subservient to Russia . Ukraine is significantly weakening Ukraine while Russia is weakening Ukraine .
 Others view the campaign and its resulting conditions a success as it has significantly weakened the Ukrainian government and its armored forces . Others see the campaign as a success.
 Hybrid warfare operates on the assumption that wars of annihilation are a thing of the past due to the governing factor that nuclear weapons play . Nuclear weapons play is a governing factor.
 The goal of hybrid warfare is to not topple existing regimes, but instead to create national ulcers . War of annihilation, or regime change, often create more turmoil for the aggressor .
 These ulcers are tools in which the aggressor can ratchet up, as needed, to apply political pressure on its opponent . Also, these ulcers can be used to apply pressure on the opponent, as well.
 These ulcers, or frozen conflicts, are alive and well in many parts of the world . They have been a tool of the Russians since the end of the Soviet Union .
As more local powers seek to expand regionally and beyond, they will likely use hybrid warfare to create enclaves.
 Hybrid warfare is a contemporary perspective on Tukhachevsky’s deep operations . The book is a modern perspective on the Russian military.
 Information Age technology addresses Information Age vulnerabilities such as the fragility of cyber infrastructure, and the diminished role of military forces in Europe .
 Russian Policy and Military Strategy Russian Policy: Overturn US-led unipolar world . Increase national prestige. Deter Ukraine from becoming more West-leaning . Maintain patrimonial relationship with Ukraine, and with Near Abroad . Serve as protector to ethnic Russians throughout the world .
 Annex Crimea and create an enclave in Ukraine in the Donbas ~ Novorossiya (Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic) Ensure survivability of annexation of Crimea .
 Hybrid campaign to annex Crimea. Siege Warfare capitalizes on Ukrainian willingness to quickly commit forces in response to a stimulus .
 Elements of National Power Diplomatic ‘Novorossiya’ to facilitate Russian support to underrepresented ethnic Russians within Ukraine .
 Russia is the protectorate of all ethnic Russians, regardless of where they are in the world . Control Ukrainian information and media infrastructure in Crimea and Donbas . Discredit Ukrainian armed forces .
Russian Military Strategy aims to weaken Ukrainian economy and create social and political unrest . See “Russian Military strategy’s” Economic Manipulate oil and gas available into Ukraine .
 The Elements of Russian Operational Art in the Russo-Ukrainian War is developed based upon suppositions on the initial Russian plan prior to initiation of action in Ukraine . After having annexed Crimea, Crimea was annexed by Russia .
 Some of the items listed in the Elements of Operational Art were either never obtained, or were lost due to Ukrainian counteraction . Some items were never obtained.
 This list is the best deductions that could be made given the limited information available on Russian operational art in relation to its actions in Ukraine .
 The goal was to focus at the operational level, and not allow strategic impacts seep into this work . The goal is to focus on the operational levels, not the strategic impacts .
 Phase I: Seizure of critical infrastructure with the Donbas with unconventional forces and partisans . Phase II: Counteroffensive against Ukrainian reaction to actions in Phase I Phase III . Phase IV: Defeat Ukrainian countermeasures or counterattacks. Phase V: Continued presence and partnership with partisan forces .
 Unable to control ground LOCs at Debal’tseve or keep highways in Donbas open . Too much negative pressure from international community from the international community .
 Some of the items listed above, such as control of the port of Mariupol, were not achieved by the Russians .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War Dates for timeline selected on the initiation of reported hostilities and the end of major battles and operations .
 The information for the timeline was pulled from a variety of sources, to include those listed in the bibliography . The Institute for the Study of War also included periodic information reports .
 The Institut Francais des Relations Internationales Security Studies Center, 2015, is the center of a security studies center . The Institute is based in Paris, France .
 The Senate Armed Services Committee held a hearing on February 9, 2016 .
 Gibbons-Neff, Thomas, interviewed by Ryan Evans, War on the Rocks, August 26, 2015 .
 The Rise of Hybrid Wars, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, Arlington, VA, published December 2014 . The Rise Of Hybrid Wars was published by the Institute of Policy Studies .
Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms .
 The Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington DC, will hold a lecture on March 10 .
 National Security Policy and Strategy is edited by J Boone Bartholomees, Jr. National Security policy and Strategy .
 The Pritzker Military Museum and Library, Chicago, will hold a lecture on April 12, 2016 .
 The Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, will hold a lecture on June 23, 2016 .
 The Subcommittee on AirLand, Committee of Armed Services, United States Senate is in review of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2017 . The subcommittee is on the AirLand subcommittee .