 The United States has imposed economic and diplomatic sanctions related to Russia’s actions in Ukraine and Syria . In response, the U.S. has also imposed economic, diplomatic sanctions on Russia .
 The United States also has led NATO in developing a new military posture in Central and Eastern Europe . The new posture is designed to reassure allies and deter aggression .
 U.S. policymakers over the years have identified areas in which United States and Russian interests are or could be compatible .
 The United States and Russia have cooperated successfully on issues such as nuclear arms control and nonproliferation . The U.S. and Russia support for military operations in Afghanistan, the Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs .
 The United States and Russia have identified other areas of cooperation, such as countering terrorism, illicit narcotics, and piracy . In addition, the U.S. and Russia are also working on countering terrorism and illicit narcotics .
 President Donald J. Trump has sought to improve U.S. relations with Russia at the start of his tenure . Like previous United States Administrations, President Trump has tried to improve relations .
 Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and President Trump said they agreed to find ways to improve channels of communication and begin addressing issues dividing the two countries . At initial meetings with President Putin in April and July 2017, Rex Tillerson said he and President Donald Trump agreed to improve communication .
 The Administration has indicated that it intends to adhere to core international commitments and principles, as well as to retain sanctions on Russia .
 Secretary Tillerson has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered them’
 Secretary Tillerson and other officials also have noted the severity of Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election .
 This report provides background information on Russian politics, economics, and military issues . This report is based on a recent report by Russian state-run media .
 It discusses a number of key issues for Congress concerning Russia’s foreign relations and the U.S.-Russian relationship .
 Background and United States Policy Contents Political Structure and Developments . The U.S. political structure and developments.
 European Imports of Russian Natural Gas .20.20 Contacts . 20 Contacts.
 From 1922 to 1991, Soviet Russia was the core of the USSR, established in the wake of the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and the civil war that followed .
 The USSR spanned much the same territory as the Russian Empire before it . The USSR spent much of its time in the Soviet Empire .
 Russian states had existed in various forms for centuries . Prior to the empire’s establishment in 1721, Russia had been in various ways .
 Russia’s multiethnic federal structure is inherited from the Soviet period . It includes regions, republics, territories, and other subunits .
 The country's constitution provides for a strong presidency and central authority . The country’s constitution is designed to provide a strong government .
In recent years, opinion polls have reported increased levels of support for President Putin . In recent years.
 Since the annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region in March 2014, he has consistently received approval from more than 80% of respondents in opinion polls .
 This reported approval level is considerably higher than what Putin received in polls over the previous two years . Putin's approval rating was in the low 60s, when his approval rating is in the high 60s .
 These deputies are not directly elected but are chosen by regional executives and legislatures . The deputies are elected by regional officials and legislatures.
 Courts are widely perceived to be subject to manipulation and control by government officials . Courts are also perceived to have been subject to manipulations .
 Basic Facts Land Area: 6. million square miles, about 1. times the size of the United States .
 Russian law considers Ukraine’s occupied region of Crimea and the Crimean city of Sevastopol to be additional administrative subdivisions .
 President: Vladimir Putin; Prime Minister: Dmitry Medvedev; Speaker of the State Duma: Vyacheslav Volodin . Foreign Minister: Sergei Lavrov; Sergei Shoigu; Defense Minister: Sergey ShoigU .
 The Constitutional Court rules on the legality and constitutionality of governmental acts and on disputes between branches of government or federative entities .
 Democracy and Human Rights Under Putin’s rule, Russia has experienced a decline in its democratic credentials .
 At the start of the 2000s, the U.S. government-funded nongovernmental organization Freedom House classified Russia as a “hybrid regime, with democratic and authoritarian elements.
 Russia joined the European Court of Human Rights in 1996 . Many observers believe the intent of this law was to enable Russia to ignore rulings by the court .
 Freedom House considered Russia to be a consolidated authoritarian regime . Putin’s second term in 2008 was considered a consolidated regime .
 Putin's handpicked successor for one term, Dmitry Medvedev, has been in power for a second term . Medvedeva has been seen to be liberalizing, despite some signs of liberalization .
 Since Putin's return to the presidency in 2012, Freedom House has noted a new rise in authoritarian governance in Russia .
 The Freedom House assigned Russia the same “freedom rating’s” to China, Yemen, Cuba, and the Democratic Republic of Congo . In its 2016 annual report, the Freedom House rated Russia as the same as other countries .
 Vladimir Putin held a variety of governmental positions from 1990 to 1998 . He was first in the local government of St. Petersburg, Russia .
 In 1998, Russian President Boris Yeltsin appointed Putin head of the Federal Security Service . In 1999, Putin was prime minister of Russia .
 Yeltsin unexpectedly resigned on New Year’s Eve, 1999, and Putin became acting president . Putin was acting president in 1999 .
 Putin served eight years as president before stepping down in 2008 . He served in compliance with constitutional limits on successive terms .
 Dmitry Medvedev was a trusted former presidential chief of staff, deputy prime minister, and board chairperson of the state-controlled energy company Gazprom . His successor was Dmitry medvedev, a trusted ex-presidential chief of Staff, and the board chairman of Gazprom.
 As prime minister from 2008 to 2012, Putin continued to govern Russia in tandem with Medvedev, who remained informally subordinate to Putin . Putin was in charge of Russia from 2008-2012 .
 In September 2011, Medvedev announced that he would not run for reelection . Putin is expected to return to the presidency in 2014 .
 Putin’s return to the presidency had always been plausible, but the announcement was met with public discontent .
 Putin has not confirmed if he is planning to run for reelection, although many observers believe he plans to do so .
 Russia's authoritarian consolidation has involved a wide array of nondemocratic practices and human rights violations . Russia’s authoritarian consolidation involves a wide range of human rights abuses .
 A 2015 law enables the government to identify as “undesirable” foreign organizations engaged in activities that allegedly threaten Russia’s constitutional order, defense capability, or state security . The law also bars Russians from working with them .
 Russia's Democracy Score has gone from a 4.88 in 2001 to a 6.57 in 2017 . Russia’s Democracy Score is now a 7.7 per cent higher than in 2001 .
 The Levada Center, a well-known polling organization, also was branded a foreign agent . In October 2016, a prominent human rights group, Memorial, was so labeled, as well .
 Eleven organizations or their subsidiaries have been barred from Russia for “undesirable activity’s” activity .
 In 2015-2016, barred organizations included the National Endowment for Democracy, Open Society Foundations, U.S. Russia Foundation for Economic Advancement and the Rule of Law .
 In April 2017, three allegedly foreign-registered affiliates of the NGO and civic movement Open Russia were added to the list . Open Russia was founded by former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who served 10 years in prison .
 In June 2017, the German Marshall Fund’s Black Sea Trust for Regional Cooperation also was barred . In June 2016, the trust was also barred .
 Public demonstrations require official approval, and police have broken up protests by force . Public demonstrations need official approval .
 The fine for participation in unsanctioned protests can be thousands of dollars . repeat offenders risk imprisonment . Repeat offenders risk jail time for participating in the protests .
 In 2016, new “antiterrorism” legislation hardened punishments for “extremism’s” law . The law required telecommunications providers to store data for six months .
 A 2013 law restricts lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender rights by prohibiting “propaganda” among minors . The law would encourage individuals to consider “non-traditional sexual relationships’s” as attractive or socially equivalent to “traditional” sexual relationships
 In June 2017, the European Court on Human Rights ruled that the law is discriminatory and violates freedom of expression . The European Court of Human Rights said the law was discriminatory .
 These laws and related discriminatory actions have impacted religious and sexual minorities . These laws have affected religious, sexual minorities, according to a report .
 Russia's Supreme Court upheld a March order of the Justice Ministry banning the operations of Jehovah's Witnesses in Russia for what it ruled to be “extremist’s activity.
 Since then, Jehovah’s Witnesses have reported increased harassment and violence . Since then.
 Some organizations classified as foreign agents have been declassified . The government determined that these organizations no longer receive foreign funding . Others have shut down .
 In May 2017, Putin said he would speak to Russia’s prosecutor-general and minister of internal affairs . It is unclear what, if any, subsequent measures the government took .
 Over the years, a number of opposition-minded or critical Russian journalists, human rights activists, politicians, whistleblowers, and others, have been reported murdered or died under mysterious circumstances .
 Those who commit crimes are often prosecuted, but suspicions often exist that such crimes are ordered by individuals who remain free .
 Corruption Observers contend that Russia suffers from high levels of corruption . Russia has been accused of corruption by some of its top officials .
 The U.S. State Department’s 2016 Human Rights Report notes corruption in Russia is “widespread throughout the executive branch ... as well as in the legislative and judicial branches at all levels of government.
 In a February 2016 poll by the Russia-based Levada Center, 76% of respondents said that Russian state organs were either significantly or wholly affected by corruption .
 In December 2015, Russia’s Ministry of Internal Affairs reported that the average amount of a bribe in criminal cases was around $2,500 .
 opposition figure Vladimir Kara-Murza fell seriously ill for the second time in two years while visiting Moscow . In February 2017, he was placed in an induced coma .
 KaraMurza is a frequent visitor to Congress and campaigned in favor of U.S. sanctions on Russian officials .
 Members of Congress issued statements of support for Kara-Murza after learning of his illness . Several members of Congress also issued statements.
 Background and United States Policy calculated the average reported bribe to be around five times that amount . Background and U.S. Policy calculated that the average bribe was five times the amount .
 Government officials are occasionally arrested for bribery or compelled to resign from their posts . Officials are sometimes compelled to quit their posts for bribery .
 In 2016, cases included a regional governor who was once an opposition figure, the mayor of Russia’s Pacific port city Vladivostok .
 These cases tend not to be interpreted as elements of a serious anticorruption campaign . Instead as manifestations of political and economic infighting or as way to remove ineffective or troublesome politicians .
 Few of Russia’s most senior officials are arrested or dismissed for corruption . Russia's top officials are not arrested for corruption or dismissed .
 Many observers believe Putin and several of his closest colleagues have amassed considerable wealth while in power .
 Putin “supposedly draws a state salary of something like $ I 10,000 a year’s a year, Szubin says . Putin also ‘supposed’ to draw a $10,000-a-year state salary .
 Many observers agree that Vladimir Putin is the most powerful person in Russia . Government Reshuffles: Putin is a powerful person .
 Putin has presided over a complex network of officials and business leaders . Many of whom Putin knew from his time in the Soviet KGB or when he worked in the St. Petersburg . He has been in charge of the Russian State Department for years .
 An influential leadership circle below Putin includes government officials, heads of strategic state-owned enterprises, and businesspersons .
 Russian-based Minchenko Consulting group has produced a series of well-regarded studies that assess who, besides Putin, are the most influential figures in the Russian policymaking process . Since 2012, the group's studies have been published .
 This list specifies 8 to 10 individuals who wield the greatest influence . This list includes some who do not hold official positions, as well as around 50 other key individuals .
 Anton Vaino and Sergei Kiriyenko are Putin’s chief of staff and his deputy, Sergei Kiryenko, among the top 10 leading officials . The list of influential Russian elites counts Putin's chief of Staff, AntonVaino, and his Deputy, Sergei K
 U.S. Policy Observers have noted some recent changes to this system of governance .
 The first change is a reduction in influence of several of Putin’s longtime senior associates . Sergei Ivanov was once pegged as possible successor to Putin .
 A related change is a steady rise in the number of senior officials who are at least a decade younger than Putin . The number has risen as Putin's subordinates more than as his colleagues .
 Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev straddles this divide with Putin . He has worked with Putin since St. Petersburg, Russia, since 2007 .
 Petersburg was Putin's handpicked successor to the presidency after Putin's first two terms . He was Putin’s handpicked replacement to the president after his first term .
 Others have served Putin or Medvedev for several years and have gained relatively powerful positions . Others have been in the same position for years .
 They are generally seen as having no real power bases of their own . They are seen as entirely loyal to Putin. They are also seen as completely loyal to him .
 There does not appear to be a single explanation for the declining influence of Putin’s longtime colleagues .
 Vladimir Yakunin, Viktor Ivanov, Andrei Belyaninov and V Ivanov are subject to U.S. Ukraine-related sanctions .
 Background and United States Policy declining efficiency or increasing mismanagement. Background and U.S. policy declining efficiency .
 Considerable speculation has occurred that such rivalries on occasion lead to developments that Putin does not control . The Russian president has not been able to control the situation .
 Potential examples include the February 2015 murder of opposition politician Boris Nemtsov, which was blamed on people close to Kadyrov . The arrest of Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukaev, which observers suspect is linked to a rivalry.
 CEO of Rostec, Russia’s large state-owned military-industrial complex, oversees scores of hi-tech and defense companies across the country .
 He is thought to have had considerable influence in shaping Russia’s recent anti-Western foreign policy trajectory, including annexation of Crimea .
 Sechin was subject to some speculation that he risked overstepping his bounds and losing power . But he ultimately appeared to strengthen his position at the expense of various rivals .
 He now heads a new security apparatus that officially serves as a special police force to combat terrorism and organized crime . He is widely considered to be Putin’s ‘personal army’ and potentially, a repressive tool for fighting civil unrest .
 Ukraine-related sanctions and Rosneft are subject to U.S. and EU Ukraine- related sanctions . Rostec is subject to United States (and, partially, EU) sanctions and Rostec.
 Russians elected the State Duma, the lower house of parliament, on September 18, 2016 .
 Russia’s last parliamentary elections, in December 2011, triggered a wave of protests against electoral fraud . The rise of a revitalized opposition against Putin's government against the Putin government .
All other seats went to those considered loyal opposition parties and deputies . All other seats in the House of Representatives went to the opposition parties .
 Total party list percentage is calculated out of the total number of valid and invalid ballots . The total party list is based on the number of invalid and valid ballots .
 The KPRF, LDPR, and A Just Russia parties are considered the loyal opposition parties . The opposition parties are also considered loyal parties .
 These parties criticize the government, if not Putin, but typically support its legislative initiatives . These parties are often critical of the Russian government .
 Yabloko and PARNAS are liberal opposition parties considered to be genuinely in opposition to the government . The opposition parties are considered to have a genuine opposition.
 Several small parties did not meet the 5% threshold for party list representation . They fall under the “Other’s category, which includes several small parties that didn't meet the threshold .
 The ruling UR party traditionally polls lower than Putin, who does not formally lead the party . The party appeared to benefit from a surge in patriotic sentiment unleashed by Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 UR also experienced a certain renewal in advance of elections . Party primaries promoted the rise of many candidates new to national politics .
 Russian government took measures after the last election to bolster the victory of UR and minimize opposition gains across the country .
 Fourteen parties that received at least 3% of the vote in the last election or held at least one seat in a regional council seat competed in the 2016 election . The election will be held in 2016 .
 Other parties technically could register after collecting 200,000 signatures, but no such registrations were approved . No such registrations have been approved .
 Opposition leaders subjected to barrage of negative publicity, branding them as agents of the West . State-controlled media and government officials subjected opposition leaders to negative publicity .
 A centrally controlled redistricting process led to the carving up of urban centers that leaned toward the opposition . The process was controlled by a centrally controlled redistribution process .
 The election date was moved up from December 2016, considerably shortening the campaign period . Finally, the election date has been changed to December 2016 .
 UR also benefited from a change in electoral rules restoring a mixed electoral system that had been in place through 2003 parliamentary elections .
 UR candidates won more than 90% of these races. UR candidates were expected to win more seats via single-member races .
 The election observation mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe noted that the counting process was bad or very bad in 23% of polling stations it observed .
 The three parties that gained seats have served in parliament already and are known as the loyal opposition .
 These parties criticize the government, if not Putin, but typically support its legislative initiatives . These parties often support their legislative initiatives.
No liberal opposition party won Duma seats in the 2016 elections . No liberal opposition parties won seats in 2016 elections.
 Both parties consider themselves European-style liberal democratic parties . Other parties criticized PARNAS for including at least one populist firebrand near the top of its list .
 The Open Russia movement was founded by former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky . 18 single-member races were contested by candidates representing the Open Russia Movement .
 The party of another prominent opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, had its registration revoked in 2015, ostensibly for technical reasons, and thus was unable to participate in the election . The party is the party of an opposition leader and anticorruption activist .
 Navalny himself is barred from running for political office due to a 2013 criminal conviction that resulted in a suspended sentence . Navalny was convicted of a criminal conviction in 2013 .
 The European Court of Human Rights concluded in February 2016 that the trial had violated Navalny’s rights . Navalny supporters and most outside observers deemed the case to be politically motivated .
 PARNAS leader Kasyanov was targeted in a scandal involving alleged hidden video footage of an affair with a party colleague . It was barred from registering candidates in September 2015 regional elections, and in spring 2016 the coalition collapsed .
 Vladimir Putin's rule is relatively stable, but new signs of discontent have arisen . For now, observers tend to see Vladimir Putin’s rule as relatively stable .
 Background and U.S. Policy grown, and social spending has been reduced . Background and United States Policy grown. Social spending reduced .
 In March and June 2017, Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation reportedly attracted thousands, many of whom were university-aged or younger, to demonstrate against corruption .
Whether such protests are sufficient to catalyze a more substantial political movement remains to be seen . Whether such protests will be enough to spark a larger political movement is not yet clear .
 Some observers believe that the government is seeking to minimize popular discontent by increasing social benefits in the lead-up to the next presidential election, scheduled for March 2018 .
 Potential future scenarios tend to center on succession politics, whether engineered by Putin or prompted by his incapacitation or untimely passing .
 As late as June 2017, Putin still would not say if he was planning to run for reelection . Many observers believe he plans to do so .
 In the event of a controlled succession, observers speculate about a number of well-known potential successors .
 Putin himself was a highly unexpected choice to succeed his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin . However, the eventual choice also coidd be a relatively unknown figure .
 Many observers put little stock in the possibility of a democratic transition of power . Many observers say there is little chance of a democracy in power .
Candidates are thought more likely to emerge from right-wing nationalist forces or a new post-Communist left, not from a liberal, pro-Western opposition or civil society .
 Other scenarios involve a loss of control by Putin or members of his inner circle, as a result of a collapsing economy, weakened state apparatus or an external war gone wrong .
 Some observers have speculated that rival political centers could compete for power in Putin’s absence . This competition could turn violent.
 Some have voiced concerns that an uncontrolled transition could lead to the rise of more nationalist forces .
 Russia has a robust system of subnational elections . In practice, the country's top-down system provides centralized control over key issues .
 All but one of Russia’s 83 governors are United Russia members or government-backed figures .
 UR also has majorities, typically substantial ones, in all regional councils . Only a handful of regional deputies are affiliated with the liberal opposition .
 Russian law allows for the direct election of mayors in cities other than Moscow and St. Petersburg . But Russian law also allows for a direct election in cities in other cities such as Moscow .
 Most municipalities have an indirectly elected mayor or council head who shares authority with a more powerful appointed or indirectly elected city manager . Petersburg, Petersburg, most municipalities have a mayor or city manager who shares power with the mayor .
 A few opposition candidates have won competitive mayoral elections . Some of the more prominent were subsequently removed from office and even imprisoned .
 The Economy 42 The Russian economy has gone through periods of decline, growth, and stagnation since 1991 . The economy has been in stagnation since the start of 1991 .
 A decade of strong economic growth followed, in which Russia’s GDP increased on average 6.9% per year . Russia's GDP grew on average of 6.8% in a decade .
 The surge in economic growth is largely the result of increases in world oil prices . The Russian standard of living has been raised and brought a significant degree of economic stability .
 The Russian economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis and resulting economic downturn that began in 2008 .
 The crisis exposed weaknesses in the economy, including its dependence on the production and export of oil and other natural resources and its weak financial system .
 The Russian government’s reassertion of control over major industries, especially in the energy sector, also contributed to an underachieving economy . Russian government's reassertions of control of major industries also contributed.
 Russia’s period of economic growth came to an abrupt end by 2009 . As a result, Russia's period of growth was ended in 2009 .
 Russian real GDP increased 5.2% in 2008, but it declined by 7.8% in 2009 . In 2009, the Russian economy grew 7.7% .
 U.S. Sanctions and Russia’s Economy are discussed in the CRS Report R43895 .
 Russia’s economy only slightly contracted . net private sector capital outflows slowed, from more than $150 billion in 2014 to $19. billion in 2016 . inflation fell by more than half since 2015, to 7.0%; the value of the ruble stabilized.
 13.5% of the population were estimated to be living in poverty . Around 19. million (13.5%) of the world's population are estimated to have lived in poverty.
Foreign direct investment into Russia came to a halt in late 2014 and early 2015 . In 2016, it started to resume in 2016 .
 The purpose and method of the sale has raised some questions among observers . The sale has also raised questions about the sale's method and method .
 U.S. Policy consolidates its two sovereign wealth funds as the government continues to face budget shortfalls .
 Russia’s other sovereign wealth fund, the National Wealth Fund, was designed to help balance the pension system and has about $75 billion . Russia's other Sovereign wealth fund is the National wealth Fund, which was designed for Russia's pensions .
 Russia’s economy faces long-standing structural challenges, including slow economic diversification, weak protection of property rights, burdensome administrative procedures, state involvement in the economy .
 The IMF argues that sanctions dampen the potential for accelerating investment growth .
 The low value of the ruble may hamper Russia’s attempts to innovate and modernize its economy . The economy's continued reliance on oil makes it vulnerable to another drop in oil prices .
 The EU as a whole remains Russia's largest trading partner . Despite Western sanctions and Russia's own retaliatory ban against agricultural imports, the EU remains Russia’s biggest trading partner.
 In 2016, 47% of Russia’s merchandise exports went to EU member states . 38% of its merchandise imports came from EU member state states .
 The price of oil, a major export and source of revenue for the Russian government, dropped by more than 60% between the start of 2014 and the end of 2015 . Sanctions were imposed at the same time the prices of oil dropped significantly .
 At the start of 2016, a State Department official argued that sanctions were not designed to push Russia “over the economic cliff’ in the short run . But rather were designed to exert long-term pressure on Russia .
 Russian economists estimated that the economic sanctions would decrease Russia’s GDP by 2.4% by 2017 . But the effect would be 3. times less than the effect from the oil-price shock .
 In November 2016, Putin stated that the sanctions are “severely harming Russia’s access to international financial markets . The impact was not as severe as the harm from the decline in energy prices, he said .
In December 2016, the Office of the Chief Economist at the U.S. State Department published estimates of the impact of the United States and European Union sanctions in 2014 on a firm-level basis .
 The average company or associated company in Russia subject to sanctions lost about one-third of its operating revenue, more than one-half of its asset value . About one- third of its employees are relative to nonsanctioned peers .
 The longer-term effect of sanctions, if they are kept in place, is unclear . If sanctions are kept, it is unclear.
 The economic bite of restrictions on U.S. long-term financing for certain sectors or technology for specific Russian oil exploration projects may manifest more prominently in coming years .
Longterm impact may depend on whether Russia can develop viable and reliable alternative economic partners . China, India, and Brazil are among countries that have refrained from sanctions .
 U.S.-Russian Trade and Investment had relatively little direct trade and investment with Russia .
 Russia has accounted for less than 2% of total U.S. merchandise imports in the past decade . Less than 1% of U. S. merchandise exports are FDI, and less than 1%.
 United States merchandise exports to Russia fell from $11 billion in 2013 to $5. billion in 2016 . U.S. merchandise export to Russia dropped from $ 11 billion to $ 5 billion in 2015 .
 U.S. merchandise imports from Russia fell from $27 billion in 2013 to $14. billion in 2016 . Russia's imports from the United States were $27billion in 2013 .
 United States investment in Russia was $9. billion in 2015, down from a peak of $20 billion in 2009 . U.S. investments in Russia were $9 billion.
 United States merchandise imports from Russia tend to be dominated by oil and unfinished metals . U.S. merchandise imports are dominated by unfinished metals and oil .
 These products accounted for more than 85% of U.S. imports from Russia in 2016 . These products were imported by more than 80% of the United States imports .
 U.S. merchandise exports to Russia tend to focus on machinery and manufactured products .
 These products accounted for more than 75% of U.S. exports to Russia in 2016 . These products were used in more than 50% of United States exports.
 CRS using U.S. Census Bureau data, as accessed from Global Trade Atlas. Created by CRS.
 The U.S. and Russia have limited trade and investment flows between the two countries . But overall economic ties between the United States and Russia are limited .
 Data are U.S. direct investment position abroad on a historical-cost basis . Data are United States direct investment positions abroad .
 Russia's actions continued to depart from the WTO’s core tenets of liberal trade, transparency, and predictability in favor of inward-looking, import-substitution economic policies .
 Some analysts have raised questions about Russia's retaliatory ban on agriculture imports from the United States and other countries . Others argue that the ban may be permitted under the national security exemption .
 Energy Sector 68 Russia is a significant producer of energy in various forms, including crude oil, natural gas, coal, and nuclear power .
 In 2016, Russia was the third-largest oil producer, behind the United States and Saudi Arabia . Russia is the second-largest natural gas producer, and the sixth-largest coal producer .
 Russia is a significant exporter of oil and the largest natural gas exporter . It has exploited Russia's market power for geopolitical purposes . It is also a significant oil exporter.
Natural gas is more of a regional commodity than oil because natural gas requires expensive infrastructure for transport . Natural gas is the most expensive commodity in the world .
 Russian gas imports made up more than half the total gas consumption in 20 countries . Russia's gas imports are made up over half of the total consumption of the world's gas .
 Only three EU countries (Hungary, Latvia, and Lithuania) and three non-EU countries depended on Russian gas for more than 20% of their primary energy consumption .
 Russia has sought to develop multiple pipeline routes to reduce its dependence on transit states such as Ukraine and to satisfy regional markets . To maintain its leverage and position as Europe’s dominant gas supplier.
 The Nord Stream pipeline runs under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany . Russia’s state-controlled natural gas company, Gazprom, is seeking to build a second, parallel pipeline, Nord Stream 2 .
Michael Ratner coordinated by Michael Ratner to address challenges to natural gas supply .
 Background and United States Policy Finland, and Sweden, whose waters it would cross .
 The European Union is considering whether and to what extent the proposed pipeline would be subject to existing EU regulations . The EU's executive branch is also considering the pipeline .
 The pipeline runs counter to the stated EU goal of diversifying European energy supply sources by increasing reliance on Russian gas . Opponents of the pipeline include Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Ukraine and Poland .
 Nord Stream 2 could leave Ukraine and other countries in Central and Eastern Europe more vulnerable to supply cutoffs or price manipulation .
 To the south, Russia had long planned the South Stream pipeline that would have run under the Black Sea .
 The planned South Stream pipeline has been replaced to an extent by the Turk Stream project . The project follows a similar route across the Black Sea but stops at the Turkish-Greek border .
 Gazprom has signed some contracts for the project, including one for the laying of pipe . The company has also signed a contract for a pipe laying project in the past .
 Many U.S. policymakers have paid growing attention to Russia’s active and increasingly forceful foreign policy . In recent years, many members of Congress and other United States policymakers have focused on Russia .
 Many observers in Russia interpret this policy as laying claim to traditional sphere of influence . Many observers inside and outside Russia interpret it as a new sphere of power .
 Russian policymakers avoid reference to sphere of influence . But they have used comparable terms at various times .
 The CIS includes as members or participants all post-Soviet states except the Baltics and Georgia . The CIS also includes as member or participants of the Soviet Union .
 The organization has had limited success in promoting regional integration, however . The organization is based in New York City .
 Russia has had relatively more success developing multilateral relations with a narrower circle of states . The U.S. has had less success developing bilateral relations with other countries .
 The aims could include the facilitation of trade and investment, as well as protection against a variety of external threats . Also may include a desire to accommodate Russia, ensure opportunities for labor migration, promote intergovernmental subsidies, and bolster regime security .
 Russia’s relations with its CSTO and EEU partners are not always smooth . Russia's relations with the EEU and CSTO have not always been smooth .
 Russia's closest partners have been reluctant to bind themselves entirely to Russia on matters of foreign policy and economic development . In addition to expressing differences over the principles and rules of the two institutions, Russia’s closest partners are reluctant.
 Russia recognized Georgia's breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states in 2008 . None of them followed Russia's lead in recognizing Georgia’s breakaways regions as independence states .
 Russia secured relatively greater support from partners in its annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region . Russia secured more support from partner partners in Crimea annexation .
 In March 2014, Armenia and Belarus voted with Russia to reject United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262 . The resolution affirmed Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 In December 2016, Armenia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan voted with Russia to reject UNGA Resolution 71/205 . The resolution reaffirmed nonrecognition of its annexation of Crimea .
 The Armenian government was planning to conclude an association agreement with the EU . It had declared its intent to join the EEU after a meeting of the Russian and Armenian presidents in September 2013 .
 Background and U.S. Policy Russia's partners also have cultivated strong ties with other countries . Background and United States Policy Russia’s partners also had strong ties.
 Armenia and Belarus have close bilateral relations with Russia in security and economic spheres . They also have established economic ties to Europe . Belarus’s authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko periodically criticizes Russia for unfair bilateral trading practices .
 These three states have opted to pursue independent foreign policies . They do not seek membership in Russian-led or other security and economic blocs .
 Russia has cultivated a partnership with Uzbekistan, although the latter competes with Kazakhstan for regional leadership in Central Asia . Russia has long-standing disputes with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan .
 All three states have concluded association agreements with the EU . They include the establishment of free-trade areas and encourage harmonization with EU laws and regulations .
 Moldova’s current president, Igor Dodon, seeks to reorient Moldova closer to Russia . His formal powers to do so are relatively limited in Moldova's political system .
 Uzbekistan was a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization from 2006 to 2012 . Uzbekistan has been a part of the Treaty Organization since 2006 .
 Azerbaijan contributes troops to the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan . Azerbaijan is part of the Resolute support mission .
 In 2010, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc’ status, but its parliament rejected that status in December 2014 . Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support of separatists in eastern Ukraine was rejected .
 Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russia to accept as fully independent . Many observers consider that of all the postSoviet states, Ukraine is most difficult to accept .
 The RussianUkrainian relationship suffered turbulence before 2014, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU . Ukraine's Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, the status of Russia’'s Black Sea fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe .
 Under Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, such disputes were largely papered over . Under Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych.
 Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing the conclusion of an association agreement with the EU and agreeing to substantial financial assistance from Moscow . By the end of 2013, Yanukovych appears to have made a decisive moves toward Russia .
 The decision to postpone Ukraine’s agreement with the EU was a catalyst for the so-called Euromaidan protests . It led to a government crackdown on demonstrators, violent clashes between protestors and government forces, and the demise of the Yanukovych regime .
 In late August 2014, Russia stepped up support to separatists in reaction to a new Ukrainian offensive .
 The protocol failed to end fighting or prompt a political resolution to the crisis . However, the protocol failed.
 The parties met again in February 2015 and reached a more detailed cease-fire agreement known as Minsk-2 . The parties meet again in January 2015 .
 Dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the future status of certain districts in Donetsk.
 Pardon and amnesty via a law forbidding persecution and punishment of persons involved in the conflict . Pardon, amnesty and amnesty for those involved in conflict .
New constitution and legislation on special status of districts in Donetsk and Luhansk . New constitution and permanent legislation on the specialstatus of districts .
 Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory and disarmament of all illegal groups. Withdrawing of allforeign armed groups and weapons, weapons and mercenaries .
 I I I Constitutional reform in Ukraine, including decentralization and permanent legislation on the special status of districts in Donetsk and Luhansk . I I. I I  I I I I I am Constitutional reform.
 Local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk to be agreed upon with representatives of those districts . OSCE standards say elections should be held in those districts and held according to standards .
 The Trilateral Contact Group is working on implementation of the Minsk agreements . Intensification of the work of the Trilateral contact Group is part of the agreement .
 Most observers perceive that little has been achieved in implementing the provisions of Minsk-2 . To date, most observers perceive little has not been achieved.
 A new round of serious fighting arose at the end of January 2017 and lasted for several days . The conflict’s intensity has subsided at various times .
 As of mid-May 2017, the conflict had led to at least 10,090 combat and civilian fatalities . The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights estimates that the conflict has led to 10,000 deaths .
 Background and U.S. Policy separatists with weapons and armed vehicles . Background and United States Policy separatists.
 Estimates of the number of Russian troops in eastern Ukraine have declined since their height in 2015 . The number of troops in Ukraine has declined since the height of the troops in 2015.
Post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative NATO-Russia partnership had at best mixed results . Even before the Ukraine conflict, post- Cold War efforts had a mixed results.
 The NATO-Russia Council was established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO- Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation . The principal institutional mechanism is the NATO-Russian Council .
 Russian and NATO leaders structured the NRC as a forum of equal member states . Goals included political dialogue on security issues, the determination of common approaches and the conduct of joint operations .
Formal meetings of the NRC were suspended in April 2014 and resumed in 2016 . Formal meetings were suspended last year and resumed this year .
 NATO and Russia had identified a number of areas for cooperation . Prior to the suspension over events in Ukraine, NATO and Russian had identified several areas for Cooperation .
 In 2010, they endorsed a Joint Review of 21 st Century Security Challenges . The Joint Review was intended to serve as a platform for cooperation .
Russia Puts on Show of Military Strength in Crimea, September 9, 2016 . For additional background on Russia's militarization of Crimea, see Reuters, “In Crimea, Russia Signals Military Resolve with New and Revamped Bases,’
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe, coordinated by Paul Belkin, and CRS Report R44550 .
 U.S. Policy challenges, including instability in Afghanistan, terrorism, and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
In the past, observers highlighted operations related to Afghanistan as a key example of enhanced NATO-Russia cooperation . In the past.
 From 2009, Russia allowed transit over its territory of cargo for NATO’s International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan .
 Russia and NATO member states also jointly trained Afghan, Pakistani, and Central Asian countemarcotics officers . The U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime has a view toward reducing narcotics transit to and through Russia .
 NATO and Russia established a Helicopter Maintenance Trust Fund to provide maintenance training and spare parts for Afghanistan’s Russian-produced helicopters .
 NATO moved to implement what its leadership characterized as the greatest reinforcement of NATO’s collective defense since the end of the Cold War . After Russia's actions in Ukraine, NATO moves to implement its leadership.
 The United States has been a key architect of and contributor to NATO’s reassurance and deterrence initiatives . It has sought to bolster United States force posture in Europe in response to Russian actions .
 The Trump Administration requested $4. billion for ER1, a 40% increase over the Obama Administration’s FY2017 request .
 Russia has adopted an increasingly aggressive posture with its air and sea patrols and military exercises since 2014 . Recent Air and Sea Incidents since 2014 have been the most recent .
 The EU has had to reconsider its relationship with a more assertive Russia and the implications for European security and stability . Like NATO, the EU has been reconsidering its relationship.
 Others, such as Poland and the Baltic states, have tended to view Russia more as a potential threat to themselves and their neighbors . Others, like Poland, have seen Russia as a threat to their neighbors, by contrast .
 Pragmatists moved more into alignment with those who have tended to view Russia with greater wariness . Pragmaticists have been seen as more cautious of Russia .
 The Russian government is seeking to influence European political discourse, policymaking, and electoral processes with an array of tools . Media reports and outside experts contend that the Russian government wants to influence Europe's political discourse .
 Such measures reportedly include the use of disinformation, the spread of fake news, and the cultivation of relations with European political parties and allies broadly sympathetic to Russian views .
 In recent years, a new and increasingly evident ideological link has appeared between European far-right parties and the Russian leadership .
 Most of these far-right parties tend to be antiestablishment and anti-EU . They often share some combination of extreme nationalism, anti-immigration, and Anti-Islamic sentiments .
 A few parties on the left or far left also appear to harbor more friendly views toward Russia . The left and far left appear to be more friendly with Russia .
 Concrete evidence of direct financial support from the Russian government to European political parties is difficult to identify . The Russian government is said to be supporting European parties .
 Widespread speculation exists that the Russian government has funneled money through Russian ha nk s or other organizations and individuals .
 Many suggest that Russia also has been proactive in offering organizational expertise, political know-how, and media assistance to parties on Europe’s far right .
 Russian support reportedly has included establishing and coordinating pro-Russian parties, nongovernmental civil organizations, and supporting friendly media outlets . Russian support also reportedly includes establishing and organizing pro-Russia parties, think tanks, and friendly media.
 Many experts note that the Russian government under Putin has become very sophisticated in its efforts to exert influence in Europe . The Russian government is very sophisticated, they say .
 Analysts point out that many European countries have been dealing with Russian disinformation and political meddling for decades . They acknowledge that Russia’s digital and cyber capabilities have greatly increased in recent years .
 Russia-China Relations 95 Russia and China have many reasons to cooperate . Russia- China relations are at a high level .
 Both countries want to counter what they see as U.S. hegemony, regionally and worldwide . Both countries have a desire to counter U.N. hegemony .
 Japan and South Korea are wary of the U.S. military presence in Asia . They criticize the United States' efforts to upgrade its defense capabilities with allies .
 Both hold vetoes on the U.N. Security Council and often work together to adjust or oppose resolutions supported by Western states . The United Nations Security Council is the body of the United Nations .
 China and Russia are far from embracing a full alliance with one another . But they are not yet fully embracing an alliance .
 To a large extent, the partnership depends on external events in a web of relationships around the world .
 Beijing has not wanted to enter into an explicitly anti-Western alliance . It has been loath to confront the West directly .
 Russia’s intervention in Ukraine also has affected its relations with China . Russia's intervention also affected its relationship with China, according to reports .
 Western countries imposed sanctions and attempted to isolate Putin diplomatically . On the one hand, the intervention drove closer cooperation and a strong show of solidarity .
 Moscow's need for Beijing’s support increased. On the other hand, it also created an imbalance in the relationship .
 Beijing also appeared to be uneasy with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which was at odds with China's official statements concerning respect for the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of other countries . Beijing also seemed to be wary of Russia's invasion of the Ukraine .
 Tensions also have periodically risen because of a perception in Russia that large numbers of Chinese migrants are crossing the border for possible economic opportunity in the sparsely populated Russian Far East .
 Many observers assert that the numbers of Chinese in Russia are much lower than suspected . Some suggest that the flow of Chinese migrants from Russia may now be going in the other direction .
 China is Russia's largest trading partner, but Russia does not ra nk in China’s top 10 partners . China is the world's biggest trading partner .
 Energy deals have played an important role in Russia and China’s partnership, particularly after Moscow's relations with the West soured after its actions in Ukraine .
 China has been willing to sign large oil-for-loan deals with Russia . Russia has supplied around 14% of China’s crude oil imports since 2012 .
 Russia and China have discussed additional gas pipeline routes, although construction plans have been repeatedly postponed . Russia, China have also discussed additional pipeline routes .
Russia-China security relations have advanced significantly in recent years . Russia-China relations have improved significantly in the past years .
 Russia and China have held increasingly large and sophisticated bilateral and multilateral military exercises, dubbed “Peace Mission,’ since 2005 .
 Beijing and Moscow are holding high-profile exercises to send strong signals to the West, particularly the U.S. Some analysts say that by holding the exercises, Beijing and Russia intend to send a strong signal .
 Soviet and Russian naval forces have accessed a facility at the Syrian port of Tartus since the early 1970s . It has been used as a logistical hub to enable longer Mediterranean operations .
 Former Syrian President Hafez al Asad regularly hosted Soviet military and economic advisers . He resisted Moscow's attempts to leverage Russian military assistance to gain greater or permanent access to shore facilities .
 Russian personnel continued to be based in Syria to maintain Russian military equipment and train Syrians . Their numbers fluctuated over time.
 The Russian government came out more strongly in support of President Bashar al Asad’s regime .
 U.N. efforts to promote a transitional government focus on brokering an agreement between the Syrian government and rebel movements . Asad provided Asad with diplomatic support, U.S. and allies typically characterized Asad's departure as negotiated departure .
 Russia and the U.S. cooperated in the United Nations and with the League of Arab States in a fitful and unsuccessful string of peacemaking endeavors . Russia’s Syria Policy, Carnegie Congressional Research Service 31 Russia.
 The Russian government made a surprise proposal to work with the U.S. to remove chemical weapons from Syria in September 2013 . In September 2013, the Russian government proposed an international mission to remove the chemical weapons .
 Moscow began a gradual buildup of Russian personnel, combat aircraft, and military equipment in Syria . Over the summer of 2015, Moscow began to build up military equipment .
 In 2016, Russia expanded its targeting to include Islamic State forces, although it continued to occasionally target U.S.-backed rebel groups . Russia also continued to target the United States-backed rebels .
 Russia continues to resupply Syrian military forces . Russian officials have stated they are merely fulfilling existing contracts .
 To date, airstrikes have constituted Russia’s primary offensive military effort in Syria . To date.
 strikes have enabled forces loyal to Asad to reverse some opposition gains, particularly in and around Aleppo . These strikes have helped Asad regain some gains, especially in Aleppo .
 Russia’s introduction of advanced air defense systems in Syria also reportedly constrains the ability of other aircraft to operate freely in the area . Russia also complicates proposals calling for the establishment of a no-fly zone .
 At the same time, Russia has pushed for cooperation between U.S. and Russian military forces in Syria against terrorist groups . Russia's view includes a number of groups fighting the Asad government .
 Russian ground forces in Syria appear to have played a limited combat role . Some may be embedded as advisers with Syrian military forces .
 Russia's transfer of modernized weapons systems to the Syrian military has bolstered the capabilities of Asad government forces . Prior to the unrest, Russia had relied on older Russian equipment .
 Russian military has been given opportunity to test new weapons systems and a platform to market Russian equipment to potential regional buyers . It has also provided the Russian military with an opportunity to testing new weapons system and platform .
 Russian media have highlighted the performance of the T-90 battle tank in Syria . They claim that it is able to withstand strikes from U.S.-made TOW missiles .
 Background and U.S. Policy could place the Syrian regime in a stronger negotiating position vis-a-vis rebels . Also accomplishing Russia’s goal of avoiding Western-led regime change in Syria, Russia has said .
 Russia may seek to retain influence with the Syrian government over the long term . Russia may continue to advise and assist the Syrian military .
 Russia has agreements to maintain a long-term presence at both the Tartus naval facility and the Hmeimim airbase in Latakia . Russia has agreed to maintain an agreement to maintain the presence.
 Russia has adopted an increasingly active role in political negotiations between the Syrian government and opposition groups . Russia has been increasingly active in political talks between the government and Opposition groups .
 Russia, Turkey, and Iran have hosted peace talks in Astana, Kazakhstan, since January 2017 . Since January 2017, the three countries have held talks in Kazakhstan .
 Russia, Iran, Turkey signed a memorandum calling for the creation of four “de-escalation areas’ in Syria . The memorandum was signed in early May .
 The memorandum stipulated that the de-escalation areas be administered by forces from the three signatory countries . It raises the possibility that these areas might become de facto spheres of influence for Russia, Iran, or Turkey .
 Russia has deployed military police and set up monitoring stations in the eastern suburbs of Damascus and along the Jordanian border . Laying the groundwork for two of the four de-escalation areas, Russia has laid the groundwork.
 The planned de-escalation area in southwestern Syria emerged from a cease-fire deal brokered in July by the U.S, Russia, and Jordan .
 In 2015, the prospect of Asad's defeat had several negative implications for Russia . The prospect of Russia's defeat in 2015 had many negative implications.
 Russia had begun to expand its influence to help establish itself as a global power and peer competitor to the United States . It would have meant the loss of a key partner in the Middle East .
 It would have set another major precedent for a U.S. military-backed transition in the Middle East after Iraq and Libya . Moscow firmly opposed the move .
 Russian authorities insisted that the final beneficiary of the Asad regime’s collapse would be the Islamic State . The Islamic State and other extremists would be likely victors in the ensuing contest for national power .
 Such an outcome, in turn, could promote the spread of Islamist extremism to other countries, including within Central Asia and Russia itself . Such an outcomes could also be seen in Central Asia.
 Russian authorities say up to a few thousand Russian citizens have fought with the Islamic State and other extremist movements in Syria and Iraq . Russian authorities have said that up to thousands have been fighting with Islamic State .
 Idlib Province and its surroundings, some parts of northern Homs Province, eastern Ghouta in the Damascus suburbs, and parts of the southern provinces of Dar'a and Quneitra .
 commanders once affiliated with the A1 Qaeda-aligned Islamic Emirate of the Caucasus, established in 2007, reportedly have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State . They formed a local affiliate, the Wilayah Kawkaz, according to reports .
 Russia’s leadership may have believed that intervention could help to avoid these negative outcomes . But it could also bolster Russian influence and stave off the collapse of the state and a takeover by Islamist extremists .
 Russia’s foreign policy priorities traditionally have focused primarily on the post-Soviet region and the West . Russia's Global Engagement is Russia's Foreign Engagement .
 Russia is one of five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . Russia plays a significant global role as a member of the U.N.
 Russia has engaged on global issues such as nonproliferation, counterterrorism, counterpiracy, and global health challenges . In these and other international fora, Russia has also engaged on non Proliferation issues . Russia has been involved in the fight against Iran and North Korea .
 Russia has cultivated good relations with Japan, with which it still has a territorial dispute over islands Russia annexed at the end of World War II . India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Vietnam, and Vietnam also have good relations in Southeast Asia .
 Russia’s Syria intervention is exceptional in scope but reflects a long-standing policy of fruitful relations with regional governments including Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, and Libya .
 Russia has not developed similarly strong relations in sub-Saharan Africa . Russia has begun to expand its focus on this region . The Soviet Union used to have several close partners .
 Since the end of the Cold War, conventional wisdom about the Russian military has tended to indicate a force in relative decline . With aging Soviet-era equipment and with technology, the military is lagging well behind that of the United States and other NATO members .
 Russian military's ability to effect ‘area denial’ with an air defense “bubble’ of overlapping missile systems. It also has highlighted the Russian military’s ability to affect “area denial.”
 Russia's military has undergone substantial reforms since 2008, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Russia has pursued an ambitious modernization program, at least until 2016, when the defense budget declined for the first time in years . Russia also has pursued a modernization program as it steadily increased defense spending .
 The plan calls for upgrading I 1% of military equipment each year . The goal is to increase the share of modern weaponry to 70% of total inventory by 2020 .
 For 2015, Putin related the expected share of “modern weapons’ was 32% in the Army, 33% in Air Force, 40% in airborne units, and “over 50%’ in the Navy and aerospace defense forces .
 Some analysts have questioned the definition of modem in this context . In some cases, the term appears to include newer versions of older designs .
 The Western Military District includes the 6 th Army, 20 th Guards Army, and 1 st Guards Tank Army . The 6 th Air Force and Air Defense Anny, as well as Airborne Troops, the Baltic Fleet, naval infantry, and coastal defense forces .
 Approximately 30,000 new troops are in Southern Military District (Caucasus, Black Sea, and Caspian region), totaling approximately 30,00 new troops .
 Kaliningrad is a key strategic territory for Russia, allowing the country to project military power into NATO’s northern flank .
 The territory has a heavy Russian military presence, including the Baltic Fleet and two airbases . The territory is also home to a Baltic Fleet .
 In October 2016, the Russian Minister of Defense reported that Russia had temporarily deployed Iskander short-range nuclear-capable missiles in the region . Russia has done similar things in the past .
 Some observers suspect Russia is planning to deploy the missiles to Kaliningrad on a permanent basis . Many consider the deployment to be a response to new NATO deployments .
 Ukraine, including unofficially deploying as many as 12,000 troops to the region in 2015 and more recently, 4,200-7,500 troops, according to Ukrainian government sources .
 Russia has stationed military forces in Georgia and Moldova without these states’ consent . Russia also has stationed troops in Georgia, Moldova and Georgia .
 Russia’s military bases in the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have housed some 3,500-4,000 personnel each .
 In 2016, Russia finalized an agreement with the de facto authorities of Abkhazia, establishing a combined group of military forces in the occupied region .
 Russia concluded an agreement with South Ossetia to integrate the breakaway region’s military forces with its own . Earlier this year, Russia concluded a deal with the breakaways region to integrate its military forces .
 Armenia has concluded agreements with Russia to establish a joint air defense system and a combined group of forces . In recent years, Armenia also has agreed to establish joint airdefense system and combined forces .
 Russia’s Military Footprint in Europe SWEDEN Baltic Fleet FINLAND 'ESTONIA ( LATVIA LITHUANIA''' Northern Fleet St.
 Russia has significantly increased the frequency of large-scale strategic exercises and short-notice snap drills . Russia has increased its readiness of its forces, rehearse for a variety of contingencies .
 In 2009, Russia alarmed many U.S. and European observers with exercises rehearsing an attack on Poland and the Baltic states . The exercises culminated in a simulated nuclear strike on Warsaw in 2009 .
 The Russian Air Force conducted a mock nuclear strike against Sweden in March 2013, NATO officials say .
 150,000 troops took part in an exercise in western Russia in February 2014 . The exercise unfolded in conjunction with the seizure of Crimea .
 Background and United States Policy live-fire exercises reportedly have increased in frequency . Background and U.S. Policy live fire exercises reportedly also increased in Frequency .
 NATO officials assert that Russia staged about a dozen unannounced, large-scale, snap military drills in 2015-2016 . The drills took place in the run-up to the July 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw .
 The exercises were presumed to be a signal to NATO through the display of forces and weaponry .
 NATO countries such as Poland, Romania, and the Baltics have been concerned about a repeat of tactics used during the takeover of Crimea .
 Russia’s next major strategic exercise, Zapad-2017, is scheduled for September 2017 . It raises concerns among Russia's western neighbors .
 Regularly scheduled every four years, the exercise will take place in western Russia, including Kaliningrad, Belarus .
 This is a far greater number than were involved in the last Zapad exercise in 2013 . This is similar to the number of participants in last year’s major strategic exercise in southern Russia, Kavkaz-2016 .
 For more than 25 years, the U.S.-Russian relationship has gone through positive and negative periods . The U. S. Policy Toward Russia has been on the ground for 25 years .
 The spirit of the U.S.-Russian ‘strategic partnership’ forged by Presidents Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin in the early 1990s was gradually overtaken by increasing tension and mutual recrimination . Russia’s efforts to reestablish a sphere of influence in the
Tensions arose again around the Iraq War, the so-called color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan . U.S. and NATO plans to deploy missile defenses in Europe .
 The August 2008 Russia-Georgia conflict caused bilateral ties to deteriorate to their lowest point since the Cold War . Cooperation continued in some areas, but the August 2008 conflict caused the conflict.
 The Obama Administration asserted it could prompt a “reset’ of relations with Russia’s new president, Dmitry Medvedev .
 The U.S. and Russia cooperated in a number of areas during the Obama Administration .
 U.S.-Russian relations remain challenging in several respects. Despite this progress, U. S. relations remained challenging.
 Russia joined China in abstaining from a U.N. Security Council vote establishing a no-fly zone in Libya . Putin expressed disapproval of the decision as an unwarranted intrusion into Libya’s internal affairs .
 U.S.-Russian relations worsened with Russia’s disputed December 2011 parliamentary elections and Putin's March 2012 return to the presidency .
 Putin infused his presidential campaign with a heavy dose of anti-Americanism, painting the opposition and pro-democracy NGOs as Western pawns .
 Russian state television accused the new U.S. ambassador and architect of the reset policy, Michael McFaul, of plotting revolution . McFaul met with opposition and civil-society activists after his first meeting with opposition .
 The Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act is part of a broader piece of legislation normalizing U.S. trade with Russia . President Obama signed into law in December 2012 .
 The Magnitsky Act required the President to identify and impose sanctions on individuals involved in the detention, abuse, or death of SergeiMagnitsky . The Magnitky Act was passed by the President after a massive tax fraud that implicated the government .
 Background and United States Policy terminated an adoption agreement that had entered into force in the month before and banned U.S. adoptions of Russian children .
 In September 2012, Russia requested that the U.S. close down foreign assistance programs run by the United States Agency for International Development .
 In August 2013, the White House announced it would “postpone” a U.S.-Russian presidential summit planned for September . The summit was due to be held because of inadequate “progress in our bilateral agenda” since Putin returned to the presidency .
 In 2014, U.S. relations with Russia deteriorated further in reaction to Russia’s invasion and annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region . Russia's annexation of Crimea region and support of separatists in eastern Ukraine led to a series of events in 2014 .
 The Administration said these measures were a response to increased harassment of U.S. diplomatic personnel in Russia over the previous two years .
 The Trump Administration came into office seeking to improve relations with Russia .
 Following a January 28, 2017, call between Presidents Trump and Putin, us-russia-usa-rights-idUSBRE85Q0EK20120620627 .
 Many observers concur that improved U.S.-Russian relations would be welcome . Many observers agree that improved relations between the two countries would be good .
 Questions concerning the extent of Russian interference in the U.S. presidential election also have imposed constraints on the Administration’s ability to improve relations with Russia .
 Media reports in March 2017 suggested that the Administration believed the time “may not be right’ for seeking cooperation with Russia in the battle against the Islamic State .
 Tillerson's April 2017 meeting with Putin covered other issues as well .
 Russia joined the United States, China, and other members of the U.N. Security Council to impose new sanctions on North Korea . North Korea has launched a series of missile launches in recent months .
 The Administration has said it supports the establishment of a dialogue with Russia on cybersecurity . United States officials suggest this will take time to evolve .
 In July 2017, President Trump appeared to reject the idea of establishing a joint ‘cybersecurity unit’ with Russia .
 The Administration also seeks to promote change in Russia’s policy toward Ukraine .
 The U.S. continues to briefing-presidents-meetings-g20-july-7-2017 . She stated that “the United States continues to Brief-Presidents- Meetings-G20-July- 7-2017.
 On several occasions, he has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions will remain in place “until Moscow reverses’s actions that triggered them.
 The law codifies sanctions on Russia provided for in existing Ukraine-related and cyberrelated executive orders .
 The act strengthens other sanctions on Russia . It requires or recommends several new sanctions, as well as establishes a review of any presidential move to ease or lift sanctions .
 The U.S. has used storage and resort facilities in Moscow for more than a decade . The Russian capital is home to a number of resort facilities .
 Observers viewed these measures, in part, as a delayed response to the Obama Administration’s December 2016 decision to evict Russian personnel and deny access to Russian diplomatic compounds .
 As of August 2017, congressional committees have held more than 20 hearings on matters relating to Russia . They include on election interference, other influence campaigns, sanctions, INF Treaty violations, civil society, Russian military and security policy, and United States responses to Russian activities .
 The bill passed the Senate in June 2017 . It was initially included in Title II of S 722, Countering Iran’s Destabilizing Activities Act of 2017 .
 The President signed the bill into law on August 2, 2017 . The bill also includes sanctions on Ran and North Korea .
 Legislation also has been introduced calling on the U.S. government to assess and respond to Russian influence operations, illicit financial activities abroad .
 Assistance is to be provided to NATO and EU members to strengthen their democratic institutions, counter Russian disinformation and cyberattacks against critical infrastructure and electoral mechanisms .
 Russian funds intended to influence the outcome of elections or campaigns in Europe and Eurasia .
 Current foreign operations appropriations restrict funds for implementing policies that would recognize Russian sovereignty over Crimea or support Russia’s occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 President Obama issued decisions to impose economic sanctions on Russia . He declared that Russia’s activities in Ukraine threaten the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, sovereignty of its neighbor .
 The U.S. Sanctions Regimes on Russia are part of the EU Sanctions on Russia . Russia's economy is a key part of Russia's economic growth .
 EU sanctions are broadly similar to U.S. sanctions, but each has imposed sanctions on individuals and entities that the other has not .
 The U.S. annexed Crimea to Russia; used illicit armed force in Ukraine; or conducted business, trade, or investment in occupied Crimea .
 Any individual or entity designated pursuant to these orders is subject to the blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction and denial of entry into the United States .
 U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with designated entities or persons . In addition, United States persons are not allowed to engage in transactions.
 The Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control continues to investigate transactions and designate persons and entities .
 OFAC restricts transactions by persons under U.S. jurisdiction related to investment and financing for designated state-controlled companies in Russia’s financial sector . OFAC prohibits transactions related to development of deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects within Russia .
 Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014, as amended by RL. 11544, requires sanctions that were previously discretionary on foreign persons who make “a significant investment’ in deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects in Russia .
 Actions in Response to Russian Malicious Cyber Activity and Harassment,’ December 29, 2016 .
 Background and United States Policy prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States .
Sanctions for Human Rights Violations and Corruption Human rights-related sanctions also specified in legislation . Sanctions for human rights violations and corruption human rights- related sanctions also included .
 The Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act of 2012 requires the President to identify persons involved in the detention, abuse, or death of SergeiMagnitsky . The President must also identify those responsible for extrajudicial killings, torture, or other gross violations of internationally recognized human rights in
 Designees are subject to the blocking of assets under U.S. jurisdiction, prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States . Designees can also be denied entry into United States.
 The act, as amended, also requires sanctions on foreign persons who support serious human rights abuses in territory Russia occupies or controls .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 requires sanctions against Russian state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport . Russian entities that transfer weapons to Syria, Ukraine, Georgia, or Moldova . Gazprom, if found to withhold natural gas from NATO member states, could also be
 The act requires sanctions on foreign persons that materially contribute to the Syrian government’s ability to acquire or develop a variety of advanced or prohibited weapons and defense articles .
 The act also authorizes, but does not require, sanctions on U.S. or foreign persons who make investments or engage in trade . The act enhances Russia's ability to construct energy export pipelines .
 The act requires reports by the Secretary of the Treasury on the potential effects of expanding sanctions . The act also requires reports on broader sets of Russian political and economic elites .
 Russian individuals and entities also have been designated under sanctions regimes related to Syria, North Korea, terrorism, transnational crime, and weapons proliferation . Russia and other countries have also been designated by sanctions regimes .
 Unofficial allegations of Russian interference in the presidential election were made public in or around June 2016 .
 The majority of released emails, including those from the DNC and Podesta, were disclosed by WikiLeaks, which allegedly received emails from Russian intelligence-connected sources .
 ODNI report said there was no evidence of tampering with vote tallies or that information in emails released by WikiLeaks had been tampered with . Some state-level voter registration systems may have been hacked .
 Background and United States Policy Congress is investigating Russian interference in U.S. elections . Background and U.N. policy Congress is looking into Russian interference .
 In January 2017, the House and Senate Select Committees on Intelligence launched inquiries into Russian cyber activities and ‘active measures’ surrounding the U.S. election .
 The Senate Committees on Armed Services, Foreign Relations, and Judiciary have conducted related hearings . The hearings have been held in the Senate and the Senate .
 The U.S. government also has taken legal actions against Russian individuals for alleged malicious cyber activities that are apparently unrelated to elections . Other Activities The United States government has also taken legal action against Russians for alleged cyber activities .
 In March 2017, the Department of Justice indicted four individuals, including one of those subject to sanctions and two FSB officers, on charges related to the theft of Yahoo user information .
 The Department of Justice is seeking the extradition of two other Russian individuals suspected of cybercrimes . The Czech Republic and Spain are also seeking extradition .
 In April 2017, another Russian member of parliament was sentenced to 27 years in prison for charges related to credit card and identity theft . He is the son of a member of the Russian parliament .
 In recent months, several people have been prosecuted inside Russia for other alleged cybercrimes . Several people have also been prosecuted in Russia for similar crimes .
 Those arrested include FSB officials who are reportedly being tried for treason . One subsequently indicted in the United States for economic crimes .
 Some Russian media have speculated that the arrests were related to Russia’s interference in the U.S. elections .
 The head of the hacking group was sentenced to two years in prison in July 2017 . He reportedly cooperated with authorities and pleaded guilty to the charge .
 During the 1990s, arms control no longer played a central role in fostering cooperation between the two nations . The relationship between the United States and Russia improved .
 The Trump Administration has not offered any official statements on the future of New START . It has not indicated whether it might seek a five-year extension of the treaty .
 Most experts agree that the elimination of intermediate-range missiles in Europe mitigated a key source of potential instability .
 General Paul Selva, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, confirmed reports that Russia had begun to deploy a new ground-launched cruise missile .
 The missile was deployed to pose a threat to NATO facilities . It showed no inclination to return to compliance with the treaty .
 The United States and Russia still use the system . President Obama used it to communicate with Putin about the hacking and interference with the U.S. elections .
 The United States has spent more than $10 billion to help Russia dismantle nuclear weapons . Since 1992, the U.S. has spent $10billion on nuclear weapons, weapons-grade nuclear material, other weapons of mass destruction .
 Most expect Congress to continue to play an active role in shaping U.S. policy toward Russia .