 Ex-president Viktor Yanukovych has finally testified as defence witness in the trial of five former Berkut officers charged with killing activists in February 2014 .
 He claimed to 'not know' or ‘not remember’ most vital details about Euromaidan . He said he came to flee to Russia, and even how he fled to Russia .
Everything – from the bloodshed on Maidan to “the situation in Crimea and Donbas’ – was supposedly the work of “radicals who manipulated people’s families, he said . He even claimed to be the ‘ally’ of the families of activists
 Yanukovych was not on trial, and appeared only as a witness, meaning that the lies, and claims of amnesia could not be properly challenged . Yanukovych was accused of lying about his amnesia, but was not charged .
 The questioning had first been scheduled for Nov 25, but had to be cancelled . Activists prevented the five suspects from being brought to the court room .
 They claimed that they feared that the men might be released from custody . This was overtly wrong since all five had only just had their detention extended .
 The obstruction gave Yanukovych a good opportunity for a press conference without inconvenient reminders of how his version diverged from the truth .
 Lawyers representing the families of Nebesna Sotnya, those activists killed during Euromaidan . Lawyers representing those killed had issued a statement before Monday’s court hearing .
 Yanukovych, they stressed, is already facing 8 criminal proceedings which have not yet reached the courts . The Yanukovych government is facing eight criminal proceedings .
 The 5 defendants on trial are charged with the killing of 48 people on February 20, 2014 .
 Yanukovych is a suspect in one of the episodes, but is not in the others . Any attempt to add another defendant would simply jeopardize the trial’s end in convictions .
 Lawyers for Nebesna Sotnya had not supported the questioning by video link . They stressed that it was the men’s defence who had wanted it .
 Yanukovych had no expectation that he would tell the truth. They were prepared for the questioning during which they had no expectations .
 It is hard to see any real information component in the 4 hours of questioning on Monday. It is not clear if any information component was there .
 Yanukovych denied virtually everything, including a phone conversation with Putin’s adviser Vladislav Surkov .
 Yanukovych says Berkut officers who were seen brutally beating and dispersing protesters were 'provoked' Yanukovych says he learned about some of the momentous events from the media .
 He denied having given the orders to shoot activists on Maidan . He claimed to not know who had ordered the shooting .
 Yanukovych claimed to be satisfied since he ‘had long wanted to tell people about all of that’ He said that the Ukrainian prosecutor should now begin investigations into crimes by activists against Berkut .
 Ukraine’s Prosecutor General Yury Lutsenko used a short break to announce that Yanukovych was suspected of state treason and helping Russian officials to try to change the borders of Ukraine .
 Yanukovych signed an appeal on March 1, 2014, calling on Putin to use armed forces on Ukrainian territory . This is over the appeal which Yanukovych signed on March 2, 2014 .
 Lutsenko says that this encouraged the deployment of Russian forces against Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea . Lutenko says this encouraged Russia's military action against Ukraine .
 He asserted that he was taking this measure since Yanukovych is outside Ukraine and effectively in hiding from Ukraine’s law enforcement bodies . The ‘suspicions’ would soon turn into an indictment.
 It remains to be seen whether this is the case, and in fact what would come of such an indictment. It remains a question of whether it is.
 Serhiy Horbatyuk's Special Investigations Department has finally achieved results in investigating specific Maidan crimes . Lawyers representing victims’ families have often expressed frustration at high-profile claims .
 This, they have warned on many occasions, risks cases falling apart at trial level and real culprits being acquitted . They have also warned that if cases fall apart, the culprits will be acquitted .