 Ukraine is mobilising its reserves and reinforcing borders in preparation to resist an attack by Russia . Russia has made an aggressive move by Moscow to attack Ukraine .
 Ukraine is mobilising in the fear Russia is about to cast aside all pretence, and outright invade . Now Ukraine has mobilised in fear Russia will cast aside any pretence and invade .
 Moscow used military force to seize control of the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine in 2014 . The Crimean Peninsula was seized by Russian forces in 2014.
 It’s since been waging a barely covert campaign to support pro-Kremlin insurgent forces in an insurrection against Kiev .
 Moscow moved suddenly to seal the narrow channel between the Black and Azov Seas . The move comes after Moscow moves suddenly to close the channel .
 Russian special forces seized three Ukrainian naval vessels attempting to pass through the Kerch Strait international waterway on November 25 .
 It effectively blockades the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol . It severely restricts the flow of trade and materials in and out of the east of the embattled country .
 President Poroshenko warned that Russia has deployed a large number of troops along its border with Ukraine . He alleged that the Kremlin intends to push inland into Ukraine after blockading its ports .
 Putin's spokesman calls Poroshenko's move “absolutely absurd’s move ‘absolutely absurd.’ Putin accuses him of “provoking tensions’ and seeking to posture ahead of presidential elections early next year .
 The S-400 ‘Triumph’ surface-to-air missiles and radar Moscow claims are capable of tracking and shooting down modern stealth aircraft .
 Russian media indicates this will be the fourth such S-400 battalion to be stationed in Crimea . The battalion will be based in Crimea, Crimea .
 Moscow also has moved a large number of mobile anti-ship missiles to the annexed Crimean city of Kerch . The city is overlooking the narrow Kerch Strait .
 The Russian military admitted its forces in Crimea were ‘conducting drills’ involving Bal and Bastion long-range anti-ship missile systems .
 These missiles can effectively seal off the Azov Sea to all but those Moscow let past . These missiles are capable of sealing the sea off the Russian coast .
 Moscow has ordered a naval military exercise in the narrow waterway to close it to all but Russian Navy traffic .
 Sea of Azov is an agreed ‘free navigation’ zone, no permission was needed . It is yet to present evidence of claims of dangerous behaviour .
 Moscow’s move as securing its hold on Crimea after the completion of a 15km-long bridge connecting mainland Russia to the occupied territory earlier this year .
 Ukrainian authorities will bar entry to all Russian males aged 16 to 60 for the duration of the 30-day martial law . Ukrainian leader said it was needed to prevent Russia from further destabilising the country .
 Poroshenko says reservists will be summoned for training as part of martial law . Poroshenko said overnight that some reservists would be summoned.
 Some military units will be redeployed to strengthen the nation’s defences . He also said that some military units would be rede deployed to strengthen nation's defences .
 The conflict in eastern regions forming Ukraine’s industrial heartland has taken a toll on the national economy . The conflict has reduced cargo flow through the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk on the Sea of Azov .
 The United States and its NATO allies have strongly urged Russia to free the Ukrainian vessels and the crews . The U.S. and its allies have also urged Russia.
 NATO allies have helped modernise Ukraine’s armed forces, says NATO spokesman . More ships deployed in the region and more air policing, he says .
 Last week’s incident was the first open military confrontation between Russia and Ukraine since 2014 . Moscow annexed the Crimea peninsula in 2014 .
 It has since been almost openly supporting pro-Kremlin separatists in the east in their conflict with Ukrainian forces . But it has since since been openly supporting the separatists in Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine .
 Russian troops, tanks and equipment have regularly been observed fighting alongside pro-Kremlin insurgents . Moscow maintains its denials, though Moscow maintains it's denials .