 From November 2013 to the end of February 2014, protesters gathered on Kyiv’s central square, in a series of demonstrations known as the Euromaidan .
 Some analysts have called a national revolution that removed the government and presidency of Viktor Yanukovych . These protests have involved several distinct stages, culminating in what some have called the revolution .
 Ukraine and Russia have been involved in a conflict between the two countries . Ukraine has annexed Crimea and support pro-separatist movements in various parts of the neighbouring country .
 historian who has followed Ukraine since Soviet times. As a historian, he recalls two earlier civic protests of importance .
 The first was the occupation of the Maidan by Kyiv’s university students in 1990, demanding the resignation of then PM Vitalii Masol .
 Communist officials were widely condemned by Communist officials . They ended with the removal of the unpopular figure .
 The second was known as the Orange Revolution, and arose as a protest against the doctored results of the 2004 presidential elections . The Orange Revolution was the first protest against doctored election results .
 Yanukovych was elected president of Ukraine in November 2013 . He has been in power for more than a decade . Yanukovych has not been elected since then .
 He did return as Prime Minister under the Yushchenko presidency . He then won the 2010 elections, narrowly defeating Yulia Tymoshenko . He did, however, return to the presidency, and then became Prime Minister .
 Yanukovych had signalled his willingness to commit Ukraine to signing an Association Agreement with the European Union at the EU summit in Vilnius in November 2013 .
 The Europeans had demanded in return that he release Tymoshenko from captivity . They had demanded that he start constitutional and legal reforms .
 Yanukovych made the decision not to sign the agreement after a visit to Moscow . He spoke with President Vladimir Putin, where he spoke with Putin .
 Ukraine would most likely commit itself to future membership of the Russian Customs Union, which is to come into force on 1 January 2015 . The union currently involves Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus, with Armenia a likely additional member .
 Protesters came to the streets, motivated by anger at the change of direction . Within hours, protesters came to streets, inspired by anger.
 They were mainly youthful, alerted by social networks and text messages . They were mostly alerted by text messages and social networks .
 What occurred was essentially a civic protest on the future of Ukraine and it took the authorities completely by surprise . It took the government by surprise.
 Every Sunday saw masses come out on the streets . The daily numbers would dwindle .
 At its peak, the numbers were so vast that it was impossible to count them . At its height, the number of people in the world was so large that it could not be counted .
 Authorities reacted cautiously, deploying the Berkut riot police but without any serious confrontations . On the whole, the authorities reacted cautiously.
 The Berkut was ordered to clear the square by force on the night of 30 November and 1 December .
 The Berkut descended on the Maidan, clubbing and beating demonstrators . It was the first time the Berkut had been involved in violence in the city .
 Putin offered Ukraine $15 billion in loans and reduced gas prices to offset Ukraine’s financial crisis . Ukraine's financial crisis was sparked by the near depletion of its hard currency reserves .
 Ukraine's offer seemed to demonstrate that without Russia, Ukraine could not survive. More than anything, it seemed to show that without Russian help, Ukraine would not survive .
 The sum was far more than the EU or the IMF was prepared to consider .
 The situation was exacerbated further by the quasi-legal rushing through parliament of draconian laws . The so-called ‘anti-protest laws’ on 16 January .
 Yanukovych's goal appeared to be to curb freedom of speech and assembly, the outlawing of NGOs and the establishment of a dictatorship under the Yanukovych regime .
 Though repealed only twelve days later, these laws heralded the culmination of the Euromaidan protests .
 The protests were less about the EU and more about the future of Ukraine . The protests are now less about EU and about Ukraine .
 More attention was paid to the innate and grotesque corruption of the ruling regime . The prevalence of oligarchs who had enriched themselves at the expense of the state, the report says .
 Yanukovych to sacrifice his Prime Minister, Mykola Azarov and try to make a compromise with opposition leaders . One was the agreement of Yanukovych to give up his prime minister . Another was the deal to make an agreement with the opposition .
 The Prime Minister's position was offered to Arsenii Yatseniuk, the former Economy and Foreign Minister of Ukraine and leader of the Batkivshchnyna party . Tymoshenko was jailed in 2009 after the incarceration of the former Ukrainian PM .
 Both refused to take up these posts, possibly because they could detect the growing weakness of the government . More likely because to have done so would have cost them influence on the square .
 Third opposition leader Oleh Tiahnybok of Svoboda had never led the protests . In reality, these leaders had never lead the protests.
 As the situation polarised, both sides changed character and personnel . Both sides changed characters and personnel as the situation polarized .
Gangs of thugs were bussed into Kyiv from other cities, principally Kharkiv and Donetsk . On the government side, they were simply to cause mayhem .
 They set fire to cars, beat up protesters, kidnapped people, and targeted journalists . They also targeted prominent journalists, including journalists .
 On the opposition side, several local militias formed, based partly on rightist groups like Pravyi Sektor . On the other side, some local militias were formed by the opposition .
 The average protester, if one can deduce such a thing, was no longer the 20-something student, but more hardened 30 and 40-year-olds . "The average protester" was not only ready for a fight but unprepared to compromise .
 In their local regions, the government of Yanukovych no longer existed . The government of Ukraine no longer exists .
 Poland, France, Germany and Germany arrived in Kyiv on 21 February . It agreed to introduce sanctions against Ukrainian leaders .
Working into the night, they brokered a deal between the government and the three parliamentary opposition leaders . The government and three opposition leaders worked in the night .
 It would have seen a temporary administration, constitutional reforms to reduce the powers of the presidency . New presidential and parliamentary elections by the end of the year would have been in place .
 The stipulation was that in the interim, Yanukovych would remain as president . U.S. supported the stipulation, which was supported by the United States .
 barricades piled high, burning tyres set off thick black smoke, and some guns and clubs . In the centre of Kyiv, the situation began to resemble the final scene of Les Misérables .
 Yanukovych and Interior Minister Vitalii Zakharenko ordered troops to fire on protesters using live ammunition . snipers on rooftops picked off targets at will .
 The numbers of dead approached 100; hundreds more were wounded . Many were wounded, many were severely .
 The assault failed and the protesters remained in place . But the assault, remarkably, failed, and the assault failed . The assault was not stopped .
 The immediate outcome has been the flight of the president and most of his Cabinet . The president has been in charge of his cabinet for months .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia, where he has remained, used alternatively as a symbol of Russia’s position that the government in Ukraine is illegal . But not one that is considered a likely catalyst of anything decisive .
 The acting president is Oleksandr Turchynov, a 49-year-old economist from Batkivshchyna . The act president is the new parliamentary speaker .
 New elections brought forward from December as agreed to in the deal between the old government, and EU leaders .
 The frontrunner is an oligarch who according to Taras Kuzio is a political chameleon . Petro Poroshenko is the president of Ukraine .
 In contrast to the Orange Revolution, the government has been overthrown . The government has not been ousted .
 Russia, initially, was left on the sidelines, seemingly preoccupied with the Sochi Olympic Games . Russia was left in the middle of the Sochi Games .
 The EU and the U.S. also failed to influence the course of events in the later stages of the event .
 Some of the militants from the protests, for example, took over the Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 Threats from anti-Maidan elements to split the country initially proved futile .
 The Right Sector, an integral part of the more violent aspects of the Euromaidan, has been removed from central Kyiv by the Ukrainian police .
 The innocence of the first days of Euromaidan was very different from 20 and 21 February . The most violent days in the history of independent Ukraine were the most violent day in history .
 The country removed some of the legacies of 1991 – a Donetsk-based regime of apparatchiks and gangsters . But it was by no means clear that the interim government could offer unity and compromise .
 The financial crisis in mid-April is much worse than was the case in late November . The crisis is much better than was in November, according to analysts .
 Euromaidan entered a second phase on 27 February, when armed units in uniforms without markings took over the Crimean parliament and government buildings in Simferopol .
 Sergey Aksionov's party had received only about 4% in the most recent Crimean elections . They installed a new prime minister, Sergey Akionov, whose party received only 4%.
 Troops took over government buildings and military installations, forcing Ukrainian units to surrender . Troops were supplemented by the 25,000 sailors of the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 The Ukrainians did not respond with force, and the attackers did not suffer any losses during the takeover . The Ukrainians didn't respond to the attackers with force .
 The annexation of Crimea was solidified by a referendum on 16 March . It was reported that over 95% supported the peninsula joining Russian Federation .
 Russia and Ukraine engaged in a war of propaganda about what was happening, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The Ukrainians, backed by most of the democratic world and the UN, maintained that Russia had invaded their territory . The Ukrainians were signed in Budapest in 1994 and Kyiv in 1997, the latter a treaty of friendship and cooperation .
 The Russian version of events is that an illegal pro-Nazi junta has taken over Ukraine and is persecuting Russians and Russian speakers .
 Western response to events has been somewhat subdued. Aside from sanctions and travel bans, however, Western response has been subdued .
 U.S. president Barack Obama ruled out any form of military response to Russian intrusions into Ukraine . President Obama rules out a military response.
 Russia has amassed a large military force on Ukraine’s borders . It is believed to be behind mass disturbances in several Ukrainian cities .
 Russian political leaders have expressed their support for a ‘federal system’ in Ukraine, including in talks with the United States .
 Ukraine’s richest oligarch Rinat Akhmetov has supported this position, with the proviso that Donbas remains in Ukraine . The proviso is that the Ukrainian government remains in the country .
 Ukraine at present is in a critically unstable position and the threat of a Russian invasion is quite serious . The threat of an invasion is very serious, according to the Russian government .
 Russia has no right to make demands on Ukraine as to its form of government, says interim leadership . Its interim leadership has acted cautiously and timidly, but insists that Russia is not right to demand demands .
In the long term, international sanctions may imperil Russia’s energy-centred economy . In the short term, there is no doubt that Putin's position is the more powerful than Putin's .
 Ukrainian authorities have stopped payments for Russian gas pending talks . Already Russian prices for gas sold to Ukraine have risen to $485 per thousand cubic metres .
 NATO is belatedly bolstering its position in the eastern borderland member states . The West is simply unable to predict Vladimir Putin’s next move .
 The Russian president has the initiative and the West is responding to his manoeuvres awkwardly . But there is no doubt that the Russian president is taking the initiative .
 The third stage of Euromaidan approaches and may well be the most critical one in the history of Ukraine . It may be the third stage in the Ukraine's history .