 No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any form . No material supplied speciﬁlming, recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher .
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations .
 The current conflict in Ukraine has had tremendous repercussions both on the individuals living in the affected territory and around the world .
 The ‘Maidan’ protests began in November of 2013 as a response to the decision of Ukraine’s pro-Russian former President Viktor Yanukovych not to sign an association agreement with the European Union . The protests led to Crimea's annexation by the Russian Federation1 and a
 Jus ad Bellum, Jus post Bellum. Jus is an impressive attempt to address the legal and practical challenges posed by this difﬁcult state of affairs .
 This book nuances the readers’ understanding of the conflict, taking the perspective of those on the receiving end . The book is published in the U.S.
 The book assembles a wide variety of scholars from around the world to address the complexities of Crimea’s sudden incorporation into the Russian Federation and the conflict in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation has not dismissed international law as irrelevant, but has endeavoured to explain it away or even redeﬁne it .
 This represents a real challenge to both the content and the relevance of international law today, says the editor .
 All matters taking place in or in relation to the territory were subject to Russia’s domestic jurisdiction and governed by Russian administrative bodies .
 Russian authorities expedited the issuance of Russian passports for residents of the peninsula . Russian authorities issued passports for the residents of Crimea .
 Those who refused to take Russian nationality were allegedly subject to discrimination . Those who opposed the annexation, and certain minority groups, were subject to persecution .
 The International Criminal Court Prosecutor’s Preliminary Examination 2017 Report contains allegations of disappearances, killings, killings and ill-treatment . The report also includes alleged harassment of Crimean Tatar population .
 Crimea's integration into the Russian Federation has been enormous, causing ﬁnancial and psychological harm in addition to the speciﬁc harms detailed above . The number of violent crimes is not high, but the overall impact of Crimea’s integration into
 In Eastern Ukraine, the struggle between government and anti-government forces has already resulted in more than 10,000 deaths and 25,000 injuries . The alleged commission of war crimes includes illegal detentions, torture and ill-treatment, sexual and gender-based violence .
This conflict continues today and threatens Ukraine as well as its neighbours . This conflict continues to threaten Ukraine and its neighbours today .
 The scope and magnitude of this ongoing conflict cannot be overstated . The importance of this timely volume cannot beoverstated .
 The ﬁrst seven chapters discuss issues relating to the jus ad bellum, or the legality and characterisation of the conflict .
 Both he and Oleksandr Merezhko address the thorny question of the conflict’s characterisation as international or non-international .
Both the conflict in Eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are international in nature . Foreword vii authors conclude in the light of the facts.
Only a handful of States have 'joined' Russia in either backing the Crimean ‘referendum’ or actively opposing measures supporting Ukraine’s territorial identity .
 She concludes that international law’s ‘foremost concern is to reverse the situation of suffering that results in the continuous production of violations. States and international organisations are charged with the heavy lifting necessary to achieve these ends by upholding these obligations in their transactions with the occupying state.
 Eleven States voted against, ﬁfty-eight abstained and twenty-four were absent . The vote was held in the United States .
 This thoughtful chapter illuminates the wisdom, as seen in hindsight, of Nottebohm’s distinction between nationality as deﬁned under municipal law and the international validity of a State's assessment regarding whom it may extend diplomatic protection .
 This chapter suggests that the tendency of other States to use a ‘self-defence’ rubric to justify protection of their nationals abroad . It suggests that incidents justiﬁed, if at all, by extreme necessity, should be treated with utmost caution, as
 Russia is taking a card straight from America’s playbook. William Burke-White makes a similar point in Crimea .
 Russia is asserting itself as a renewed hub for a particular interpretation of international law . It challenges the balance at the heart of the post-Second World-War order and the United States to lead that order .
 Gergely Tóth argues that the Russian Federation is using ‘hybrid’ or ‘asymmetric warfare’ to achieve its ends in Ukraine . In a similar vein, Bill Bowring suggests that the justiﬁcation for annexation of a �
 Crimean Tatars would potentially have such a right as an indigenous Turkic people . In his view, the only ‘people’ potentially having such right would be the Crimean Tatar .
 The use of the term ‘hybrid’ or ‘asymmetric’ warfare in this volume, as also suggested by Olga Butkevych, centres upon the fact that Military aggression is just one element of Russian hybrid warfare against Ukraine .
 hybrid conflicts involve multilayered efforts designed to destabilise a functioning State and polarise its society .
 Unlike conventional warfare, the ‘centre of gravity’ in hybrid warfare is a target population .
 The adversary tries to influence influential policy-makers and key decision-makers by combining kinetic operations with subversive efforts . The adversary uses kinetic operations to influence key decision makers .
 They argue that aggressors will often resort to clandestine actions, to avoid attribution or retribution . They say aggressors are often trying to avoid retribution .
 The Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare suggests cyber-operations involve the use of force only when their ‘scale and effects are comparable to a non-cyber operation rising to the level of a use of Force’ This does not mean that cyber
 The principle of non-intervention is embodied in Article 2 of the UN Charter . It forms part of the principle of the sovereign equality of States .
 The principle of non-intervention is also part of customary international law . He distinguishes the attacks in Ukraine as involving largely ‘political and ideological effect'
 Foreign Fighters in the Framework of International Armed Conflict between Russia and Ukraine . Anastasia Frolova considers whether international humanitarian lawfully addresses the complexities presented by the high level of foreign nationals.
 Belarus nationals might not have protected status under the Third or Fourth Geneva Convention if captured by Russia . Russia usually exercises diplomatic protection over them, says the author .
 The plight of children afflicted by the conflict in Ukraine is taken in Chap., Children and the Armed Conflict in Eastern Ukraine, penned by Natalia Krestovska .
 She notes the toll of the war on children, many of whom have been killed or wounded . Thousands more have been internally displaced, she says .
 Children’s living standards, educational attainment, health and security have been negatively affected by the conflict in violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law . Children's living standards and educational attainment are negatively affected, according to the UN .
 In Chap., on the International Legal Dimensions of the Russian Occupation of Crimea, Evhen Tsybulenko and Bogdan Kelichavyi develop further the complications of Russia’s occupation in terms of the legal regimes applicable to the annexed territory .
 The legal relationship between Russia and Ukraine and between individuals living in Crimea has been upended by the war . Butkevych’s earlier chapter notes, the relationship between the two countries is upended .
 Crimea has imposed real challenges to individuals currently living in Crimea as well as those displaced, says Tsybulenko and Kelichavyi .
 The protection of human rights for all the individuals living in Ukraine has been compromised, according to the Ukrainian government .
 The Russian invasion has put the Tatars of Crimea again ‘on the brink of extinction’ The possibility that violation of the Genocide Convention may be in play .
 Ukraine has submitted two declarations to the International Criminal Court relating to the conflict . Ukraine has applied to the European Court of Human Foreword xi Rights for relief .
 The authors claim that the ‘possible destructive effects’ of this historical revisionism are more harmful than those which took place in other European conflicts . It is likely that they helped to solidify the aggression that did take place much more quickly than in the past .
 The Genocide Convention protects ‘national’ and ‘ethnic’ groups . ‘Russian language speakers’ as such are not a group protected under the Convention .
 Russian law permits Russia to engage in a form of legal warfare that accompanies the acts of physical violence and territorial conquest . Russia also allows Russia to promote and even insist upon the use of the Russian language in countries, such as Kazakhstan .
 In Chap., Gerhard Kemp and Igor Lyubashenko address the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine in terms of International, regional and comparative perspectives of the jus post bellum options . In Chap, Kemp and Lyub ashenko discuss the conflict.
 Their project is to canvas the broad ﬁelds of ‘post-conflict justice and transitional justice’ in considering responses to the conflict .
 Russia must refrain from imposing limitations on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to conserve its representative institutions, including the Mejlis .
 They worry hybrid nature of the conflict may be ‘a signiﬁcant constraint on the goal of peace’ because it ‘effectively conceals the international dimension of the war’ and poses an obstacle to truth .
 The focus on truth as one of the primary casualties of the conflict is reinforced by the ﬁnal chapter of this volume, Post-Conflict Reconstruction of Trust in the Media .
 She catalogues the struggles Ukraine is facing with propaganda, intimidation of journalists, lack of access to information and other difﬁculties . She concludes that the best response is to protect freedom of information .
 Three chapters focus on the possibility of an International Criminal Court intervention into the situation in Ukraine . The three chapters include three chapters on the possible international criminal court intervention .
 ICC's preliminary examination of the situation is underway . The two Article 12 declarations were made by Ukraine regarding alleged crimes committed in its territory from 21 November 2013 to 22 February 2014 . Beatrice Onica Jarka takes up the preliminary examination.
 Her analysis covers the Preliminary Examination Reports from 2014, 2015 and 2016 . She also covers the preliminary Examination Reports.
 Ukraine may have hurt its cause and may have provoked the Russian Federation into withdrawing its signature from the Rome Statute . ICC's possible intervention could have hurt Ukraine's cause .
 ICC Focus On? adds to Jarka’s chapter by examining the possible violations of the laws of war that may have been .
 In Chap., Ioannis Tzivaras complements Atadjanov by focusing on the possible application of the Rome Statute to crimes involving sexual violence in Ukraine .
 His chapter discusses the possibility of war crimes charges and crimes against humanity as well . His chapter also discusses possibility of crimes against human rights as well.
 This book reveals a complex and sad struggle for control of Eastern Ukraine and Crimea . It pits Ukraine’s government on the one hand and the Russian Federation and its allies and surrogates on the other .
 Foreword xiii captures the conflict at a particular point in time and leaves out some of the historical and geopolitical context . It is a useful collection of essays on how international law and international legal institutions interact with the use of force .
 The Russian Federation used international law to make its case for annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . In making its case, the Russian Federation twisted it to its advantage and often bending the facts to ﬁt the law .
 The ability of international law, international legal institutions and effective diplomacy to resolve the crisis in Ukraine will be a test of its efﬁcacy and resiliency .
 Both States have tried to use the media to sway public opinion to them . Russia may have prevailed inside the Russian Federation, but it is clear that Ukraine has the sympathies of most of the world .
 The conflict is currently considered a stalemate, but sanctions on Russia, such as its removal from the G8 in 2014, have helped strengthen Ukraine’s position . A tentative rapprochement of Ukraine with NATO with NATO has helped strengthen the Ukrainian position .
 The election of U.S. President Donald Trump, with his pro-Putin leanings, gave rise to speculation that the USA might recognise the annexation of Crimea by Russia . But thus far that has not happened .
 This book appears at a critical time in which the legal consequences of Russian activities are under scrutiny by courts and international organisations .
 The authors, and the two co-editors, are to be commended for this important contribution .
 The effects of Crimea’s occupation and illegal annexation by the Russian Federation since early 2014. Louis Preface the effects of the Crimea occupation and Russian aggression in Eastern Ukraine extend far beyond Ukraine's borders .
 Individuals’ daily lives are affected by broken friendships, and new friendships are made on the basis of respective afﬁliations .
 sanctions against the Russian Federation were introduced by the USA, the European Union, Japan and some other States . On the international plane, most States and international organisations were aligned themselves with Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation introduced so-called countersanctions against States . It had introduced the ‘original’ sanctions against it,15 empowered its Constitutional Court, in violation of the European Convention on Human Rights .
 Some commentators went even further and asserted that, at this time, ‘international law was absolutely not there only the law of the strong work’,18 . Others, including a co-editor of the present volume, regarded the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine as a challenge to
 All contributing authors were guided by academic freedom, and hence the co-editors do not necessarily share the views expressed in individual chapters . It is also understood that all contributing authors are guided by academics .
 Miras Daulenov's inaugurating chapter recalls Russia’s obligation under applicable international law not to have used force against Ukraine . Russia's fundamental obligation under international law is not to use force.
 Bill Bowring's and Valentina Azarova's chapters focus on aspects of Russia’s use of force in Crimea .
Sabine Hassler and Noëlle Quénivet test validity of Russia's claim to use force against Ukraine to protect ‘nationals’ abroad .
 Gerhard Kemp and Igor Lyubashenko consider possible models of post-conflict justice . They say they could be used in Ukraine, which could also be used for justice .
 The International Criminal Court’s jurisdiction with respect to the core crimes committed during the armed conflict in Ukraine . Beatrice Onica Jarka and Rustam Atadjanov study.
 Ioannis Tzivaras identiﬁed sexual violence in the conflict as a challenge to international Preface xvii criminal justice . Tzvaras is a member of the Italian National Assembly .
 Katrin Merike Nyman-Metcalf’s chapter considers the post-conflict reconstruction of trust in the media . The chapter also considers the reconstruction of the media.
 The Appendix contains links to the most signiﬁcant resolutions adopted by international organisations and institutions . It also includes Sergey Sayapin’s amicus memorandum in defence of Nadiya Savchenko .
 The co-editors take this occasion to thank all contributors wholeheartedly for their excellent work .
 English language editors at Academic Proofreading Services Ltd. trading as www.englishproofread.com were very helpful in proofreading selected chapters .
 Asser Press for their excellent support throughout the publication process . Asser press for their great support during publication process.
 Professor Oleksandr Zadorozhny is the former President of the Ukrainian Association of International Law .
 Professor Zadorozhny taught and inspired many scholars and practitioners of international law in Ukraine and abroad .
 Professor Zadorozhny was invited to contribute a chapter to this book . He passed away before this book was completed .
 He will remain in our memory as a patriot of sovereign Ukraine and a brilliant scholar and mentor .
 Formerly a Legal Adviser at the Regional Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Central Asia dealing with humanitarian law and public international law issues .
 She has worked with and advised civil society working on Palestine for close to a decade . She has published extensively on international law issues including occupation and third-state responsibility .
 As a practising barrister since 1974, he has represented applicants before the European Court of Human Rights in many cases since 1992, especially against Turkey and Russia . As a barrister, he is also a lawyer for the European Human Rights Court .
 In 1999, she earned an LLM degree in international law from the same Institute . She also earned an LMA degree from the Institute of International Law .
 He is a critical reviewer of the Wrocław Review of Law, Administration and Economics, Poland, and of the Law and State Journal, Kazakhstan .
 His research interests include Public International Law, International Humanitarian Law, European Union Law, Constitutional Law, Contract Law, Legal Philosophy and Foreign Policy . He also has his own interests in the EU and EU .
 He is the recipient of many awards to include receiving the Prime Minister’s Scholarship Grant in 2014 . He is one of the four best freshmen students at Tallinn Law School in 2015 .
 The Tallinn Law School team won the All-European International Humanitarian and Refugee Law Moot Court Competition 2016 in Ljubljana, Slovenia .
 In the 2017–2018, he will be pursuing postgraduate studies and research in his ﬁeld of interests .
 Between 2010 and 2016, he held a position of editor-in-chief of an academic journal Acta Iuridica Olomucensia . He was editor- in-chief at the journal between 2010-2016 .
 Nowadays, he is responsible as an editor-in-charge for another academic journal, International and Comparative Law Review . He is responsible for the journal's coverage of law and law .
 In his research, he focuses on relations and interactions between EU law and national law . He focuses on the theoretical impacts of the membership in the EU on the state sovereignty .
 Sabine Hassler is a Senior Lecturer in Law at the Department of Law, UWE Bristol . She is a senior lecturer at the University of Law in Bristol .
 He is an Advocate of the High Court of South Africa and member of the board of directors, Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, Cape Town . He is also a member of a board of Directors of the Institute of Justice and reconciliation .
 His academic interests are various aspects of transition to democracy in post-communist states, in particular Poland and Ukraine .
 Previously, he worked as an analyst at the Polish Institute of International Affairs, focusing on politics and international relations in Eastern Europe .
 She is active as an international consultant primarily in the area of information and communication technology law including freedom of expression, as well as e-governance . She is also a consultant for information and communications technology law .
 Her research interests include how law and technology meet with special emphasis on IT and communications . Her research interest includes how law, technology and communications meet withspecial emphasis.
 She has published several articles in international humanitarian law and international criminal law . She has co-edited two books, one on the relationship between international law and human rights law and another on armed conflict .
 In 2000-2014, he held a number of posts at the Regional Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Central Asia .
 His areas of expertise include international conflict and security law, international human rights and humanitarian law, and international criminal law . He also has expertise in human rights, humanitarian law and human rights .
 Historical Development, Comparative Analysis and Present State and over 50 academic and publicist articles, chapters and essays .
 He is the Founding Editor-in-Chief of the Central Asian Yearbook of International and Comparative Law . He is also the founding editor of the C.A. yearbook of international and comparative law .
 He previously worked as a Legal Advisor at the Regional Delegation for Central Europe of the Red Cross . Currently serves at Hungarian Ministry of Defence’s Department for Coordination of Public Relations .
 She currently teaches the Theory of Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, Religious Factor in International Relations and Social Policy . She also teaches the theory of politics, corporate social Responsibility and Religious Factor.
 He is an Adjunct Professor and Senior Visiting Mentor at the Joint Command and General Staff Course at Baltic Defence College . He is also an AdJunct Professor at the joint command and general Staff Course .
 He is the head of the group of authors of several textbooks in the ﬁeld of public international law . He is also the author of several books on the subject of international law.