 Waiting for Mother Russia – In Two Acts documents the daily tensions between pro-Russian and pro-Western residents of Eastern Ukraine .
 Sands’s balancing of portraits of political action and protest against more mundane snapshots of daily life highlights the complexity in the relations between these two communities . Sands' balancing of portrait and protest highlights the complex relationship between these communities .
 Core ideas of Ukrainian identity evolved over many centuries as borders in the region were impacted by military and political conflicts throughout the evolution of modern Europe .
 Between 1921 and 1991, Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union, like many of its neighbors . Ukraine was a member of the Russian Union .
 After independence, residents in central and western parts of the country celebrated their identity . Residents celebrated their Ukrainian identity .
 Large numbers of eastern residents, particularly in Donbass and Crimea, remain tied to their ethnically Russian roots . However, large numbers of Eastern residents, especially in the areas of Don Bass and Crimea.
 In recent decades, economic depression created by financial corruption has exacerbated the country’s ethno-national divide . Tensions between an expanding European Union and current Russia leader Vladimir Putin have additionally exacerbated the nation's ethno national divide .
 The current conflict is commonly regarded as the 2013 Maidan protests in Kiev of then president Viktor Yanukovych’s signature of a trade deal with Russia in lieu of the widely supported EU Association Agreement .
 In mid-February 2014, these protests evolved into violent clashes between police forces and protesters .
 In the days that followed, Yanukovych was impeached and a pro-Western government was set up until elections could be held . The days after that, the pro- Western government had been set up .
 protests against the interim government broke out across pro-Russian eastern Ukraine . Sparatists seized the Donbass region and Putin sent troops to “reclaim’s’ Crimea.
 After several years of violence, an estimated 8,000 people, including children and the elderly, have been killed . 1. million people remain internally displaced .
 Armed forces on both sides of the conflict have used deadly weapons in areas populated by civilians . Potential war crimes have been documented in a number of regions .
 In the midst of the current uneasy ceasefire, Waiting for Mother Russia – In Two Acts depicts both the dramatic and banal aspects of life in conflict .
 Ukraine's current government lurches through efforts at reform, it is clear that the potential for further violence simmers under Ukraine’s barely stitched together surface .
 Wil Sands is based in Barcelona, where he has been active in various social movements . He has been involved in prison abolition initiatives, particularly in prison reform initiatives .
 His interest in documentary photography began on a trip to South America in 2007 . He has been photographing South America since 2007 .
 In the spring of 2011, Wil co-founded the Fractures Photo Collective, an independent documentary photography collective based in Barcelona .
 Photographer Wil is in a constant search for images that complicate dominant discourses . As a photographer, he is in the constant search of images.