 A top Chinese official visited Kyiv this week to announce a host of new infrastructure projects and investments in Ukraine . The two countries could nudge Kyiv away from the West, some say .
 Ukraine is at the nexus of a spider’s web of geopolitical interests, including those of Russia, the United States, the European Union and now China .
 Beijing has ramped up its investments in Ukraine to prepare Ukraine's transportation infrastructure for its role as a portal into Europe for China’s proposed One Belt, One Road overland trade route across Asia .
 The One Belt, One Road initiative is Chinese President Xi Jinping’s foreign policy mantelpiece . Also known as the “New Silk Road,’ the ‘ New Silk Road’ is the ’s ‘New Silk road’
 Beijing wants Ukraine to become a stable, reliable partner through which Chinese goods can flow into Europe . China wants to see Ukraine become a reliable partner.
 Kai announced plans for $7 billion in joint projects between China and Ukraine in Kyiv .
 2019 will be the “year of China’s year in Ukraine, Groysman said . In turn, he announced that 2019 would be “the year of China.
 Ukraine and Russia have been in a de facto state of war for almost four years, dating back to Russia’s March 2014 invasion and seizure of Crimea . The Ukraine-Russia conflict has been in the past four years .
 The war is now a low-intensity, static, trench warfare conflict in which, on average, one Ukrainian soldier dies every three days . On average, a Ukrainian soldier died every 3 days .
 At first take, Russia and China appear to have conflicting interests in Ukraine . At first takes, the two countries appear to be divided over Ukraine .
 Fatima-Zohra Er-Rafia is a corporate consultant and researcher who specializes in Asia . She is also a researcher and corporate consultant .
 China would ultimately prefer Ukraine to be in Russia's orbit rather than the West’s .
 The level of instability in Ukraine due to Russian aggression is not likely to rattle Chinese investors, who are well acquainted with business in risky markets .
 Russian influence in Ukraine evaporated after the 2014 Maidan revolution overthrew Ukraine’s then-President Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych fled to exile in Russia after his ouster .
 Russia's subsequent hybrid war gambit to obstruct Ukraine’s turn to the West has backfired . Russia's next hybrid wargambit has also backfired, says CNN .
Anti-Russian sentiments have skyrocketed within Ukrainian society and its politics . Anti-Russian sentiment has skyrocketed in Ukrainian society .
Rolls of toilet paper adorned with the likeness of Russian President Vladimir Putin have been a staple among street merchants in Kyiv .
 Russo-Ukrainian split has been the renaissance of Ukraine’s military, which was a broken force prior to 2014 .
 Ukraine has since rebuilt its armed forces into Europe’s second-biggest in terms of active-duty ranks . Russia is the ‘aggressor nation’ in the process .
 The end goal of Ukraine’s military rebuild is to meet NATO interoperability standards by the year 2020 .
 Ukraine has undergone a purge of all things Russian since the 2014 revolution . On the economic front, Ukraine has had a purge on the economy .
 Russia remains Ukraine’s top export destination and biggest foreign investor, Kyiv Post reported in March .
 Ukraine has completely weaned itself off of Russian natural gas, as well as Russian-made parts for its military equipment .
 Moscow may not be able to re-establish its direct influence over Ukraine in the current political climate . Moscow may be unable to regain direct influence in Ukraine .
 A Ukraine economically beholden to China might be the next best option to forestall Ukraine’s pro-Western transformation . The country has been in a state of crisis for years .
 The post-revolution economic divorce between Russia and Ukraine has left Ukraine looking for new markets in which to sell its goods, as well as foreign investors to jump-start its economy .
 China has proven to be a lucrative alternative to Russia. In both respects, China has proved to be an attractive option to Russia .
 Ukraine is looking for economic emancipation . But swapping China for Russia may not be the economic emancipation Ukraine has been looking for .
 Trade between Ukraine and China increased by 14. percent in the first nine months of 2017 . Trade between the two countries reached about $5. billion .
 Ukraine has taken over from the U.S. as China’s top supplier of corn . China is the world's top supplier.
 Five years ago, the U.S. supplied about 97 percent of corn imported by China . The United States supplied 97 percent.
 China is now the top purchaser of military equipment from Ukraine, totaling $90 million in sales in 2016 . China is the top seller of military gear from Ukraine .
 China has already had a hand in rebuilding Ukraine’s transportation infrastructure . It underscored the importance of Ukraine to the One Belt, One Road initiative .
 Kyiv awarded contracts worth tens of millions of euros for Chinese companies to upgrade Ukrainian highways . Kyiv has awarded multiple contracts worth thousands of euros to Chinese companies .
 Beijing has plans for a $400 million passenger railway connecting Kyiv Boryspil International Airport and Kyiv.
 A Chinese company has been dredging Ukraine's Yuzhny port, the country's busiest .
 Ivan Miroshnichenko says China could invest $8 to $12 billion in Ukraine over the next five years .
 corruption and Russia’s war in the east have dampened Western investment in Ukraine . Lingering corruption and Russian war in east have also dampened investment in the country .
 Kai's visit to Kyiv came as both the EU and the U.S. unleashed criticism on Ukraine’s government for its faltering anti-corruption reforms .
 Kyiv’s failure to fulfill reform requirements spurred the move, the EU said . Kyiv's failure to meet reform requirements led to the move.
 The State Department issued a blunt statement urging Ukrainian lawmakers to pick up the pace of anti-corruption efforts .
 China could have an opening to quietly gain leverage through economic inducements that are not tied to any to-do list of reforms . The EU and the United States are apparently losing patience with Kyiv .
 Russia and China are in the midst of a diplomatic rapprochement, in principle, on a common aversion to the U.S.-led, post-war world order .
 Putin and Xi outlined their common worldview in a July joint statement .
 The two countries are inclined to see eye to eye in areas of overlapping interests, such as their respective goals in Ukraine .
 China may want to set a historical precedent in Ukraine by nudging the country back into Russia’s orbit, as Cheng suggested .
 Beijing may not ultimately see Ukraine's fate as an either-or choice between Russia and the West . But Moscow does, as Moscow does .
 Kai's visit to Kyiv this week underscored a broader Chinese effort to increase its sway over Central and Eastern Europe . Kai’s visit toKyiv underscores a broader China effort to increased its sway.
 A gambit, some say, that should raise U.S. officials’ eyebrows, especially in light of Russia’s continuing hybrid aggression in that same region .
 China has positioned itself as a regional power broker in Central and Eastern Europe . China is a major power broker for the region .
 China has been laying the groundwork for its One Belt, One Road Initiative through a laundry list of various agreements and initiatives . Across the region, China has laid the groundwork.
 The Chinese brainchild was launched with the goal of ‘intensifying and expanding cooperation’ among countries in the transportation corridor of China’s New Silk Road project . Comprising 11 EU member states and five Balkan countries, the brainchild is launched .
 In 2016, China and a handful of Central and Eastern European countries signed the Riga Declaration, reaffirming their support for the Chinese plan . The Declaration was signed in 2016 by China and other countries .
 The Three Seas Initiative is a North-South trade corridor among the EU member states of Central and Eastern Europe . It was first proposed by Premier Li Keqiang during the China-CEEC Summit in 2015 .
 Beijing claims the trade corridor will ‘contribute to greater synergy’ between the transportation infrastructures of Central and Eastern European countries and its One Belt, One Road initiative . Beijing claims it will “contribute’ to greater synergism’
 China's 16+1 format highlights another collision of Russian and Chinese interests . China’s 16+ 1 format highlights a collision of Russia and China's interests .
With so many countries’ interests converging in Central and Eastern Europe, it could spark something analogous to a geopolitical bidding war for influence .