 Kiev left Crimea totally in the dark a few months ago – and this was no story for the Western media . This comes after Kiev left the country totally in a dark .
Journalists in modern Germany have a more crooked psyche and conscience than Nazi Third Reich journalists, says author .
 Donetsk region did not recognize the post-Maidan ‘revolutionary’ government of Ukraine . The Ukrainian army’s punitive onslaught during the summer war in 2014.
 In the neighboring Lugansk People’e Republic, Ukraine cut all energy supplies back in April . 1. million people live in Lugansk, where 1.million people live .
All the electricity that Donetsk and Lugansk consume is either produced by themselves or supplied from neighboring Russia . German chancellor Merkel and similar European humanists set themselves to reduce Russia's involvement in these areas to zero .
 The story with the total cut of Ukrainian energy supplies to Donetsk did not interest the EU countries’ media in the least . The story was not interested the EU media.
 Siemens infuriated as they were with Russia's “abuse of its confidence’s confidence. What kept them busy was the recent scandal with Siemens .
 Siemens even offered to ‘buy back’ from Russia the gas turbines produced with the use of Siemens’ technologies on Russian territory . Siemens also brought for installation in Crimea .
 These turbines may help to provide warmth and light to 2 million of Crimeans .
 Siemens’ turbines in Crimea are a total breach of the great world order which the EU and the United States have been building during all of those years since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The German authorities issued a tough statement about Russia’s “breach of confidence,’ the German authorities said . Siemens were insulted and sobbing Siemens to go off the hook.
 There was no German protest against Ukraine’s cutting electric supplies to its own citizens or to Crimea . There was, of course, no German protests against the cuts .
 Merkel and other humanists from the EU are NEVER concerned by the continued water and food blockade of Donetsk and Lugansk . The blockade has been continuous since 2014 .
 Crimea plunged into darkness by blowing up the energy lines near the Crimean border . Almost no one in the Western press was concerned when the so called “Ukrainian nationalist activists’ a few months ago plunged Crimea into darkness .
 Ukraine's electricity lines for decades have been allowing Ukraine’s electricity to flow to Crimea . These lines have been allowed for decades to flow.
 Putin's horrible Russia signed a contract on energy supplies to Crimea with Poroshenko’s government in 2014-2015 . Poroshenko still allowed the electric lines to be blown up .
 No one in the Western publications was then concerned about young women in Crimea giving births in maternity wards in complete darkness and without minimal medical aid .
 No one in Germany, supposedly full of regret about World War II, asked questions about the transportation in Crimea . Crimea came to its first full stop since 1943 because of the German-supported Ukrainian and Tatar nationalists .
 The Fuhrer dreamed of that “new consciousness’ under which only the “right’s suffering will be pitied and alleviated . That is, of Nazi Germans and their allies among Ukrainian and Tatar anti-Russian nationalists .
 Britain will always be there, regardless of right or wrong, says Geoffrey R Pyatt .