 I have made some progress in delving into the rich compost of back stories which illuminate the territory which talmudic kabbalists try so hard to keep under wraps . I have also made someprogress in delve into some of the rich back stories .
 A critical analysis of the converging American/Russian loss of sovereignty to the forces of Lubavitcher darkness will be forthcoming .
 A petition was published calling for the immediate removal of Vadim Rabinovich, the president of the All-Ukrainian Jewish Congress . On the same day this slip of the tongue was uttered, on the Chabadnik Internet site run by the Or Av
 Rabinovich defines himself as a fervent Zionist . He is considered a long-standing personal friend of Yuschenko .
 He says he has spoken to the rabbis who signed the petition and most of them said their names had been added without their knowledge or agreement . Most of them say they have been added to the petition without knowing or agreement.
 The petition was signed by 32 Chabad rabbis in Ukraine whose congregations are members of the Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS, which is considered closest to Putin .
 There is suspicion that the initiators of the petition were harnessed to help Putin in his fight against the ""Zionists"" who are among those close to Yuschenko .
 The Federation of Jewish Communities makes a point of distancing the Jews from politics .
 Rabinovich wanted to raise an outcry against the attempt to involve the Jewish community in the support of one of the candidates in the elections .
 Vladimir Guzinsky was the dominant figure in the Russian Jewish Congress . He was a media tycoon and hero of the age of privatization during Boris Yeltsin's presidency .
 The conflicts between Guzinsky and Putin severely damaged the strength and prestige of the congress . The conflicts also damaged the power of the Russian government .
 At its peak was $10 million a year, its budget was $1 million annually . Its budget has plummeted in recent years to less than $1million annually .
 The Federation of Communities budget was $70 million last year, $40 million of which was in Russia alone .
 The joint communal activity of Lazar and Leviev, who is the president of the Federation of Jewish Communities, began at the end of the 1980s .
 The federation has been impressively successful in recent years, but at the same time there has been increasing criticism of its policy . The federation's policy has been criticised for being too restrictive .
 This year there is a conflict between the federation and the Liaison Bureau Nativ over the return to Russia of Jews who immigrated to Israel . This year is the first time the federation has been involved in a conflict with Nativ .
 The Nativ people claim the federation is intentionally exaggerating the phenomenon to encourage more Jews to return to Russia . The Natv people say the federation has intentionally exaggerated the phenomenon .
Number of Israeli passports currently in Russia is no more than 13,000, Nativ says .
 Critics of Lazar say he has refrained from expressing criticism of the impotence of the authorities in dealing with the increasing anti-Semitism in the country . Others say he intentionally makes the situation of the Jews in Russia sound better than it really is .
 The million Jews we know here don't want to immigrate to Israel, says Ariel Sharon . They say that this is not a blessing for Ariel Sharon, because the million Jews they know here do not want to move to Israel .
 In 1992, Leviev and Lazar tried to get a permit to open an Or Avner school in St. Louis . The school was closed in 1992 .
 Petersburg's deputy mayors needed an authorization from one of the deputy mayors . Petersburg is a city of Petersburg, Russia, and the city's mayor is a former mayor .
 The second deputy, who provided the authorization with no delays, was Vladimir Putin . The third deputy, Vladimir Putin, provided no delays .
When Lazar was chosen as chief rabbi of Russia in June 2000, Putin was quick to recognize him .
 Lazar was chosen by communities that are members of the organization he heads . Lazar is chosen by the communities he heads his organization .
Putin ignored other organizations in the country, which refused to accept the federation's choice . Putin ignored other groups, including the Russian Federation .
 Putin has made use of Putin's services quite a few times in order to obtain ownership of properties throughout Russia . Since then, the federation has used Putin's service quite a many times .
 The federation obtained ownership of old synagogues that had been diverted to other uses and of buildings where schools and community institutions will be located .
 In the federation they like to tell of hostile or corrupt local politicians who gave their representatives the runaround . But they changed their approach after a phone call from the ""friend"" in the Kremlin .
 Putin's support of the federation is worth a lot more than a few hundred pieces of real estate . Putin's backing of the Federation is worth more than 100 pieces ofReal estate .
 Putin participated in a ceremony for the dedication of a Jewish community center in the Marina Rusha neighborhood of Moscow .
 The luxurious, modern, modern seven-story building has become the liveliest Jewish center east of Israel .
 In recent years it was decided to dedicate a corner of the first floor to plaques of recognition for the largest donors .
 The size of the plaque would be directly proportional to the amount of the donation . It was decided that the size of a plaque would also be proportional to its size .
 The most famous man of all, who until recently topped the list, is not there . However, he is not the most famous person of all .
 Mikhail Khodorovsky hasn't contributed, says the guide, who is from Chabad .
 Sources close to Chabad admit in private conversations that the federation repays Putin with its willingness to provide a sort of kashrut certification .
 Global Security has hypothesized that Donald Trump may be a Manchurian Candidate planted by the Russian mafia in collusion with the Russian government . The Russian mafia may have planted Donald Trump by the Russians .
 The Russian government was able to influence the 2016 U.S. Presidential election in favor of Trump . The Russians used a network of hackers and Internet trolls controlled by the Russian mob .
 The basis of Trump’s cooperation in the plot has been alluded to in the 35-page report, known as the Trump Dossier, first reported by CNN and then published by BuzzFeed on January 11, 2017 . The report alleges that Russia has gathered damaging intelligence on Trump which it
 Trump was bailed out by Russian crime lords after a string of six successive bankruptcies . In fact, a series of studies by the Financial Times has shown how after he suffered.
 Lubavitch messianism involves the belief in the coming of the Messiah . The goal of raising awareness is to raise awareness that his arrival is imminent .
 Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, known to many as the Rebbe, could himself be the Messiah . In addition, the term also refers more specifically to the hope that he could be a Messiah .
 Schneerson was a Russian Empire-born American Orthodox Jewish rabbi . He was considered one of the most influential Jewish leaders of the 20th century .
 Schneerson transformed the Chabad-Lubavitch movement, that almost came to an end with the Holocaust, into one of the most influential movements in world Jewry . Chabad Houses is an international network of educational and social centers, known as Chabad houses .
 Chabad's goal is to reach every Jew in the world . Sue Fishkoff, author of The Rebbe’s Army, says the Rebbe's Army aims to reach all Jews in the globe .
 Chabab seeks out the support of the rich, famous and powerful . Bob Dylon, Jon Voigt, Whoppi Goldberg and Al Gore are among the stars .
 The Rebbe's eminence as a moral leader for our country was recognized by every president since Richard Nixon . The late Rebbe’s eminence is recognized by all presidents since Nixon .
 For over two decades, the Rabbi's movement now has some 2000 institutions . For more than 20 years, the rabbi's movement has been around the world .
 We recognize the profound role that Rabbi Schneerson had in the expansion of those institutions . We recognize a profound role he had in expanding those institutions.
 Schneerson took great interest in the affairs of the state of Israel . He was a major political force, both in the Knesset and among the electorate .
 Many of Israel's top leadership made it a point to visit him . Although he never visited Israel, many of the country's top leaders made a point.
 Prime Minister Menachem Begin came to visit him before going to Washington to meet President Carter .
 Shimon Peres and Benjamin Netanyahu also visited and sought Schneersons advice . The two men also sought Schneerons advice from Schneerson .
 Netanyahu later retold this episode in a speech at the General Assembly, on September 23, 2011 .
 By the late 1990s the actual chaos that resulted from Yeltsin’s warped policies had laid the foundations for a strong counterrevolution . The rise of ex-KGB officer Putin and a massive outpouring of oligarchic flight capital has continued virtually up to
For many banks, private bankers, hedge funds, law firms, and accounting firms, for leading oil companies like ExxonMobil and BP . For needy borrowers like the Trump Organization, the opportunity to feed on post-Soviet spoils was a godsend .
 Putin's Kremlin has used organized crime to carry out arms smuggling, assassinations, raising funds for black ops, or fomenting subversion .
 Moscow relied heavily on local organized crime structures in support for separatist movements in Transdniester, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Crimea, and the Donbas .
 Grinda said the mafia now exercised tremendous control over sectors of the global economy . Grinda says the mafia is now exercising tremendous control of the world's economic sectors .
 Gonzalez claimed the KGB and its SVR successor had deliberately created the Liberal Democratic party of Russia . The party worked hand in hand with mafia groups, he said .
 Grinda said he agreed with claims made by former FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko . Grinda says he agrees with claims by former Russian officer.
 Organized crime in Russia uses legal businesses as fronts for illegal activities and for setting up illegal product lines .
 The expansion of organized crime in Moscow occurred through buying real estate, and through gaining controlling shares of banks and other enterprises . The expansion was also through buying shares and real estate .
 Putin exploited his influence over the Russian legislature to create an oil and gas monopoly under Gazprom, Russia's largest company . Gazprom has exclusive rights to export natural gas from Russia .
 Terror from Within and Lubyanka Criminal Group accused the Russian secret services of staging the Russian apartment bombings and other terrorism acts in an effort to bring Putin to power .
 Litvinenko died in 2006 from what was established as a case of poisoning by radioactive polonium-210 .
 Simeon Mogilevich is believed to be the “boss of bosses’ of most Russian Mafia syndicates in the world . Former FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko claimed Mogilevic had a “good relationship’s with Vladimir Putin since the 1990s .
 In the year he was murdered, Litvinenko was investigating suspicions that Roman Abramovich was involved in money-laundering and illegal land purchases .
 In 1990, Mogilevich and his top associates settled in Israel, where they received Israeli citizenship . In early 1990, he and top associates lived in Israel .
 Mogilevich ‘succeeded in building a bridgehead in Israel’ and “developing significant and influential ties,’ says an Israeli intelligence report .
 In Europe and Russia, the “corruption of police and public officials has been part of the Semion Mogilevich Organization’s modus operandi, a classified FBI document says .
 In 1998, the BND had entered into a secret contract with Mogilevich to provide information on the Russian mob .
 His reported ties to the BND and also ex-police officers in Hungary keep him informed of police efforts to penetrate his organization . His reported links to BND are also reported to police in Hungary .
 Mogilevich allegedly participated in a $150 million scheme to defraud thousands of investors in a Canadian company, YBM Magnex, based just outside Philadelphia, which supposedly made magnets .
 Russian mafia suspected of having a sizable investment in General Motors . Russian mafia is suspected of investing in Canadian auto parts maker Magna International .
 48 Jews who made the list, 42 are Ashkenazi and together have a net worth of $122. billion . They comprise only 0.11% of the population .
 The wealthiest Ashkenazi is Mikhail Fridman, who has a net worth of $17. billion . He is Russa’s second richest man, and is Russia's second richest.
 Under Putin, the Hasidic Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia became increasingly influential within the Jewish community of Russia . It was partly due to the influence and support of businessmen close to Putin, notably Lev Leviev and Roman Abramovich .
 Leviev has come under scrutiny by the U.S. government and international media . His partnership with a Chinese business group believed to have funded North Korea and his possible role in developing West Bank settlements .
 Chris Hutchins, a biographer of Putin, describes the relationship between Putin and Abramovich as like that between a father and a favorite son .
 Abramovich was the first person to originally recommend to Yeltsin that Putin be Putin's successor .
 Abramovich is the primary owner of the private investment company, Millhouse LLC . He is best known outside Russia as the owner of Chelsea Football Club .
 In 1996, Sibneft acquired the oil company for about $US100 million, and sold it to Gazprom for $US13 billion a decade later . The company bought the company in 1996 for $ US100 million .
 His $5.6-billion legal dispute with a former business partner, Boris Berezovsky, uncovered evidence involving illicit activity . He was nicknamed the “Godfather of the Kremlin,’s ‘Godfather’
 Abramovich is a chairman of the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia . He also donates money to the Chabad movement .
Donald Trump purchased 93% of the shares in Resorts International in 1987 . The company evolved from a CIA money-laundering front company set up by CIA chief Allen Dulles in 1950s .
 Resorts International has a sordid history which began in the early 1950s . It evolved from a CIA and Mossad front company which had been established for the purpose of money laundering the profits from drug trafficking and gambling .
 The Meyer Lansky Syndicate has expanded operations outside Las Vegas . Resorts International was the result of a decision by the Meyer Lanski Syndicate to expand operations .
 On October 30, 1978, The Spotlight newspaper reported that the principle investors of Resorts International were Meyer Lansky, Tibor Rosenbaum, William Mellon Hitchcock, David Rockefeller, and one Baron Edmond de Rothschild .
 Wilber Ross, who Trump would later appoint to Secretary of Commerce, would later be appointed to Commerce Secretary .
 Ross specializes in leveraged buyouts and distressed businesses . He is known as the “King of Bankruptcy’s”
 Rothschild & Sons, where he ran the bankruptcy-restructuring advisory practice, ran the company's restructuring practice . Rothschild and Sons was founded in 2007 .
 Trump was allowed to keep control of the casinos . The deal allowed Trump to control the casinos for the first time .
 Ross has had direct financial ties to several leading oligarchs from Russia and the Former Soviet Union . Ross has also had direct links to Russian oligarchs .
 Forbes magazine lists Ross as one of the world’s billionaires, with a net worth of $2. billion . Ross is one of world's richest men, according to Forbes .
 Ross has been Vice Chairman and a major investor since 2014 in the Bank of Cyprus . The bank is one of the key offshore havens for illicit Russian finance .
 Cyprus has served as one of the top three offshore destinations for Russian and former Soviet Union flight capital . Most of it is motivated by tax dodging, kleptocracy, and money laundering .
 The Trio recently attracted the attention of many investigators and news agencies, including the September 11 Commission Report, the Guardian, Forbes and the Wall Street Journal .
 The Trio’s alleged activities include resource grabbing, money laundering, bribery, and racketeering . The litany of the Trio's alleged activities includes resource grabbing.
 In 2010, Arif and other members of Bayrock’s Eurasian Trio were arrested in Turkey during a police raid on a suspected prostitution ring .
 At the time, Turkish investigators reportedly asserted that Arif might be the head of a criminal organization that was trafficking in Russian and Ukrainian escorts . Some as young as 13, according to Turkish investigators .
Bayrock’s COO and managing director, Tevfik Arif hired Felix Sater, the son of a reputed Jewish-Russian mobster .
 The Russian mafia was in fact more Jewish than Russian, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the mafia was more Jewish.
 Sater had already served time prison for stabbing a man in the face with the stem of a margarita glass .
 Sater pled guilty in 1998 to one count of racketeering for his role in a $40 million stock fraud scheme involving the Genovese and Bonanno crime families . Sater pleaded guilty to one charge in 1998 for his part in the scheme .
 Sater’s father was a boss for the crime syndicate of Simeon Mogilevich, according to a petition . The FBI handler said Sater's father was the boss of the syndicate .
 Trump SoHo was featured in Trump’s television show The Apprentice . Their best-known collaboration wasTrump SoHo, which was featured on the show .
 Most of the Bayrock-Trump projects either never materialized or were complete failures . Most of these projects never materialize or were completed .
 SoHo was foreclosed by creditors and resold in 2014 after more than $3 million of customer down payments had to be refunded . SoHo had been foreclosed and sold in 2014 .
 Bayrock’s Trump International Hotel & Tower in Fort Lauderdale was foreclosed and resold in 2012 . At least three other Trump-branded properties in the U.S. were foreclosed in 2012.
 Trump and Bayrock partnered with the Sapir Organization, led by the now-deceased Tamir Sapir and his son Alex, in the development of Trump SoHo .
 Tamir Sapir was born to a Jewish family in Georgia . He emigrated to the United States where he sold electronics to KGB agents from a Manhattan storefront .
 Sapir was ranked on Forbes Magazine’s list of billionaires . He was a donor to Chabad Lubavitch .
 Rotem Rosen is a former lieutenant of Lev Leviev . Alex Sapir’s business partner Rotem Rosenberg is a ex-Leviev lieutenant .
 Sater also served as a government informant on the mob and mysterious matters of national security . All the while, Sater served as an informant on mob and national security matters .
 Sater explained that his effort was aimed at achieving Tikkun Olam . In his own words, Sater said that his goal was to achieve TikkunOlam .
 Trump Tower has received press attention for its tax-dodgers, bribers, arms dealers, convicted cocaine traffickers, and corrupt former FIFA officials .
 A typical example involves an illegal gambling operation that reportedly took up the entire 51st floor run by the alleged Russian mobster Anatoly Golubchik and Vadim Trincher .
 The indictment was filed by Preet Bharara, then the U.S. attorney in Manhattan .
 Following the 2016 election, Bharara claimed that Trump asked Bharara to remain as U.S. Attorney . Bharara agreed to stay on .
 Attorney General Jeff Sessions asked for all remaining 46 U.S. Attorneys appointed during Obama's administration to resign . He was eventually fired after refusing to resign, as a result of Jeff Sessions' request .
 Trump had reportedly personally sold five separate condos in Trump Tower to David Bogatin .
 Jacob Bogatin was CEO of a fraudulent company, YBM Magnex International, supposedly a world-class manufacturer of industrial magnets . David’s brother Jacob was CEO.
 Vyacheslav Ivankov was a key Mogilevich lieutenant in the United States during the 1990s . He reportedly had the private telephone and fax numbers for the Trump Organization in his personal phone book .
 Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, FL, is one of the most highly regarded private clubs in the world . Hundreds of foreign guest workers from Romania and other countries have worked at the club .
 A Reuters review found that at least 63 individuals with Russian passports or addresses bought as much as $98 million worth of property in seven Trump-branded luxury towers in southern Florida .
 The buyers include Alexander Yuzvik, a former executive in a Moscow-based construction firm . Andrey Truskov, co-owner of Absolute Group, the biggest wholesale electronic business in Russia . Alexey Ustaev, the founder and president of St.
 Petersburg-based Viking Bank is one of the first private investment banks established in Russia after the fall of Communism .
 Trump's personal counsel, Michael Cohen, Felix Sater, and Ukrainian lawmaker Andrii V Artemenko delivered a “peace’s plan for Russia and Ukraine to former national security adviser Michael Flynn . Flynn was asked to resign by the White House after Flynn's resignation .
 The plan involved lifting sanctions on Russia in return for Moscow withdrawing its support for pro-Russia separatists in eastern Ukraine . The plan was part of a plan to end Russia's support for separatists in Ukraine .
 It would also allow Russia to maintain control over Crimea, which it annexed in 2014 . Russia would also be able to maintaincontrol over Crimea .
 Flynn travelled to Moscow where he became the second director of the DIA to be invited into the GRU's headquarters . He will later boast of being the first to have been invited into GRU, though he later boasted of being first .
 Flynn was also paid $11,250 by a U.S. air cargo company affiliated with the Volga-Dnepr Group, which is owned by a Russian businessman . Flynn also was paid by the American subsidiary of a Russian cybersecurity firm, Kaspersky Lab .
 Kaspersky Lab makes some of the world’s most popular anti-virus software . U.S. intelligence has long suspected of being used to assist Russian espionage efforts .
Top Kaspersky Lab official was arrested by Russian authorities in December 2016 . He was accused of spying for American companies and intelligence services .
 In 2007 Volga-Dnepr was removed from a list of approved UN vendors following corruption allegations against two Russian officials . Two Russian officials who steered contracts to the firm.
 Ukrainian billionaire Dmytro Firtash was one of the biggest clients of the Ukrainian billionaire .
 Firtash maintains strong ties with Ukrainian/Russian mob boss Semion Mogilevich . He also maintains ties with the Ukrainian/ Russian mob boss.
 Firtash and a partner owned half of RosUkrEnergo, which was founded in 2004 . The company emerged as Ukraine’s sole gas importer in 2006 to 2009 .
 Ukraine’s security service in 2005 said may be indirectly controlled by Semion Mogilevich .
afort stepped down as Trump's campaign manager in August of 2016 in response to press investigations into his ties to Ukraine’s previous pro-Russian Yanukovych government .
 Bankers close to Putin granted Firtash credit lines of up to $11 billion . The credit lines helped Yanukovich to back Yanukovich who won power and went on to rule Ukraine for four years .
 Yanukovich ended up steering the Ukraine away from the West and towards Moscow until he was overthrown in February 2014 .
 Yanukovych is mentioned in the unverified Trump Dossier that went public just before the inauguration . The unverified Dossier went public in the early days of Obama's inauguration .
 Putin assured Putin that no one would ever trace alleged cash payments toafort back to the Russian president .
 Trump recently recruited Carter Page, who is well familiar with Russian politics, as one of his foreign-policy advisors . Page is also a well-known Russian political adviser .
 Page worked to open a Merrill Lynch office in Moscow . Page maintains close ties to prominent Russian politicians and businessmen .
 Sergei Yatsenko is a former Gazprom executive . His partner in that venture is Sergei Yatenko . He is also a former executive of the company .
 Page is known as a staunch defender of Russia’s ambitions as well as a routine critic of current U.S. policymakers . Page is also a regular critic of the United States.
 The Kushner's were friends with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, who stayed at their home in New Jersey .
 The foundation of Jared's parents gave $342,500 to Chabad institutions and projects over a 10-year period . Trump’s foundation has donated thousands of dollars to the institutions .
 Jared's father, Charles Kushner, was a real-estate titan and one of the most important Democratic donors in the country . Jared’s father was Charles Kushner. Charles Kushner was an important Democratic donor .
 He was arrested on charges of tax evasion, illegal campaign donations, and witness tampering in 2004 . He was eventually convicted on all charges and sentenced to two years in federal prison .
 In 2004, Charles Kushner was investigated for hiding violations of federal limits on campaign contributions . He was found guilty of hiding violations.
 He then hired a prostitute in order to blackmail one of the case’s key witnesses . His wife then informed investigators of his attempts at obstructing justice .
 Gary Cohn is currently the president and COO of Goldman Sachs, the investment bank for which Trump took Hillary Clinton and Ted Cruz to task for their connections .
 The Kushners invited Cohn, Mnuchin and several members of the President's cabinet for a Shabbat meal . Rabbi Levi Shemtov, from the local Chabad-Lubavitch house, was also invited .
 Department of Commerce pick Wilbur Ross and his wife Hilary Geary Ross, and Strategic Communications Director Hope Hicks, were also attending . Also attending were Department of commerce pickWilbur Ross, his wife and his daughter .
 Shemtov serves the daily governmental and diplomatic needs of the international Chabad-Lubavitch movement . SheMTov flies to Buenos Aires, Moscow and other capitals in the world .
 Shemtov is often at the White House, Pentagon, U.S. Department of State and other venues in official Washington . SheMTov maintains close relationships with members of Congress, senior Administration officials and leaders in international community .
K Kushner has acted as a liaison with dozens of influential figures, including Henry Kissinger, Paul Ryan, Rupert Murdoch, and Roger Ailes .
 Jared and Ivanka are close friends with Rupert Murdoch’s former wife Wendi Deng . Wendi was rumored to be dating Putin .
 They are friends with the wife of Abramovich, Dasha Zhukova, who Ivanka invited to Trump’s inauguration .
 All of them were guests in August 2016 on David Geffen’s $200 million yacht off the coast of Croatia . A few weeks later at the U.S. Open, they were at the United States Open .
 Putin is popular amongst the Russian Jewish community, who see him as a force for stability .
 In 1992, Lazar became acquainted with Putin confidant Lev Leviev, who introduced him to Boris Berezovsky and Roman Abramovich . Leviev introduced Lazar to the two Russian leaders .
 Putin set up a Kremlin-affiliated Jewish structure called the Federation of Russian Jewish Communities .
 In 1999, Putin’s ally Leviev established the new organization, which was chaired by Abramovich .
 Lazar, an American citizen and a native of Milan, Italy, was quickly granted Russian citizenship . Lazar was appointed chief rabbi of the new federation .
 Chabad members are a small fraction of Russia’s small Jewish community . The Jewish community is in a small part of the Russian Jewish community.
 Adolf Shayevech, a prominent figure in the Jewsh community since the late Soviet period, was considered chief rabbi until 2000 . He still claims the title .
 The Russian Jewish Congress, the country’s largest secular Jewish organization, recognizes Shayevech .
 FEOR had received government support, which has restored dozens of synagogues and built Jewish community centers throughout the country . FEOR has also built Jewish communities in the United States .
 Jason Greenblatt, a former Trump Organization lawyer, met with Lazar in the summer of 2016 . He is now a special representative for international negotiations at the White House .
 Orthodox scholars and rabbinic authorities believe that rebuilding of the Third Temple of Jerusalem should occur in the era of the Messiah .
 The revived Sanhedrin contacted Trump, who has promised to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel . Putin expressed desire to join forces and fulfill their Biblically-mandated roles .
 The revived Sanhedrin, also known as the Nascent Sanhedin, was established in 2004 . It is now known as NascentSanhedrin .
 It represents the sixth attempt in recent history, after Rabbi Jacob Berab in 1538, Rabbi Yisroel of Shklov in 1830, Rabbi Aharon Mendel haCohen in 1901, Rabbi Zvi Kovsker in 1940 and Rabbi Yehuda Leib M
 The Nascent Sanhedrin regards itself as a provisional body awaiting integration into the Israeli government . The Israeli secular press regards it as an illegitimate fundamentalist organization of rabbis .
Long-term aims are to build the third Jewish temple on the Temple Mount .
 The Al Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock are built on top of the Temple Mount . The most immediate and obvious obstacle to realization of these goals is the two historic Islamic structures .
 Muhammad was transported from the Sacred Mosque in Mecca to al-Aqsa during the Night Journey, known as the Isra and Mi'raj .
 Putin approached the man, who explained the importance of the Temple Mount and the Jewish Temple . Putin asked the man to explain the significance of the temple.
 The Jerusalem Embassy Act, passed in 1995, initiated the move of the embassy . It has been vetoed by every American president since .
Sanhedrin calls on Trump to withhold veto after he takes office . Sanhedrin: Trump should withhold the veto.
 The two most important national leaders in the world support the Jewish right to Jerusalem as their spiritual inheritance, Rabbi Weiss says .
 The BEST, most complete and enlightening compendium of articles and information on Putin the crypto-zionist, the Talmudic Jews, and their Russian and American connections .