 This approach must be credited for maintaining European and transatlantic unity . This approach has been credited for keeping European and Transatlantic unity.
 Put differently, it has prevented internal divisions within the west from triggering political and policy paralysis . It has also prevented internal division within the West from trigger political and Policy paralysis .
 The eruption and escalation of the conflict over Ukraine caught the European Union by surprise .
 Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014. The EU did respond promptly by condemning Russia’s aggression . The EU suspended bilateral talks on visa matters and a new EU-Russia agreement .
 The EU imposed its first travel bans and asset freezes by mid-March 2014 . As the conflict showed no signs of abating, the EU imposed a first travel ban and asset freeze .
 By the summer of 2014, restrictive measures had expanded to include import bans on goods from Crimea, restrictions on economic cooperation with Russian entities supporting actions against Ukraine, and full-blown economic sanctions covering such sectors as banking and energy .
 The sanctions have been regularly renewed since then . These various layers of sanctions are regularly renewed .
 The EU has repeatedly emphasised the imperative of maintaining open channels of dialogue with Russia . Alongside economic pressure, the EU has also repeatedly stressed the need for dialogue .
 Dialogue was the premise underpinning the Minsk agreements between Russia and Ukraine . Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande brokered the agreements in September 2014 and February 2015 .
 Dialogue has been pursued by the European Commission in efforts to negotiate successive energy deals between Kyiv and Moscow .
 dialogue has been the name of the game between the EU, the U.S. and Russia on a number of global issues . The Iranian nuclear file, the Syrian civil war and the fight against terrorism are clear examples .
 The two-track approach has had the value of securing European and Transatlantic unity . The approach has been successful in securing EU and Trans Atlantic unity .
 This two-track approach has had the value of securing European and transatlantic unity . This two track approach has been successful in securing Europe and trans Atlantic unity .
 This is more than many – no doubt Vladimir Putin included – have expected . This is no doubt many – not many - have expected – to have expected. This is not the first time this has happened .
 Europeans have been divided in their approaches to Russia for years . Europe's approach to Russia has been no secret for years. Europe has been divided for years over its relationship with the country .
 Mobilising a united reaction, particularly when it would have impinged on member states’ economic interests in times of crisis, has value in and of itself, says the author .
 Petro Poroshenko has tirelessly insisted on the imperative of maintaining western unity throughout the crisis . Unsurprisingly, the first who has recognised such value is Poroshenko .
 The EU has latched onto this approach because it has maintained unity between member states pushing for a more decisive European reaction . So far the EU has lagged on this approach as it has kept unity among member states .
 Europeans would reveal the depth of their divisions on Russia. Put differently, the concern is that by moving beyond the twin-track approach, Europe would reveal its divisions on the country .
 First, there are divisions concerning the perception of what and where Russia is at the moment .
 Depending on whether Russia is viewed as expansionist or in retreat conditions the threat perceptions of different EU member states are different .
There are divisions concerning the reading of the status quo in west-Russian relations . Second, there are divisions about the reading. of thestatus quo in the west- Russian relations .
 Within the EU, there is no agreement on the ‘diagnosis’ of where we are today .
 There cannot be agreement on the 'prognosis' of where we should get to in future . There is no agreement on where to go next .
 At the same time, we cannot remain anchored to a reactive twin-track approach which hinges on Russia’s whims and behaviour . Russia's behaviour has been criticised for its behaviour .
 The EU needs to chart a way that lies somewhere in between the reactive twin-track approach governing the here and now and the new world of EU-Russia relations . We are unlikely to see in the decade ahead.
 Building on the architecture of a dual approach, but reinterpreting this in a pro-active manner, two pillars may be worth exploring . A dual approach to the architecture may be a good idea, but it's not a bad idea .
 The first would focus on actively reducing our vulnerabilities and the vulnerabilities of our neighbours . The first will focus on reducing vulnerabilities and reducing vulnerabilities .
 The heavy lifting is unlikely to be done by the EU in the medium-term, but it is still Europeans that will need to become primarily responsible for their own security .
 In the age of hybrid destabilisation, there is much more the EU can do to reduce the vulnerabilities of its member states and of its neighbours .
 Ukraine is moving forward on the energy union and enhancing the state and societal resilience of its neighbours . Ukraine's energy union would do much to enhance security within the EU and beyond Eu borders .
 A second pillar would see the EU actively seeking common ground with Russia on issues of convergent interest . The EU would also seek common ground.
 The EU can sustain an artificial division between a confrontational approach towards Russian in Europe and a cooperative one on other global issues. In this respect, it is an illusion to believe that the EU can sustained an artificial divide between Russia and Europe .
 It is essential for the EU to explore areas of cooperation with Russia on European issues too, grounded on the premise that it is in the EU’s interest to see a stable, prosperous and secure Russia, and that Russia as a neighbor is here to stay .
 There is no shortage of topics that could reflect both EU and Russian interests . There is a lack of topics to reflect both the EU and Russia's interests .
 The Chinese One Road One Belt initiative could foster a positive sum conception of wider Eurasia spanning from Beijing through Moscow to Lisbon .
 The writing on the wall had been there since the 2008 Georgia-Russia war . It was only with Ukraine that the EU woke up to the geopolitical consequences of its actions and inactions .
 The fact that the EU has mustered and maintained internal consensus on its reaction to Russia should be commended . The EU has toered and maintains internal consensus.
 Europeans need to start urgently discussing how to change gears, from reactive to pro-active mode . Europe needs to change its approach to its dual track approach . Europe's leaders need to change their approach to the world's most successful nations .