 United States "disappointed" by Poland's enactment of law criminalizing attribution of Nazi crimes to Polish state . U.S. disappointed by Poland's enacting lawcriminalizing attribution to Nazi crimes .
 Dodon threatens to punish measures that have signed the declaration on association with Romania .
 Employees of the Federal Security Service of Russia are involved in the shooting at Maidan .
 Former head of the Security Service of Ukraine Valentyn Nalyvaichenko was questioned at the Obolonsky court in Kiev . This was announced by former head of Security Service.
 Nalyvaichenko told that FSB officers of Russia had arrived in Ukraine three times in the period from December 2013 to January 2014 . Nalyvichenko also told that Russian officers arrived in the country three times .
 The judges agreed with the prosecution that the lawyers violated the reasonable time frame for the criminal proceedings . The judge then noted that the judges agreed that the prosecution violated thereasonable time frame .
 Earlier, the case of Yanukovych's treason was questioned by former head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Andriy Deshchytsia .
 Yanukovych's court questioned the four guards of the ex-president . Also questioned the former president's four guards .
 In December last year, the court ruled to challenge Petro Poroshenko and other high-ranking officials as witnesses in the state-run case of former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Investigators found that a resident of the Odessa region in June 2014, a group of 20 mercenaries was trained in one of the military training ground in the Rostov region of Russia .
 In July 2014, he fought against the forces of the ATU on the advanced positions of terrorists in the Mining District of Donetsk Oblast .
 He received a task to return to the Odessa region and collect information about the situation in the region near Transnistria .
 The spy also had to work out illegal channels of penetration into Ukraine from the Transnistrian region of Moldova .
 The government of a great coalition in Germany intends to continue to support Ukraine on the path of reform and seek to restore its territorial integrity .
 The future government of Germany simultaneously warns that it will provide financial assistance under harsh conditions . The future German government also warns that the future government will help under harsh circumstances .
 Berlin and Paris intend to continue to actively promote their implementation and seek to resolve the conflict . Berlin, together with Paris, will continue to promote the arrangements itself .
 The German government is ready to abolish anti-Russian sanctions, says treaty . It is in the case of the implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 It also reminds that Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and "interference" in the east of Ukraine violated European peaceful order .
At the heart of this is compliance with the truce in eastern Ukraine and the withdrawal of all heavy weapons . At the heart is cooperation with the ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons.
Ukraine and Russia have to fulfill their obligations under the Minsk Agreements . Ukraine and Russia must meet their obligations to fulfill the agreement .
 The U.S. is disappointed by the intention of the Polish President Andrzej Duda to sign the amendments to the draft law on the Institute of National Remembrance . The amendments ban any claims that the Polish people or Polish state were responsible or complicit in the Nazis' crimes
 Censor.NET reports citing a statement by U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson .
 We understand this law will be referred to Poland's Constitutional Tribunal . We understand it will be called to Poland.
 Enactment of this law adversely affects freedom of speech and academic inquiry . Enactments of the law adversely affect freedom ofspeech and academic Inquiry .
Historical inaccuracies affect Poland, our strong ally, and must be combatted in ways that protect fundamental freedoms . Such historical inaccuracies affected Poland's strong ally .
 The Polish Sejm adopted the bill in January . The bill sets a ban on promoting the so-called "Bandera ideology" with its historic roots stemming from Ukraine .
 The Israeli Foreign Ministry called Deputy Ambassador of Poland in Tel Aviv for explanations in connection with the amendments in the draft law on the Institute of National Remembrance .
 Polish people or Polish state were responsible or complicit in the Nazis' crimes, crimes against humanity or war crimes . In particular, it bans any claims that the Polish people are responsible or complicity in the Holocaust .
 The bill was backed by 57 senators without amendments, while 23 were against it . Two more senators abstained, while 57 senators backed the bill .
 heads of at least 10 Moldovan villages have recently signed a symbolic document to the centenary of the unification of most modern territories of Moldova with Romania at the end of the First World War .
 Moldova's mayor-signers violated the existing laws, according to the law . Dodon condemned the declaration and criticized the intelligence service of Moldova .
 The mayors of 53 other settlements signed another statement against the association with Romania and for the maintenance of the state of Moldova . Moldova's president also said that the mayors of 52 other settlements sign a statement against Romania .
 Earlier, Dodon said that the idea of ​​uniting Moldova and Romania could lead to a civil war .
 On 3 February, the Mayor of Saysin, Calarash district, and local advisers in Moldova adopted a symbolic declaration on association with Romania .
Deputy health minister of Tatarstan Elena Shishmarev was found dead . She was suspected of stealing budget funds .
 The Soviet District Court of Kazan sent her under house arrest for two months . It is specified that on February 3, the court said .
 If they refused to do so, she did not sign documents to allocate funds to the medical institutions . If they didn't sign documents, she didn't allocate the necessary funds to medical institutions. If they did not, she would have to sign documents.
 Shishmariev took place in the case as a suspect and did not admit his guilt . He did not confess to the crime .
Passengers kept for two hours in a plane with an open door at a temperature of -16c degrees due to President Putin .
 At the same time, the passengers of "Boeing 737" airlines ""Victory" were not released from the plane . At this time in the airport was supposed to sit on the presidential board .
 The man entered the salon of the aircraft and silently closed all curtains and portholes from one of the parties . The man did not look at the president .
 Krasnoyarsk Yemelyanov airport delayed departure of 15 flights on February 7 an hour or more .
 Everyone who had transplants promised to compensate for the costs . The airline said it would pay for the cost of the transplant .