 The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of, and should not be attributed to, the Center for Integrity in the Defence Sector or the Norwegian Ministry of Defence . The views of the authors are those that of theAuthor
Ukraine is facing growing internal and external risks in the second half of 2018 . Ukraine is facing internal and External risks in 2018, according to the government .
Political elite and oligarchs have already launched the electoral campaign for the presidential election scheduled in March 2019 . The election to the Parliament in October 2019 is scheduled to be held in October .
 The country and society are deeply sinking into an atmosphere of total distrust . The country is sinking into a atmosphere oftotal distrust .
 Politicians are competing in killing reputations of each other, rather than proposing to the society new ways and strategies of development .
 Further political developments in Ukraine will center on the logic of electoral campaigns until the end of 2019 .
 It could be a period of growing populism and political disturbance with unknown consequences for a country in which the state’s institutions are still weak .
 Russia has finished its presidential elections with a predictable victory for Vladimir Putin . On the external front Russia has won the election with a comfortable victory .
 There is no change in his government with regard to the defence and security sectors . There are no changes in the government with regards to the security sector .
 The old political, military and economic course of Kremlin, with exporting as much hybrid war around the globe as they can, will continue . That implies that the old political and military course of the Kremlin will continue, says the author .
 President Trump is so far not a serious obstacle to Russia’s aggressive strategy of ruining the West and its values from the inside . Russia is using corruption, propaganda, disinformation, hackers’ groups under the supervision of intelligence, direct military force and other instruments .
 Russia’s struggle to redraw the map of world influences in the beginning of the 21st century will continue . Russia's struggle toRedraw world influences will continue.
 Moscow will be the most aggressive participant in the new geopolitical game, as it is considerably weaker in the field of economical, technological and human resources compared to other competitors . Moscow is considerably less aggressive than other competitors.
 Putin’s goal is to break the existing rules, institutions and the fragile balance of peace and security in Europe and the rest of the World . Russia has a possibility to regain some of its global influence, at least in Eastern Europe and post-Soviet space .
 Ukraine is a very convenient testing ground for Russia in testing out hybrid war methods, technologies, informational influences and military equipment . In that battle for a new global leadership and survival in the 21st century.
 Old working methods are used in combination with new ones which are splitting the Ukrainian society from the inside, weakening its reforms process, state-building and the development of modern and effective armed forces .
 Moscow is preparing the ground for revenge in Ukraine, and the hybrid war is the way it may happen .
 Thorough research of Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine will let Western countries better defend themselves from such complex forms of aggression in 21st century .
 Ukraine will be interesting for the Western countries as a testing ground for hybrid warfare . Ukraine will also be interesting to the West as a test ground for Hybrid warfare .
 Western capitals want to know what Moscow will do towards them in next month or year from this perspective . If Western capitals are interested in Ukraine, they should attentively look to Ukraine .
 Russia is upgrading its old system of hybrid warfare, which was used at least from the beginning of the 20th century or even earlier .
 One of the current primary goals in Ukraine in this hybrid war is raising internal chaos . The current primary goal in Ukraine is to raise internal chaos.
 This means to provoke panic among the population by showing the government’s incapability to protect the society from technological, biological or any other threats that may appear . The government has been accused of being incapable of protecting society .
 The intention is to paint a picture of the government’s collapse in case of urgent and dangerous situation, says the author .
 Case of spraying of unknown substance in schools of Ukraine in May 2018 .
 Police say pupils did this in order to block the educational process, stopping classes and stopping classes .
Parents were disturbed and worried about the situation in schools . Many parents were concerned about the schools situation in school .
 Most of them accused central authorities for the lack of protection of their children . Most of the parents accused them of failing to protect their children.
The level of fear for children and criticism of the government was very high . The level of concern for children was high .
Exploiting of old Soviet holidays for supporting Soviet identity and ruining Ukrainian identity. Exploiting Soviet holidays is a way to support Ukrainian identity, say experts .
 Russia demonstrates its direct legacy from Soviet Union in state, historical and other aspects and supports the Soviet myth of the Great patriotic war . Russia also shows its direct heritage from the Soviet Union.
 The Soviet Union was the victim of Nazi Germany aggression in 1941, but was not an aggressor itself, according to the report .
 Kremlin perverts its own and global history in order to breed in people’s mind the cult of force and violence .
 In Ukraine, which was divided in WWII among two sides, there were and still are veterans of the Ukrainian Rebellion Army and the Soviet army .
 The Soviet Union killed more Ukrainians before, during and after WWII than any other state in the world . They have different believes and positions .
 exploitation of the 9th of May is still being a very cheap and effective way to increase the level of internal conflict in the Ukrainian society, says the author .
 Russia informally organizes marches in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities of so called “veterans’ with Soviet symbols, communist songs, etc. The marches are called ‘veteran’
 At the same time, they inspire different radical Ukrainian nationalist movements to attack those marches . The marches inspire different Ukrainian nationalists to attack them .
 Russia underlines and feeds the international community and own population with the thesis that Ukraine is captured by radical nationalists, that they are violent, aggressive and chaotic . Only Moscow can restore order in Ukraine in order to make it predictable and stable.
 There are still millions of pensioners in Ukraine who identify themselves as Soviets and not Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian protesters are protesting against the current Ukrainian authorities and their Western choice of lifestyle . For them, such performances on 9th of May become an argument for hating the current Ukraine authorities .
 Ukrainian politicians are the worst enemies of their own country even without any Russian interferences . Ukraine is the worst country in the world, according to U.S.
 Kremlin tries by all possible means to discredit the current Ukrainian president, government, parliament . However, Kremlin tries to discredit current president and government .
 Russia still has an almost unlimited access and influence on different Ukrainian TV-holdings, newspapers, magazines and electronic media .
 Kremlin continues to get under its control of opinion-makers in Ukraine .
 Russian propaganda is still present in Ukrainian media and has a wide network of opinion-makers who support it, especially in the South and East .
 This "information army" is playing against Ukraine, helping to kill the trust of Ukrainians in their authorities, state and Armed Forces . This “information army’s” is playing a role in killing Ukrainians in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is preparing for new protests with the aim of strengthening the position of politicians more loyal to Kremlin .
 According to Razumkov Centre, Ukrainians have most trust in volunteers, the church and the army .
 The number of respondents who trust these institutions at a statistically significant level exceeds the number of those who do not trust them . It is noted that the number who trust them is higher than those who don't .
 Moscow is trying to reduce level of resistance to Russia’s influence in Ukraine . It can be argued that this situation is created with purpose from Moscow .
 This thesis is a precondition underpinning the informational campaign against Ukraine . It is to justify that Ukraine is located in Russia’s zone of geopolitical interests .
 Russia wants to demonstrate to Europe, especially to Germany and France, that Ukraine is not capable of building its own safe and prosperous state .
 Ukraine is constantly generating risks to EU which can be handled by limiting Ukraine’s sovereignty under Russian influence .
 Moscow will start using such technology very widely in Eastern Europe and in other regions . If EU and NATO countries accept the “failed state’s concept sticked to Ukraine, Moscow will begin using it .
 Russia has developed a new type of hybrid war, developed by Russia . Corruption and corruptive erosion of society is the key element of the hybrid war .
 Exports of corrupt businessmen with their “dirty money is one of the most important components in thispicture. Exports are a key part of thispicture .
 They bring with them not only their money, but their mindset and mentality as well . They also bring with their money and mentality .
 That affects both business practices and policies in the societies of those countries that host them. That affects business practices, policies in those countries .
 A group of Russian businessmen is controlling a part of Ukraine’s energy sector, as well as other strategic assets . That is the very precise case of Ukraine where a group of Russians are controlling part of the energy sector .
 The main goal of Russia's hybrid war is to return Ukraine and its resources under Moscow’s control . All tools are used in order to reach this end state .
 At the beginning of the 20th century, Lenin said that without destroying the independent Ukrainian state, no strong Russia was possible .
 President Putin, in trying to revive Russia as a global superpower, is following the same path . President Putin is in a bid to revive the country as a world superpower .
 Corruption is used as one of the main instruments in the decomposition of the Ukrainian state .
 Corruption is the main tool for Russia to make the Ukrainian state weak, Russia says . Russia is trying to ruin Ukraine’s sovereignty through capturing the control of its resources .
 The use of corruption as a tool of hybrid war against Ukraine was a creation of the very wide net of journalists loyal to Russia .
 Ukrainian society was disorienting Ukrainian society by the messages that Russia is a friendly state . There are no Russian soldiers in Crimea and Donbas, according to Ukrainian media .
 The message was that the Ukrainian people should not resist and oppose Russian actions in Crimea and Donbass, and that it was the Ukrainian authorities that initiated the war .
 Russia got control of the information channels, sending messages highlighting “Russia’s friendship’ with Ukraine, while at the same time killing Ukrainians in Donbas.
 Monitoring of the information sphere of the country should be very important in order to prevent hybrid war . Monitoring of information sphere is very important to prevent Hybrid War .
Only about 5-10,000 soldiers and officers were able to fight against the Russian invaders in 2014 . This goal was almost reached as only about five-10 thousand soldiers and police officers were available .
 At the beginning of the war, Ukrainian Armed forces did not have enough uniforms, special equipment, proper food, weapons or heavy machinery .
 More than 10,000 Ukrainian lives were killed defending their country in Ukraine . Now, the situation is different .
 corruption has been a powerful tool with regard to destroying the country’s defence sector, as well as demotivate both the army and the society .
 Most operations of a “hybrid war,’ would be prepared by sabotage by infiltrating agents or ideological sympathizers . Most operations would be preparation for sabotage, according to experts .
 It is necessary to have professional units to deal with mass disturbances that would neutralize such activists . It could prevent cases where small groups of such people are capturing administrative agencies .
 Russian special forces pretended to be local habitants in Ukraine . Russia's work with the people in the interior opened the way for capturing Ukrainian regions .
 French researcher Ulrich Boone notes that such an element is very important in the case of Ukraine .
 Admiral Berezovsky joined side with the Russians during annexation of Crimea .
 corruption and weakness of the state system give the enemy the opportunity to penetrate into structures that make important decisions and thus paralyze the state . This clearly demonstrates that corruption and the weakness of state system gives the enemy an opportunity to enter into the state.
 In the second half of 2017 – first half of 2018 – a new scandal related to corruption and the President of Ukraine appeared . In the third half of the year, a new corruption scandal appeared in Ukraine .
 Oleksandr Onyshchenko was a member of the Parliament . He was mediator of the presidential group in solving many delicate requests of corrupt nature and consequences .
 Onyshchenko taped many conversations with the President and other top officials from the presidential team who gave him orders to perform corrupt actions . OnysHchenko taped conversations with President and others from the Presidential team .
 The main episodes of the tapes are related to closing some investigations against very rich and influential corrupt ex-officials . The tapes are also related to investigations of gas schemes that led to the victory of the party “People’s Front”
 It must be said that Onyshchenko was involved in the gas business which is normally done in very tight cooperation with Russians . It must have been said that he was involved with the business .
 He has made loud statements about his tapes through Ukrainian media that are loyal to Russia . He has been accused of being a Russian spy in Ukraine .
 Onyshchenko’s statement implies that this was a special operation directed by Russia in order to discredit President Poroshenko . The statement was made by the Ukrainian president .
 It does not cancel the suspicions of his deep involvement in corruption. It doesn't cancel his suspicions of deep involvement.
 Such a special informational operation against the President by Onyshchenko has resemblance with a scandal in 2003 in Ukraine which involved President Leonid Kuchma . The operation was organized by Russians .
 The current story shows that Russians are trying to repeat the special informational hybrid warfare operations against Ukraine that had good results 15 years ago . The current stories show that Russia is trying to replicate the same tactics that had a good result .
 Pro-Russian politicians would seek to implement Kremlin’s will even without direct military aggression .
 Russia is preparing for a political return match in the elections scheduled in Ukraine in 2019 . From this perspective, Russia is prepared for a return match .
 Moscow is successful in attracting more support to its political proxies . So far, by splitting the Ukrainian society from the inside and misbalancing it, Moscow has won more support .
 The results of fresh sociological surveys that demonstrate such a situation. Below are the results.
 The research is conducted by the Kyiv International institute of sociology . The research was carried out by theKyiv International Institute of Sociology .
 The electoral picture in Ukraine is very complicated, says the author . Pro-Russian political forces can influence both the presidential and parliamentary elections, he says .
 There is a risk of victory of such political forces in 2019 who would be in favor of Russia and soften the Ukrainian policy towards Moscow . There is also a chance of victory in 2019.
 oligarchs are tired of war and are not ready to resist Russia in the long run . Money want silence: oligarchs want silence .
 Ukraine's economy is still very monopolistic belonging mainly to oligarchic groups . To prove this, I propose to have a look at the Ukraine – Russia bilateral trade, as Russia bilateral Trade .
 The indicators of foreign economic activity of Ukraine and the Russian Federation in 2017 have grown for the first time since 2013 . The indicators are the first since 2013, according to the Ukrainian government .
 YouControl made calculations based on data from the State Statistics Service . This is evidenced by calculations made by YouControl .
 Between 2013 and 2016, trade turnover between Ukraine and the Russian Federation decreased by 4. times . Between 2013-2016, trade between the two countries decreased by four times .
 Last year shipments of railway locomotives increased by 161% and led by 191% from Russia . In addition, last year's shipments of rail locomotive shipments increased by 191%.
 Ukraine sold mostly mineral and chemical products, machinery and equipment last year . Last year, Ukraine sold most mineral, chemical products and equipment .
 President Poroshenko is not interested in stronger Russian influences in Ukraine, says the Ukrainian president .
 A possible new government in 2019 could lead to him being the object of criminal investigations . His business would strongly suffer, and his business would also suffer .
 The rest of the oligarchs would like to renew their business directed towards Russia . However, besides Poroshenko, the rest would want to focus their business on Russia .
 It seems that they want to make Ukraine again sit “on two chairs’ after the annexation of Crimea, ongoing war in Donbass and a radically changed society .
 The top four Ukrainian oligarch have a strong wish and intention to renew their economic relations with Russia after the elections in 2019 . They hope for new internal rules of the game that will be established with a new president and parliament .
 Moscow will never burn the bridges to Ukrainian oligarchs, understanding how easily they might be manipulated with engaging big money . It is possible to state that the Ukraine oligarchs are remaining one of the biggest hybrid threats to the country .
 The hybrid war is about the people’s hearts and minds, according to the author .
 The goal is to make the people of Ukraine do what Moscow desires without direct violence or military intrusion . The goal of Ukraine is to be made what Moscow wants .
 Russia is partially successful in reaching this goal, since a big part of the society is disoriented . The level of support for membership in NATO and EU and EU is decreasing .
Only 11,2% of Ukrainians are satisfied with the direction of Ukraine’s development . 83,7% are not satisfied with Ukraine's development, according to survey .
 4.9% of respondents did not define their opinion, and 0.2% refused to answer the question . Another 4.8% of those who answered the question did not answer it .
 Another 30.1% of Ukrainians believe Ukraine should not be guided by joining the EU or joining the Customs Union . 10.1%, not determined by their opinion, and 0.6% refused to answer .
 12.2%, 15.7% of respondents did not define their opinion, and 0,3% refused to answer the question . People who would not take part in the voting were not asked to answer .
 If Western capitals want to know what Moscow will do towards them in the next months or year, they should look to Ukraine .
Export of corruptive influence and corruptive erosion of society is the key element of a new type hybrid war, developed by Russia .
 Export of corrupt big businessmen with their “dirty money is one of the most important components of this influence . The export of corrupt businessmen is a key part of the influence of the corrupt businessmen .
 Corruption is the main tool for Russia to make the Ukrainian state weak, Russia says . Russia wants to make Ukraine weak, to destabilize the society and to ruin Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Moscow is trying to reduce the level of resistance to Russia’s influence in Ukraine . This situation is created on purpose by Moscow in order to reduce resistance to the Russian influence .
 Corruption and the weakness of the state system give the enemy the opportunity to penetrate into structures that make important decisions and thus paralyze the state . The weakness of state system gives the enemy opportunity to enter into structures.
 The electoral picture in Ukraine now is very complicated and in favor of pro-Russian political forces . The presidential and parliamentarian elections are being held in Ukraine .
 There is a risk of victory of political forces in 2019 who would be in favor of the Russian Federation . There is also a risk that political forces will win the election .
 Ukrainian oligarchs are remaining one of the biggest hybrid threat to the country on the way to its true independence, sovereignty, democracy and prosperity . Ukraine's oligarchs remain one of its biggest hybrid threats to the nation's sovereignty and sovereignty .
 Ukraine’s example is showing that corruption is a powerful tool for destroying the defence sector and demotivating both the army and society as a whole .