 The Naval War College Foundation held its annual symposium in San Francisco on April 12, 2014 . The symposium was held by the Naval War college Foundation .
 I was delayed initially by a major schedule commitment I had immediately afterward . I was also delayed by major schedule commitments I had earlier .
 I wanted to see if participants' analysis could survive several months of real-world events . I also wanted to hear if the participants' analyses could survive a few months .
This article reflects my own thinking in response to the material presented . This article reflects his own thinking. This article is a response to material presented by the author .
 The headline topic was China, but Russian aggression in Ukraine was on everyone's minds that day .
 A Web search of that first term brings up links to discussions of nation-states deterring each other's aggression in the electromagnetic spectrum .
 The key lesson is that control of the sea includes dominance of undersea telecom cables . The key lessons are that control is to control the sea.
There is no grand unified theory for large-scale complex socio-technical systems available in open sources . There is no great unified theory.
 The closest is the ultra-large-scale system specific to the cyber-electromagnetic domain . The system is based on the internet and is based in New York City .
 The spectrum of cyber-EM conflict is as broad as kinetic conflict in the land, sea, and aerospace domains . The spectrum is as wide as kinetic war in the sea, land and sea .
Resilience in defense and targeted disruption in offense characterize cyber conflict . Resilience is a key factor in cyber conflict, says CNN's John Sutter .
US-North Korea conflict over Sony hacking in this light. It is tempting to see the current US-North Korean conflict over the Sony hack in the light .
 Sony was not resilient, and entire sectors of the U.S. economy may be similarly unprepared . The company was also not resilient.
Targeted disruption is a perfectly appropriate response to a rogue state's encouragement of vandalism . Targeted disruption should be a response to the rogue state of vandalism.
 China's digital Great Wall separating its domestic networks from the outside world is well known . China's Digital Great Wall separates its domestic network from the world .
 Capabilities honed in suppressing dissent are very useful in stealing technology from economic competitors . Capabilities Honed in suppress dissent are also useful in taking technology from competitors .
 Strong U.S. intellectual property controls offer resilience in defense . Strong United States intellectual property control offers resilience in defence .
 China's large but uncoordinated cyber effort is spread between the state and its SOEs . It is opening vectors for targeted disruption, opening vectors.
 Her proposed U.S. strategy is to match deception and opaqueness to our scale / proximity / precision advantage . Her proposed United States strategy would match deception to the scale and proximity of the United States .
 They are no longer "as close as lips and teeth," to borrow a translation . They are "asClose as lips" to borrow the translation .
 Japan's dominance of the dagger-shaped peninsula was an interruption of thousands of years of Chinese imperial patronage and hegemony . Japan's domination of the peninsula was a result of the rise of Japanese power over China .
 The large China-DPRK trade imbalance in the junior partner's favor must make Beijing wonder what it gets in return . The large trade imbalance must be seen in return.
 The mandarins certainly do not get North Korea's reportedly large deposits of high-grade rare earth elements .
 Continued Kim family purges of KWP China hands must irk Beijing to no end . Continued Kim Family purges must irK Beijing tono end .
 The US, China, South Korea, and Japan calibrate their regional moves as hedges against North Korean instability . The U.S. and South Korea are among the countries that are hedging against North Korea .
 No one is willing to admit in open sources whether North Korea can weaponize a ballistic missile with a nuclear warhead .
 The United States cannot rule out the outlier of a surprise strike. This is why the U.S. can't rule out it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The inability of U.S. elites to comprehend the North Korean nuclear program and missile program as existential threats indict their ability to safeguard a democratic society, says the author .
 The North should also smuggle some Choco-Pies into the North to destabilize its black market. They should smuggle them into the country to destabilise its black markets .
 Seoul's Blue House should read my Third Eye OSINT article on "Mishandling One of the Two Koreas" for insights into Office 39 . The article is based on an article on the Korean government's Office 39.
 Russia is not a suitable partner for the U.S. space program after its rupture with Russia . It is not the suitable partner.
 Open sources have little to say about U.S. workarounds if China neutralizes our space assets .
China's odd approaches to legal classification and organizational structure pose analytical challenges . China's odd approach to legal classifications and organization structure poses analytical challenges.
 The U.S. easily falls for China's baloney about its space program .
 Copying components is easier than replicating full systems and managerial competence . Copying is more difficult than replication full systems.
 Great power ASAT shootouts in low-earth orbit test the international community's limited tolerance for the weaponization of space .
 Cold War precedents for overflight of other nations' territory offer little moral suasion to the Chinese . Cold War pre-emptions for over flight of other countries' territory offered little moral Suasion to China .
 The U.S. cannot successfully co-opt China into openness as long as they can steal all the IP they need . The United States cannot successfully Co-opt Chinese into openness .
 An international effort to mitigate orbital debris fields could be a ripe area for US-China cooperation . US- China cooperation could be an area for cooperation .
 Debris is a proportionately larger threat to smaller space-faring nations than to those with many satellites who can afford to lose one . The loss of a satellite is a bigger threat to small nations than the loss of one .
 The case for an anti-U.S. conspiracy is weak given the history of imperial rivalries in Asia .
 Russian military exercises in its own far east are only nominally directed against the US . The more likely opponent is closer at hand than the U.S.
 Russia's demographic decline and geopolitical isolation from the West likely doom it to developing country status . Russia's population decline and its geopolitical isolation will likely doom the country's future .
 These two bears do not hibernate and they inhabit the same hunting grounds . The two bears are not in hibernates and they live on the same grounds .
 The NWC's China Maritime Studies Institute analyzed the Rising Sea Dragon in Asia . The analysis is based on the analysis at the NWC.
 One source will prove to have more predictive value in about 13 years as China's demographics overwhelm its economy's ability to deliver satisfaction . China's population is expected to overtake its economic growth in 13 years .
 If much of this article comes across as a tease, then that is a condition my readers shall tolerate, says author . "If much of the article comes out as a teasing, then it's a condition I will tolerate," he says .
 I am breaking from my usual discussion of public events by not fully disclosing many of the notes I took . I'm breaking from the usual discussion. I'm not fully revealing many of those notes I take .
 The departure this year of USPACOM's outspoken Naval intelligence officer is regrettable, because the red star is rising in the East .
 Third Eye OSINT stream-of-consciousness reaction to its major points was powered by pure genius . Third Eye's reaction to major points is powered bypure genius .
 making the case for emerging threats in the MENA region means understanding their sociocultural context . Making the case means understanding the region's social context .
 Claiming it is not an authentic Islamic force invites ridicule in the souks of Cairo and Riyadh. Claiming the Islamic force is not authentic is not a real Islamic force.
 Citing barbaric tactics and genocide correctly places the threat in a category requiring international response . Citing barbarity and genocide is correct to call for international response to the situation .
 This supports international conventions dating back decades and more recent responsibility to protect doctrine . This support international conventions that date back decades .
Air strikes are easy against equipment we recognize,e.e. captured United States materiel . Air strikes areeasy against equipment, we recognize .
 The United States can quickly exhaust its high-value target list of easily identifiable vehicles . The U.S. can easily identify vehicles with easily identifiable names .
 The harder part is destroying ISIL's very mobile C2 network of bad actors . ISIL is destroying the C2 system of bad actor actors .
 The U.S. must DESTROY any armed force that threatens violence against our homeland, national leadership, or citizens abroad . The United States must DES TROY any Armed Force that threatens our homeland .
 The widely-shared photo of someone outside the White House displaying ISIL's flag on a smartphone proves how easily a threat can reach our own C2 nodes .
Training and equipping proxy forces is not as easy as rhetoric makes it sound. Training and equipped proxy forces can be difficult to do as well as training .
 The moderate Syrian opposition is mostly cut off and surrounded in many areas where it was formerly active, open source reports .
 I'm pretty sure I could assess Iraqi armed forces' condition from my laptop, using open media . I'm not sure if I can do so, but I'll use open media to assess the situation .
 U.S. advisers knew the condition of the Iraqi partners they trained all throughout Operation Iraqi Freedom .
 Western journalists have covered Iraq since the U.S. troop withdrawal in 2011 . They knew about endemic corruption and incompetence in the Iraqi military .
 Wealthy Kuwaitis and Qataris were willfully blind to the misuse of donated funds intended for humanitarian projects in Syria .
 Ruling out U.S. ground forces lengthens the time needed for a counteroffensive .
Iraqi forces cannot carry the load until they can reconstitute in safe havens far from ISIL-controlled areas . Unready Iraqi forces can't carry the loads until they are ready to move out .
 This means extensive retraining under American supervision in either Kurdistan or the Shiite south of Iraq . This is under supervision under U.S. supervision in both Kurdistan and the Iraqi Shiite south .
 Referencing America's economic and scientific strength is obviously intended for a foreign audience, especially the Ebola comment .
 Foreign intelligence services will review the inventory of America's aid programs mentioned and ask their American ambassadors how they will benefit by joining this coalition of the willing .
 ending with "vanquished from the earth" is a good call that articulates a desired end state . Ending with "vanquished from the earth"" is an end state. ending with  "vanished from the earth"
 The U.S. is in "it to win it" but only with air power for the time being . The United States is in ""it to winning it"
Air campaigns against highly mobile urban insurgencies are not effective without ground forces conducting COIN in liberated territory . Air campaigns against mobile urban insurgencyencies are also not effective with ground forces conducted COIN .
 U.S. planners will eventually realize the need to introduce competent ground forces .
 Active-duty United States military members should not make vacation plans for 2015 .
 The U.S. response to ISIL's emergent threat was delayed by a politically-driven unwillingness to acknowledge its potency .
 The National Security Council's mission is to synchronize threat warnings with a whole-of-government response to threats . The council's goal is to coordinate the response with the whole of the government .
 Political operatives who supplant foreign policy professionals among NSC staffers are incapable of providing thereat warnings or staffing strong responses . NSC staff can't provide strong responses to foreign policy operatives, they say .
 The tragedy of America's new counter-ISIL policy is that it came long after the threat was obvious . The tragedy is that the new policy was not obvious .
 Boko Haram, a radical Islamist terror gang, abducted hundreds of Nigerian girls several weeks ago . Boko Haram is a radical Islamic terror gang.
 The women of the U.S. Senate gathered in support of the #BringBackOurGirls social media meme . The meme was created by a group of women on Twitter .
 This is a good idea that you'd think every decent American could see the wisdom in claiming the moral high ground . This is so obviously good idea.
 America's loudest conservative pundits registered their objections to the photo below . The photo was taken in New York City .
 Leading voices on the Right have denounced the photo and its meme as weak and pointless .
 He meant that claiming the moral high ground is an absolute advantage in fighting a conflict. He meant he meant that claimed that claiming a moral highGround is anabsolute advantage in fight .
It clarifies strategic goals to allies and gives domestic morale a boost . It clarifies strategy to allies . It also gives the country a boost.
Every time we demonstrate the moral clarity of Western Civilization, we rally neutral people in the developing world to our cause and force jihadis to explain their atrocities .
The anti-female rhetoric I've heard from my conservative colleagues on this photo is disgusting. The anti- female rhetoric is disgusting, it's disgusting, says one conservative colleague .
 They sound pathetic by trotting out old misogynistic stereotypes that working women have tried hard to banish, they sound pathetic . They sound like they are trying to make women's lives better .
 The language some Americans have used to describe the Senators is the kind of verbiage a Salafist sheikh might use to describe his harem .
 This is the power of "information operations," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I assure you that plenty of people in the United States national security establishment take crafting these narratives very seriously"
 The United States will benefit once we share credit for the girls' safe return . If you disagree, consider how the U.S. will benefit from credit .
 I've seen a bunch of comments criticizing women for wanting girls to be safe . I've also seen a lot of comments about women wanting girls' safety .
 The U.S. is doing what it can to help Nigerians bring them back. Meanwhile, the United States is doing the same thing .
Radical Islamic groups are openly questioning the radical Islamic groups that have grown throughout the continent . They are openlyquestioning the Islamic groups.
 Getting Americans on the right side of that message is a powerful adjunct to our diplomacy, says John Sutter . Sutter says getting Americans on right side is apowerful adjunct to diplomacy .
 I'm less interested in placing blame for past oversights than in solving a present problem . I'm more interested in solving the present problem than placing blame on past oversight .
 U.S. leaders made plenty of missteps in the Cold War but our bipartisan foreign policy won in the end partly because our messaging to the world was based on a morally sound foundation .
 I believe the Gipper would be totally on board with hunting down Boko Haram fighters and rescuing their captive girls . I believe he would be on board.
 Anyone who disagrees with what these women Senators have to say in their hashtag should put up a photo of themselves with a #Don'tBringBackTheGirls tag .
 Hillary's operatives run the "GOP anti-women" canard all over again in 2016 . See how well that plays in 2016 when Hillary is in charge of the GOP's 2016 campaign .
 Republicans are willing to cede the moral high ground to both Democrats and Boko Haram out of pure spite . I am amazed that Republicans are able to do so out of spite .
 Conservatives should be better than this if they are to convince Americans that the GOP is fit to govern . The GOP should be a better party than the GOP to govern.
 It is true that U.S. foreign assistance programs are sometimes messy. It's true that United States foreign assistance program is sometimes messy .
 It is difficult to advance a freedom agenda in authoritarian countries. It is hard to advance an authoritarian country's freedom agenda .
 We succeeded in countries like South Korea and Thailand even though they had military governments for part of their modern history .
 The alternative is to cede contested countries to powers that have clear anti-West agendas . The alternative would be to give power to countries that have anti- West agendas .
 I'll take the 50% solution if I think it can get to 100% with continued U.S. involvement . I will take 50% if I believe it can be 100% of the solution .
 Republicans can't seem to say anything positive about Administration figures who have this crisis on their radar .
 Democratic President who directed national security team to work with Nigerians doesn't count, he says . I guess the Democratic President didn't count .
 Today's conservatives have so little positive news to offer America that they can't resist harassing our own female political leaders .
 American conservatives have done a whole lot more than make themselves look like fools, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says conservatives have made themselves look more like fools .
 They have missed a golden opportunity to demonstrate U.S. resolve in the face of violent jihadi movements they claim to hate so much . They have failed to demonstrate American resolve against the jihadi movement .
 The conservative loudmouths criticizing the #BringBackOurGirls meme have a profoundly immature understanding of information operations . The conservative Loudmouths have a profound understanding of the information operations.
 I am tired of American media reports that describe Russian forces "massing" east of Ukraine . I am also tired of U.S. media reports describing Russian forces in Ukraine .
 The unclassified aerial photos released from DigitalGlobe show Russian forces staged, not massed . The images were released by NATO from NATO's headquarters .
 The Russian forces are in a "sitzkrieg" awaiting the outcome of partisan contests inside Ukraine . The Russian force is in a 'sitzKrieg'
 The firing they've done so far has been mostly non-lethal . Those masked men are doing their own sort of massing at various decisive points, and the firing has been non- lethal .
 Massing means concentrating forces in action, not sitting around, but the U.S. media approaches military commentary without any nuance .
 This presents Ukraine with multiple opportunities to show media observers what massing really means if they ever get their act together . This presents them with multiple opportunity to show what massed really means .
 A sufficiently bloody recapture of a city hall or police station from the masked men of "Novorossiya" will give Russia the pretext it seeks to mass its forces .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea is complete and there isn't much the West can do to reverse the result . The West can't do much to reverse it.
Thousands of troops to Crimea and deploying a naval blockade of Ukrainian ships in their ports required planning that must have predated the Sochi Olympics .
 The international community must understand Russia's strategic rationale for the annexation to anticipate its next moves . Russia must understand its strategic rationale to anticipate next moves.
 Historical memories of Galicia, Ruthenia, and the Donbas / Donets Basin are very much alive for ethnic Russians .
 It is difficult for citizens in the individualistic Anglo-West to imagine the hold that ancient stories have on some modern peoples .
 The mere mention of any of these memories is enough to stoke Russian nationalism . It's just enough to make it seem Russian nationalism.
 Ukrainian memories of the Holodomor are just as vivid, and just as easily fire the imaginations of right-leaning nationalists .
 The post-Yanukovych revolutionary government in Kiev repealed a law recognizing the status of the Russian language .
 This was a major flashpoint for ethnic Russians in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . This was the biggest flashpoint in the country's history .
 The wide commingled use of both the Ukrainian and Russian languages is not much of a unifying factor in the Ukrainian national identity .
 Yugoslavia had an extensively commingled ethnicity, yet the Croats and Serbs went to war anyway in the 1990s . The Croats, Serbs and Croats had an extensive commingling ethnicity .
 Ukraine's assembly from parts of Poland and Austria-Hungary in the 20th century is just as tenuous as Yugoslavia's architecture without support from all of Ukraine's strongest neighbors . Ukraine's Assembly from parts. of Poland, Austria- Hungary in the20th century.
Diplomatic recognition of Ukraine's pre-2014 borders never offered such assurance . Diplomatic recognition was never offered by Ukraine .
 Ukraine surrendered its legacy Soviet nuclear weapons and accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty . It is an instrument that allowed Ukraine to surrender its legacy nuclear weapons .
 It does not commit its signatories to go to war if one of them violates the agreement . It doesn't commit to war unless one of the signatories violates it .
This commitment has the force of international law but has no clear enforcement mechanism . This commitment has been made by the European Union . It is not clear how to enforce this commitment .
 The memorandum invites an attempt to breach it; Russia took its chance with Crimea and succeeded . The memorandum thus invites an attempted breach of it .
 I was present in the audience and gleaned two major points the U.S. often overlooks about Russia . The United States sometimes overlooks the country's relationship with Russia .
 First, she said that the Russian narrative of the "Soros conspiracy" had little substantiation during the Orange Revolution .
 The U.S. should not rule out the possibility that Russian intelligence services promulgated the narrative to stir up anti-foreign sentiment in Ukraine .
 Russia expected the United States to accommodate its sphere of interest in Europe, she said . Second, she noted that Russia supported the U.S. response in Afghanistan .
 President Putin believes the U.S. let Russia down by pushing NATO expansion . The Russian president believes the United States is pushing the NATO expansion.
 The United States doesn't recognize that Russia sees its contraction in the 1990s as chaotic and humiliating . The U.S. doesn't realize that Russia saw its contraction as chaotic, humiliating .
 NATO forgot its promise to Mikhail Gorbachev not to deploy troops into the former East Germany or admit new alliance members . NATO promptly forgot its promises to Mikhail.
 Mere mention of humiliations stokes Russian policymakers' nationalism . Mere mentions of these humiliations are a sign of Russia's nationalism .
 The West is left to wonder what else Russia seeks to achieve in Ukraine . The West has been left wondering what Russia wants to do in Ukraine.
 East Ukraine's heavy industries have significant economic links to Russia. East Ukraine has significant economic ties to Russia .
 Natural gas pipelines through Ukraine deliver Russia's gas exports to Europe . Natural gas pipeline through Ukraine delivers Russia's natural gas exports.
 Russia cannot cut off gas to Ukraine without cutting off gas. Western Europe's dependency on Russian gas is not so dire, as Russia cannot do so .
 Russia's newest territory in Crimea remains vulnerable to Ukrainian attempts to control its gas and fresh water supplies . Ukraine is trying to control the territory's gas and water supplies.
 There is no land link from Crimea to Russia's Kuban region, which has a large population of ethnic Ukrainians . The region has no land links to Crimea .
 Yanukovych government agreed with Russia to build Kerch Strait Bridge connecting Crimea to Russia . Yanukovych government in Kiev had agreed to build the bridge .
 The provisional government in Kiev obviously had little interest in proceeding with this project . The provisionalgovernment in Kiev after the events of early 2014 obviously had no interest in the project .
Russia must secure a land corridor from its territory to Crimea to ensure that peninsula's viability . Russia must secure the land corridor to ensure Crimea's viability. Russia must also secure its own land corridor .
 Moldova's breakaway Transnistria region has demanded unification with Russia for some time . The region has been in dispute with Russia since 2008 .
 The Ukrainian oblasts of Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhia, Kherson, Mykolaiv, and Odessa constitute a land corridor that secures Russian access to both Crimea and Transnistria .
 Third Eye OSINT stands behind its judgment that Russia will continue to foment unrest in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Ethnic Russian provocations of Ukrainian government overreactions will provide the strategic pretext for Russian military intervention in this land corridor .
 SS Divison's actions against Russians are easy to stir among irredentist Russians . Memories of the "Galician" are easy.
 These memories translate as calls for the mother country's intervention . These memories are often called for mother's intervention.
History never ended in this part of the world, and its frozen conflicts are thawing out for action . History never ended, and the frozen conflicts never ended .
 The rapid deployment of airmobile forces and subversion of Crimean political institutions presented the world with a fait accompli. The rapid Deployment of air mobile forces and Subversion of political institutions present the world.
 The pending referendum on Crimea's future presents voters with little choice . The only ballot alternative to a union with Russia is a return to autonomous status under a Ukrainian constitution that is no longer in force .
 Russia's stated intent to protect "compatriots" who are not Russian citizens establishes a strategic doctrine for intervention in other countries . Russia's state of intent is to protect ""compatriot" who aren't Russian citizens .
 Russia used its veto power to nullify a UN Security Council resolution that would have upheld Ukraine's established borders against the Crimean referendum . The resolution would have kept Ukraine's existing borders against Crimea's referendum .
 effective action to counter Russian intervention in Ukraine now lies outside the UN diplomatic machinery. Effective action tocounter Russian intervention is now outside the diplomatic machinery .
 Crimean peninsula is heavily dependent upon Ukraine for water and energy . The Crimean peninsula has been heavily dependent on Ukraine's energy supply .
 Ukraine claims Russia has already launched an incursion into Strelkova from the Crimea . Ukraine claims it has already been launched into the Crimea.
 The seizure of a "natural gas station" is probably a warning to Ukraine that it should not interfere with the resource links that feed Crimea .
 There is no evidence from open source reporting that Ukrainian military units were able or willing to repulse this incursion .
 This lack of resistance will embolden Russian commanders to make further incursions, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 One regional commander sent a combined arms task force to secure a location outside his unit's defined area of operations . The decision indicates that other Russian commanders possess similar freedom of initiative .
Ukraine's options for mitigating Russian freedom of maneuver are limited . Ukraine's options are limited, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Reducing water flow from the North Crimea Canal through the Isthmus of Perekop would hurt all Crimeans and invite a Russian attempt to seize the power plant that controls the Kakhovka Reservoir feeding the canal .
 Third Eye OSINT assesses the Kakhovka Hydroelectric Power Plant to be a critically important infrastructure node . The plant is located in the Russian city of Kakhova .
 Outside The Beltway helpfully provided three maps of Ukraine's ethno-linguistic breakdown, political leanings, and natural gas pipelines at the beginning of March 2014 .
 Knowing where Russian sympathies are strongest in Ukraine indicates areas where pro-Russian partisans are likely to block Ukraine government actions and incite unrest . Knowing where Russia's sympathies is strongest in the country indicates where it is strongest .
 Wikipedia article on roads in Ukraine describes general lack of serviceability . It shares little detail on routes from the Russian border into the eastern Ukrainian interior .
 The accompanying Wikipedia graphic on Ukraine's International E-roads identifies six routes connecting Russia and Ukraine . The accompanying graphic on the Ukraine's international E- roads identifies the routes .
 Knowing where the E-roads connect to the Russian interior allows understanding of where Russian armored forces may stage prior to tactical maneuvers . Knowing where E-roads connect to Russian interior helps understanding where Russian forces might stage before maneuvers .
 Zerohedge's most recent infographics on Russian force commitments to the Ukraine theater compare what is known in Western media to what Ukrainian observers would like us to know .
 Zerohedge publishes geopolitical perspectives that are frequently intriguing and sometimes alarming . Its perspectives need independent verification .
 The second infographic is from former Ukrainian military officer Dmitry Tymchuk, who publishes an English-language blog for the Kyiv Post .
 The blog's header notes that it works closely with Voices of Ukraine, which is associated with the PR apparatus of EuroMaidan .
 State Department travel warning for parts of western Russia that are probable staging areas for Russian military units . Both graphical depictions generally match yesterday's State Department warning .
 Photos of Russian armored vehicles moving by rail to locations in Russia's western interior are widely available on the Web in English-language media . I have not seen many in official Russian- language media .
 Unopposed Russian incursions outside of Crimea indicate the occupying force's ability to seize critical infrastructure at will. Unoppose Russian incursion outside of the Crimea indicates the occupation's ability.
 Moscow's declared interest in ensuring the safety of Russian language speakers anywhere in Ukraine is an expansive statement of intent . Moscow's declaration of intent is a statement ofintent .
 It is very likely that Russia will launch armed incursions into eastern and southern Ukraine . It is therefore very likely.
 The Carnegie Endowment noted that Russian forces' initiative and tactical maskirovka have succeeded in achieving dominance . The Endowment said Russian forces have achieved dominance .
 Third Eye OSINT notes that this success has come partly due to very restrictive rules of engagement for Russian forces in Crimea . Ukrainian forces have blockaded Ukrainian forces in their garrisons .
 Pro-Russian partisans intimidating Crimeans and foreign journalists show no such restraint . Pro- Russian partisans intimidate Crimeans, foreign journalists, show no restraint .
 Russia will continue to employ a combination of cooperative local ""volunteer" provocateurs and military units under very restrictive rules of engagement .
 Temporary incursions and unrest may be sufficient to exert a level of control over parts of Ukraine . Russia may have more strategic options in engaging the West .
 Pierre Englebert's State Legitimacy and Development in Africa discusses illegitimate states whose modern functions are not contiguous with their pre-colonial functions . The issue is partly due to artificially drawn borders .
 Their seemingly interminable corruption and inefficiency stem from the difficulty of managing these borders, says CNN's John Sutter . The country's borders have been plagued by corruption, he says .
 These states expend enormous resources supporting themselves instead of funding vital public goods . These states spend enormous resources on their own.
 State corruption precludes African entrepreneurs from counting on a fair shake from their own leaders .
 The World Bank's data for Sub-Saharan Africa shows that it lags behind the MENA region in GNI per capita and life expectancy .
 MENA's oil-producing countries have their own problems with artificial borders and corruption . Yet they outperform their southern neighbors .
 The oil wealth of the MENA region is not the only explanation for its advantage over the rest of Africa . The region's oil wealth is the only reason for the region's advantage .
 A large number of the World Bank's heavily indebted poor countries are in Sub-Saharan Africa . The poor are in Africa's poorest countries .
 The explanation for the development differential between MENA and Sub-Saharan Africa isn't as simplistic as the presence of oil in the north and the burden of debt in the south .
Resource-rich African countries can export their way to success rather easily, while debt-burdened countries cannot . Knowing that this disparity exists provides a context for national developmental goals .
 The African Union and African Development Bank speak for the continent . The African Economic Development Bank speaks for the country .
 Whether they speak for corrupt autocrats or ordinary Africans is up for debate . Whether they talk for corrupt leaders or ordinary people is up to debate .
 State illegitimacy casts doubt on the ability of officials to push true development agendas without lining their own pockets . State officials are accused of using state funds to push agendas without the help of others .
 Bottom-up agendas can build credibility in areas that top-down agendas can't reach, says CNN's John Sutter . Top-down agenda can't be reached, he says .
 Bankers Without Borders' Sub-Saharan program has completed multiple microeconomic assessments . The program allows investors to bypass dysfunctional state programs .
 This philosophy supports the Center for Financial Inclusion's FI2020 goal of maximizing the participation of developing country citizens in the world's financial markets . This philosophy is supported by the Center For Financial Inclusive's FI 2020 goal of maximising the participation.
 Even the UN Research Institute for Social Development recognizes the importance of non-state mechanisms for socioeconomic development .
 The Africa Finance Corporation channels investors into infrastructure projects . Its initial capital and membership are limited .
 A Google search of that organization with the word "corruption" reveals some troubling early stories of mismanagement .
 Africa's efforts at developing a hi-tech economy have not yet borne fruit . The World Bank's data on value-added manufacturing reveals that Africa's attempts to develop hi- tech economy have yet to bear fruit .
 Both the MENA and Sub-Saharan regions trail the United States and world averages for the portion of the economy devoted to value-added manufacturing .
Both regions do track fairly closely to the numbers for the HIPC group . Both regions do not share the same numbers as HIPC .
 If manufacturing doesn't differentiate MENA from Sub-Saharan Africa, then resource extraction is probably the key difference between those regions .
 Development usually follows a clear pattern in the life of most nations . It is hard to skip from agriculture and extractive sectors directly to high-tech innovation .
 The United States and Germany were large agricultural producers whose exports produced excess capital available for investment in manufacturing . The U.S. and Germany are large agricultural producer.
Leaders need to convert resource exports into capital surpluses for their domestic tech sectors .
 The UN's Global Pulse reports on Big Data in development can show African leaders how to leverage their countries' unique gifts .
 Dayo Olopade's book The Bright Continent is more than a play on words for Africa's colonial nickname . There is more to Africa than its outdated Western references can describe .
 The M-Pesa mobile payment system is the classic result of this mentality . MIT Sloan recognizes its value and even MIT Sloan recognize its value .
 They should instead thank themselves for remaining open to the possibilities that development brings. They should also thank themselves.
 Two distinguished geopolitical scholars presented their analysis of "China's Rise and the Global Resource Game" at the World Affairs Council of Northern California .
 I have not yet read their companion book By All Means Necessary but now it's on my list . It's on the book's list.
 I have read the China National Development and Reform Commission mission statements . I have been reading the mission statements for the commission. I have also read the Chinese government's mission statement .
 China's leadership absolutely believes the quest for resources bolsters its security . China must pursue a stronger security posture to obtain the commodities it needs .
 Any outside attempt to interfere with one pursuit will imperil the other. The two are so intertwined that any outside attempts to interfere will imperill the other .
 This is the fundamental fact that the West and China's Asian neighbors must understand when dealing with China . This is a fundamental fact. The West and the Chinese must understand how to deal with China, says the author .
 China's state-sponsored strategy of resource acquisition is tailored to microeconomic circumstances, authors say . I am inclined to agree with the authors that China's strategy ofresource acquisition is tailor-made for micro economic circumstances .
 China has almost as much coal as the U.S. but most of it is not nearly as high in quality . Most of the coal in China is not as high as the United States .
 China still seeks to expand its coal capacity . . . by all means necessary . That is why China still wants to expand. by all Means necessary .
 China's coal quest is a resurgence of resource nationalism in Mongolia . Mongolia recently decided to restrict foreign ownership of its resource projects .
 PRC representative will address this at the next China Coal and Mining Expo . I wonder if a PRC rep will address the issue at the Expo .
 China's energy quest does not stop with coal, and analysts could do more to explain the country's challenges . China is also developing hydropower, natural gas, and solar technology .
 China is determined to dam the Mekong and other major rivers, with little regard for the water needs of its downstream neighbors . China is also trying to dam other rivers.
 China does not participate in transboundary water management mechanisms, according to a previous analysis .
 I will restate my belief that the U.S. can play the role of honest broker in Asia . I will also restate that the United States can play a role in Asia's honest broker.
 The United States is trying to align China with international norms mitigating climate change . The U.S. wants to align the country with global norms to mitigate climate change.
 China needs to build capacity for settling disputes peacefully with its neighbors in ways that do not disrupt Asia's water-energy-food security nexus . The next logical step is to help China build the capacity to settle disputes peacefully .
 Analysts outside the mining sector try to describe China's rare earth element mining policies . I sometimes chuckle to myself when analysts outside themining sector try.
 I predicted China's ability to produce REEs would have more to do with global demand than with its export quotas . I gave an interview to the Gold Report in December 2011 on rare earth metals .
 The world prices of rare earth metals plummeted that year and have remained low . The world price of rare metals has remained low since then .
 Investors who went all-in on REE stocks at the top of that bubble have been hurting ever since . Investors who have been hurt ever since are still hurting.
 China keeps its export quotas just high enough to exceed global demand . China uses environmental laws as a stalking horse to consolidate domestic production and shut down underperforming mines .
 I blogged about my experience on the TREM12 panel in March 2012 . I further elaborated on my REE market analysis in front of Washington DC policymakers and mining industry big shots .
 I will continue to toot my own horn on this subject because the halls of power can benefit from my genius. I will be able to continue to do this because of my genius, says the author .
 China mines over 95% of the world's REE product is less important than the fact it owns 100% of world's oxide and concentrate refining capacity .
 REE ore mined outside China must still be shipped to China for the final metallurgy that turns it into specialty alloys for industrial use . Even REE mining outside China can still be sent to China.
Digging new REE mines in Canada and elsewhere gives the West little strategic leverage without a multi-year investment in processing capacity and engineering knowledge that breaks China's real monopoly .
 I have a small equity investment in a privately held company that is attempting to break this monopoly by establishing a world-class REE processing facility in North America .
 The Wilson Center has a program for building state capacity for the U.S. military's advise and assist missions in Iraq and Afghanistan . The program could have been a usable framework for the United States military's advising and assisting missions .
 The NBER thinks state capacity germinates in common interest public goods . NBER: State capacity germates in public goods.
 NBER study traces the relationship between state capacity, taxation, and conflict . Another study traces state capacity and taxation .
 Nation-building is a big topic for another article, but there are simple metrics for assessing state capacity . There are simple measures for assessing the state's capacity .
 The two authors' example of China's desire to import timber from Russia left me wondering which state they consider to be stronger .
 It may be a question of which state is less dysfunctional, or which is less captive to an oligarchical elite .
 Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index ranks China 80th and Russia 127th . China is ranked 80th. Russia is ranked 127th.
 The Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom ranks China 137th and Russia 140th . China is ranked 140th and 137th in the world .
 The World Bank Logistics Performance Index ranks China 26th and Russia 95th . China is ranked 26th. Russia is ranked 95th.
 Standard and Poor's rates sovereign credit as AAfor China and as BBB to BBB+ for Russia . Standard and poor's rates for China as AA for China and BBB for Russia.
 The People's Republic of China is a stronger state than the Russian Federation almost across the board . It looks to me like the People's republic of China, it looks like the Russians are stronger than China .
 Russia is slightly higher on Freedom House's scale but both countries are pretty much in the basement on that metric . Both countries are in the bottom of the Freedom House scale .
 The World Affairs Council's guests come all the way out to San Francisco from the Council on Foreign Relations .
 I would be overjoyed to add my own perspectives to the CFR's deliberations if someone would be generous enough to sponsor me for membership . I would like to add his own perspective to the deliberations .
 The CFR needs market expertise that bolsters its geopolitical bench strength . The CFR is based in New York City, New York .
 The Two Koreas are going on his watch list for his next trip to the SF Public Library . I have not yet read the Koreas so it's going on my watch list .
 The political division of Korea is one of the last Cold War legacies on the planet, aside from Castro regime in Cuba .
 The North Korean regime exhibits behavior that the American negotiators of the Agreed Framework do not completely understand . The North Korea regime exhibitsbehavior that the U.S. negotiators do not fully understand .
 The Clinton Administration negotiated the Agreed Framework in the 1990s with the Kim family regime . The Clinton administration negotiated theAgreed Framework with theKim family regime.
Negotiating in good faith with a regime proven to break faith with agreements is an exercise in futility . Negotiating with a regimes proven to broken faith with agreement is a exercise in futility. Negotiations are an exercise of good faith.
 Western diplomats think Oriental despots can be trusted to keep their word . This wisdom is lost on Western diplomats who think they can't be trusted .
 The Agreed Framework itself allowed lopsided U.S. concessions to the DPRK and next to nothing in return .
 The DPRK promised renewed adherence to the NPT, which later abrogated with nuclear tests . What little the DPRK promised was renewed adherence.
 I am profoundly disappointed at the immaturity of key U.S. diplomats who were witness to this willful negligence of United States strategic interests in the 1990s . I am deeply disappointed by the imm aturity of these diplomats, he says .
 Political determination to pursue a questionable diplomatic goal should be grounds for career diplomats to raise strenuous objections . Career diplomats should raise strenuously objections to the move .
 It is difficult to describe the Clinton Administration's policy toward North Korea as a success given the high costs the U.S. paid for the illusion of progress toward normalization .
 JPAC's ability to dig up the North Korean countryside for U.S. servicemembers' remains depended on millions of dollars in aid incentives . JPAC can dig up North Korea's countryside for United States servicememberbers.
 The Bush Administration was still releasing funds to North Korea in 2002 under the Agreed Framework . It declined to certify the DPRK's compliance .
 Competent diplomats could have seen that coming based on North Korea's demonstrated diplomatic record of duplicity .
 Independent assessments of light water reactors make it clear that they can still produce weapon-grade plutonium .
 The GAO's EMD-79-15 report made it clear during the Carter administration that light water reactors were not proliferation-proof .
 A gift of an LWR to a hostile state will not hinder nuclear weapons development. Any competent diplomat could have leaned on the U.S. intelligence community's technical specialists to confirm the gift .
 U.S. diplomats should not view strategically questionable agreements as resume builders, time fillers, full employment programs, or bestseller book material .
Coercion could have succeeded in curtailing the DPRK's nuclear ambitions where the Agreed Framework failed . Coercion has failed to achieve its goals in the past .
 North Korea's Room 39 is the Kim dynasty's primary source of slush fund revenue from illicit activities worldwide . The Kim dynasty is the main source of illicit activities in North Korea .
 The Bush Administration launched a comprehensive plan to take apart Office 39 . But for some reason never completed it .
 The U.S. effort to shut off North Korea's illicit funding forced the Kim family to make policy changes . Some of these comments indicate that this United States effort to close off the North Korean government forced the family to change its policy .
 The Kims and their entourage approach all foreign dealings, including diplomatic efforts, as a matter of personal survival . The family is known for their commitment to the world .
 The Kim dynasty cannot maintain its extravagant lifestyle, its bribes to internal KPA and WPK factions, and its WMD programs without illicit sources of foreign funds . The Kim family cannot maintain their extravagant lifestyle without illicit funds .
 Third Eye OSINT is convinced that a serious effort to shut down Room 39, its successors, and other Kim regime extralegal funding mechanisms remain the most promising U.S. interagency option .
 The United States Treasury designated two banks as nodes of Office 39 in 2010 . The U.S. Treasury designated the two banks in 2010.
 At least one U.S. agency is keeping up the pressure on the government . It's good to know that at least one agency has been keeping up pressure .
 Any claim that the U.S. is unable to monitor North Korean compliance with nonproliferation accords is difficult to believe .
 The U.S. has maintained national technical means that enable it to monitor Russia's nuclear arsenal . The United States has long maintained technical means to monitor the nuclear arsenal.
 IAEA physical site visits have been sufficient to catch North Korea in the act of violating its agreements . This surveillance, together with physical site visit, has been enough to catch the North Korea .
 The U.S. does indeed lack a diplomatic capability to assess the intent of leaders in closed societies .
 Diplomatic scholars should revisit Confucian thinking to recognize ancestor worship and other forms of filial piety the Kim regime demands of its people .
 The United Nations Human Rights Council Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the DPRK completed its report in February 2014 . The U.N. Human Rights Commission of inquiry on Human rights in the North Korea completed the report last year .
 The objective evidence for barbarity inside the DPRK is as incontrovertible as it is appalling . The objectiveevidence for barbarism inside the North Korean regime is as appalling as it's appalling .
 News of North Korea's horrors has been available through open sources such as NK News, DailyNK, and various defector sites .
 U.S. diplomats and intelligence professionals engage their North Korean counterparts as if an exchange among equals is possible over coffee in Geneva .
 The Ploughshares Fund's North Korea section put too much faith in international norms against proliferation . The idealists at the Plough Shares Fund put too many faith in the international norms.
 Operation Paul Bunyan resolved the JSA axe murder incident on favorable terms for the U.S. and South Korea . The incident took place in South Korea and the United States .
 The United States tends to mishandle its relations with at least one of the two Koreas at any given time . The U.S. tends to miss out on the two countries at any time .
 South Korea should be the lead international actor in dealings with its forlorn northern twin . It stands to reason that South Korea shouldn't be the leading international actor .
 The Republic of Korea has matured into a modern democracy that ranks very high on numerous global measures of health . It ranks high on many global measures.
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea ranks at the bottom on almost every conceivable measure . The country is the only country in the world to rank at the lowest .
 The US's wisest move would be to defer to its strong ally South Korea in all future negotiations with North Korea . The US would also defer to South Korea.
 Koreans understand their kin better than U.S. diplomats who pursue negotiations for their own sake . Koreans are more likely to talk to their kin than diplomats, they say .
 The confrontation between government forces and protesters has turned deadly . The confrontation in Kiev has turned violent .
 The difference in how Western media and Russian media portray this conflict has become a trope . The difference between the two countries is seen as an example of Western media portraying this conflict .
 Russia sees right-wing coup plotters where the West sees neoliberal modernizers . The West sees the West as neoliberal modernizer, Russia says . Russia has a long history of right- wing coup plots .
 A Polish diplomat tweeted a panicked mood in the office of Ukraine's head of state . The WaPo reports that the diplomat was in a panic.
 A stable country has no interest in revealing an ally's weakness unless said ally's regime is in mortal peril . In which case the diplomatic penalty for such a revelation is minimal .
 The Ukraine's pro-West opposition has occupied government buildings, burned official documents, and captured Interior Ministry police .
 That indicates a level of organization and commitment far beyond that of a peaceful protest movement . That indicates the level of group's commitment to peaceful protest, says the author .
 The Financial Times reports on the possibility that the Ukrainian military will intervene to crush the protests . The Ukrainian military has not yet responded to the protests.
 A senior Ukrainian commander who expressed a reluctance to intervene has been removed from Ukraine . That is premature despite the removal of a senior Ukrainian Commander who expressed reluctance to intervention .
 The order of battle in Kiev appears to favor the Interior Ministry against the protesters . The Interior Ministry is fighting the protesters in Kiev .
 Kiev would likely only commit its military if the protesters achieved some sort of breakout by repulsing the Interior Ministry in a decisive battle or seizing more government buildings .
 The United States Secretary of Defense has not been able to contact his Ukrainian counterpart . The Washington Examiner reports that the U.S. secretary of defense has been unable to contact him .
 The FT's description of Ukraine's decades of NATO contact through unit training and officer education is important in light of the FT's descriptions of the country's years of contact with NATO .
 If Ukraine's leadership were preparing a military response, the planning would preclude contact with other nations' counterparts to avoid tipping its hand .
 American theory about insurgency holds that genuine grass-roots insurgencies begin among disaffected classes, typically in rural areas, and only spread to capitals after establishing bases in the countryside .
Pro-Moscow government has nothing to do with whether it can hold government buildings against the Interior Ministry . Its success in confronting the pro-Russian government has no effect on the government .
 It has succeeded in exposing severe disconnects in governance between the nativist western parts of Ukraine and the pro-Moscow Russian ethnic enclaves in the east .
 It is unclear at this time whether the cities in western Ukraine that have expressed autonomous sentiments have backing from elements in the Ukrainian military .
 The pro-Moscow regime in Kiev has a short window in which to rout the protesters . The protesters have been protesting for months .
 If it does not rout the opposition, the risk of full civil war is high . If it doesn't rout opposition, it could lead to full civil War .
 If the Ukrainian military is so split that its commitment to support the Interior Ministry would precipitate a larger crisis, then no national institution could hold east and west Ukraine together . . . in the absence of foreign intervention .
 Yesterday I went to the Commonwealth Club for a lecture on the rise of China . I expected to be a good lecture on China's rise.
 Orville Schell was a vaunted old China hand from the Asia Society . He was one of the most trusted names in the think-tank world .
 The Commonwealth Club has pushed this topic before, and I'll note for the record that I have not yet read Wealth and Power .
 China's rise leaves out a significant number of salient details. I need to read it to understand why this coverage of the country's rise left out a number of key details .
China's resurgent nationalism in turn has motivated China's strong economic growth, says author . He says decades of humiliation at the hands of Western powers motivates Chinese nationalism .
 Western observers are missing other unique forces driving that nationalism, says John Sutter . Sutter: Western observers missing other forces driving nationalism .
Ignoring these forces means the West will once again misjudge future turning points in China's internal development and external strategy . China missed the turn to modernization after the Cultural Revolution .
 The "Chinese Dream" of wealth and power that will secure China's identity is more than some belated response to 19th century colonialism . The ""Chinese Dream"" of wealth, power will secure the country's identity, says the Chinese .
 China's governmental style has never lost its Confucian foundation despite Mao's efforts to break down traditional Chinese cultural traits . China's government style has not lost itsConfucian style despite Mao.
 Modern Chinese interpret the ""mandate of heaven" as continued economic growth . Modern Chinese interpreted the ""Mandate of Heaven" as continuing economic growth.
 The question is about a decade away from becoming reality by virtue of demographics . The answer is about 10 years away from being a reality.
 China's unassimilated minorities must figure into any Western analysis of that country's stability . But Western analysts disappoint me by continuing to refer to China as monolithic .
Early scholars of Oriental despotism such as Karl August Wittfogel never corrected. This failure to see ethnic nuances is one fatal flaw that early scholars never corrected . The failure to spot ethnic nuances in Oriental despots is a fatal flaw .
 China's insecurity is the product of an unfinished nationalist attempt to reconcile some irreconcilable minorities to Han and Manchu primacy . China's insecure is expressed in its reassertion of historic claims over inconsequential islands .
 Nationalism as a unifying impulse is the only way China can contain restive Tibetans, Uighurs, and Mongolians when economic growth begins to falter . Nationalism is a unifies impulse.
 China's unresolved territorial disputes with India over Arunachal Pradesh and other areas are the perfect future rationales for more saber-rattling . India's territorial dispute with India is still unresolved .
 China is unable to meet its own middle class's economic expectations for a ""mandate of heaven" in its standard of living . I do not expect those areas to be quiet for long once China's middle class is able to meet those expectations .
 Oh BTW, those seemingly inconsequential islands are fairly consequential after all . The islands are a fairly consequential island.
UNCLOS allows China to extend its exclusive economic zone under UNCLOS far beyond its coastal waters . Securing unchallenged basing rights to uninhabited rocks is a key step for China .
 This provides legal precedent for regulating fishing, crabbing, and even ocean transit . It reflects the tributary relationships imperial China once imposed upon its weaker Asian neighbors .
 China's desire to assert an air defense identification zone over the entire East China Sea reflects the same impulse . China wants to assert a zone over East China sea over the whole East Chinese Sea .
 The United States Navy guarantees freedom of navigation through Pacific sea lanes, free of charge to all comers .
 There is no assurance in Asian history that Chinese naval dominance will be as generous as it has been in the past .
 Any PLA Navy attempt to charge a tariff for transit will provoke an outcry that will demand an international response .
 Chinese nationalism is not the self-deterministic expression familiar to Western scholars . China's nationalism is not self-Deterministic, according to Chinese scholars .
 It is a resurgence of the ancient imperialist impulse that runs through much of China's pre-modern history . It is also a resurgence in the ancient imperial impulse .
 The Beijing Consensus uses economic development and nationalism to restore China's self-image as an empire . China's economic development is used to restore its self- image as a nation .
 The Chinese Dream is the domestic mythos covering that policy consensus . It is based on the Chinese Dream .
 Faltering economic development means nationalism becomes the stronger impulse to maintain the unifying self-image .
 Beijing Consensus is a competing development model for emerging markets. This is why neoliberal interpreters of the Washington Consensus for economic development misapply it to emerging markets, says Peter Bergen .
Traditional Chinese imperialism is directed at China's unassimilated minorities and weaker neighbors . It is traditional Chinese imperialism, directed simultaneously at minorities and weak neighbors .
Western analysts can increase their understanding of Asian dynamics by updating some forgotten concepts like hydraulic empire without Wittfogel's ideological limitations . Western analysts can update some forgotten Concepts like the hydraulic empire.
 Himalayan hydrology has everything to do with the water-energy-food security nexus . China's internal development and its relationship with India over contested territories are driving China's development .
 The Asia Society and Commonwealth Club should study this Alfidi Capital thesis in more detail . It should be more detail.
I'm available for speaking engagements in front of VIP audiences, if you know what I mean . I'm available to speak to VIP audiences. I'm also available to talk to people in the UK .
 It's also a cool segue to discussing risks to global stability from a lack of access to potable water . It's a coolsegue to discuss risks toglobal stability from the lack of potableWater .
 Three fourths of the earth's surface is covered in water but only a small amount is fit for human consumption .
 The World Resources Institute studies water risk through its Aqueduct global mapping tool . The World resources Institute studies the water risk of water in the water system .
 A China-India resource conflict within 15 years is my pet theory, I said last year . I mentioned last year that a China- India resource conflict in 15 years was my pet Theory .
 The Aqueduct map shows India more stressed for water than China in each scenario . China is more stressed than India for water, according to the map .
 Perusing the Aqueduct's supporting publications reveals those river basins under the most stress from water extraction .
 A large number of the highest-risk basins are in China, Central Asia, and the Middle East . The Middle East has the highest number of basins .
 Water supply risk gets a special mention in the World Economic Forum's Global Risks Report for 2014 . Water supply is a key concern for the world economy .
 This report cites food and water crises as major risks but does not link them to a water-energy-food nexus . The report says tradeoffs and prioritization of efforts should be prioritized .
 The report places both water and food in the upper-right quadrant of its global risk matrix . But an oil price shock is in the lower left quadrant, it says .
An energy price shock in the water-energy-food nexus will almost immediately drive secondary effects in water and food . It seems to be to me that an energy priceshock in the food-energy nexus will nearly immediately drivesecondary effects in food and water .
 The vulnerability of water production industrial control systems to cyberattack is another risk the WEF identified separately, even though that can also impact the water-energy-food nexus . The vulnerability to cyberattacks is also a risk, as well as water production control systems .
 The UN's World Water Development Report will be an annual guide for policymakers once the next edition comes out this year . The report will be a guide to policymakers for the next year .
 The UN-Water Analytical Brief from October 2013 expands upon the water-energy-food nexus as a basis for security .
 The most positive observation in that brief is the recognition of transboundary water management commissions where neighboring countries can discuss water management . The mostpositive observation in the brief is that transboundARY water management commission .
 I am unclear at present whether these commissions can adjudicate disputes as binding arbitrators . I'm guessing that they cannot unless they point to signed UN conventions or other sources of international law .
 I like that the brief assigns a dollar figure to watershed management in some regions . I like to see that a dollar is assigned to watershed managers in some areas .
 Pakistan will come under water pressure first and most severely of all the potential crisis regions . Pakistan will be most severely affected by water pressure, according to studies .
 Pakistan will face a tradeoff between agriculture and hydropower if it doesn't get enough water for both functions . Pakistan will have to rely on more water to meet its needs for agriculture .
 This will force it to play an increasingly destabilizing game provoking India via Kashmir . This will be the first time India has played a game of destabilizing games in Kashmir .
 India will be tempted to retaliate by extending its influence into Afghanistan as a back-door way to destabilize Pakistan . India will also be tempted by extending it into Afghanistan.
 New Delhi is already preparing this strategic option by extending diplomatic and military overtures to Kabul . New Delhi has already been preparing to extend diplomatic andMilitary overtures.
 India can win a conventional conflict with Pakistan over water access, provided the conflict does not go nuclear and China does not intervene with military force . India can also win a traditional conflict over the water access.
 Every major Middle East river is shared by two or more nations and national borders do not coincide with watershed boundaries . Every major river in the Middle East is shared.
 The Middle East's vast oil and gas resources enable it to adapt water infrastructure to the region's needs . Water is more important than oil because it has no substitutes .
 Water systems present attractive terrorist targets but shared management among regional rivals can be a basis for cooperation . State-sponsored groups can deters state- sponsored groups from attacking infrastructure .
 The Middle East Desalination Research Center offers a way forward that is neutral toward infrastructure for delivery . Almost every Middle East nation borders the open sea and most are wealthy enough to afford desalination technology .
 Water shortages are relevant to Syria's instability, possibly more so than the Arab Spring . Water shortages may be more relevant to the country's instability than the Spring .
 The country's population growth stressed its environment and a multi-year drought from 2006-11 drove millions of rural dwellers into food insecurity and urban migration .
 Assad regime subsidized water-intensive crops, favoring inefficient techniques that overdrew groundwater . The Assad regime subsidized water- intensive crops .
 Trade in food and other commodities represents the transfer of virtual water, or embedded water, between regions .
 TWM bodies need to be ready to go to work in Asia and the Middle East . The TWM body is ready to work.
 The lack of reputable TWM organizations in the Middle East and Asia will be a detriment to regional stability, says the group . The lack in the region is a threat to stability, the group says .
 Arab recalcitrance over the US-sponsored Jordan Valley Unified Water Plan was a partial cause of the 1967 Six-Day War . The 1967 Six Day War ended in a stalemate .
 The only TWM organization covering Israel and its Arab neighbors is the Arava Institute's Center for Trans-boundary Water Management .
 The Carnegie Endowment presented its "Blue Peace" comprehensive IWRM plan in 2011 . I do not know whether any Middle Eastern nations signed on for implementation .
 The Indian-based Strategic Foresight Group published "Water Cooperation for a Secure World" regarding potential for water resource cooperation to reduce the risk of war .
 India and China have been willing to share water data, but long-term cooperation is hampered by border disputes . The two countries have been unwilling to share data .
 The world's water problems present an opportunity for the U.S. to emerge as an honest broker in regions key to its strategic interests . The United States has a chance to be a broker in the world's key regions .
 The United States can use a DIME-based outreach via USAID water and sanitation development programs . The U.S. can use the program to focus on efficiency and demand reduction .
 The DIME approach's success metric should be a reduction in the target region's water footprint, using the Water Footprint Network's data .
 The World Bank's work on water development will give the DIME effort credibility. Leveraging the World Bank will give it credibility .
 Asia and the Middle East will have to manage their water resources in different ways, with or without U.S. assistance . Asia and Mideast will need to manage water resources.
 The UN FAO Natural Resources and Environment Department has data and programs useful in resolving water disputes . Most of which are now sub-national, most of which have been in the United Nations .
 Regional rivals cannot peacefully adjudicate water disputes through TWM commissions, they will come into conflict . If regional rivals can't peacefully adjudiate water disputes, they'll come into war .
 US Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus spoke last night at the Commonwealth Club .
 I attended to hear him speak on the U.S. Navy's efforts to adopt renewable energy sources .
 The entire event was recorded for the CW Club's Climate One series so I don't need to repeat much of what the Secretary said .
 His talk shed some intriguing light on how the availability of energy affects a navy's power projection capability .
 Secretary Mabus mentioned that biofuel has a higher octane rating than petroleum-based fuel .
 He did not mention the specific composition of fuel the Navy was using in its Great Green Fleet so I don't know whether he meant E85 or some other blend .
 The Great White Fleet's demonstration of U.S. power projection during its rise as a world power. I like that the name of this technology demonstration invokes the Great WhiteFleet's demonstration.
 An underwater autonomous vehicle can make its own fuel from ocean water and sea floor biomass . The vehicle can stay at sea indefinitely, according to the inventor .
 ships can spend more time on station and can avoid port visits that increase security vulnerabilities . The freedom of maneuver this will grant a naval force is phenomenal because ships can spending more time at station .
 The USDA's Economic Research Service publishes regular updates on the market for biofuels . The agency also provides information on how to make biofuel products .
 The USDOE EERE Alternative Fuels Data Center compares biofuel prices to more conventional fuel prices . The data was compiled by the US EERE EEREAlternative Fuels data center .
 Ethanol is clearly more price competitive than biodiesel but the federal government subsidizes its production . The federal government is subsidizing its production.
 International Institute for Sustainable Development’s Global Subsidies Initiative of biofuel subsidies in several countries show that they are expensive ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
 The U.S. government agencies are providing demand in the interest of national security . They have done throughout American history .
 The Defense Production Act is the government's legal means of requiring the private sector to produce goods that meet the nation's security needs even if no market exists .
 An interagency committee runs study groups that publish capability assessments . The DPA Title III portal publishes contracting opportunities .
 Secretary Mabus mentioned a security premium that oil traders include when submitting orders for oil contracts . Mabus also mentioned a price premium for oil traders .
 The Navy is forced to divert O&M funds to unbudgeted fuel costs . This premium plays havoc with the Navy's budget .
 The premium's volatility increases with instability anywhere among oil-producing regions . Even when minor producers experience instability, it increases .
 The study suggests that increased U.S. domestic oil production dampens price shocks from instability . Overall reductions in oil consumption do more to enhance security than source substitution .
 This research is an argument in favor of more biofuel production, which comes with its own premium . This research was published in the U.S.
 Secretary Mabus said U.S. hegemony enables freedom of navigation through the world's sea lanes and around crucial choke points . More audiences outside the United States need to hear what Mabus says about how United States hegemony enables navigation .
 The U.S. State Department outlines the United States freedom of navigation program but does not mention the US's refusal to sign the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea . The US State Department also does not include the US refusal to signs the Convention on
 The USDOE EIA's World Oil Transit Choke Points show where the U.S. Navy's presence does the most good for the world economy .
 Petroleum shipping would be far more hazardous without the Navy on duty .
 shipping oil across the English Channel during World War II was hazardous due to German Luftwaffe attacks . Shipping oil across English Channel was hazardous because of the LuftWaffe attacks.
 The Allies had to build Operation Pluto's cross-channel pipeline to keep oil flowing to U.S. and British forces on the continent .
 Undersea pipelines are practical in some areas, such as the Langeled pipeline from Norway to Great Britain . They face economic and technical limits over long distances .
 Secretary of the Secretary mentions vessel mission planning as a fuel cost reduction method . It was interesting to hear the Secretary mention vessel mission plans as a cost Reduction method .
Commercial shipping lines are correct to pay captains some incentive bonus to save fuel costs by using old-school knowledge of currents and wind . Prevailing currents deserve consideration.
 This is good for the Navy in peacetime when tour routes are known . But wartime cruises will be mission-dictated. This will be good for Navy when tour route is known .
 Commercial shippers also sometimes mount a large hard sail on a ship's bow so prevailing winds can reduce steaming costs . Commercial shipper also often mount a big hard sail to reduce steamed costs .
 A modern Navy ship would interfere with systems for guidance and fire control . That won't work on a modern ship as it would be a problem for the Navy .
 DLA Energy addresses multiple energy needs for its DOD customers . But I did not see them listed as participants in the Defense Energy Summit for 2013 or the defense Energy Technology Challenge for 2013 .
 DLA has tasked analysts to assess the national security impact of resource shortfalls . I know from personal experience that DLA is tasked with assessing the impact ofresource shortfalls.
 I hope DLA is part of the U.S. government's renewable energy effort, but hope is not a method . I hope it is part the United States government's energy effort .
 World shipping needs the U.S. Navy, and the Navy needs energy, says the Navy's chief executive .
 More demand from government purchase requirements leads to more industry capacity and more opportunities for green businesses .
 Contractors seeking government opportunities in smart grids, microgrids, and net-zero facilities should review the EPA's green regulation initiatives and SBA's green business guide .
 David M Kennedy presented The Modern American Military at the Commonwealth Club last year . I compared it to the notes I took when he presented the Military at Commonwealth Club .
 Bacevich accurately describes America's relationship with its citizen-soldiers after more than a decade of war against Islamic radicalism . The U.S. has been involved in the fight against Islamic radicals for more than 10 years .
 The Bacevich article could read very well as the follow-up to the Kennedy anthology . It could be a follow- up to the anthology .
 "One Percent" describes the resulting alienation of the American people from their military . Modern describes how the all-volunteer force allows the U.S. to conduct war with reduced accountability .
 Kennedy contrasted the high ratio of general officers whose children serve in uniform with the low ratio of Congress members whose children are in uniform . Kennedy, in his talk, said the ratio of children serving in uniform is low .
Anecdotally, I have observed a high degree of multigenerational service among officers below flag rank . Anecd Totally, he says, he has observed aHigh degree ofmultigeneration service among officer below flag ranks .
 The Society of the Cincinnati and other hereditary orders are the closest thing the U.S. has to an aristocratic nobility .
 I used to wonder whether those officers fortunate enough to perform duty in and around the Military District of Washington were able to leverage any hereditary connections during their careers . I used the question to wonder if those officers lucky enough to do so had any family connections .
 There's even a Hereditary Society Community to keep track of all these hereditary societies . There's also a He hereditary Society Community.
 The reception was held in Washington DC, of course .
 Trace your lineage to a hero of our past wars and you get invited to high tea with people who don't have to fight in our current wars .
 The all-volunteer force came into being after the Vietnam War, as Kennedy noted . American expeditionary deployments have indeed increased dramatically since the war began .
 Americans are simply no longer interested in being accountable for war . Americans are just no longer want to be responsible for war.
 It's just another spectator sport providing amusement to a passive public . It's not a spectator sport, it's just a spectator sports providing amusement .
 This fulfills the prophecy Samuel Huntington made in The Soldier and the State in the 1950s that the American people would become more traditionally conservative in their tolerance of a large defense establishment . This fulfilled the prophecy Huntington made.
 American "conservatism" today primarily conserves Wall Street's grasping ethic and the middle class' unfunded entitlements .
 Its liberal opposite is more like a Siamese twin, conserving and expanding every benefit program that progressive academics dreamed up . It's more like the Siamesese twin.
 TR Fehrenbach described in This Kind of War how liberals and conservatives checked each other's power during WWII and the Cold War .
 The balanced dynamic has given way to a Janus-faced pantomime of difference, regardless of partisan noises . The balance of difference has made the difference between the two sides .
 Americans could write the next chapter in their history but now prefer it to be ghostwritten .
 Americans want handouts and our plutocrats know how to keep us pacified . Americans want to be pacified by handouts .
 A people who lose interest in the burden of self-governance invite the entrance of actors who will lift the burden from their shrugging shoulders .
 Bacevich notes the entrenchment of wealth at the apex of society . Kennedy notes the military establishment's freedom of action in crafting policy .
 We will soon see whether plutocracy and stratocracy can co-exist in America . We will see if plutocrats and stratocrats will co-existence in America.
 The Founding Fathers' own aristocratic pretensions often go unnoticed . They intended the Electoral College to represent the nation's most enlightened beings .
 This article is dedicated to the memory of TR Fehrenbach, who died last month at the age of 88 .
 I will never forget reading This Kind of War while on active duty in South Korea in 1995 . I will not forget reading this kind of war while on duty in 1995.