 Poroshenko, worried he wouldn't meet Trump at all, downplayed his arrival in D.C., but pleased is with the administration's stance .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko met with U.S. Vice President Mike Pence and then, briefly, enjoyed a "drop-in" visit with President Trump .
 The brief visit appeared to be a departure for the Trump White House, which has been featuring one-on-one meetings with presidents big and small .
 Poroshenko slipped into Washington, keeping a low profile while he met with the Ukrainian diaspora .
 Poroshenko was not sure that he was going to get what he wanted, according to a source . The Ukrainian president is expected to visit with Trump .
 The visit was intentionally “kept very low key to avoid the embarrassment of not getting any face time, he said . The White House announced the visit on Monday, shortly after 10m.
 The Ukrainian leader's treatment is likely to be viewed back in Ukraine, and elsewhere in Europe, as a weather vane of sorts for the White House's stance toward Kiev and Russia’s military intervention there . Ukraine has been deadlocked since war began in 2014 .
 80 percent of Ukrainians nationwide and 73 percent of those in the “war-torn Donbas region’s region” should indeed remain as Ukraine .
 His campaign manager used to work for Viktor Yanukovych, the former Ukrainian president and friend of Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Former Vice President Joe Biden was tasked with spearheading engagement with Kiev . He also wielded great influence over the Ukrainian government .
 Pence as the new point person for Poroshenko and the administration’s stance on Ukraine do not mark much of a radical departure from previous policy, says Matthew Rojansky .
 Obama-era stance on Ukraine seems to be in line with Obama's stance on Russia . Moscow has been dealing with Moscow since its annexation of Crimea in 2014 .
 The Senate recently passed new economic sanctions against Russia . It's still to be seen if they’ll make it past the House .
 The Treasury Department announced new sanctions of its own on Tuesday . But even if they don’t, the new sanctions will come, the Treasury Department says .
 To date, the U.S. adopts additional sanctions almost every day . The United States adopts more sanctions almost each day .
 Poroshenko says the U.S. is a "solid, reliable and strategic partner of Ukraine’s Ukraine"
 Scrutiny over Trump's relationship with the Kremlin remains intense . Poroshenko's treatment during his visit will invite comparison to Trump’s backslapping meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov .
 Poroshenko has run into no small amount of criticism for what failing to make good on the latter . The Ukrainian president has been criticized for what he has not done .
 Poroshenko saw Trump before Putin will. But then, there is at least one feather in Poroshenko’s cap .
 The Ukrainian leader's visit came ahead of Trump's first scheduled meeting with Putin at the G-20 summit in Hamburg .