 The protests continued for months and their scope widened, with calls for the resignation of Yanukovych and the Azarov Government . The protests continue for months .
 Protesters opposed what they saw as widespread government corruption and abuse of power . They also saw the influence of oligarchs, police brutality, and violation of human rights .
 Following this, protesters occupied government buildings throughout the country .
 Thousands of protesters advanced towards parliament, led by activists with shields and helmets, and were fired on by police snipers .
 On 21 February, an agreement between President Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition was signed . The agreement called for an interim unity government, constitutional reforms and early elections .
 The following day, police withdrew from central Kyiv, which came under effective control of the protesters . Police withdrew from Kyiv.
 Yanukovych said this vote was illegal and possibly coerced, and asked Russia for help . Yanukovych said that this vote is illegal and may have been coerced .
 Russia considered the overthrow of Yanukovych to be an illegal coup, and did not recognize the interim government . Russia considers the overthrow to be a illegal coup and does not recognize it .
 Widespread protests occurred in eastern and southern Ukraine, where Yanukovych previously received strong support in the 2010 presidential election .
Russian military intervention, the annexation of Crimea by Russia, and the creation of the self-proclaimed breakaway states in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia initiated a full-scale invasion of the country in 2022 . This sparked the Donbas War, and culminated with Russia initiating an invasion in 2022. This led to the Don Bas War .
 The interim government, led by Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the EU association agreement and disbanded the Berkut . The Berkut was formed by the interim government .
 The new government restored the 2004 amendments to the Ukrainian constitution that had been controversially repealed as unconstitutional in 2010 . The government also initiated a large-scale purge of civil servants associated with the overthrown regime .
 The European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement has been signed by the European Union . The agreement was signed in a bid to secure a deal between the EU and Ukraine .
 The government of president Viktor Yanukovych had been negotiating an association agreement with the European Union since 2012 . The government has been negotiating with the EU since 2012.
 Ukraine was Ukraine's biggest trade partner with Russia at the time . Such comprehensive trade agreement with the EU would have impacted Ukraine's trade agreements .
 Yanukovych said he intended to enter the agreement, but continued to postpone it . Yanukovych believed that the complications could be addressed, and he believed that he would enter it .
 This was interpreted as an attempt to back out of signing this agreement . This led to a wave of protests which came to be known as the "Euromaidan" movement .
 Prime Minister Mykola Azarov had asked for €20 billion in loans and aid . Azarov has asked for $20 billion.
 The EU was willing to offer €610 million in loans, but Russia was offering $15 billion in loans . Russia was also willing to pay $15billion, as well as cheaper gas prices .
 Russia did not stipulate regulatory or legal adjustment of such nature or scale . In addition, the EU demanded major changes to Ukraine's regulations and laws .
Yanukovych was widely disliked in Ukraine's west but had some support in the east . His native Russian is much more spoken, and in the south . Russia also applied economic pressure on Ukraine .
 The rallies were initially peaceful but became violent in January 2014 after parliament passed laws intended to repress the protests . The rallies became violent after parliament, dominated by Yanukovych's supporters.
In the lead-up to the February revolution an amnesty agreement was made with protesters wherein they would be spared criminal charges in exchange for leaving occupied buildings . The European Union and the United States urged Yanukovych to negotiate a peaceful end to the conflict .
 Kyiv's City Hall was also released back to government control on 16 February . The demonstrators vacated all occupied Regional State Administration buildings .
 A period of relative calm in the anti-government demonstrations in Kyiv ended abruptly on 18 February 2014, when protesters and police clashed .
 At least 82 people were killed over the next few days, including 13 policemen . More than 1,100 people were injured. At least 13 policemen were killed .
 On 18 February, some 20,000 Euromaidan protesters advanced on the Verkhovna Rada in support of restoring the Constitution of Ukraine to its 2004 form . The 2004 form had been repealed by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shortly after Yanukovych was elected president .
 The confrontation turned violent, citing correspondents, reported that each side blamed the other .
 Police fired both rubber bullets and live ammunition . They also used tear gas and flash grenades in an attempt to repel thousands of demonstrators .
 Police stormed the main protest camp on Maidan Nezalezhnosti and overran parts of the square . Police officers stormed the protest camp.
 The Trade Unions Building, which served as Euromaidan headquarters, was burned down . The building was built in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Political commentators suggested that Ukraine was on the brink of a civil war . Ukraine is currently on the verge of civil war.
 Some areas, including Lviv Oblast, declared themselves politically independent of the central government . Some areas have declared themselves political independent .
On 19 February, the authorities instituted police checkpoints, restrictions on public transportation, and school closures in Kyiv . On 20 February, Internal Affairs Minister Vitaliy Zakharchenko announced he had signed a decree authorising the use of live ammunition against protesters .
 Central Kyiv saw the worst violence yet, and the death toll in 48 hours of clashes rose to 77 . At least 77 people were killed in the clashes .
 Volodymyr Rybak announced next day that he had signed a parliamentary decree condemning the use of force and urging all institutions to cease immediately .
 President Yanukovych signed a compromise deal with opposition leaders on 21 February . On 21 February, President Yanukovych agreed to a deal with Opposition leaders .
 It promised constitutional changes to restore certain powers to parliament and called for early elections to be held by December . It also called for elections in December .
 On 21 February, a bill to remove Yanukovych was introduced in parliament . The bill is expected to be introduced in Parliament .
On 22 February, the protesters were reported to be in control of Kyiv . On the same day, Yanukovych left for Kharkiv .
 A warrant for the arrest of Yanukovych was issued by the new government on 24 February . The new government issued a warrant for Yanukovych's arrest in February .
 Russian nationalist politicians and activists organised rallies in Crimea . They urged Russia to help defend the region from advancing "fascists" from the rest of Ukraine .
 The Kyiv Metro stopped all service because of a terrorist threat . On 18 February at 16:00, the Kyiv metro was stopped because of the threat .
 Protesters building a barricade Trucks that had been carrying troops were burned in Kyiv's city center on 18 February . Initial clashes broke out when protesters started building barricade .
 The night before the clashes, Right Sector called on all of its members to ready themselves for a ""peace offensive" on 18 February .
 The Maidan People's Union urged all concerned citizens to take part in the "peace offensive" Student unions had agreed to join as well as student unions .
 The Maidan Union reported on the morning of 18 February that columns of protesters would begin a march on parliament at 08:30.30.
 Around 20,000 demonstrators marched on the parliament building as that body was set to consider opposition demands for a new constitution .
 demonstrators break through the police barricade near the Central Officers' Club of Ukraine .
 The clashes started after some two dozen demonstrators moved a police vehicle blocking their path to parliament .
 Police armed with Fort-500T shotguns had begun to attack with flash and stun grenades from Shovkovychna Street and Lypska Street .
 There were reports that the number of protesters had swelled to 50,000 . There were also reports that there had been more protesters .
 At 10:18, explosions and smoke were seen on Instytutska Street . People tear up roadway paving blocks .
 Protesters started to throw pavement blocks at the police, while officers tried to subdue the crowd with stun grenades . Officers defended themselves with shields and stun grenades.
 Protesters barricaded themselves near Dynamo Stadium colonnade began setting fire to tires . Protesters had been barricaded near the stadium.
 At about 10:30, parliament was set to vote on whether to restore the 2004 constitution . The 2004 constitution was created in 2004 .
 Chairman Rybak did not register the bill . However, it did not happen as he did not sign the bill.
 At 10.33, the street fights between protesters and the police shifted to Shovkovychna Street .
 Protesters in Mariinskyi Park started to wave banknotes in the face of some of Yanukovych's police forces . They said that they were mercenaries. Protesters said they were protesting against Yanukovych's government .
 An activist, Oleksandr Aronets, reported that snipers were targeting civilians .
Molotov cocktails were thrown by the protesters, and on Shovkovnycha Street, a barricade of dump trucks was set on fire . By 11.00, protesters had sustained serious wounds .
 A barricade burning outside the headquarters of the internal defence forces in Lviv, caused by mass protests .
 At 11.30, protesters set fire to the building . The journalist Tetyana Chornovol was among the protesters .
 Two persons died as a result, including a programmer who worked at the headquarters of the company . Two people were killed in the incident .
 Minister of Healthcare Raisa Bohatyriova escaped unharmed at Mariinskyi Park .
 One protester with a head wound told the Kyiv Post that charging police officers had "smashed everybody" in their path .
 Four officers on Instytutska Street were stationed atop a building, lobbing stun grenades at the crowd . Protesters stormed the building and set part of it on fire .
 The protesters forced their way to the roof, forcing the police to retreat .
 Building on Instytutska Street was described as the scene of the day's most violent clashes .
 Berkut and Internal Troops servicemen opened a full-scale assault, firing directly into the crowd . The attack was carried out by Berkut, Internal Troop servicemen .
 By mid-afternoon, police officers using tear gas drove as many as 10,000 protesters from Mariinskyi Park . barricades had been built earlier in the day .
Multiple news outlets published photographs showing the police armed with AK-74 assault rifles . Other anti-government activists tried to keep the pro-government and anti- government forces apart .
 Former Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs Hennadiy Moskal speculated that they were Alpha Group units . Former Deputy Prime Minister of the Internal Affairs said they wereAlpha Group units.
 Berkut leader Vladimir Krashevsky says armed police officers in black with yellow armbands were part of a Berkut unit that had been deployed to help evacuate interior troops .
 At 15.45, hundreds of riot police officers advanced toward parliament, attacking protesters . At 15:45, police officers attacked protesters outside parliament .
 Riot police threw bricks down the hill at protesters from a bridge along Instytutska Street . The October Palace is visible from Independence Square .
 Protesters lit tires, threw and launched Molotov cocktails, bars of steel and other projectiles at lines of Berkut police . Breach of Hrushevskogo Street Barricade occurred on February 18 .
 At 17.04, armed Berkut untied the wire at the Mykhaila Hrushevskogo Street barricade gate near Dynamo Stadium .
 EuroMaidan protesters were watching a drone hovering from the opposite direction . Their backs turned to the police .
 Hundreds of Berkut began throwing grenades, two of which injured U.S. photographer Mark Estabrook and countless others .
 Euromaidan protesters and civilians began a mass retreat toward the next gate in a barricade on Khreschatyk Street . Protesters and civilians started to retreat towards the next gates .
50 unknown or presumably Pro-Russian assailants were trying to break into the Canadian embassy . There were many injuries and several deaths .
 In 2015, the embassy had deliberately opened its gates after spotting a Canadian passport-wielding EuroMaidan protester being chased by Berkut .
 A deluge of EuroMaidan protesters stormed the embassy and occupied the main lobby, using the embassy as a safe haven from Berkut .
 The embassy was used to treat the wounded during the evening of February 18 . The embassy is located in the United States .
 EuroMaidan protesters later left the embassy voluntarily, leaving flowers .
 Canada played an intentional and deliberate role in enabling EuroMaidan protesters . Unnamed European allies later asserted, that Canada played a deliberate role .
 Contemporary media sources argue that Stephen Harper never acknowledged the true extent of the security breach .
 Police advanced on thousands of protesters on Maidan Nezalezhnosti with guns, water cannon, and armored personnel carrier .
 The TV channel 5 Kanal's broadcast was shut down countrywide but remained available via satellite and a live feed on YouTube . Protesters stacked tires and other burning debris to create a wall of fire between themselves and security forces .
 Kyiv's Trade Unions building, used as Euromaidan headquarters, on fire after a police raid .
 The police broke through the protesters' barricades on the eastern side of the square .
 street lights were switched off around the square at 01:35 the next morning .
 Activists believed that this heralded the beginning of a decisive assault . The activists believed this was the start of an assault .
 Opposition leader Vitali Klitschko told Hromadske TV that the talks had not been successful . Opposition leaders met with President Yanukovych on Monday .
 opposition leaders had listened for more than an hour to Yanukovych's claims that they were to blame for 20 deaths on 18 February . Klitschko said that opposition leaders have listened for over an hour.
 The president demanded that the opposition force the protesters to leave Maidan Nezalezhnosti . The president also demanded that they leave the protesters .
 Yanukovych reportedly threatened opposition leaders with criminal prosecution . He said if they did not do so, he would "talk differently" with them .
 The Security Service of Ukraine launched an "anti-terrorist" operation . The intelligence services began investigating unnamed politicians over what was described as an illegal attempt to seize power .
 Olena Lukash announced that the opposition had refused to sign a declaration disapproving of radical measures . In the early morning, Lukash said the opposition would not sign the declaration .
 President Yanukovych demanded that the opposition stop occupying buildings and seizing arms . The opposition, however, would not concede .
 Pavlo Lebedyev acknowledged that he had sent some airborne troops from Dnipropetrovsk to Kyiv .
 Ciphered telegrams were discovered in which Yuriy Ilyin gave direct orders to deploy military units . A military An-26 made a secret flight from Kyiv to Russia to pick up anti-riot weapons and ammunition . This only became known in 2015 .
Right Sector occupied the Kyiv Central Post Office and the State Committee for Television and Radio . By 14:50, about 5,000 remained on the square .
 protesters burning tires near Kyiv Conservatory to obscure snipers' visibility . Protesters burning tires to obscure sniper's visibility .
 President Yanukovych fired the chief of the general staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, Volodymyr Zamana . He replaced him with Ilyin, who was previously the commander of the Ukraine Navy .
 Ministry of Defence redeploys units around the country to guard military facilities . Ministry of Defense announced that it was redeploying units to guard facilities .
 Both sides declared a truce after meeting between government and opposition leaders . Both sides agreed to start negotiations late at night .
 The truce included a pledge from Yanukovych not to launch a police assault that night . Right Sector did not agree to the truce .
 Yanukovych declares 20 February a day of mourning for those killed in clashes . Activists claim to have torn a patch from the uniform of a Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs soldier .
 Protesters at Independence Square continued to hear gunshots, despite the ceasefire agreement .
Yakymenko blamed Ukraine's current Euromaidan government, claiming they were responsible for hiring snipers .
 Protesters accused the police of starting the conflict by throwing Molotov cocktails and improvised explosive devices .
Security forces tried to set fire to Kyiv Conservatory, which was being used as a field hospital for wounded protesters . At 09:25, protesters pushed the Berkut back to the October Palace .
 Euromaidan protesters marched on the police with shields and Molotov cocktails and forced them to retreat . They captured up to 67 police officers, capturing up to 70 officers .
 Law enforcement personnel were captured while sleeping in the Ukrainian House and during clashes on barricades near the October Palace .
 Many of the men were only 18 or 19 years old, and were armed only with rubber truncheons . Many were not trained, and many were not even trained .
 The captured police were from Crimea, the central-eastern cities Dnipropetrovsk and Kryvyi Rih, and eastern Luhansk .
 There were more than 30,000 people on Independence Square, UNIAN correspondent says .
 Andriy Klyuev announced that the president was prepared to sign a treaty with the opposition on the demanded changes to the Constitution of Ukraine . The president said the ongoing clashes should compel politicians to find a quick consensus .
 Euromaidan's activists picketed the main office at the Kyiv Metro station Politekhnichnyi Instytut . They demanded that the system be reopened .
Former head of Kyiv City State Administration, Ivan Saliy, also called for the reopening of the metro . Saliy was also a former head of the Kyiv State Administration .
 The Titushky were transported by metro from the Pozniaky station to Pecherska station, Lvivska Gazeta reported .
 Trains between Kyiv and Lviv, one of the protesters' strongholds, were temporarily suspended . A railway spokeswoman said this was because of damage to the lines .
 By 15.00, the metro was still not running, and ground-based transport in the city was scarce . By 15:00, it was not running .
Radio Liberty published video footage of police special forces shooting protesters with Kalashnikov and sniper rifles . The metro was partly reopened in the early evening, but interchange stations remained closed .
 The ministry further stated that a sniper had injured 20 of its police officers .
 The Euromaidan self-defense force had repeatedly urged protesters not to go outside the square's perimeter .
 Three visiting EU foreign ministers were due to meet with President Yanukovych to push for a compromise with the Ukrainian opposition . The clashes erupted shortly before the meeting .
 The European Union introduced a visa ban and a financial asset freeze against those responsible for the violence in Ukraine . A ban on export to Ukraine of equipment that could be used for repression .
 Lawmakers barred chiefs and commanders of the Interior Troops, the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the SBU, and other government agencies from carrying out any counter-terrorism operations because they violated the Constitution of Ukraine .
 Kyiv ordered to stop blocking roads and bridges, squares and streets in Kyiv and other cities and towns . They were also ordered toStop blocking roads, bridges and squares in other cities .
 Several scholars discussed the possibility of Russian intervention in Crimea specifically . The Crimea region has a unique geopolitical nature and demographics .
 Lieutenant-General Yuri Dumansky resigned because he disagreed with the involvement of the army in the conflict . The Armed Forces' deputy chief of staff resigned because of the conflict.
 10 BTRs had departed from Kozachia Bay, where the Black Sea Fleet of Russia is based, escorted by DAI vehicles .
 The Security Service of Ukraine officially ended its ""preparations for antiterrorist operation" on 19 February . Meanwhile, the entire police force of Radekhiv joined the protesters in Kyiv .
 A compromise deal was agreed to on 21 February after hours of negotiations led by European Union mediators and Foreign Ministers .
 Another bill made changes to the Criminal Code, allowing for the release of Yulia Tymoshenko . The bill also made changes in the criminal code .
 Parliament also adopted a resolution late that evening that ordered all Interior Ministry troops and police officers to return to their barracks . The resolution was passed late that night .
 Agreement after Right Sector activists stand in front of a Belarusian opposition movement flag . Belarusian government and Belarusian authorities have agreed to a deal .
 He called for the "people's revolution" to continue until power had been completely removed from the governing authorities . He said the revolution should continue until the power was completely removed .
 Euromaidan leader Andriy Parubiy insisted that elections be held as soon as possible . He also reiterated that one of the main demands of protesters had been the resignation of President Yanukovych .
 The summer home of pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk was set on fire . Hundreds of riot police officers guarding the presidential compound and nearby government buildings had vanished .
 The riot police had begun withdrawing early in the morning because they feared that Yanukovych's government would pin the responsibility for the violence on them . Protesters stole around 1,200 pistols and Kalashnikov rifles from the police on 18 February .
 Deputy Interior Minister Viktor Dubovik ordered the riot police to leave the city . It is unclear where this order originated .
 Opposition member Serhiy Pashynsky arranged escorts out of city for more than 5,000 officers, Interior Ministry forces, and other special forces .
 Parliament Chairman Volodymyr Rybak submitted his resignation in parliament on 22 February . He cited illness as reason for resignation .
Opposition leader Oleksandr Turchynov was elected chairman of Parliament, acting president and prime minister of Ukraine . The decision also violated the Constitution, according to which the impeached President was to be succeeded by the Prime Minister Serhiy Arbuzov .
 Prosecutor Pshonka and Minister of Revenues Oleksandr Klymenko were stopped at the Russian border while trying to flee the country .
 Yanukovych also tried to flee via a charter flight from Donetsk, but was stopped by border guards . State Border Service says Yanukovych tried to fly from Donetsk to Donetsk .
 Yanukovych then left by armored car, and his subsequent whereabouts were unknown . His subsequent whereabouts are unknown .
 Former Interior Minister Zakharchenko also tried to fly out of Donetsk and was similarly turned back .
 Journalist Tetyana Chornovol speculated that he was actually trying to flee on his private yacht, also in Sevastopol .
 On the same day, Yanukovych and Zakharchenko were declared internationally wanted . On the day, Ukraine's president was declared international wanted .
 Criminal proceedings were launched in 20 February killings of Euromaidan demonstrators . The killings took place in February.
 Yanukovych, Andriy Kliuyev, Zakharchenko, Yakymenko and Stanislav Shuliak are declared suspects in the case . The former head of the presidential administration and former Prosecutor General Pshonka are among those declared suspects .
 Yulia Tymoshenko was released from prison and addressed more than 100,000 people on Independence Square . She was released on 22 February .
 Arsen Avakov appointed as acting interior minister . The same day, parliament appointed ArsenAvakov as acting Interior minister .
 Lawmakers also ousted Viktor Pshonka as general prosecutor of Ukraine in a no-confidence vote . The law had given the Russian, Romanian, and Hungarian languages the official status of regional languages in some areas .
 acting president said he would not sign the bill until new legislation protecting minority languages was developed . However, this measure was later vetoed by the acting president .
 Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara, Health Minister Raisa Bogatyrova, and Education Minister Dmytro Tabachnyk dismissed . The same day, parliament dismissed Foreign MinisterLeonid KozHara and Health MinisterRaisa Bog at the same day .
 Warrants were issued for former Incomes Minister Oleksandr Klymenko and former Prosecutor General Pshonka .
Kyiv Metro became fully operational again, including the reopening of the Maidan Nezalezhnosti station . Parliament also passed amendments restoring its power to appoint and dismiss judges .
 Valentyn Nalyvaichenko appointed as head of the Security Service of Ukraine . Oleksandr Yakymenko was dismissed from the post on Monday .
On Tuesday, acting President Turchynov called for the formation of a national unity government by Thursday . Seventy-seven of its MPs had left the faction over the past few days .
 The cabinet was formed as a coalition of the parties Batkivschyna, UDAR and Svoboda and other independent MPs . The coalition was formed by the parties Economic Development and Sovereign European Ukraine .
All political prisoners, including the father and son in the Pavlichenko criminal case, have been released . Five judges of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, appointed from parliament's quota, were terminated for violating their oath .
 Lawmakers also offered to dismiss two judges appointed by Ukraine's president . Council of Judges of Ukraine to convene an extraordinary congress within three days to consider dismissing five judges .
 The People's Deputies of Ukraine were guilty of adopting a decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine on the procedure of introducing constitutional amendments . In the same resolution, parliament assigned the prosecutor general of Ukraine to begin criminal proceedings against all judges .
On 27 February, judges of the Constitutional Court sent a letter to European organizations, international organizations, and human rights institutions questioning the constitutionality of the parliamentary resolution . Yanukovych was accused of having stolen $70 billion from the state budget .
 Former Prime Minister Mykola Azarov was placed on the international wanted list for alleged abuse of power . Azarov is accused of abusing the power of the Russian government .
 Yanukovych attended a press conference in southern Russia on 28 February . Yanukovych answered questions from mostly Russian reporters .
 The Ukrainian National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting instructed all cable operators to stop transmitting a number of Russian channels .
 Ehor Sobolev was nominated to lead the Committee on Lustration in the new Yatsenyuk government .
 The law on lustration affected up to a million people . The law excluded from government most officials who had worked in the Yanukovych administration .
 The Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group called it "unreasonable" and a "serious, systematic violations of human rights" Among other reasons, it meant too many people would lose their jobs, including officials who could not be replaced .
 Berkut dissolved on 25 February, acting Interior Minister Avakov signed a decree dissolving the Berkut .
 Russia announced that the Crimean Berkut unit would preserve its name as it was incorporated into the Russian Interior Ministry . In March, Russia announced the unit's name would be preserved .
 The pro-Russian Ukrainian Front organisation held a meeting on 22 February with representatives from southern and eastern Ukraine .
Organiser says group intended to discuss the federalisation of the country into semi-autonomous regions .
 Yanukovych flew from Kyiv to Kharkiv to attend the Ukrainian Front congress . Sources indicated that Berkut forces had gathered inKharkiv in anticipation of the event .
 The SBU opened criminal proceedings against Governor Mikhail Dobkin of Kharkiv and Mayor Hennadiy Kernes . The deputies passed a resolution declaring that they were ready to take responsibility for protecting constitutional order in their territory .
Recent events in Kyiv had paralyzed the central government and destabilised the country . They stated that the recent events had paralyzed the government .
On 23 February, parliament adopted a bill to repeal the country's law on minority languages . Governor Dobkin and Mayor Kernes then fled to Russia .
Also on 23 February, clashes erupted in Kharkiv between pro and anti-government rallies . Mayor Kernes was blocked from entering the City Council building . Acting President Turchynov vetoed the bill on 28 February .
Pro-Russian protesters stood guard over the statue of Vladimir Lenin in the city center in Kharkiv, Donetsk . The city will dismantle the statue regardless on 25 February .
 Most people in Ukraine's eastern regions considered all levels of the government illegitimate . Public surveys in April revealed that most people in the eastern region considered alllevels of thegovernment illegitimate .
 Roughly half held the same opinion about the central government led by Prime Minister Yatsenyuk .
Nearly 70% agreed that Yanukovych was also not the legal president of the country . However, nearly 70% agree that Yanukovych is also not legal president .
 Putin requested and received authorization from the Russian parliament to deploy troops to Ukraine in response to the crisis . On the same day, Putin requested the deployment of troops.
 Russian troops mobilized throughout Crimea and the southeast of Ukraine . Russian troops accordingly mobilized throughout the Crimea region .
 The monument to the Russian field marshal Mikhail Kutuzov was demolished in the city of Brody in western Ukraine .
 The militant group Right Sector was blamed for much of the destruction . It was also blamed for the destruction of the buildings .
 A statue honouring Soviet soldiers was removed from the western Ukrainian city of Stryi . In addition, a statue of Soviet soldiers has been removed from city.
 In early December 2013, unknown activists partially painted in red and black a statue honouring the workers of the Arsenal factory in Kyiv .
On 28 February, a monument dedicated to Soviet forces who fought in World War II was vandalized and painted with nationalistic slogans . Both in the city of Dnipropetrovsk, both in Afghanistan, were vandalized .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry described the targeting of Russianand Soviet-built monuments as "Russophobic vandalism" and an "outrage" It demanded that it be stopped .
 In May 2014, the International Monetary Fund disbursed US$3.2 billion to stabilise Ukraine . The IMF has spent $3.3 billion to stabilize Ukraine .
 The European Union required Ukraine to secure this aid package from the IMF in order to obtain about 1.6 billion euros pledged under the recently signed Ukraine-EU Association Agreement .
 UEFA announced that it had decided to change the venue of the 2013–14 UEFA Europa League Round of 32 match between Dynamo Kyiv and Valencia from Olympic Stadium in Kyiv to GSP Stadium, in Nicosia, Cyprus . Dynamo Kyiv held a minute of silence for
 The second part of the 2013–14 Ukrainian Premier League was suspended because of the situation in the country . Three HC Donbass home KHL playoff games were moved from Donetsk's Druzhba Arena to Slovnaft Arena in Slovakia .
 The Slovak team returned to Donetsk for the sixth game of the series against Lev Praha . The team played Game 7 of their first-round series against Dinamo Riga and Games 3 and 4 in the second round .
 The First Yatsenyuk Government signed on 21 March 2014 the European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement with the DCFTA to be signed after the presidential election in May 2014 .
 The General Prosecutor's Office initially replied that all information about the deaths was a state secret . When Newsweek approached the office about the death, the office initially said that all the information about them was a secret .
 The prosecutor's office later said that four of the deaths were being investigated as murders . A suspect was also charged with murder in a fifth case, the office said .
 List of people killed during the 2014 Ukrainian revolution. A memorial in Kyiv is located in the city of Kyiv .
 Those hospitalised included three minors, five journalists, and 79 police officers . Those hospitalized include three minors and five journalists .
 In the early afternoon, Kyiv Post journalists reported a further eight bodies on Khreshchatyk Street . The bodies were found in the early hours of the morning .
 The Kyiv City State Administration reported 67 deaths based on the number of bodies delivered to forensics .
 The Ministry of Healthcare reported 75 deaths since the start of the conflict . The ministry of Healthcare said 75 deaths have been reported since the conflict began .
Officials intercepted a telephone call between Estonia's foreign minister and U.S. official Catherine Ashton . Paet relayed a doctor's testimony that the sniper killings of protesters and Berkut troops had been committed by the same people .
 The current minister of internal affairs, Avakov, and the chairman of the SBU, Nalivaichenko, were protecting the personnel who actually planned and carried out the killings, he said .
On 31 March 2014, The Daily Beast published photos and videos showing that the snipers were members of the SBU's ""anti-terrorist"" Alpha unit who had been trained in Russia . Avakov said that the conflict had been provoked by a ""non-Ukrainian"" third party
 The media suggested that it was not the Ukrainian riot police who fired on the protesters, as previously believed . Members of the Alpha team are Ukrainian citizens .
 The perception that Yanukovych was trying to establish closer ties with Russia played a major role in the protests . Russia–Ukraine relations are a key part of the Ukraine protests .
 Yanukovych accepted $2 billion out of a $15 billion package from Russia . This was interpreted as a sign that he would seek close ties with Putin .
 Russian officials had been pressuring the Ukrainian administration to take decisive action to crush the protests . Police assault on Euromaidan protesters was ordered hours after the $2 billion from Russia was transferred .
 Several government ministers from across Europe blamed Russia for exacerbating the violence . A retired colonel of the Main Intelligence Directorate of Russia said Ukraine could not exist as an independent, sovereign state .
 Former Deputy Interior Minister Hennadiy Moskal says Russian officials served as advisers to the operations against protesters .
Code-named "Wave" and "Boomerang" operations involved the use of snipers to disperse crowds and capture the protesters' headquarters in the House of Trade Unions .
 Before some police officers defected, the plans included the deployment of 22,000 combined security troops in Kyiv .
 The former first deputy of the Russian GRU stayed at the Kyiv Hotel, according to documents . He was paid by the Security Services of Ukraine, the documents say .
 authenticity of documents could not be confirmed, according to Reuters .
 Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev of Russia said that Yanukovych needed to stop behaving like a "doormat" He said further loan installments would be withheld .
 Russia's Foreign Ministry issued a statement urging Ukrainians to "crack down on the extremists who are trying to get established in power" Medvedev refused to recognise Ukraine's provisional government as legitimate .
 Valentyn Nalyvaichenko, the interim head of the Security Service of Ukraine, said agents had been stationed in Kyiv throughout the Euromaidan protests . They had been provided with ""state telecommunications"" while residing at an SBU compound .
 Investigators established that Yanukovych's SBU chief, Oleksandr Yakymenko, had received reports from FSB agents stationed in Ukraine . He later fled the country .
 The FSB rejected the claims as "groundless accusations" and otherwise refused to comment . The F SB rejected these claims as ""groundless accusation"
 Ukraine will make Europe better and Europe will make Ukraine better, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine will be better than Europe and Europe, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The Ukrainian government is trying to bring about a peaceful transition. What we're trying to do is try to stop the violence and give the Ukrainian people what they unfortunately have not had, with different revolutions that have taken place .
 This is a grassroots revolution here – it's been peaceful except when the government tried to crack down on them, and the government hasn't tried that since . This is the first time the government has tried to cracked down on the movement .
I'm praising their ability and their desire to demonstrate peacefully for change that I think they deserve. I'm praising them for their willingness to demonstrate peaceful for change, I'm also praising their desire for change .
 "I don't think you could view this as anything other than our traditional support for people who want free and democratic society. These people love the United States of America, they love freedom," he says .
 I just think Klitsch going in… he's going to be at that level working for Yatseniuk, it's just not going to work. I just thinks Klitsch will go in, he's not going in. I'm just thinking Klitsch is going in, it
 Nuland was also recorded in the same conversation saying, ""Fuck the EU,"" dismissively referring to slow-moving European efforts to address political paralysis and a looming fiscal crisis in Ukraine . Nul and was also heard saying, "F*** the EU"
 Last Chief of Staff of Yanukovych ordered separate army units to suppress Maidan .
 Crimean speaker in Moscow threatens annexation of the Crimea to Russia Archived 13 April 2014 .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Crimea is ready for separation of peninsula in the case of Ukraine Archived 13 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine .
 Moscow moved in hours after Moscow gave Ukraine $2 billion in aid which it had been holding back to demand decisive action to crush the protests .
 Moscow announced it would pay the next $2-billion tranche before the fighting began . The Kremlin unsubtly pushed Mr Yanukovych to use force to clear the fortified tent city .
 A leaked tape of Victoria Nuland has been released . The Guardian, 14 Dec.13, was published on Sunday .
 In recording of United States diplomat, blunt talk on Ukraine, The Washington Post, 6 February 2014 .