 The Ukrainian ships were en route from Odessa to Mariupol through the Kerch Strait . They were detained by officers of the Federal Security Service of Russian Federation .
 During the detention, Russian border guards used life-threatening violence, according to reports .
 The coast guard boat of the Russian Federation rammed a Ukrainian tug. As a result, the coast guard vessel rammed the tug .
 All three Ukrainian vessels were seized together with a crew of 23 people and taken to the port of Kerch, located on the territory of the occupied Crimea on the Crimean Peninsula . Six Ukrainian seamen were wounded.
 Spokesman for the President of the Russian Federation announced the opening of criminal proceedings against detained sailors on charges of illegally crossing the border .
 This incident became a turning point in the Azov conflict, which has been mounting over the past few months . The two countries have been involved in the conflict for several months .
 Russian side strengthened its military presence in the waters of the Sea of Azov . Despite the existing international treaties ensuring unhindered access of the two countries to their ports .
 Arbitrary detentions of Ukrainian ships, as well as the emergence of new military equipment, were regarded by many Ukrainian and international experts as a deliberate escalation of the conflict .
 The collision in the waters of the Azov Sea was the first case of open aggression of Russia against Ukraine .
 The armed conflict between the parties began in 2014 with the illegal annexation of Crimea . Earlier Russia did not commit acts of military aggression against Ukraine under its own flag .
 Andreas Umland, a German political analyst, is an expert of the Euro-Atlantic Cooperation Institute specializing in Russian ultra-nationalism and authoritarianism . Umland identifies three possible reasons why such an escalation could occur right now .
 The first and most common version is a decrease in Putin’s rating and the need to divert attention from socio-economic problems with yet another demonstration of power . The first, most common versions of Putin's rating are a decrease.
 The second possible reason is the existence of the project on turning the Sea of Azov into the inner Russian sea and the desire to negatively affect the Ukrainian economy by the blockade of ports in Berdyansk and Mariupol .
 The construction of the brand-new Kerch Bridge is allegedly shifted . The third possible reason concerns the news that the construction is allegedly shifting .
 A new attack could have been undertaken in order to divert attention from the news damaging the reputation of Russian authorities .
 The situation should be looked at much wider than just the conflict between the two neighboring countries . Mikhail Gonchar, director of the Centre for Global Studies ‘Strategy XXI,’ says .
 Russia claims the leading world position and in every way demonstrates to the west its strength, checking the limits of what is permitted . Russia claims to the world position.
 Mikhail also cites a recent example of failures in the GPS navigation system in Norway and Finland . The Norwegian frigate rammed the Finnish tanker during NATO exercises in Norway .
 Presidents of both countries say GPS-interference from the Russian side was the reason .
 Mikhail Gonchar claims that Ukraine in this chain of events is just an element of a more global policy of Russia’s aggression against the West .
 Russia accused Ukraine of provocation and violation of the state borders of the Russian Federation . An emergency session of the UN Security Council took place on November 26 .
 UN Security Council calls on Russia to immediately release the detained Ukrainian sailors and return the vessels to Ukraine . The member states of the UN Security council expressed their deepest concern about the events .
 The NATO Secretary General, as well as the President of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, expressed their full support for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine . The OSCE parliamentary Assembly also expressed their support for Ukraine .
 The IMF says it would not stop cooperating with Ukraine even if martial law was introduced . The International Monetary Fund says it will not stop cooperation with Ukraine .
 The Russian side violated the basic principles of the U.N. concerning the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations . By its actions, the Russian side violates the basic principle of the United Nations .
 The provisions of Section 2 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as Art. of the Treaty between Russia and Ukraine on cooperation in the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait were also violated .
 The Russian Federation is a permanent member of the UN Security Council . It has the right to veto its decisions, bringing Russia to justice becomes a rather difficult task .
 Other UN member states have the legal tools for a peaceful resolution of the current situation in the framework of existing international law .
 New approaches to international practice have not yet been applied in international practice . This would require extraordinary efforts and the development of new approaches .
 It is entirely possible, under rule 9, to convene an emergency session of the UN General Assembly . Under rule 9. It is also possible, if necessary, to hold a session under the rule 9 .
 The Russian side would be obliged to abstain from voting in the Security Council on the issue of resolving this dispute . If the GA recognizes the fact of a material violation of the basic UN principles and the fact that Russia is a party to the conflict, then guided by paragraph 3 of Art
 23 detained Ukrainian sailors fall under the status of prisoners of war . “no physical or moral torture or any other coercive measures’ can be applied to them.
 At the same time, the detainees are in the status of suspects who have allegedly committed a criminal offense . Most likely, they are subjected to cruel, degrading and inhuman treatment .
 Many experts question Ukraine's use of international legal means in Ukraine . They question their effectiveness in comparison with economic tools .
 Mikhail Gonchar believes that the so-called collective West has to take decisive consolidated actions necessary in order to break the chain of illegal actions of Russia . Gonchar says that the West must take decisive consolidating actions necessary .
Both Gonchar and Umland see the most realistic response to the suspension of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline being built from Russia to Germany . They also see the second thread of the Turkish Stream as a realistic response .
 Ukraine has taken unprecedented measures to ensure internal security . Ukraine has also taken steps to ensure security in its own country .
 On November 25, 2018, the President of Ukraine convened the National Security and Defense Council . The Council took the initiative of imposing martial law throughout Ukraine .
 On November 26, a presidential decree on imposing martial law was approved by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine . The decree was approved on November 26 .
 The presidential decree on the introduction of martial law to enter into force is necessary . The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine is needed to approve the decree .
 The legal framework of the martial law is settled by International Humanitarian Law and the Law of Ukraine on the Legal Regime of Martial Law . The legal Framework of the Martial Law is settled on the legal basis of the law .
 Martial law implies a significant expansion of the powers of state bodies, simultaneously with a significant restriction of civil rights . Martial law means the power of the state bodies is expanded .
 The text of the presidential decree introduces only a small part of the measures on martial law . However, the text says that this list of measures will expand in the future .
 The validity of such emergency measures throughout the territory raises serious doubts . The validity of such emergency measures is questioned .
 Presidential elections already scheduled for March 31, 2019 could be delayed by at least one month . Special attention should be paid to the clause on a direct prohibition of elections for the period of martial law .
 Petro Poroshenko changed his decision and shortened the period of martial law to one month . He narrowed the geography of the application to several regions .
 The President instructed the Administration of the State Border Service of Ukraine to strengthen the protection of the state border with the Russian Federation and the administrative border with Crimea . The Security Service of the Ukraine to take measures to strengthen counter-intelligence, counter-terrorism and counter-sabotage regime
 The essence and limits of these measures are not yet clear; it is the responsibility of the authorities to determine this . It is not clear whether the measures will be implemented .
 The Decree contains a secret part closed for the public. Apart from that, the Decree is also open to the public .
 As of November 27, 2108, there were no additional restrictions imposed on persons present on the territory of Ukraine regarding their movement and stay inside the country .
 The administration of the Boryspil airport has officially stated that the adoption of martial law will not affect the mobility of the population . The airport will operate in a normal regime .