 The Sea of Azov is a tiny and small sea that historically has not often earned much strategic attention from the countries that possessed it . The sea is a small and tiny sea that traditionally has not earned much attention from countries that possess it .
History reveals that the strategic importance of the sea periodically rises when at least two countries possess the shores of this sea .
 The sea lends itself to regional geopolitical rivalry . As a result of tensions both sides often create Azov flotillas .
 Both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany had to establish special naval units in the Sea of Azov . Such a contest existed during the Civil War in Russia and the Second World War in Germany .
 Russia's historical expansion to the South had three main directions – the Northern Caucasus, the Sea of Azov, and Crimea . In general, Russia’s historical expansion had three major directions – Northern Caucasus.
 First, the Russian Azov Flotilla appeared in 1768 in order to fight the Crimean Tatars and Ottoman Empire . First, Russia's Azov flotilla first appeared in 18th century .
 Kiev and Moscow urgently create Azovian geographical units drawn from their naval forces . Now the geopolitical situation again necessitates that both Kiev and Russia urgently createAzovian units .
 The Russian Federation became a full-fledged hegemon in the Azov Sea after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . The annexation greatly expanded Russian coastal possessions .
 The Kerch Straits made Russia the keeper of a strategic chokepoint where the Kerch Strait acts as a gate to free waters and to Ukrainian and Russian ports . The KerCh Straits is a key point for Russia and Ukraine .
 Russian river waterways facilitate a connection between the Black Sea with Russian cities that are almost located in Siberia and even deliver goods directly to Moscow or to the Baltics .
 The possession of the Kerch Strait and access to the Sea of Azov has strategic meaning to Russia . In these regards, the possession of Kerch strait and access of the Sea is strategic meaning .
Tensions have been building in recent months in the Sea of Azov Russia and Ukraine . Tensions are poised for further escalation in the region .
 It is crucial to view Russia’s general vision regarding naval strategy and its place in the Sea of Azov since 1991 in order to understand the current state in broader context .
 Russia's leadership did not pay much attention to the country's naval forces, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia introduced the ‘Naval Strategy of Russia’ in which there was pointed attention from the Kremlin in the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea .
 The Baltic and Caspian Seas have serious importance to Russian national interests . In the document it was clear that these seas, together with the Baltic and the Baltic, are important to Russia .
 Sea of Azov Russia proposed it be labeled as internal waters as the most suitable approach to national interests . The Sea ofAzov Russia had proposed it was labeled asInternal waters .
 Russia wanted to establish a favored regime that would block every non-Azovian state warship from the entrance into the seas . Moscow also wanted to turn southern seas into “internal seas,’s return to old Soviet Union approach .
 Russia introduced the “The Russian Maritime Doctrine’s” in 2001 . The Kremlin asserted that the Sea of Azov is a part of national interests .
 Russia in the Black and Azov Seas were the restoration of the naval and merchant fleets along with the inland navigation system, ports, and other infrastructure .
 It emphasized the necessity of addressing with the Ukrainian government the legal status of the Black Sea Fleet . Sevastopol remains the main base of the Fleet .
 It discussed the creation of conditions for basing and using the components of maritime potential that would protect the sovereignty of the Russian Federation in the Black and Azov Seas . And finally, it discussed thecreation of conditions.
 Next, the “Naval Strategy of Russia 2020’s was issued in 2012 and neither of the seas were mentioned . Neither, nor the seas, were mentioned in 2012 .
 Some aspects of the document were related to the Sea of Azov . Russia was facing restrictions to full access to the global maritime domain, and faced disputed maritime claims .
 Previously mentioned threats were indicated, but the language of the document changed gravely in that it became more antagonistic and aggressive .
 The Azov Sea was mentioned regarding the necessity of maintaining favorable legal regimes around the state border of the Russian Federation . The Caspian and Azov Seas are in the exclusive economic zone of Russia .
Russia's policy in the Azov Sea is impossible to fully appreciate the security implications for Russia’s policy. Without the Crimean peninsula it is impossible for the country to appreciate the situation .
 Russia recommended that Russia pursue an increase of the operational and combat capabilities of the Black Sea Fleet . In Crimea, Russia would develop an interspecific grouping of forces.
 A historic moment that sheds light on Russia’s strategic vision in the Sea of Azov is the Yeysk meeting in 2003 . The meeting was the first in Russia to take place in the sea .
 The Tuzla Island conflict started on September 29, 2003 when Russia initiated the construction of an artificial dam on the tiny island within the Kerch Strait . The Yeysk meeting was conducted under Vladimir Putin’s supervision on September 17, 2003 .
Already in Yeysk, Putin held a historical meeting for Russian geopolitical ambitions in the region .
 All the most important ministers responsible for the state military, naval, and security policy were present . All the important ministers were present.
 Negotiations regarding the status of the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait began in 1995 . Russia steadily avoided finalizing them on Ukrainian terms .
 Only after the Tuzla Island crisis in September 2003 did Ukraine and Russia finally sign the agreement in December of the same year .
 At the same time, the biggest political disaster that Russia faced as a result of Tuzla crisis was the consolidation and hardening of the Ukrainian nation toward Russia .
 The Tuzla events were partly preconditions for the Orange Revolution in 2004 . The Orange Revolution took place in 2004. The events were part of the first Orange Revolution .
 For the first time in many years it posed the possibility of a direct confrontation between the two nations . The two nations have been at odds for many years .
After the Orange Revolution in 2004 new political leadership in Kiev called for a revision of this agreement . After the Orange revolution in 2004, new political leaders in Kiev considered it a deal that had been imposed on Ukraine by political and diplomatic pressure .
Ukranian President Viktor Yushchenko could not manage to settle the issue on Ukrainian terms . Since then, negotiations were conducted many times but negotiations were held many times .
 The 2003 agreement did not satisfy Moscow, but it was definitely a victory for Moscow after years of contention . It should be taken into account that even the 2003 agreement didn't satisfy Moscow .
 Ukraine was holding the largest and richest share of fish zones in the Sea of Azov . It had total control of the Kerch-Enikale Canal . Ukraine was also holding the biggest share of the sea's largest fish zones .
 Russia secured the Sea of Azov from any possibility of foreign warships entering the sea . Russia earned the ability to use the Kerch-Enikale Canal freely .
 Before, Russian vessels had to pay Ukraine for passage in and out of the Kerch Strait .
 Ukraine was forced to recognize the Sea of Azov as an internal sea . The treaty that ended the dispute had a positive impact on Russia . Russia was forced by Ukraine to recognize it as a sea .
 Ukraine in 2003 did not effectively use international law and the influence of the West in order to settle the issue with Russia .
 Ukrainian President Kuchma publicly asked the General Secretary of the NATO Lord George Robertson for an intervention into the confrontation before his departure to Moscow .
 In 2010 when the regime of Yanukovich came to power, Russia made the status of Sevastopol a priority . But negotiations about the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov never stopped because Russia wanted further expansion .
 Putin officially returned to the Sea of Azov question in 2013, but he never returned to this topic very publicly . In 2013, Putin officially return to the question but he didn't return to this issue publicly .
 Even since the annexation of Crimea, he delegated the issue while he was silent about it himself .
 New Ukrainian political elite confronted the agreement but did not manage to revise it . After the Maidan Revolution, the new political elite faced the agreement .
 Ukraine has legal control over 62 percent of Sea of Azov’s area and Russia only 38 percent . Russia possesses de facto three-quarters of the territory of the sea .
 Russian proxies are possessing additional territories in the East of Ukraine that play on Russian advances . Plus, Russia is possessing additional territory in the east of Ukraine .
 The whole coastline of the breakaway Donetsk People’s Republic is approximately 45 km. The entire coastline of Donetsk People's Republic is 45 km .
 In their territories, there are plans to erect a naval base in the Obryw village . In their territory, there is also plans to build a base in their territories .
 It is more likely that Russia will be denying its involvement in the creation of the base . Russia is likely to deny involvement in creating the base.
 The Kerch Bridge opened in May . The bridge was a great hindrance to the free navigation of international and Ukrainian ships .
 The bridge has an air draught of 33 meters and a waterdraught of eight meters . The water draught restricts the entrance of larger ships into the Sea of Azov .
 Ukraine is reportedly eager to denounce the 2003 Agreement . Russia could go even further unilaterally – eventually sealing the free passage in the Kerch Strait to the Ukrainian merchant fleet .
 Ukraine could have to pay for passage as Russia did before 2003 . In this scenario Ukraine could be paying for passage in this scenario .
 Ukraine lost 50 percent of fishing, 30 percent of the profit of ports in metallurgical export from January to July . The share of the ports in meetallurgical exports deteriorated to 50 percent .
 In the long-term Russia may attempt to eventually halt commercial activities . This trend will only be broadening and it is even possible to say that in the long term Russia may try to halt commercial activity .
 This could lead to social and political protests against the current political elite in Kiev if the situation does not change . This could be the first time the situation in Kiev has changed .
 Russia has plans to extract and use Ukrainian and Crimean natural resources from Crimea and the Sea of Azov . Russia has also plans to use Ukraine and Crimean Tatar natural resources .
 Moscow may also be desperately seeking the fresh water in the Sea of Azov . As a result of the Ukrainian water blockade of Crimea, Moscow is desperately seeking water .
 Ukraine should take into account that economic and social deterioration will become a direct consequence of this confrontation. First, if Ukraine is going to confront Russia and demonstrate principality in the Azov sea, she should take to account, says Peter Bergen .
International maritime companies will be avoiding this region and will try to find alternative routes . Ukraine goes to a stiff political stance in confronting Russia .
 Russia is popular with mining the Ukrainian coastline . It should be noted that a popular idea with Russia is that of mining the Ukraine coastline .
 In Ukraine, denunciation is quite popular but some voices are against the argument that Ukraine will be deprived of a free passage through the Kerch Strait for the Ukrainian merchant fleet .
 Capitan Andriy Ryzenko presented a strategy of a “Mosquitoes Fleet’s’ as the best option to counter Russia expansion in the sea .
 NATO and Ukrainian specialists are engaged in preparation of the “Naval Strategy 2035’ that will take into consideration the recent developments in the Sea of Azov . NATO and Ukraine specialists are preparing for the ‘Naval strategy 2035.’
 Ukraine is considering the possibility of convoying Ukrainian and European vessels into the Sea of Azov .
 Ukrainian politicians are voicing the necessity of sanctioning Russian ports in the Black and Azov seas for Russia’s unlawful activities . Russia is developing the coastal missile defense systems that could deter Russia from direct invasion of Mariupol.
 Western reaction to the developments in the Sea of Azov have not been prompt since the recent confrontation began in March 2018 . Western reaction has not been prompts since the latest confrontation began.
 The State Department called on Russia to cease its harassment of international shipping . Russia has been accused of harassing international shipping.
 Jens Stoltenberg stressed the importance of the freedom of navigation both for Ukrainian and NATO ships in the Sea of Azov .
 Both sides discussed the situation in Ukraine and the escalation in the Sea of Azov but without any public details .
 In Brussels, already in the middle of summer there were some discussions regarding the situation in the Sea of Azov .
 The impact on human rights and security in the Black and Azov Seas has been dedicated to the recent escalation in the region . The impact in the area has been particularly focused on recent escalation.
 Representatives of the European Parliament, Ukrainian Ministers, experts and former NATO officials took part in the event .
 A very effective hearing was held in the European Parliament of Subcommittee on the Security and Defense . It provided analytical grounds for European Parliament's Resolution .
 The European External Action Service is responsible for the Eastern dimension of the EU foreign policy . Ambassador Konstiantyn Yelisieiev is now the Deputy Head of Presidential Administration to the President of Ukraine and NATO's officials .
 At the same time Yelisieiev outlined the necessity of the technical and economic assistance to Mariupol and Berdyansk .
 Ukrainian government asks for extension of sanctions against southern ports of Russia . Ukrainian government also asks for sanctions against Russia .
 He reiterated that the best option to deter Russia is to be braver in Ukraine and to finalize the membership action plan .
 Three littoral states have access to the Black Sea together with strategic partners . Warsaw Summit NATO is trying to establish stronger presence in this region .
 NATO is actively involved in the reconstruction of Ukrainian naval and maritime capability and the associated training .
 Stefanova has reinforced the staff in Kiev and especially to those fields that are related to security and defense . He has sent to Kiev more experts to prepare a Ukrainian naval strategy .
 Another event of interest is the Plenary Session in Strasbourg on October 23 “On the Situation in the Sea of Azov’s’.
 In her speech, she outlined that the EU is concerned about the situation in the sea and its militarization . She reiterated the EU’s support to Ukraine .
 She emphasized that militarization of the sea is threatening to undermine the wider Black Sea region . This is in no one's interests, she said .
 She said that the Black Sea is a European sea – an idea that is not welcomed in Russia and is considered aggressive . She also said that she said that it is not welcome in Russia .
 In general, the discussion during the plenary session demonstrated full commitment to Ukrainian sovereignty .
 mission experts to Mariupol will look at alternative ways of maintaining regional, social, and economic sustainability . Underlines the necessity to send mission experts.
 The western reaction was again quite restrained. Regarding the recent escalation in the Black Sea zone of the Kerch Strait the reaction was quite restrained .
 Washington again called for both parties to “exercise restraint and abide by their international obligations and commitments’ Washington again calls for both sides to ‘ex exercise restraint’
 It is possible to assume that such a vague statement holds little water with Ukraine. It is also possible that it holds littleWater with Ukraine .
 European Union called on both sides to exercise ‘utmost restraint’ and called for de-escalation . The European Union’s reaction was similar to that of the European Union's reaction .
 The Turkish Republic also called for the peaceful resolution of the confrontation . The Turkish Foreign Affairs Ministry said it is concerned that Ukrainian vessels were fired upon .
 Ukraine and its allies managed to conduct an emergency meeting at the UN Security Council . But it did not have desired effect .
 The most lackluster reaction was the private meeting of the Political and Security Committee in Brussels . The Russian Federation refrained to go tougher against the Russian Federation . The meeting was held in Brussels.
 The consequences of the incident remain unclear . The incident occurred in the early hours of the morning .
 The international reaction demonstrates to Kiev that it is not ready to escalate the situation . Kiev is not prepared to escalate its situation .
 The European Union and the U.S. are likely to provide more measures to deter Russian hegemony in the Sea of Azov and Black Sea .
 Russia is again trying to impose a long-term strategy to deal a crucial blow in Ukraine via the Sea of Azov . Almost five years after the annexation of the Crimean peninsula it appears that Russia is still trying to exert pressure on Ukraine .
 The case of the adopted EU resolution is direct evidence of how interested Western commitments are. The case is direct proof of the Western commitment to the EU .
 Russia is poised to deal another blow to Ukraine and the West. But if the recommendations in the resolution remain on paper it means that aggressive Russian behavior is likely to be dealt another blow .
 The following two-part series will analyze the maritime dimension of competition between Ukraine and Russia in the Sea of Azov . The series will focus on the sea's maritime dimension .
 In 2014, Ukrainian President Yanukovych declined to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union to expand bilateral trade . In 2014 he declined to signs an Association agreement with the EU to expand trade .
 Ukrainians took to the streets of Kyiv in the Euromaidan protests . The protests led to the ouster of President Yanukovych .
 The new President, Poroshenko, refused to sign the 25-year extension on the lease of Sevastopol naval base in Crimea to Russian Navy .
 Russia responded immediately by taking over Sevastopol and Crimea through Russian proxies clad in unmarked fatigues . Russia responded by taking control of Crimea through Russia's proxies in the Crimea .
 To date, Russia has not returned Crimea and its naval base in Sevastopol . Russia has still not returned the Crimean peninsula to Crimea .
 Ukraine must be able to defend its borders and sovereignty so that it can contribute to the stability of the Black Sea region . Ukraine must defend its sovereignty and borders so it can help the region's stability. Ukraine must also contribute to its stability.
 Russia's need to resupply Crimea, and Kerch Strait Bridge construction delays, will tempt Russia to gain control of the Sea of Azov . Ukraine's Navy's weakness will tempt Russian to establish a land corridor between Russia and Crimea .
 Russia and Ukraine have failed to agree on the demarcation of maritime borders in the SOA and Kerch Straits . Since the Soviet Union’s dissolution, the two countries have not agreed on maritime borders .
 Ukraine’s National Security Strategy published in March 2015. President Poroshenko defined current security challenges that exist below the threat level .
 Ukraine has insisted on designating the SOA as an open sea under UNCLOS . It links directly to the Black Sea and the world’s oceans .
 Russia called on Kyiv to abide by a 2003 agreement signed by the previous Ukrainian Government . It designated SOA as internal waters of Russia and Ukraine to be jointly owned, managed, and unregulated by international law .
 Ukraine has instituted arbitration proceedings against Russia under UNCLOS to adhere to maritime zones adjacent to Crimea in the Black Sea, SOA, and Kerch Strait . More recently, Ukraine's arbitration proceedings have been held against Russia .
 Ukraine asserts that Russia has usurped Ukrainian maritime rights in these zones . As a result, Ukraine claims that Russia usurped Ukraine maritime rights .
Russian maritime aggression has not halted Russian maritime aggression . However, these legal actions have not halted Russia's maritime aggression. However, they have not stopped Russia's aggression .
 In mid-September 2016, Russian vessels illegally seized Ukrainian oil rigs in the region and chased Ukrainian vessels out of the area . Russian vessels seized Ukrainian rigs in mid- September 2016 .
 Tensions continue to mount as Russia solidifies its gains in Crimea, extending to offshore claims against Ukraine . Tensions remain to mount.
 Russia and Ukraine’s relationship has shown no sign of improvement as more resources are discovered on its seabed .
 Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch Shell and other major oil companies have explored the Black Sea . Some analysts say its potential may rival the North Sea .
Natural gas exploration has availed as many as 13 gas and dry gas deposits with a combined 75 billion cubic meters of prospected resources discovered on the shelf . Three new gas deposits have been found on the southern Azov Sea shelf .
 President Vladimir Putin declared the ‘Azov-Black Sea basin is in Russia’s zone of strategic interests’ The basin provides Russia with direct access to the most important global transport routes, he said .
Keeping hydrocarbon resources from Ukraine is clearly among Russia’s interests . In addition to commercial routes, keeping Ukraine's resources from Russia is also a key concern .
 Russia could also seek a land corridor connecting Crimea to Russia through the Donbas Region . In addition to having access to the sea, Russia may also seek to have access to Crimea through the sea .
 There are at least two primary reasons for Russian leadership's desire to encroach further on Ukraine’s territory .
 Russia needs to protect new claims in Crimea, SOA, Black Sea, and its maritime resources . First, Russia must protect newClaims in Crimea and Black Sea .
 Russia needs to increase capacity to resupply Crimea through a land corridor connecting Crimea to Russia . Second, Russia must increase the capacity to re-supply Crimea by increasing the capacity.
 Since the occupation of Crimea, Ukraine closed the northern borders of Crimea and Ukraine . Ukraine has also closed the north borders of Ukraine and Crimea .
 Russia supplies Crimea with food and basic wares from the sea, mainly via ferries across the Kerch Strait from Krasnodar Region .
 The reliance on a single ferry system could cause a bottleneck in traffic when it reaches a daily limit on supplies carried across the Strait .
 Crimea depends heavily on Russia to fulfill basic services, with 75 percent of its budget last year coming from Moscow . Crimea has daily electricity rationing, with daily rationing and daily electricity shortages .
 A land line of communication via a road between Crimea and Russia would alleviate the burden of supplying Crimea by sea .
 Russia is building the Kerch Strait Bridge, which will connect the Crimean Peninsula to Russia . Russia is also building a bridge to connect Crimea to Russia.
 There is no land LOC to sustain the economy and bases in Crimea . Until its completion in 2019, there isno land LOC in Crimea. Until that completion, there will be no land Loc to sustain.
 SOA carries significance for its sea line of communication from Russia to Crimea . SoA carries significant significance for the sea line.
 Russia’s main objective is to consolidate its gains and secure sustainment of Crimean bases. Protection of this SLOC is Russia's main objective .
 Only then would Russia be able to use Crimea as a lily pad for power projection into the Black Sea .
 Russia is in dire financial straits due to sanctions placed on Russia by the E.U. and the U.S. The completion of the bridge at risk is at risk .
 The construction cost of the bridge is expected to cost more than $5 billion . Construction delays mount as construction delays mount . The bridge will cost $5billion .
 Unpaid workers are quitting the project in protest over dangerous working conditions .
With uncertainty over the bridge’s construction and overcapacity of the ferry, the need for land routes to Crimea becomes even greater . With uncertainty over bridge's construction, the needs for land route to Crimea become greater .
Defections, low morale and training also plague the Ukraine Navy, decimating its end strength . Defections and low morale also plague Ukraine Navy .
 There is a systemic failure to invest in training and personnel, with housing shortages and low personnel pay depressing morale and retention . There is also a lack of investment in training, personnel and housing .
 Ukraine will not win a symmetrical engagement on the open water against the Russian navy .
 Ukraine must seek comparative advantages in the asymmetric realm by addressing tangible and intangible issues in force structure, doctrine, morale, and training .
 Russia would attack from the sea taking advantage of Russia’s dominance in the SOA and Kerch Strait vice attacking on land . If Russia were to strike at the Ukrainian Achilles’ heel, it would attack on land.
 Ukrainian Army is a more sizeable and proficient force compared to the Navy that is weak and underfunded . This is due to the Ukrainian Army being a more proficient force than the Navy .
 Russia’s control of Crimea shortens its line of operations into eastern Ukraine . Russia's control of Ukraine shortens the line of operation into Ukraine .
 With uncontested control of SOA, Russian transports will have the freedom of maneuver to assemble forces in the SOA and utilize interior lines of attack .
 Russia will be able to increase combat power of its limited “hybrid troops to seize objectives ashore. Consequently, Russia will have more combat power .
 Russian forces are using the sea to seize the Azov coast, says a strong navy is necessary to deny Russian forces .
 Russia will weigh the benefit of seizing more Ukrainian territory to establish a LOC between Crimea and Russia against the costs of likely Western sanctions or retaliations . Russia will also weigh the benefits of seizing Crimea to set up a LOC .
 Russia will seize the initiative upon any perceived Ukrainian or international weakness that presents an opportunity . Russia will also seize on any perceived Ukraine or international weaknesses that presents a opportunity .
 Russian Op idea would be to reach objectives along the Azov coast with speed, surprise, and plausible deniability using amphibious crafts . Ropucha and Alligator-class LSTs, LCM landing crafts, and LCUA/LCPA air cushion landing crafts .
 Hybrid forces clad in civilian clothing will use speed, surprise, and plausible deniability to seize decisive points along the Azov coast . The shortened LOO/LOC will seize the ultimate objective of Mariupol .
 The Russian Navy will assert sea control in the SOA, and attempt to close Mariupol port through a blockade . The Russian navy is trying to close the port through sea control .
 Russia’s critical strengths and operational center of gravity are its well-trained and commanded special and ground forces, which are key to seizing territory and linking the Crimean Peninsula to Russia by land .
 Separatist forces from Donbas Region will support by encircling Mariupol from the north . Separatists from the Donbas region will support Mariupols from the south .
 The Russian Navy and Air Force will likely support ground offensives through naval gunfire, land-attack missiles, and air support to attack defensive positions .
 Russia will ensure unity of command between the special forces, navy, and separatist forces . Russia will maximize functions of intelligence, C2, sustainment, fires, and protection combined with principles of war such as speed, initiative, surprise, deniability .
 Russia will complement the offensive using hybrid warfare techniques such as a strategic media blitz and cyber warfare to win the war of the narrative and global opinion . Russia will use hybrid warfare tactics such as media blitz, cyber warfare, to win war of narrative andglobal opinion .
 Russian media outlets such as RT will broadcast the Russian strategic narrative that it will protect Russian speakers in the near abroad and reunite inherently Russian territory back to the motherland .
 cyberspace will be a key domain of its main attack vector in addition to air, sea, and land . cyberspaces will be an attack vector for air and sea, as well as land, air and air .
 Deborah Sanders, “Ukraine’s Maritime Power in the Black Sea—A Terminal Decline?’, 18.