 To maintain security for its member states and citizens is clearly one of the fundamental purposes of the European Union . Security is defined as a low probability of damage to acquired values, says the EU .
 The European Union prides itself in being a community founded on shared values among its members . European Neighbourhood Policy frequently refers to a vision of a ring of countries, sharing the EU's fundamental values and objectives .
 The ENP is essentially a policy that seeks to achieve security for the European Union, its member states and citizens .
 EU’s Response to New Security Challenges in the European Neighbourhood Area will enhance, deepen and disseminate knowledge and understanding of a strategic approach to resilience in the EU Global Strategy and the European Neighborhood Policy .
 The European Security Study is based on European Security studies . The study has been published in the past two years . It is the first time the study has taken place in Europe .
 The Workshop is closely linked with Research component of the proposed project . The Workshop will engage its principal investigators .
 Workshop will explore and explain the links between conflict and resilience to them . Online discussions will be supplemented with online discussions and consultations .
 We will develop a more comprehensive knowledge base of how state institutions and policies can be strengthened in their effectiveness and legitimacy to mitigate the risk of further conflict escalation and restore sustainable peace and stability .
 The program of the workshop is made up of a series of lectures, panel discussions, briefings, simulation games and case studies . The program includes lectures and panel discussions .
 Lectures focus on specific issues of European security in the conflict management area . Lectures also focus on European security issues.
In panel discussions a specific issue will be analysed from different perspectives . In panel discussions the topic will be discussed from different perspective .
 In briefings, government officials will present public policy and security strategy and discuss them with participants .
 There is no age/geographical limit, but we will give preference to younger participants with a practical experience in the areas of security and conflict .
 Scholarships will cover costs of hotel accommodation in Kyiv and buffet breakfast, lunches and dinners . The scholarships will also cover the cost of hotel rooms and meals .
 Russia is going to the polls Sunday to re-elect President Vladimir Putin . There was one policy that Russia was implicitly reviewing, it says .
 Many remember Russia’s Cold War strategy of invading, destabilizing and intervening in other countries’ governance .
 Russian policy toward Ukraine has become ever more aggressive since late 2013 . Since late 2013, Russia has become more aggressive.
 The Kremlin pressured then-President Viktor Yanukovych not to sign a free-trade agreement with the European Union .
 Ukraine overthrew Yanukovych in the Maidan revolution of 2013-14 . Russia responded by annexing Crimea in March 2014 .
 Russia began supporting a separatist movement in Donbas, the easternmost part of Ukraine . The region includes the regions of Donetsk and Lugansk .
 Pro-Russian regimes are now firmly entrenched there . Russia hasn’t annexed the area outright . Neither does it look likely to withdraw its protection from the separatists anytime soon .
 France, Germany and Russia negotiated four ‘agreements’ about the region since February 2014 . None of which has resulted in so much as a stable cease-fire between separatist and government forces .
 Many think the crisis in Ukraine has signaled the start of a new Cold War .
 Our latest research, involving four years of extensive fieldwork, includes interviews with officials on all sides, leads us to agree . The latest research involves interviews with official officials on both sides, including interviews with both sides .
 "success" in Donbas has once again become the Kremlin's model for destabilizing post-Soviet states . Do so would support Russia’s geopolitical interests, he says .
 Expert analysis of Russia’s intervention in Ukraine has largely divided into two schools of thought .
 The second is that we’re glimpsing a grand strategy to restore Russia’s global superpower status . The third is that the U.S. is trying to restore Russian power to the world .
 Russia is playing a worldwide zero-sum game in which it perceives that even the tiniest gain in influence for one side means an equivalent loss for the other side . The latter view suggests that, as in the original Cold War, Russia is play a worldwidezero-sumgame
 Russia has been following in the Donbas region, says study. Our studyindicates that this is precisely the logic that Russia is following, it says .
 Russian policies from late 2013 to early 2015, found that with each new agreement, it focused on gaining a stronger status for the separatists . The territories were reintegrated into Ukraine .
 Each time one of the agreements collapsed, Russia increased the stakes . Russia increased its stakes in the agreement .
 separatist forces roamed eastern Ukraine while not holding any territory permanently . When the first agreement collapsed, it supported separatist forces logistically and with military equipment .
 The three powers negotiated the Geneva Declaration of April 2014 — another agreement that was never put into force . Then the three power powers negotiated a new agreement that never was put in force .
 Russia sent in military advisers and Russian soldiers who took leave from their units to fight in Ukraine . Russia also delivered military hardware to separatists who took control of eastern Ukraine .
After intense fighting in July and August, the three powers negotiated the first Minsk Agreement in early September 2014, which did not result in a cease-fire . The three powers reached the first agreement in September 2014 .
 At this stage, Russia helped the separatists consolidate their territorial gains and begin building a state, complete with their own government, in the areas under their control .
 We spoke with Ukrainian officials in Kiev; with officials in the Brussels E.U. and NATO headquarters . We also spoke with Russian experts and analysts in Vienna and Kiev .
 Russia considers Ukraine a strategically important prize. Russia has escalated its policies to ensure that Ukraine will not drift out of its control .
 Ukraine hasn't been the only battleground on which Russia and the West have been fighting to impose their respective geopolitical visions . Ukraine hasn’t been the first battleground for Russia and West.
 Russia has increasingly shown that to prevent the drift westward, it will intervene by any means it deems necessary . In all these cases, Russia has shown that.
 Russia appears, understandably, to want secure, settled and unambiguously pro-Russian neighbors . Russia appears to wantsecure, settled, unambiguous pro- Russian neighbors .
 Russia would prefer an unstable neighbor over a stable one that is fully aligned with the West . If Russia can’t have its ideal outcome, it would prefer a stable neighbor over an unstable one .
 Russia has concluded that Ukraine is not about to become a friendly and stable regime . Russia has clearly concluded that Russia has not been a friendly regime .
 Russia has a friendly yet unstable Ukraine, the kind of government it arguably had under Yanukovych . Neither will Russia gain a friendlyyet unstable Ukraine .
 Russia is therefore choosing to destabilize the current Ukrainian government . Russia is also choosing to undermine the current Ukraine government . The renewed “gas war’s” between Russia and Ukraine is also being blamed for the conflict .
 The European Union and NATO also view Ukraine as too strategically valuable to concede . The EU and NATO say Ukraine is too strategic to concede.
 Washington announced the sale of antitank missiles to Kiev just as Russia's Gazprom threatened to cancel all its supply contracts to Ukraine .
 Russia apparently would rather tolerate instability than Western influence than West influence . Russia would instead tolerate instability.
 That bodes ill for future East-West relations, no matter what margin Putin wins by . That bode ill for the future of the world over, according to Putin .
 The conflict could yet again spiral out of control and prompt a resumption of high-intensity fighting in Ukraine or full-fledged military hostilities with Russia . The conflict is set in the context of more fractious relations between Russia and the West .
 The conflict in the Donbas pits the government in Kyiv against separatist rebels . The former government enjoys Western support while the latter is backed by Russia .
 Minsk II has become unimplementable, and the continuing nonimplementation justifies each side’s uncompromising stance . The two sides are locked in a zero-sum game in which Minsk has become unimplementable .
 The parties to the conflict use the “no peace, no war’s situation to try to consolidate their military positions . The parties are increasing their institutional and ideological hold on the territory they control, they say .
 Ukraine’s military expenses grew to 5 percent of GDP in 2018, according to official data . Ukrainian army's troop strength has increased to 250,000, and its troop strength is now 250,00 .
Self-declared republics have expanded military production and enlarged their fighting forces . The self- declared republics are also expanding their military production .
 The status quo guarantees that the Kremlin has at least some degree of control over parts of Ukraine . It prevents the country from drifting completely into the orbit of the West .
 This control, in turn, facilitates a certain ‘state-building’ in the breakaway republics and the strengthening of links with Russia . This control also facilitates a “state- building’s” in the Breakaway Republics .
 Russian control is a central part of this geopolitical strategy . Russian control, whether directly exercised over the breakaway republics or indirectly through them over Kyiv, is a key part of the strategy .
 The “no peace, no war situation’ in eastern Ukraine thus has important implications, first and foremost for the national security of Ukraine . The ‘no peace’, “No peace,No war situation,’s important implications for Ukraine,
 The utility of the conflict in the Donbas as a lever that Russia can use to destabilize Ukraine has decreased as a result of Kyiv’s policy of complete isolation of rebel-controlled territories .
 isolation contributes to the alienation of people living in Donetsk and Luhansk from “mainland’s Ukraine and vice versa, thereby magnifying the difficulties of any future reintegration . The unavoidable flip side of isolation, however, is that it contributes to
Reintegration becomes both less likely and more costly. In other words, reintegration is less likely, more costly .
 This domestic logic of no peace, no war locks Russia and the West into a similar zero-sum game . Russia and West have been locked in a similarZero-Sum game .
 Ukraine's current status quo is each side’s second-best, and currently only achievable, outcome . With each side competing for influence in Ukraine and fearing that any concession or compromise equates to a loss that results in an equivalent gain for the respective opponent, the currentstatus quo
 There is little likelihood of restoring the full sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine in the near future .
 The nonimplementation of Minsk II will lead either to a protracted but more stable status quo situation, as has been the case with Transnistria in Moldova . The self-declared republics, as in the cases of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
 Moscow can still ensure a level of instability that limits the domestic and foreign policy choices of the Ukrainian government . Moscow can also ensure that the government can still make its own policy choices .
There is still some prospect of the breakaway areas’ reintegration on terms favorable to long-term Russian influence in the country . But this volatile status quo still offers some benefits to Russia .
 Putin’s presentation of new and more sophisticated weapons, U.S. missile sales to Ukraine, NATO's proclamation of Ukraine as an ‘aspirant country’ and the West's willingness to impose new sanctions and dismiss diplomats following the alleged Russian assassination attempt in the UK
 Russia and the West pursue their own interests in a Cold War-like struggle in which Ukraine is a pawn rather than a player, grave and increasing social, economic, and political costs will be imposed on the country and its people .