 Russian policy toward Ukraine is often puzzling, writes Steven Pifer . Now it is backfiring, writes Pifer, but now it's back firing .
 He has created a strong sense of national identity, and has imbued it with deep anti-Russian sentiment . He has also created an anti-Russia sentiment in his work .
 During a visit to Moscow nine years ago, I asked a retired senior Russian diplomat whether anyone in the Kremlin really understood Ukraine .
 On the margins of the April 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest, he told alliance leaders that Ukraine was not a real country .
 The Russian president last visited Kiev in July 2013, to commemorate the 1025th anniversary of Kyivan Rus’ conversion to Christianity . The president has not visited Kiev since July 2013 .
 During the visit, he gave a speech in which he said Ukrainians and Russians were one people .
 The remark went down poorly with a large number of Ukrainians, who heard it as a denial of their culture, history, language, and very identity .
 The number of Ukrainians harboring anti-Russian sentiment was a minority of the population . When I served at the U.S. Embassy in Kiev in the late 1990s, the number of Ukrainian citizens were a minority .
 After Russia's seizure of Crimea and some 10,000 dead in Donbass, that is easily understood . After Russia’s seizure of Crimean, that's easily understood.
 57 percent of respondents expressed a cold or very cold attitude toward Russia, compared to 17 percent who expressed a warm or very warm attitude . The survey was conducted by the International Republican Institute .
 As attitudes toward Russia harden, Kiev's leadership has found itself with less room for maneuver . Russia's leadership in Kiev has less room to maneuver .
 In summer 2014, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko hinted of a readiness to set aside any push to draw closer to NATO as part of an effort to settle differences with Moscow .
 He firmly embraces the goal of NATO membership, as unrealistic as that may be in the near term . Now, he firmly embraces that goal, as realistic as that might be in a near term.
 Mr Putin’s conflict with Ukraine also reinforces an anti-Russian bias in the Ukrainian Parliament .
 The other 27 sit empty in Crimea and eastern Donbass . Ukraine illegally annexed by Moscow or occupied by Russian and Russian proxy forces .
 Those traditionally voted for political parties more sympathetic to Moscow . Those traditionally tended to vote for parties that were sympathetic to the city .
 Most countries presumably want stable, friendly, and positive relations with their neighbors . Most countries apparently want stable and friendly relations .
 It will take years, if not decades, to restore positive feelings toward Russia among Ukrainians . The reconciliation process cannot begin until Moscow makes major changes in its approach to Russia .
 They increasingly want nothing to do with Russia, though it remains a geographic fact that they cannot avoid . Russia increasingly want to do nothing with Russia .
 Mr Putin and the Kremlin should seek better advice on how to deal with their southeastern neighbor .
 Some suggest that the Russian president's proposal for a peacekeeping operation is the opening bid in the Kremlin's search for a way out of its Donbass quagmire .
 His current approach is locking in a generation of Ukrainians who will detest Russia . He is trying to lock in a new generation of Ukrainian people who will take control of Russia .