 You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate . You may improved this article.
 Media portrayals of the Ukrainian crisis have differed widely between Ukrainian, Western and Russian media . The 2014 Ukrainian revolution after the Euromaidan protests, the subsequent 2014 annexation of Crimea, incursions into Donbas, and the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, have differing widely
 Russian, Ukrainian, and Western media have been accused of propagandizing, and of waging an information war . Russian and Ukrainian media narratives of the ongoing conflict differ considerably, due to the extent of government control .
 Two-thirds of Russians relied on state television for their news in 2021, according to Levada Centre .
 Russian channels have repeatedly used misleading images, false narratives, misrepresentation, suppression, and fabricated news stories, such as 2014's fictional child's crucifixion and fictional death of a fictional 10-year-old .
 The Ukrainian army commits "genocide" against Russian speakers who strongly want Russia to protect them from Kyiv . Russian speakers strongly desire Russia to "protect" them from Ukraine .
 Gallup poll showed that fewer than 8% of eastern residents "definitely" wanted Russian protection . Yet a Gallup poll shows fewer than eight% of Eastern residents wanted Russianprotection .
 Russia denies involvement in the Crimean crisis, despite evidence that Russia has regularly shelled across the border . Putin boasted about the key role of Russian soldiers in the Crimea crisis .
 Reactions 4 Terminology 5 Public reactions and social media 6 Assaults, intimidation, and restrictions on press freedom 6. Reactions.
 Russia 7 See also 8 References Media in Russia Russian state media . This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .
 Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding sub-headings . Please consider split content.
 Media freedom in Russia is highly restricted, and Russian state media presents the official viewpoint of the Russian government .
Russian state media frequently reported stories that were completely invented, or distorted statements by Ukrainian and Western politicians . Russian state media often reported stories completely invented.
 News presented as actual events is frequently hearsay, from anonymous blogs, intentionally staged videos, and selectively quoted materials, omitting anything critical of Russia .
 Dmitry Bykov said "the language of today's propaganda has become full of artificial connections" Writing for Sobesednik.
 Maria Alekhina from Pussy Riot and Max Skibinsky also criticized the Russian media's reporting . Maria Alekina from the Russian press also criticized Russian media.
 Edward Lucas and Peter Pomerantsev noted that Russia's portrayal borrowed from Soviet narratives and terminology .
 Rossiya 2 aired a short simulation of a Topol-M rocket hitting London . Channel 5 simulated a conventional invasion of Warsaw, Berlin and the Baltic states .
 Maksim Trudolyubov, writing in Vedomosti, said state-run media in Russia is much smarter than previous incarnations .
 Euromaidan State Russian media consistently portray the fighting in Ukraine as instigated by successive Ukrainian governments following the 2014 ouster of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Euromaidan described as controlled by "ultranationalist" "fascist" "neo-Nazi" and "anti-Semitic" elements, and "far-right nationalist" "Right Sector" commonly featured in Russian media .
 The revolution has been depicted as a violent "coup d'etat" Fomented by the West to overthrow the elected government of Ukraine .
Channel One Russia says Euromaidan protests were "dying out" with "only a few hundred" attending .
 Russian state media claimed Western countries orchestrated events in Ukraine to harm Russia . The European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement was depicted as a weapon against the Kremlin . Protesters as paid stooges of the United States, and the Vilnius summit as akin to the Munich Agreement .
 Ukrainian state media claimed that Kyiv authorities had allowed total anarchy to take root in Ukraine . Ukraine was often portrayed as "irreparably dysfunctional" and "deeply divided"
 Eastern Ukrainians portrayed as seeking Russia's intervention and protection, despite a Gallup poll showing less than 20% of residents agreed . Eastern Ukrainians were portrayed as trying to protect themselves from Russia .
 The Ukrainian government was accused by Russian media of "genocide" and "pogroms" against the Russian-speaking population in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Channel One presented footage from a Shehyni border crossing between Ukraine and Poland . Ukrainians escaping to Russia are seen fleeing to Russia .
 Russian state channels depicted Donbass civilians as under attack by Ukrainian forces . There was no mention of insurgents firing from residential areas .
 A group of Russian nationalists prepared an international exhibition Material Evidence . The exhibition was presented with highly anti-Western and pro-Russian bias .
 Russian media claimed that western media ignored the apparent "violence" Russian media said that demonstrators in Crimea were protesting for democratic rights .
 Russian sources consistently refer to the events as the "Russian Spring" Russian sources say the events are harking back to pro-democracy movements like the Prague Spring .
 Russian media echoed the Russian government's assertions that Russian troops were not involved in the Crimea crisis .
Russia 24 used footage of the Maidan square in Kyiv to support its claims of chaos in Simferopol, Crimea . They claimed that a bus carrying members of Right Sector attacked Crimean residents . But footage showed a bus with Crimean license plates transporting men armed with Russian weapons .
Claims of violence and suppression against Russian-speakers in Ukraine were used to justify the Russian military intervention in Crimea .
 The Kremlin has reinvented the conflict in Ukraine as a genocide against Russians, says Peter Pomerantsev .
 Russian media focused particularly on Right Sector, portraying the group as powerful, fascist, and neo-Nazi .
 Russian propaganda tried to demonize the Ukraine government and build a case for the annexation of Crimea, Hanna Kozlowska said .
 During the first half of 2014, Right Sector was the second-most mentioned political group in online Russian mass media . Right Sector is the second most mentioned political groups in online mass media.
 The Associated Press and other international news organizations found no evidence that the group had committed hate crimes . The group was accused of committing hate crimes in 2009 .
 Right Sector and other far-right candidates had poor results in both the 2014 presidential election and parliamentary elections . The 2014 Ukrainian presidential election was held in Kiev .
 historian Timothy D Snyder rejected the claims of a "fascist coup" in March 2014 .
 Some observers were critical of the Russian media's heavy focus on radical and right-wing groups during Euromaidan . Some observers found that the protests were broad-based .
 The Kyiv Post's Oleg Sukhov and BBC News' Stephen Ennis accused Russian media of "demonization of Ukrainians"
 Russia-1 state television said "Kyiv threatened the citizens of Donetsk with psychological attacks from the air" Russia- 1 state TV said the threat was "psychological"
 In July 2014, pro-Russian separatists shot down a Ukrainian military plane over Torez . In July, ITAR-TASS, RIA Novosti and LifeNews reported that pro- Russian separatists had shot down the plane .
In August 2015, Komsomolskaya Pravda published a purported wiretap transcript of two named CIA operatives planning an attack on MH17 . Russian channels suggested Ukraine was responsible for the MH17 crash .
 TASS published a false report that the Carpatho-Rusyns had held a congress in which they decided to seek autonomy . Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was a Malaysia Airlines flight 17 .
 Russian state media criticized for reporting on Odessa Oblast, particularly their claims of riots and persecution of ethnic minorities . State media also criticized for their reporting of riots, persecution of minorities .
 Russia-1 presented Poroshenko's statement that Ukrainian would remain the only state language as a violation of the right to speak Russian freely . Even Donbass and eastern oblasts preferred Russian to have the status of a second official language in particular regions .
 In May 2015, Izvestiya ""disclosed"" a letter allegedly from the United States Embassy to LGBT activists in Russia . The U.S. Department of State republished it with the errors marked in red and a dedication in Russian .
 LifeNews reported irregularities as part of campaign against Navalny . As noted by The Insider, she had no legal way to obtain these forms .
 Former Russian security services officer Boris Ratnikov gave examples of what kind of "secret" information he was able to extract from Western leaders using experimental "remote mind control" research .
 The origins of this statement had been traced in 2007, but Russian leaders continued to repeat it as truth .
Arseniy Yatseniuk was widely ridiculed in Ukrainian and Russian media . He was accused of taking part in the First Chechen War . The surreal character was ridiculed in Russian and Ukrainian media .
Mykola Karpyuk and Stanislav Klykh, Ukrainian citizens held, tortured and extorted in Russia since 2014 . These accusations were based on testimony from Mykola. KarpYuk andStanislavKlykh .
 Ukrainian citizen Serhiy Litvinov was also charged with murdering 20 'unidentified people' and a rape . Russian media used his forced statements as 'proof' of 'genocide' of Russian nationals .
 By the end of 2014, most of the charges against him against him were dropped, leaving one robbery charge .
Prosecution statement in Karpyuk and Klykh contains errors and inconsistencies . It was written based on the Russian Wikipedia article on Salman Raduyev rather than any actual evidence .
 Some theories outline support for ethnic and/or religious separatist movements in and around Russia .
 Russian state television has described the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring of 1968 . Both stopped by Soviet-led invasions, as orchestrated by the United States and Western European countries .
 Russian TV presented the invasion of Czechoslovakia "as brotherly help aimed to prevent an invasion by NATO and fascism" The invasion provoked outrage in the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
 Social media are used in a coordinated way to influence public opinion in Russia and elsewhere . Social media is used to influence people's opinions in Russia, Russia and other countries .
Kristina Potupchik, a former Nashi spokeswoman, was an employee of the Putin administration . She was a former spokeswoman for Nashi, a Russian government spokeswoman . She also worked for the Russian opposition media .
 Earlier leaks said she had been involved in similar activities at least since 2012 .
 Russian mass media played a significant role in starting the war in Donbass, according to war reporter and veteran of the First Chechen War Arkadiy Babchenko .
 Yekaterina Bolotovskaya said the Russian media presented an "apocalyptic" image of Ukraine . The Russian media has presented an ""apocalyptic"" image of the Ukraine .
 Russian channel claimed Ukrainians had crucified a child in Slovyansk . Former chief editor of Lenta.ru, Galina Timchenko, said this is an egregious violation of professional ethics .
 Boris Nemtsov stated that Vladimir Putin and the directors of Channel One Russia and Rossiya Segodnya employed ""Goebbels-style propaganda" Boris NemTsov said that Putin and his directors employed  "GoebBels- style propaganda" 
Russian and Ukrainian blood spilled in Ukraine, Ukraine . Putin, Ernst and Kiselyov are responsible for spilling both Russian and Ukraine blood .
 Russian hacker group Shaltay Boltay published v Kremlin documents telling journalists to justify the Crimean annexation . The documents also praise Vladimir Putin's development plans and depict Ukraine as swarming with fascists .
 Russia's opposition politician Alexei Navalny said the ""monstrosity of lies" in the Russian state media ""is unimaginable. On 5 April 2022, he said .
 Russian state media personalities should be treated as war criminals, he tweeted . He tweeted that "warmongers" among Russian media personalities should be treated as war criminals .
Roskomnadzor issued a warning to Ekho Moskvy after two journalists, Sergei Loiko and Timur Olevskiy, discussed the battle for Donetsk Airport .
 Vitaliy Portnikov mocked justifications of Russia's seizures of land . Portnikov, writing in Grani.ru, mocked justification of Russian land seizures .
 Alexander Podrabinek wrote that Putin had a history of using wars to increase and maintain his power . He said Putin was now using a war with Ukraine to deflect opposition in Russia .
 Boris Nemtsov wrote that the Kremlin demonstrated hypocrisy by advocating federalism for Ukraine . He said Putin sought to "punish" Ukraine to discourage a revolution against corruption from taking place in Russia .
 In October 2014, Russian economic expert Stepan Demura criticized the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the 2014 Crimean crisis . Demura said they would harm the Russian economy .
 Russian media have widely reported that RT and TASS agencies who worked with Saponkov previously condemned his comments .
 Journalists who wrote critical of the Russian government's actions usually experienced ostracism and were accused of treachery or fascism by mainstream media .
 In March 2014, Vedomosti published an article by a Moscow university professor, Andrey Zubov, comparing Russia's military intervention in Crimea with Nazi Germany's Anschluss . Zubov was subsequently fired, after the article was published .
 Russian historians Alexandr Skobov and Andrey Piontkovski commented on the ideology of the self-declared Federal State of Novorossiya . They concluded that its basic features bore strong similarities to 20th century fascist movements .
 Skobov was assaulted by unknown perpetrators and received several stab wounds in St. Petersburg . On 28 July, Skobova was attacked by unknown assailants .
In Russia, opponents of the war frequently face discrimination and coordinated hate campaigns . In Russia, anti-war opponents often face discrimination, coordinatedhate campaigns .
 The most extreme example was the assassination of Boris Nemtsov, which his daughter Zhanna Nemtsova blamed on Putin and Russian media .
 She said that Putin's "information machine" employs criminal propaganda techniques to sow hatred, which in turn spawns violence and terror .
 Alexandr Byvshev, a poet whose anti-war works were banned as "extremist" earlier, was added to an official list of terrorists and extremists . The campaign began in his village in June 2015 .
 Russia's narrative has roots in Soviet dezinformatsiya and active measures, says Luc Maffre and Peter Pomerantsev .
 Some commentators believed that Russian state-controlled media attempted to sow confusion . Some believed that state-run media was trying to sow chaos .
 Western and Ukrainian media have accused Russian media of fabrications . Unsubstantiated atrocity claims have been made by Russian media .
 The Kyiv Post reported that a journalist from the same channel, Yevgeni Poddubny, was involved in a plot to frame the Ukrainian army for a Red Cross worker's death .
 Russian media also presented images from military conflicts in Georgia, South Ossetia and Syria as being from Ukraine .
 In April 2014, Russia-1 presented a man by the name of Andrei Petkov as a pro-Russia activist who had been attacked by Ukrainians . NTV said he was funding pro-Ukrainian extremists .
 Maria Tsypko appeared in various roles on Russian channels during the 2014 crisis . She appeared in several roles during the crisis .
An analysis of Russia-1's video of a gun battle in Crimea indicated it was staged . Telekrytyka said that an analysis of the video of the Crimea gun battle indicated it is staged .
Multiple Russian news outlets have been criticized for producing unsubstantiated reports of atrocities . The same channel falsely presented a construction site as a "concentration camp" and a man critical of Euromaidan as a Ukrainian former diplomat .
 LifeNews aired footage which it said was evidence of Ukrainian forces using white phosphorus to attack a village named Semenyovka .
 Human Rights Watch analysts rejected the claim, saying footage was inconsistent with white phosphorus or an incendiary weapon .
 Russian news organizations aired footage of white phosphorus in Iraq to support their allegations against Ukraine . Other Russian news agencies aired footage in support of Ukraine .
 In July 2014, Channel One Russia stated that Ukrainian soldiers had crucified a three-year-old boy in Lenin Square in Sloviansk . The only witness to the alleged atrocity falsely claimed that she was a refugee from the town .
The same channel used a 1995 photo of a mass grave in Chechnya to depict Ukraine . The same channel also used the 1995 photo to depict the Ukraine .
 Russia's Zvezda channel accused of editing footage of a failed rocket launch in Baikonur, Kazakhstan . In August 2014, Russia's channel was accused of using footage to claim Ukraine attacked civilians .
 REN TV used images of MH17 plane crash victims to support its claims of atrocities by Ukrainian soldiers in eastern Ukraine .
 NTV 's documentary 13 Friends of the Junta described anti-war activists and critics of Russia's policies in Ukraine as ""traitors" and supporters of ""fascists" also received criticism .
 Russian media claimed in late September that "hundreds of unmarked graves of civilians executed by Ukrainian army" had been found and verified by OSCE monitors . Both the OSCE and DPR officials debunked the claim .
 footage of Andrei Makarevich's concert in Sviatohirsk "was merged with images of fighting that he supposedly endorsed" The Moscow Times reported that footage of the concert was merged with footage of fighting .
Ukrayina aired a documentary demonstrating how an NTV movie attributed actions of Russia-backed separatists to Ukrainian armed forces . The documentary aired on NTV.
 StopFake.org reported that Rossiya Segodnya's Ukraina.ru mixed in images of the 2004 Beslan massacre, in southern Russia, into their documentary .
 Russian TV coverage of 2 May 2014 Odessa clashes was misleading, says BBC News . BBC News found that it "either completely ignored or seriously misrepresented the street clashes that preceded the fatal fire"
 In April 2015, Russian media widely reported a 10-year-old girl killed by Ukrainian artillery . But Russian reporters on the site interviewed by the BBC admitted that they were reporting this fake story because they were instructed to do so .
RTEnglish-language television channel RT has been called the "primary hub of Russian propaganda in the West" It has been accused of distortions and omissions, aligning its coverage to suit the Russian government, and fueling paranoia .
 Liz Wahl resigned on air after saying that she disagreed with the channel's "whitewashing" of the Russian government's actions during the 2014 Crimean crisis .
 It later removed after heavy criticism. It was later removed from the Ukrainian government's website .
 RT reporter Sara Firth resigned in protest against the network's coverage of the crash . She said the network was heavily biased .
 The Interpretermag.com said that some Russian reporters were involved in serious violations of journalism ethics . The website also said some Russian journalists were involved.
 Russian media accused of employing whataboutism as a response to criticism of Russia's actions in Ukraine . Some Russian media have been accused of using what aboutism to respond to criticism .
 Rossiya Segodnya published an interview with Igor Girkin after removing his statements on working for Russia's Federal Security Service and chaos among pro-Russian militants .
 Russian media narrative of Malaysian airline shoot-down was a 'grab bag of conspiracy theories' Daniel Drezner suggested that Putin could become trapped by the nationalist rhetoric created over the incident .
 The theories presented by Russian broadcasters and newspapers are "vary wildly in content" but "all point the finger at Ukraine," says the Associated Press .
 In October 2014, Taras Kuzio wrote in the Financial Times that "the world view created by Putin's state controlled media has never corresponded to reality"
 Putin always mixed up "Russian speakers" with "Russians" in Ukraine, believing they were one and the same . Putin always believed they were both Russian and Ukrainian .
 The Russian media's depiction of Kharkiv as eager to join Russia was called "wishful thinking" by Katya Soldak of Forbes .
 Pierre Vaux criticized the efforts of Kremlin propagandists to portray the Ukrainian government as waging a war on Russian speakers . Vaux said large swathes of the government are Russian speakers.
 In addition to Russophones from Ukraine, about a hundred Russian citizens joined pro-Ukrainian forces, according to Kyiv Post .
 NATOAssertions that the West had broken an agreement against NATO enlargement were criticized by some commentators . Some commentators said that NATO had broken the agreement against enlargement .
 Mikhail Gorbachev also dismissed claims of a non-expansion pledge . He said the idea that the West had deceived him was "a myth"
 Russian media was "distorting Western perceptions of the conflict," says Ben Nimmo of the Central European Policy Institute .
 NATO said that the statement ""ignores the facts of geography. Accused of trying to ""encircle" Russia and deepening divisions by accepting new members .
 The Road to the Homeland, which aired in March 2015, was criticized for distorting a March 2014 incident in which a man attempted to stop a truck from breaking through a Crimean checkpoint . Oleg Gorshkov was accused of unsupported claims of an anti-Crimean "pogrom
 Lithuania's Radio and Television Commission banned RTR-Planeta for three months . In April 2015, it said it had violated the law against "war propaganda, hatred and inciting discord" and ignored repeated warnings .
 In 2015 European Union External Action started a periodic publication called "Disinformation Review" The publication documents articles by Russian media accompanied by debunking information .
 In Left Foot Forward, Pierre Vaux described Milne's article as "the distorted apologia of a Kremlin advocate" Vaux questioned The Guardian's decision to publish it despite its own editorial criticizing moral relativism and disinformation .
 Some writers for western newspapers accused of apologism for Russia . The Nation, The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph among those accused .
 Isaac Chotiner of the New Republic said Cohen's writing implied that "some sort of control over Ukraine is a requirement of Russian greatness"
 Critics said pro-Russian western media used whataboutism and focused disproportionately on the minority of Euromaidan protestors who belonged to the far-right .
 Historian Timothy D Snyder found that both far-right and far-left publications echoed the positions of the Kremlin and Yanukovych .
 Andrew Wilson said the way that the left talks about Russia's "legitimate interests" in Ukraine is bizarre .
 John Mearsheimer's article for Foreign Affairs was criticized by Anders Åslund of the Peterson Institute and Mariana Budjeryn of World Affairs .
 mainstream media ignored allegations that Russian reporters had committed serious violations of journalism ethics . Laas Leivat of Estonian Life also found that Western media were "internalizing" Russia's portrayal of Ukraine as an "irreparably dysfunctional" country .
 Newsweek was criticized for articles by Damien Sharkov and Felicity Capon .
 Sharkov and Kenneth Roth falsely claimed Ukrainian lawmakers had passed a motion allowing deserters to be shot . Human Rights Watch says the motion was passed by Ukrainian lawmakers .
 Yuri M Zhukov said western and Russian portrayals of the war in Donbass,e. focusing on language and ethnicity, were not supported by data on violence . Data on violence showed a stronger connection with local economic factors .
 Western media outlets have described Ukrainian victims of the invasion as "white" and "Christian" The Middle Eastern victims of war have not been described in such favourable terms .
Western media outlets criticized for lack of coverage of conflicts in other parts of the world compared to Ukraine invasion . Western media outlets have also been criticized for their lack of Coverage of other conflicts .
 Russian state-controlled media systematically downplays both civilian and military losses, denouncing reports of attacks on civilians as "fake" or blaming Ukrainian forces .
Roskomnadzor investigated several independent Russian media outlets for publishing information about the war or civilian casualties . RoskomNadzors investigated severalindependent media outlets .
 The regulator threatened to block access in Russia to the Russian Wikipedia, and fine Wikipedia up to four million rubles . The article reflects casualties among Ukrainian civilians and Russian military personnel .
Novaya Gazeta suspended publication after it received warnings from Roskomnadzor . The independent newspaper is critical of the Russian government .
 Media in Ukraine have stated that the unrest in Ukraine was manufactured by Russia .
 Russia has accused Russia of being a provocateur, and of controlling anti-government groups behind the scenes . They have also accused the Russian government of controlling pro-Russian groups .
 The Ukrainian media published some fake news stories and false reports . The Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group criticized Russia for calling for "federalization" of Ukraine .
 Volodymyr Zelenskyy has used social media to counter Russian disinformation about him during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . He has posted statements, videos and photos to counter Russia's claims about him .
 In April 2014, historian Timothy D Snyder stated that Ukraine is now the site of the largest and most important free media in the Russian language, since all important media in Ukraine appear in Russian .
 Mikhail A Molchanov is a professor and former chair of the Department of Political Science at St. Petersburg . He was also a professor of political science at the University of St. Peterburg .
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's accumulation of wealth received coverage . Yanukovych's wealth was covered in coverage .
 Media mostly saw the Euromaidan protests as an anti-corruption and pro-democracy movement . Some observers suggested that these groups played a decisive role in armed confrontations .
Russian president Vladimir Putin was described variously as a "bully" and a "brilliant" and skilled leader . Moscow's claims of fascism and western conspiracies were often included for balance .
 OSCE observed high numbers of dumper trucks transporting coal from the Luhansk region to the Russian Federation .
 A number of U.K. and U.S. commentators reflected the Russian state media's portrayal of the Ukrainian crisis .
 Seumas Milne, John Pilger, John Mearsheimer, Stephen Cohen, and others blamed "neo-Nazis" in Ukraine and "NATO expansion" in Russia . Some Western sources did ascribe the 2014 fighting to Russian government and Russian special forces .
 Some outlets proclaimed a "new cold war" Some saw similarities to Adolf Hitler's annexation of countries with German-language speakers, such as Austria and the Sudetenland .
 Foreign Policy stated "The West has dithered under the assumption that providing lethal aid to Ukraine would escalate the conflict"
 A sanctions-dominant approach clearly has not prevented escalation. But a sanctions-Dominant approach has not stopped escalation .
 Berlin has ignored warning signs from Chechnya to Georgia and the authoritarian restructuring of the Russian state .
Putin triumphs when other world leaders allow the lies to go unchallenged, says Boris Schumatsky . In his article for Die Zeit, he said, "Putin Triumphs when others allow the lie to go unpunished"
 Putin knows that at least some politicians are wise to his ways . Of course Putin knows he is wise to some politicians .
 Volodymyr Valkov said EU and NATO policies "cannot be considered as ""provocative policies" against Russia to excuse Russia .
 Former Soviet republics and Warsaw pact countries have chosen democracy and joined alliances that best represent their interests and aspirations . Many former Soviet Republics and Poland pact countries are choosing democracy .
 Glenn Kates said some media's maps, such as one presented by Al Jazeera, oversimplified Ukrainian divisions .
 27 guests were journalists, none were from Ukraine, compared to eight from Russia . Most of the German journalists were experts on Russia rather than Ukraine .
 By January 2015, media coverage of events in Ukraine had decreased significantly . Media coverage in Ukraine has also decreased significantly.
 The former Prime Minister of Sweden Carl Bildt said, "It's striking how most media just avoid the battles in eastern Ukraine"
New pro-Russian media outlets have appeared in the Czech Republic, Sławomir Budziak said . The Polish New Eastern Europe said they fostered "a state of doubt" and "mistrust" in readers .
 This support was due to affection for Putin's strongman leadership, as well as anti-US and anti-Western political alignments . This support is due to the strongman leader's leadership, and support for anti-U.S. and pro-Russian policies .
 Many Indonesians disliked Zelenskyy due to seeing him as a weak leader and a "comedian" not worthy to rule a country .
 Many supported Russia due to positive reports of Ramzan Kadyrov and claims that the Azov Battalion covering their bullets with lard to be used against Chechen troops in the invasion .
Russian propaganda has been repeated by the state-controlled outlets of other countries such as Serbia and Iran . The same event also appeared in Malaysia which the Russian embassies in Malaysia were publishing video on facebook featuring a russian male wearing Malay outfit .
 In Iran, the British embassy in Tehran raised the Ukrainian flag in support of Ukraine . Iran's state media criticised the British Embassy in Tehran .
 Reports from Sputnik have been actively republished by Iran's pro-regime media .
 RT Actualidad is a popular channel that has spread disinformation about the war . In Latin America, the channel has spread misinformation about the conflict .
 Authorities in Vietnam have instructed reporters not to use the word ""invasion" and to minimize coverage of the war . Authorities have also instructed reporters to avoid using the word 'invasion'
 In South Africa, the governing African National Congress published an article in its weekly newsletter ANC Today . The article endorsed the notion that Russia had invaded Ukraine.
 A social media researcher found apparently orchestrated Twitter amplification of pro-invasion themes stressing Europe’s history of colonialism and Russian assistance to liberation movements .
 The fact that we don't see information warfare doesn't mean it isn't happening, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It doesn’t mean we’ve won. We’re not winning," he says .
 The word "invasion" was usually avoided . Garry Kasparov, Ian Birrell of The Independent, and Trudy Rubin of The Philadelphia Inquirer, were among those criticized .
 Peter Dickinson stated that the Western media was "enabling" Russian aggression against Ukraine . Peter Dickinson said that the media was "enabling Russian aggression" against Ukraine.
 Russia's actions described as terrorism by Alexander J Motyl of World Affairs, Marius Laurinavičius writing for Lithuanian Delfi, and Taras Kuzio in New Eastern Europe .
 He also avoids the term "rebel" and finds it "too gentle" and "civil war" "This conflict simply would not be happening if it were not instigated by Russia," he says .
 Reichelt wrote that it comes out of Putin's propaganda machine, which frames the war as a national issue rather than an act of aggression .
 The Russian media had more influence in parts of Donbass . 5% of Ukrainians had a "great deal" of confidence in the Russian media .
 A few stock phrases about a "referendum" and "the illegitimate Kyiv junta" I also got no answers as to their motivations .
 Poland's governmental computer emergency response team later confirmed that pro-Russia commentary had "flooded" Polish internet portals at the start of the Ukrainian crisis . Poland's government computer emergency team confirmed the commentary .
 Dubbed a "troll factory/house/farm" by the media, it operates out of a building on Savushkin Street in Saint Petersburg . It was moved from the outskirts of the city to a building in the city .
 Paid commenters may earn 45,000 roubles a month or 65,000 if they know a foreign language .
 Ukraine is a tool to weaken Russia, the Ukrainian government as fascist, Vladimir Putin as superior to leaders of other countries, and Western countries as depraved . The Ukrainian government has been accused of being a fascist and a fascist .
A poll conducted in December 2014 found that 63% of Germans have "little or no trust" in German media coverage of the Ukrainian conflict . The Kremlin is also active on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LiveJournal, VK.com, and Odnoklassniki .
 This is compared to 53% for the coverage of the Islamic State and 40% for coverage about the recent strike of German locomotive drivers . This is Compared to 53%, for coverage of Islamic State.
Messages, photos, video and audio shared on social media and news sites have included both authentic first-hand portrayals and depictions of past events . In China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Africa, and Latin America, some social media users trended towards showing sympathy for Russian narratives
 Facebook announced on 26 February that it would ban Russian state media from advertising and monetising content on the platform .
 During the 2014 Euromaidan protests, some journalists were physically assaulted or intimidated by the Russian-backed regime .
 Tetiana Chornovol was severely beaten and sustained a concussion in December 2013 in Boryspil . She was one of the leaders of the Euromaidan protests .
 Also during Euromaidan, Ihor Lutsenko was attacked by unknown assailants . RFERL journalists were injured by riot police .
 Vyacheslav Veremyi died after he was pulled from his taxi and shot by unknown assailants . 27 other journalists were injured in Kyiv on 18 and 19 February in attacks .
Journalists were particularly vulnerable in eastern Ukraine . Oleksandr Yaroshenko was beaten on three occasions in the first half of 2014 . His apartment was set on fire in Odessa .
 Staff of Provintsiya, the local newspaper in Kostiantynivka, Donetsk Oblast, were threatened for reporting critically on the Donetsk People's Republic . The newsroom was burned down in April 2014 .
 In May 2014, The Daily Beast reported that pro-Russian militants were conducting "systematic abductions" of journalists . In May 2013, the Daily Beast said that the militants were carrying out abductions .
 Irma Krat was held by insurgents from April to July 2014 . She was accused of beheading Berkut members and injected with a drug .
 Oleksiy Matsuka reported on links between pro-Russian separatists and Moscow . His car was set on fire and leaflets calling him a traitor were circulated in his hometown, Donetsk .
 Scholl was soon released and Kanygin was also released, after the abductors were paid . The abductors had been paid .
 Serhiy Lefter, a Ukrainian journalist for Poland's Open Dialogue Foundation, was kidnapped and held for three weeks by insurgents in Sloviansk .
 Sergey Zakharov, an artist from Donetsk whose work satirized pro-Russian fighters, was held for six weeks and tortured . Other journalists who disappeared in militant-controlled areas included Roman Cheremsky, Valery Makeyev, Yehor Vorobyov, Yury Le
 Maria Varfolomeyeva was taken prisoner by LPR militants on 9 January 2015 . She was accused in March of spying for the Ukrainian military in late January .
 Donetsk People's Republic militants were unable to find Viktoria Ishchenko, who had moved to Kyiv . In August 2014, they took her parents from her home in Donetsk .
 The same month, militants from the Luhansk People's Republic seized Serhiy Sakadynsky, holding him until January 2015, and his wife, Mariya Havak, holding her for two months .
 The Institute for Mass Information and the Independent Media Union of Ukraine – which began holding annual Enemies of the Press awards in 2007 – reported in June 2015 that the DPR and LPR were the most dangerous places in Ukraine for the media .
 Italian photojournalist Andrea Rocchelli and interpreter, Andrey Mironov, died in mortar fire near Sloviansk . French photographer William Roguelon suffered leg wounds in the exchange of mortar fire .
 Rossiya 24 journalist Igor Kornelyuk and sound engineer Anton Voloshin died on 17 June 2014 during mortar fire near Luhansk . The two died during the mortar fire.
 Anatoliy Klyan of Channel One Russia died on 29 June 2014 in Donetsk Oblast . His bus came under fire while approaching a Ukrainian military unit in the middle of the night .
Serhiy Nikolayev, a photojournalist for Segodnya, died on 28 February 2015 from wounds sustained during shelling in Pisky, Donetsk Oblast . He was arrested by Ukrainian authorities on suspicion of treason for posting a video on YouTube urging people to dodge the new
 After the publication of the list, a number of journalists received death threats in emails and phone calls .
 The Institute for Mass Information noted 32 cases of censorship, 13 abductions or illegal detentions of journalists . The Independent Media Union of Ukraine noted 11 attacks on editorial offices .
 Media were threatened with denial of registration if they criticized the annexation or described the situation as an ""annexation" of Crimea . Media were also threatened with denying of registration for criticizing the annexation .
 They were prevented from taking photographs or recording video of pro-Ukrainian gatherings . They were also prevented from photographing or filming pro-Ukraine gatherings .
 Alexandr Skobov was stabbed in July 2014 after writing an article for Grani . The article criticised the ideology of the self-declared Federal State of Novorossiya .
Lev Shlosberg was beaten unconscious in August 2014 in Pskov while investigating the alleged deaths of Russian paratroopers in eastern Ukraine . In August 2014, Arseniy Vesnin sustained a concussion in an attack while he was reporting for Ekho Moskvy on demonstrators supporting Ukraine
 A BBC crew was attacked in September 2014 in Astrakhan, also while investigating Russian soldiers' deaths . The crew was also investigating the deaths of Russian soldiers .
Timur Kuashev, a journalist for Dosh magazine and human rights activist, openly criticized the invasion of Eastern Ukraine as well as abuses by security services in southern Russia . Ksenia Batanova was attacked the same month in central Moscow, sustaining a fractured skull and concussion .
On 4 March 2022, Russian President Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish "knowingly false information" about the Russian military and its operations . Some media outlets in Russia have stopped reporting on Ukraine or shut their media outlets
 propaganda is being used in two very different ways, Ashleigh Stewart says .
In a first, internet bypasses TV as main news source for Ukrainians. www.unian.info.com.com .
 Ukrainians, according to the prosecution, trained in ""Raduyev camp" from Spring 1999 to May 2000 . Ukrainians trained in the camp from 1999 to 2000 .
 The obscenity of Russian state TV news, as it conceals war crimes for Putin," inews.co.uk.com .
 It's striking how most media just avoid the battles in eastern Ukraine . It is striking how many media just avoided the battles.
 The fact that Western analysts don't see information warfare doesn't mean it isn't happening, says Carl Miller . Miller: It doesn’t mean the West has won, and it doesn”t mean it’s happening .
 German media have been complaining for months about pro-Russian comments on their sites .
Security sources say they are part of an organized offensive steered from the Kremlin . German security sources say the offensive is part of a coordinated effort by Kremlin .