 Lt Col Crouch served as Director of Operations for the 52nd Expeditionary Intelligence Squadron . She was responsible for leading joint and coalition airborne ISR operators at multiple operating bases .
 In 2016, Russia unquestionably interfered in the 2016 U.S. presidential election by employing the first and second phases of NGW . NGW primarily through the manipulation of information .
Why Russia has and is conducting NGW operations is not well understood. Why Russia has been conducting N GW operations is also not well known .
 NGW and the critical role information plays in its success is also poorly understood . NGW's success has been poorly understood by many people .
 A history of invasions, violent Russian revolutions, and geographic challenges fuel this belief . The Russian revolution is a major cause for concern .
 President Vladimir Putin's continued fear of a U.S.-sponsored regime change in Russia. This sense of vulnerability contributes to Putin’s continued fear, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He has devised a comprehensive strategic defensive plan based on this belief . He has developed a comprehensive defensive plan.
 Putin believes returning Russia to great power status and becoming a pole in a multipolar world will ensure regime survival . Putin believes Russia will return to power in the future .
 NGW is focusing on information and how it is used in the first and second phases of NGW to influence its target population .
 NGW's ultimate success is defined by not reaching the level of direct, overt military intervention . The latter phases of NGW employ the use of military assets .
 Presidential election, and continues the first two phases in the Baltic States today .
 NGW has published a paper detailing how information was the key enabler in making NGW successful . Those cases are described in this paper and highlight how information is key to NGW success .
 The U.S. government will need to work with civil society and the private sector on a robust plan to counter Russia’s disinformation campaigns .
 The U.S. government and its NATO partners will need to take action to deter Russia. To counter Russia’s attempts to fracture the NATO alliance and its pushback against NATO encroachment, the United States must take action . The United States will also need to reassure Russian leaders
 Putin does not seek to conquer the world or to see the United States crumble, but he does desire stability and security . His goal to attain great power status and become a pole in a multipolar world is the defining factor of his defensive campaign .
Russian President Vladimir Putin said the greatest criminals in our history were those weaklings who threw power on the floor-Tsar Nicholas II and Mikhail Gorbachev . In July 2014, Putin stated, “The greatest criminals’ in the Russian history were the hysterics and the mad
 The Russian elite has a historical fear of regime change and for good reason . The Russian Elite has a history of fearing regime change, according to a report .
 Russia’s geographic curse, its history of invasions, and its record of violent revolution contribute heavily to Russia's sense of insecurity . Russia's geographic curse and history of invasion contribute to its sense of security .
 The United States has a long history of sponsoring regime change in countries in which it desired a government more compatible with Western thinking . During the Cold War, the U.S. was at least not pro-Communist .
 Russia has rationalized its millennium-long fears of being under attack . Russia has coined a new type of warfare whose foundation is based on weaponizing information . Russia perceives the U.S. as an overly aggressive United States .
 This type of warfare was on display in Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, the U.S. Presidential election in 2016, and its ongoing efforts in the Baltics .
 Russia values information as the key enabler and incorporated it into NGW as part of an ongoing strategic defensive plan to ensure regime survival . Kremlin leadership fears U.S.-led regime change in Moscow .
 Russia values information as the key enabler and incorporated it into NGW as part of an ongoing strategic defensive plan to ensure regime survival . Kremlin leadership fears the United States will attempt to conduct a regime change in Russia .
 Russia has historically had limited access to the open ocean, limiting its ability to project power globally . Russia has also had limited ability to use the ocean as a source of power .
 With those vulnerabilities in mind today, the current regime has developed a fortress-like mentality . The current regime is known to have developed a Fortress-like attitude .
 Size Russia is immense, its geographic expanse at times seeming almost infinite . The country's size is immense .
 It stretches continuously from east to west for over five thousand miles and eleven time zones . It is nearly double the size of the United States, and it stretches continuously .
 On Russia’s east is the Pacific Ocean and the Seas of Japan and Okhotsk .
 On its west, Russia shares a border with Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia . Russia also shares the border with Poland, Lithuania and Lithuania .
 The Trans-Siberian and Baikal-Amur Mainline are the only two rail networks that run west to east . The north to south routes are also sparse .
 Russia’s lack of manpower and an underdeveloped transportation network in Siberia make it exceptionally difficult for Moscow to project power east of the Urals to protect its own borders .
 Ports along Russia's northern coast are frozen much of the year as are those on Russia's east coast .
 Some ports on the east coast open into the Sea of Japan, which is dominated by the Japanese . In addition, some ports in Japan open to the Sea.
 Russia is limited in its ability to project power globally . With its frozen ports and lack of independent access to the open ocean, Russia islimited in its able to projectPower globally .
 The Northern European Plain begins in France, north of the Alps, and spills eastward into Russia to the Ural Mountains . The Plain is named for the Russian Plain .
 It's a vast, flat piece of land over which invading armies can and have easily traversed . It is a vast and flat part of the world that can be easily accessed by armies .
 The plain is at its narrowest in Poland, where it is only three hundred miles wide . It is at the narrowest place in Poland.
 This narrow strip would be the place for Russia to stop an enemy invasion from the west before the enemy reaches the country's heartland .
 The former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics bordered Poland and that, combined with Moscow’s control of the former Warsaw Pact countries, created a Soviet-controlled buffer zone far to the west of Moscow .
 Russia is farther from the entry point of a potential mass invasion. With Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania all today sovereign nations and Poland as a NATO partner, Russia is far from theentry point of the potential invasion .
 Moscow's western border is closer to Moscow now than when Tsar Peter the Great died in 1725 .
 Russia's enemies have made multiple attempts to invade the country over the Northern European Plain . Such an invasion would require long supply lines that would be difficult if not impossible to sustain .
 History of Invasions Russia has seen no shortage of invasions in its long history . The Russian military has been involved in many invasions, including those of the past .
 These invasions have shaped modern Russians and their view of their homeland relative to foreign powers . The invasions of foreign powers have shaped the view of modern Russians .
 As early as the 1200s, East Slavic tribes living under the Kievan Rus, centered in what is today the Ukraine, were continuously attacked by Mongols .
 The Kievan Rus, recognized as the earliest Slavic state in what will become Russia, was destroyed by the Mongols . The center of Slavic Rus’ power moved northeast to Moscow .
 The move to Moscow created the same problem that has haunted Russia for the last thousand years . The problem continues to haunt Russia today .
 There are no mountains, deserts, and few rivers in the west, making Moscow, and the Russian heartland, challenging to defend . The Russian capital is home to the largest city in the world .
 From 1812 forward and including the Crimean War of 1853, the Russians were defending their own territory in the North European Plain on average once every thirty-three years .
 Russia’s history of invasions from the west contributes to the vulnerability Russians feel about security, as does their history of revolutions . Russia's history of invasion from the West contributes to its vulnerability .
 History of Revolutions 5 Russian Revolutions Russia has suffered three revolutions and the collapse of both the Tsarist Empire and of the Soviet Union in the twentieth century .
 In 1905, Tsar Nicholas II was forced to acquiesce to a Russian population weary of food shortages and labor exploitation by granting civil liberties and forming a parliament .
 The February 1917 Revolution forced Tsar Nicholas II to abdicate in favor of a Provisional Government due to his inept leadership and a war-weary population .
Three years of civil war and a terrible famine transpired before the Bolsheviks consolidated power . The USSR was largely within the borders of the former Tsarist empire .
 Soviet Revolution The USSR under Joseph Stalin was a brutal dictatorship . The USSR was a ruthless dictatorship under Stalin .
 The USSR's economic problems culminated in the early 1980s with an economy that was only expanding between a half percent and two percent annually . The USSR’s economic problems ended in the late 1980s .
 The multiethnic and cultural differences of the USSR also began to bubble to the surface with Baltic States lobbying the United States to pressure Moscow . Georgians marching in protest at the potential loss of their native tongue as the state language .
Economic stagnation, corruption, and domestic problems led to a demand for change from all but 6 most hard-liner Communists .
Hard-liner conservatives roared back to life,18 and the Soviet people, now less afraid of the regime, began demanding ethnic and national freedom . The plan resulted in unintended effects, and the hard-liners roared back.
 The coup failed after democratic resisters, led by Boris Yeltsin, rallied both the people and military and peacefully quashed the attempted coup .
After the coup, power shifted from Gorbachev to Yeltsin, who was still basking in a hero’s glory . The coup took place in the early 1980s .
 Yeltsin emboldened the non-Russian republics to “assert their sovereignty’s, 21 and one by one, they began applying for and receiving international recognition . Yeltsins have been given international recognition for their sovereignty .
 Gorbachev resigned on 25 December 1991, and six days later, the Soviet Union officially dissolved . The Soviet Union was officially dissolved in 1991 .
 Even in the twenty-first century, Russia continues to face the challenges that have haunted the country and its rulers .
 In the mind of many Russians, the Northern European Plain is still an inviting path for would-be invaders . In the minds of many Russian, it is still inviting path to invasion .
 Russia still does not have sovereign, year-round direct access to any ocean, making it unable to truly project and sustain power globally . Russia still doesn't have sovereign access to the ocean .
 Russia's elite is 7 wholly insecure and more than a bit paranoid, says author . Russia's history of invasion and revolutions are in the back of Russians' minds, he says .
 Russian mindset of being under constant state of siege heavily contributes to the Russian mindset . Russia is under constant siege by the Russian army .
 Vladimir Putin believes the U.S. is laying the foundation for regime change in Russia . Both the Tsarist and Soviet empires collapsed in the 20th century .
 The United States will stop at nothing to maintain its unipolar position in global affairs . NATO's continued encroachment toward Russia’s borders will continue, the U.S. has a colorful history of successful regime changes .
After World War II, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin worked tirelessly to install pro-Soviet regimes in Eastern Europe . U.S. history of attempted regime after World war II: Joseph Stalin .
 He was attempting to prevent future invasions by ensuring an enemy’s march to Moscow was not enabled by anti-Soviet governments .
 The U.S., on the other hand, worked to contain the Soviets spread of influence and covertly rollback Moscow’s gains and counter the spread of communism .
Between 1947 and 1989, the U.S. has attempted regime change sixty six times . Truman and Eisenhower sponsored the majority of regime change attempts in order to rid Eastern Europe of pro-Soviet regimes .
 The second regime change movement occurred as Kennedy and Johnson aimed to prevent pro-Soviet regimes from arising in post-colonial Middle East, Africa, and Southeast Asia . The second movement was aimed at preventing pro- Soviet regimes from emerging in the region .
 U.S. attempted twenty-five offensive operations aimed at replacing pro-Soviet government with pro-western government . Only three were successful, with only three successful .
Twenty-five preventative operations aimed at countries that were not yet allies of the USSR, of which thirteen were successful . 26 and twenty-one hegemonic regime changes aimed at maintaining hierarchical regional order .
 If the U.S. did not have such a history of attempting regime change specifically aimed at the USSR, there would be little basis for Russia’s paranoia .
 The United States was only successful at directly overthrowing pro-Soviet governments during the Cold War in three of twenty-five cases . Russia is fully aware of the U.S. sponsorship in all three of those cases .
 The United States must maintain its global hegemony in order to ensure the U.S. dollar continues its dominance as the world’s reserve currency .
 The Russian elite believes the U.S. has used its influence to impose economic sanctions against Russia . The sanctions are in order to limit Russia's military growth .
 Putin likely views this as a form of economic warfare and not merely an instrument of national power the United States proclaims .
 Putin: "The USA prefers to follow the rule of the strongest and not by the international law" In 2014, Putin said the U.S. would follow the "stronger and not the strongest"
 The situation of a unipolar world, of a monopoly, is coming to an end. Thank God, this situation of an un bipolar world, is ending, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia will continue to take actions that empower Russia as an influencer in the world, while diminishing the global role of the U.S. and its allies .
 Vladimir Putin faces the same challenges as Ivan the Terrible and Josef Stalin in defending Russia’s western border .
 The agreement on the final settlement with Germany stated that no additional NATO troops would be deployed on the territory of the former GDR . Neither would weapons of mass destruction .
 NATO's military infrastructure would not move eastward. That meant that NATO’s military infrastructure wouldn’t go eastward . That means that NATO's infrastructure wouldn't move eastwards .
 Russia must protect its western border as NATO and the EU push closer toward the Russian heartland .
 Estonia and Latvia both border Russia in the northwest . The only remaining buffer between Russia and the rest of NATO today is Ukraine and Belarus .
 Putin will likely do everything in his power to keep Ukraine from joining NATO and ensure Belarus remains an obedient ally . He will likely keep Ukraine out of NATO and keep Belarus from joining .
 Russia’s Overall Strategic Plan is no secret Vladimir Putin longs for Russia to inspire the same fear and respect around the globe as the former Soviet Union . Russia's overall Strategic Plan.
 Russia has operationalized NGW as the primary weapon to execute the plan . NGW has been operationalized as a primary weapon for Russia to execute plan .
 NGW is being used to execute components of Russia’s strategic defensive plan . The next section will describe NGW, the role information plays as a sub- component of NGW .
 Sergey Chekinov, Doctor of Technical Sciences and Sergey Bogdanov are retired Russian military officers . They describe information superiority in future wars as a requirement in order to meet strategic goals .
 Nonmilitary tools, including the use of information, could become the primary factor in determining outcomes .
 Chekinov and Bogdanov coined the phrase ‘New Generation Warfare’ to describe a type of warfare that reflects their interpretation of the evolution of military art .
 Asymmetric Warfare is “both systemic and comprehensive, simultaneously employing political, diplomatic, informational, economic, military and other indirect forms’s ‘asymmetric warfare’
 In Asymmetric Warfare, Russia strives to create an alternate reality as part of its military strategy . Russia uses this alternate reality to legitimize conflict and avoid direct military confrontation .
 Information operations are critical to creating this alternate reality . Information operations have been critical to create the alternate reality.
 Low-Intensity Conflict occurs as competition between groups or nations below the level of conventional war but above peaceful competition . It ranges from subversion to the use of armed force .
Change, discontent, poverty, violence, and instability are what make LIC possible . Change, discontent and poverty are what makes LIC possible.
 Operations begin under a crisis meant to destabilize the geopolitical situation . Operations start under the threat of a crisis.
 Next, they progress to degrading, impoverishing, or disintegrating the nation to make it a failed state . Next, the nation will be disintegrating, or making it a failing state .
 The attacker finishes it by swooping in as the “savior of the affected country’s. Finally, the attacker finishes the attack on the country .
 Information is a primary component of LIC and is used to promote the political and 14 ideological values of the aggressing country .
 Intelligence, psychological operations, and information warfare are all key subunits of the autonomous information unit . The unit is used to adversely impact the decision-making of the opponent, thereby enabling attacking forces .
 Sixth-Generation Warfare is a method of modern warfare that makes or attempts to make the massing of large forces for a conventional war obsolete .
 It uses non-contact warfare and conventional systems so precisely that the physical effects approach the nuclear threshold of 15 destruction . The nuclear threshold is 15 .
 The main goal is to destroy the enemy’s means of retaliation, attempting to effect the downfall of the political system . Then using the local population as the instrument to triumph over the opponent .
 The tactic is to provide information to the opponent that induces him to take a specific action desired by the controller .
 The information can be used constructively, where the desired action is favorable to the controller, or destructively, to paralyze the opponent’s decision-making ability . The information is a constructively and destructively.
Experts in military strategy Chekinov and Bogadanov describe NGW and its eight phases . In an article called ‘The Nature and Content of a New Generation War’, experts in military Strategy Chekinova and Bogdanov describe the NGW .
 The first four phases are generally non-kinetic and variations of LIC . The fifth phase is beginning some conventional military operations .
 First Phase: non-military asymmetric warfare encompassing information, moral, psychological, ideological, diplomatic, and economic measures as part of a plan to establish a favorable political, economic, and military setup .
 All types, forms, methods, and forces, including special operations forces, space, Russian radio broadcasts, electronic, diplomatic, and secret service intelligence, and industrial espionage .
 The phases of NGW may take place sequentially or simultaneously and not all of them may be employed . Not all of the phases of the NGW could be employed.
 In fact, the ultimate goal is success without resorting to overt military actions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The ultimate goal" is to be successful without overt military action .
 Russia’s NGW is a long17 term play, and information operations used in phases one through three could take place over years .
 The key to Russian NGW strategy is influence, which involves exploiting all aspects of information using skillful internal communications, deception operations, psychological operations, and external communications .
 It takes time to acquire influence, and Russia is playing the long game . Russia is a long game, and it takes time for influence to acquire .
 The first tsar of Russia, Ivan the Terrible, first executed the concept of attack as a defense by attempting to expand Russia’s territory .
 He was able to secure territory east through Siberia and south to the Caspian Sea . He created a buffer zone between Moscow and would-be invaders .
 Putin's tactics today are different only in execution, but the strategy is still the same as a defense . Putin’s tactics are different in execution and in execution .
 Putin has mastered NGW, in particular the information dimension, and employs it in a deliberate manner to achieve his ultimate defensive goal . Putin has used NGW in order to return to great power status .
 NGW is designed to help Russia accomplish its interim goals of diminishing U.S. reputation, fracturing Western alliances such as NATO and the EU . The next sections will illustrate Russia’s use of NGW, and demonstrate that it is robust enough to cover a range of desired effects
 Crimea in 2014; interference in the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election; and current influence operations in the Baltic Sea Region . Crimea was annexed by the United States in 2014 .
 Russia employed subversive methods of Low-Intensity Conflict, a component of NGW, against Ukraine from 2004 to 2014 . It culminated in the latter phases of N GW when Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 LIC began during the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, with Russia attempting to influence the election of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych over the pro-Western candidate .
Pro-Western Yushchenko declared the winner of the election . The results were discarded and a new election took place .
 Russia ramped up efforts in 2008 against Ukraine as it was contemplating membership in NATO . Russia issued passports to Crimean residents, pushing propaganda delegitimizing the Ukrainian government .
 His election was a result of both his “orange” coalition’s inability to govern60 as well as the successful Russian influence operations that occurred between presidential 2004 and 2010 Presidential elections . He was elected to the presidency in 2010 .
 Russia employed information operations during early NGW phases by using propaganda and disinformation to influence local, regional, and global audiences . In 2013, during the Euromaiden uprising, Russia used information operations.
 Russia used a mix of Russian-language TV, online media, and social networks to influence the Ukrainian and Crimean population . Russia used several propaganda strategies in order to influence its population .
 Propaganda included discrediting Ukraine’s EU Association Agreement integration efforts, calling pro-Western forces ‘fascists’ and blaming the United States for information operations against Russia .
 The regime change from pro-Russian to a pro-Western government meant Russia had lost its influence in one of its critical border nations in the west . Russia shares language, culture, history, and vast business ties with Russia .
 The disinformation and denial and deception strategies employed in the latter stages of NGW during the takeover of Crimea caused confusion among global leaders . By the time anyone could determine what was accurate and what was disinformation, Russia had already successfully annexed Crimea .
 Russia once again controlled Sevastopol naval base, not by an agreement with the Ukraine but by physical domination .
 Sevastopol made Russia once again a Balkan power, giving them a year-round warm water port and enhancing Russia’s power projection in the Black Sea Region, southern Europe, and Asia Minor .
 Seizing Crimea and attempts at securing Eastern Ukraine also satisfy Putin’s interim goals . Putin also wants to push back against NATO expansion into border countries of Russia .
 Ukraine is not a NATO member, but a pro-western government could decide to apply for membership in both NATO and the EU . Russia would abhor the move .
 The actions Russia took immediately to annex Crimea and stir unrest in Eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian 20 population understands that a dalliance with NATO or the EU will have painful consequences for them .
 Putin ensures Ukraine stays “gray’ at a minimum does not join NATO or the EU . He continues to attempt to influence the Ukrainian population to eventually take a more pro-Russian stance .
 Operations in Ukraine are designed to create a Russian-influenced buffer zone and increase space between the nearest NATO member and Russia .
 Russia’s NGW is not limited to nations or areas in which it plans to use military force . Russia's NGW will not be limited to countries or areas that it plans for military force.
 NGW has a multi-layered approach to increasing turmoil in locations in order to create the conditions in which it knows it can be effective . NGW says it is so effective that it has been able to create a new set of conditions that it knows can be
 The first few phases of NGW create the environment Kremlin leadership desires, which is precisely what occurred during the 2016 United States presidential election . For some situations, military force may be used whereas with others, such as the U.S., such as with others.
 Multiple U.S. federal agencies concluded Russia interfered in the election in a deliberate and extensive manner with two main objectives .
 The earliest Russian involvement in the targeted 2016 elections began through the Internet Research Agency as early as 2014 . Social Media Campaign is the first Russian election campaign to target 2016 elections .
 The IRA is a Russian company funded by Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Viktorovich . Viktorovich has known ties to Vladimir Putin .
 Posing as United States activists, they set up social media profiles aimed at attracting large U.S. audiences and addressing divisive political and social issues .
 IRA specialists created social media accounts through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Tumblr, and Instagram . They created accounts through social media sites such as Instagram and Twitter .
 The IRAcontrolled accounts initially posed as individual persons but by 2015, the IRA-controlled accounts began posing as larger groups or public groups . The IRA controlled accounts initially posing as individual people .
 IRA’s focus changed from sowing general political discord in the U.S. to deliberate measures to support the Trump Campaign and disparage the Clinton Campaign . By 2016, the IRA's focus changed to supporting the Trump campaign .
76 The IRA also purchased Facebook advertisements to promote Trump and disparage Clinton . The pages were used to criticize Hillary Clinton and continued throughout 2016 .
 Many tweets were re-tweeted by members linked to the Trump campaign as well as high-profile U.S. citizens . Former Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul, Roger Stone, Sean Hannity, and Michael Flynn, Jr. were among those who tweeted .
 The IRA managed to convince unwitting Twitter followers to stage political rallies on behalf of the Trump campaign . The IRA also managed to persuade unwitting Twitter users to stage rallies on their behalf of Trump .
 The IRA used all of the popular social media platforms to impact the U.S. election by vigorously promoting Trump and disparaging Clinton . The IRA also used all the popular Twitter platforms to promote Trump .
 The IRA's tactics were so effective, members of the Trump campaign unwittingly interacted with IRA members to provide assistance and coordinate on Trump rallies .
 Cyber unit 26165 predominantly hacked into the organizations and then turned those materials over to cyber unit 74455 to disseminate them through various methods with the intent to embarrass and disparage Clinton Campaign .
 The GRU's 26165 hacking efforts began in March 2016, while 74455’s began disseminating the hacked materials as early as April 2016 . GRU unit 26165 used spear-phishing emails on multiple members of the Clinton Campaign, DNC, and DCCC, targeting
 Unit 26165 was exceptionally effective and gained email access to John Podesta, Clinton’s campaign manager, other members of the Clinton Campaign, and DNC member .
 GRU hackers gained access to the DCCC network to access documents related to the Clinton Campaign . The hackers gained tens of thousands of documents, including the Clinton campaign .
Once on the DCCC network, they were able to use a virtual private network to gain access to the DNC’s network . Once on the network, the DNC was able to access the DNC's network .
 Unit 26165 used malicious software to harvest any data needed for its anti-Clinton operation . It logged keystrokes, screenshots, and the ability to compress and compile data.
 GRU 26165 spear-phishing tactics against the DNC, DCCC, and Clinton Campaign members resulted in the acquisition of tens of thousands of emails between members of the Clinton Campaign and internal strategy documents, fundraising data, and opposition research .
 GRU's next move was to get the information out to the American people . The GRU’s next move is to retrieve the data .
 Members of 26165 and 74455 created fictitious online personas “DCLeaks’ and “Guccifer 2.0’ in order to disseminate the stolen information .
 The GRU released personal and financial information of Clinton Campaign members and a DNC member as well as internal Clinton Campaign correspondence . The DCLeaks Facebook page and DCLeaks Twitter handle, the GRU. handle, were also released .
 The GRU even created a Gmail account to correspond privately with reporters and other U.S. persons in order to give them early access to the content prior to it being released to the public . The GR U even created an account to communicate privately with journalists and others .
After the DNC realized it had been compromised, the GRU set up a Guccifer 2.0 Wordpress blog . It subsequently published its first post, attributing the DNC intrusion to a lone Romanian hacker .
 Wordpress blog, GRU also published thousands of stolen DNC and DCCC documents, including opposition research conducted by the DNC .
 Releases were timed and related to states considered competitive such as Florida and Pennsylvania . releases were timed.
 The GRU also forged a relationship with Wikileaks in order to amplify its effect on the U.S. population . In addition to using DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0, the GRU used DCLeaks.
 Wikileaks’ previous release of stolen documents related to Hillary Clinton when she served as Secretary of State made Wikileaks a perfect partner for the GRU’s operations .
 Wikileaks founder Julian Assange believed if he received information from DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0, in addition to the thirty thousand Clinton emails he had already acquired through the Freedom of Information Act, 25 that Wikileaks could be seen as the de facto repository for data disparaging or embarrassing to
 Between October 2016 and November 2016, Wikileaks released 33 installments of the GRU's stolen emails, including fifty thousand emails from John Podesta’s personal email account .
 The GRU took advice from Candidate Trump to help him persevere over Candidate Clinton . The Trump Campaign was cleared from knowingly communicating with Russia .
 GRU cyber unit 26165 created and sent spearphishing emails to the domain that housed Clinton’s personal server . Within five hours of his famous, “Russia, if you're listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails.
 Up until this point, there had been no previous targeting of that domain .
 It targeted state boards of elections, secretaries of state, and county governments . It also targeted private companies involved in the hardware and software of electronic polling stations and voter registration .
 Russia demonstrated to the world that Russia has 26 the willingness and capability to affect a superpower . First, it demonstrated that Russia's willingness to affect the world .
 To reach Russia’s ultimate goal is to be a great power again with its own sphere of influence . Russia must demonstrate it actually has great power, says Peter Bergen .
 Putin demonstrated the impact that NGW, and in particular disinformation, can have when applied effectively .
 Kremlin leaders believe that the United States is involved in Russian politics, so they should also have the right to intervene in U.S. politics .
 Putin made progress on one of his interim goals within the overall strategic defensive campaign . By interfering in the U.S. 2016 election, he undermined the United States political process .
 With a democratic political system in doubt, the U.S. population loses trust in that system . The United States is losing trust in the democratic system .
 By interfering in the U.S. election, Russia placed doubt in the political process and caused a deep divide among Americans .
 U.S. democracy’s biggest advocate, should not be the global hegemon . By Russia's logic, a chaotic democracy does not instill a sense of 27 security, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin is essentially chipping away at the U.S.’s reputation little by little .
 As the U.S. reputation trends downward globally, the opportunity arises for another to rise and take its place . In areas where it seeks to influence, such as Eastern Europe and the Baltics, the chance arises for a rise . The opportunity arises in areas of
 The Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are home to a significant number of Russian speakers . Most of the Russian speakers are ethnic Russians .
 As of 2011 data, Russian speakers in Estonia comprise 30 percent of the population . Twenty-five percent are ethnic Russians .
 Latvia hosts thirty-five and twenty-seven percent respectively, and Lithuania eight and six percent, respectively . Latvia hosts 30-35 and 20-27 percent respectively .
 Policies were responsible for relocating Russians to the Baltic States to dilute the ethnic population and instill the Soviet culture .
 Much of the Russian population in the Baltic States has limited rights due to their Russian ethnicity . However, much of the Baltic states have limited rights because of anti-Russian regulation .
 Putin has capitalized on feeling of second-class status and feeds Russian media and anti-Western propaganda into the Baltics . The Baltics pose a threat to the Baltic States, according to Putin .
 President Putin has the opportunity to incite discord in the Baltics and influence government in those states through the political process . The ultimate aim is to bring Baltics under the influence of Russia .
 Russia has used trolls extensively to aid in pro-Russian propaganda as well as to disparage the West by spreading disinformation and propagating fake news .
 Russian propaganda is a mix of lies and truth, meant to confuse and influence its audience . Russian propaganda has been used as a way to influence and influence the public .
 Russia exploits human vulnerabilities by using memes, caricatures, videos, and images to evoke an emotional response . Using themes of human rights violations against Russian speaking minorities, anti-NATO messaging, and fear of refugees, Russia exploited human vulnerabilities .
 Russia uses Russian television such as Russia Today and Sputnik News . In Lithuania, Russia propagated a false narrative depicting a NATO soldier raping a Lithuanian girl102 in an effort to besmirch NATO troops and highlight NATO's threat to Russia .
 Lithuanian police investigated and found no evidence to support the claim . Lithuanian Police investigated and said there was no evidence.
 Russian social media accounts depicted NATO soldiers as drunkards pursuing fights with the locals . Putin’s propaganda highlights the poor treatment of the Baltic States’ Russian-speaking population .
 Russia's propaganda also blames Western-backed fascists as the cause of Ukraine's crisis . Russia’s propaganda also blamed Western- backed fascists for the crisis .
 Evidence from a study with multiple Russian-speaking Estonians illustrates that the rhetoric is having the desired effect .
6.6 29 Russia also uses social media in the Baltic States to attack Western ways of life . Russian-speaking Estonians acknowledged their belief in Russia’s fascist propaganda regarding Ukraine .
 Facebook hosts Russian-friendly online communities that talk of Putin’s greatness and his embrace of traditional values .
 Putin has an interest in gaining influence with the governments and people of those countries . The Baltic States are part of NATO, but are not part of the alliance .
 If successful, at a minimum, it could result in pro-Russian policies at one end of the spectrum . Baltic State governments demanding the removal of NATO troops from those countries or even more dangerous .
 Putin’s interim goals in his drive to great power status is his desire to fracture NATO and make it irrelevant . Putin's aim is to make NATO irrelevant and fracture NATO .
 Putin wants to be the hegemon in the Baltic States region, but by becoming a greater influence, the United States becomes less of an influence . Putin's desire to move to a multipolar world gains traction .
 Putin's long-term goal is to demonstrate that NATO cannot respond to military situations below the level of armed conflict . In the end, Putin’s long- term goal is for NATO to show that it can't respond to such situations .
 He desires the world to know that “Russian aggression will always result in an unchallenged fait accompli,’112 which is exactly what happened.
 Russia will more likely employ NGW to make progress toward its long-term goal of regaining great power status . NGW will likely be more likely to use NGW as a tool for regaining power .
 The first and second phases of NGW are information and psychologically based . The key to identifying where and when Russia will next employ NGW revolves around understanding what motivates Russian leadership .
 Russia’s ultimate goal of becoming a great power requires interim goals of diminishing U.S. reputation, fracturing western alliances, enhancing Russia's power projection, and pushing back against NATO encroachment . Russia's ultimate goal is to become a greatpower, says the
 One can assume Russia is or will be executing NGW operations. By identifying the countries and organizations that can help Putin reach these goals, one can assume that Russia will be doing this .
 Russia would like to promote pro-Putin and pro-Russian propaganda in those countries along its periphery or that share similar ideals . Russia desires to harm those nations, organizations, or individuals promoting Western ideologies .
 The list of countries, organizations, and individuals upon which President Putin would like to create an effect is long and is outside the scope of this paper . However, a couple of examples are in order .
 Both U.S. and Poland are holding presidential elections in 2020 . Both countries should expect widespread Russian interference in the elections .
 Russia would like to continue to sow doubt in the democratic process, and the U.S. and Poland are long-time adversaries .
 Belarus is holding a presidential election in 2020, but President Putin and Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, have had strained relations recently .
 The United States attempted to take advantage of their strained relations with Russia by pulling Belarus out of Russia’s sphere . At least partially, the United States offered to provide oil to Belarus .
 It is all but certain Russian leadership is already conducting first and second phase NGW in Belarus . It is in an attempt to promote Russian 31 ideals and President Putin .
 Belarus could find itself in a precarious position if the current spat over oil prices is reignited . Belarus is one of the top contenders on a short-list of countries Russia might consider .
Russia believes it to be the case for regime change in Russia . The U.S. wants regime change, but Russia says it's not .
 The thesis argues Russia’s entire strategy is based on regime survival . NGW will continue to conduct NGW until it no longer feels it is under threat .
 The U.S. must find a way to deter Russia while simultaneously reassuring Russians they are not under attack from the West .
 Russian leadership will continue to employ first and second phase NGW at will . It may eventually find enough success to wreak havoc in the United States internally, or fracture NATO and EU relationships .
Countering Information in NGW Countering Russia’s disinformation and propaganda strategy must be at the forefront of any attempt to gain the upper hand against Russia's meddling .
 Alina Polyakova and Ambassador Daniel Fried authored an article entitled, “Democratic Defense Against Disinformation’’s’. The article made a series of recommendations for governments to fight Russian disinformation and propaganda campaigns .
 None of these sectors by itself is enough to stop disinformation, collectively, they may reduce the impact of disinformation, says author .
 Recommendations are grouped at the strategic level and operational/tactical level . Recommendation is based on the strategic and operational level .
 The U.S. should label foreign state propaganda organs for what they are. Strategic Relations and Messaging The United States should label them as propaganda organs .
 The U.S. government needs to loudly identify Russian networks, such as RT and Sputnik, as vehicles for propaganda . The government should loudly identify the Russian networks.
 The U.S. government should actively monitor overt foreign propaganda narratives and inform the public on their content . The United States government should also actively monitor foreign propaganda.
 The State Department’s Global Engagement Center was created after the 2016 elections to counter state-sponsored propaganda . It should be adequately funded to support counter-information initiatives abroad .
 The GEC should be the point of contact for European Stratcom teams and to be the coordinator for U.S. civilsociety and academic endeavors . The G EC should be a coordinator for the United States Civilsociety.
 This information coordination office would share information with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the Department of Homeland Security, the GEC, and Congressional oversight committees .
 The United States government should regulate and apply legislation to political and issue ads generated by Russia and other authoritarian sources . The U.S. government should regulation and apply law to political, issue ads created by Russia .
 The Honest Ads Act, a bipartisan measure, would extend disclosure requirements for political and issue ads to social media . It would also extend disclosure standards for other media outlets .
 The loophole has permitted Russians to use social-media ads for disinformation purposes . The loophole is not required to disclose issue ads .
 The Act would require social-media companies to make reasonable efforts to prevent foreign persons from engaging in campaign-related communications activities, including ads . It would also require social media companies to be responsible for making reasonable efforts.
 Social media companies should clearly identify the sponsors and funders of all content . Social media firms should also identify the sponsor and funder of the content .
 The U.S. government should establish a high-level interagency fusion cell, perhaps called the National Counter-Disinformation Center . The cell would include liaisons from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, the GEC, and other relevant
This office should be funded and empowered to implement operational activities based on inputs from the information coordination office . This office should also be funded to implement operations based on input from the Information coordination office.
 The U.S. government and social media companies should fund tech-savvy civil-society groups . The United States government should fund the groups.
 StopFake, the Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, the Alliance for Securing Democracy’s Hamilton, and Baltic Elves. The Atlantic Council’'s D FR Lab is the Alliance of Securing democracy's Hamilton .
 Russian troll/bot/cyborgs can identify prominent Russian trolls and expose campaigns run by them . They have shown an ability to identify prominent Russians .
 They are often faster at and more effective than the government at identifying, countering, and discrediting Russian propaganda . They are also often more effective at identifying and countering Russia's propaganda .
 civil society and academia should develop opensource standards for sharing information on malicious actors and their activities .
 This effort would enable tech-savvy groups to share information faster with social media companies and 34 limit exposure to avoid amplifying disinformation tweets or posts . The effort would allow the social media groups to shared information faster .
Social media companies would be required to share information with social media companies and the DHS information coordination office . Those groups would be needed to share info with social Media companies and other groups .
 Print, television, radio outlets, and civil-society groups should educate editors and reporters on how to quickly identify suspected disinformation .
 Traditional media and highimpact online “influencers’ are often target of disinformation campaigns. Traditional media is often the target of misinformation campaigns .
 Spotting disinformation would ensure exposure is limited to the large U.S. audiences who consume mainstream media .
 Traditional media companies should be able to identify content originating from propaganda organs such as RT and Sputnik and treat their output as suspect .
 This would prevent content from populating newsfeeds or influencing trending topics . This would stop content from popping up on social media sites or trending topics. This would be the first time this would happen .
 Social media companies should also experiment with labeling automated and fake accounts . In addition, social media firms should also try to label automated accounts .
 They should experiment with algorithms used to better identify credible versus weak content . They should try to use algorithms to identify credible and weak content.
 Companies would use a set of transparent metrics, including user feedback, site longevity, and third-party independent reference points to help identify credible content . Companies would also use transparent metrics.
Social media companies should also revise advertising policies to ban ads from known propaganda outlets . Social media companies must also revise their advertising policies .
 Free speech does not require allowing commercial relations with foreign propaganda organs . Free speech doesn't require commercial relations. Free speech is not allowed to be used in foreign propaganda .
 The alternative is to make sure the ads are prominently labeled with their originators’ companies’s companies .
 Social media companies should limit the dissemination of social media content by bots and cyborgs . Social media firms should limit social media use of bots and cyberborgs, they say .
 Media and digital literacy courses are a great tool to teach consumers how to think critically about online and social-media content .
 Russian disinformation is not a new practice and will continue long into the future . Russian disinformation will continue to be used in the future, according to experts .
 Mandating a digital literacy course as part of the public education curriculum would ensure U.S. citizens learn from an early age how to spot disinformation .
 Finland is one story showing promise in fighting disinformation campaigns . Finland is also one of the world's largest countries .
 It has used education and a strong government acknowledgment and interaction to limit the effect of disinformation on the Finnish people .
5 Deterrence, Reassurance, and Policies Russia uses all of the national instruments of power against its adversaries . The United States has predominantly engaged Russia with the economic tool . Italy has also introduced digital literacy to its public school curriculum in its attempt to teach teens how to
 The U.S. will need to use the other non-military instruments of power to respond to Russian NGW in the 20-first century .
 The United States must look at Russia’s overall goal and its interim goals in order to mount an effective response . The U.S. must also focus on Russia's return to great power status.
 Russia is executing NGW operations to achieve the first interim goal to diminish the reputation of the U.S. It is to promote disinformation and propaganda in the United States to sow discord and fracture the democratic system .
 U.S. could take other steps to show strength and unity within NATO without further antagonizing Russia . But there are other steps that could be taken, including counter-disinformation campaign .
 Russia will not stop its campaign to try to fracture those alliances or push back against NATO encroachment . The United States and other NATO members can take the following steps to ensure their strength .
 The following statements and breakout of options are taken entirely from Dr. Dr. John Sutter's statements .
 First, U.S. and other countries need to deter Russia from threatening or undermining any members of the alliance .
 The U.S. needs to assure Putin that NATO is for defensive purposes only and does not threaten Russian territory .
7.7 Deterrence Measures to deter Russia in the European theater, NATO should rely on its comprehensive capabilities, not just conventional military forces . Third, U.S. policy decisions should be based on law, including international law .
 NATO should not post a large conventional buildup in the Baltics, as doing so could appear to be aggression, not deterrence . In other words, NATO shouldn't post a big conventional buildup, as it could appear.
 The alliance should think creatively about cross-domain deterrence as part of its comprehensive capability toolkit . The alliance has a range of capability tools to use .
 Efforts might include creating a “cyber incubator’s policy to encourage partnership between the U.S. government and private sector . Private sector members serve a one-two year term in United States Cyber Command .
 The U.S. government should encourage NATO in its planning scenarios to include consideration of how the alliance would react to potential new Russian land grabs beyond NATO borders .
 Russian aggression in Ukraine and Georgia might be designed in part to break NATO by sowing confusion about how to respond . Russian aggression may be designed to help break NATO.
 The U.S. should encourage NATO to incorporate these scenarios into planning to map out possible joint responses . The United States should encourage the NATO to include these scenarios in planning .
 This might deter Russia from believing that aggression in non-NATO areas could cause the alliance to collapse . This might also deter Russia.
 The United States can take several measures to reassure Russia that NATO does not pose a threat to Russia . The U.S. can also treat Russian leaders and the Russian state with respect .
 The U.S. is likely to achieve more toward its aims, or at the very least, not causing the leaders to lose face in Russia, which only inflames matters .
 The U.S. government should formally reaffirm that the United States does not seek to impose regime change in Russia . The United States should also reaffirm its stance against regime change.
 The U.S. should emphasize cyber operations against civilians is unacceptable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Economic sanctions should stand and be expanded if Russia does not back off its first and second phase NGW operations against the U.S. and other European nations . Russia is currently in its second phase of its NGW operation .
 NRFA is an agreement, not a treaty, but the United States should remind Russia it has a voice with 38 NATO . The agreement is the cornerstone of NATO-Russia relations .
 NATO’s new deployments are “rotating” battalions instead of long-term deployments that they are, even though they are consistent with the NRFA pledge . For example, at the 2016 Warsaw Summit, NATO's called its new deployments ‘
 Using transparent language is a step toward boosting the credibility of the alliance and combatting Russian claims of NATO aggression .
 The United States should support new conventional military deployments in Europe only up to the limit of NATO’s internal understanding of the 1999 adapted conventional forces in Europe treaty requirements . Unless Russia invades or seriously damages a NATO member state, the U.S. government should support them .
 Russia has repeatedly requested that NATO be limited to what was agreed upon in the unratified A/CFE treaty in 1999 . The U.S. government should state that the United States believes Ukraine does not currently meet NATO membership standards .
 Russian officials have stated the prospect of NATO membership was a driving factor in Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 Ukraine is far from meeting the requirements for NATO membership, and discussion of Ukraine in NATO is premature and puts NATO in a somewhat precarious position . Ukraine is not meeting the requirement for membership, but it is in a precarious position.
 The U.S. government says Ukraine is far from meeting NATO requirements . The statement would reassure Russia and encourage Ukrainians to move the country on a more stable path to free and fair elections .
 The U.S. government should encourage new bi-lateral and multilateral agreements on limiting dangerous military incidents between NATO and other European states and Russia, especially in the Baltic and Nordic regions .
 The U.S. government should also work with NATO allies to eventually reestablish regional arms control negotiations on both conventional and nuclear weapons .
 NATO shows unity and strength and will deter Russia from threatening NATO countries without further antagonizing them . By implementing these measures, NATO shows strength and strength .
 To prevent Russia from gaining too much power, the U.S., European Union, and NATO should take the steps outlined above in countering disinformation, deterrence and reassurance measures, as well as utilizing diplomatic and economic instruments of power .
 The Russian Federation and its predecessors have a long and stormy history of invasions, violent revolutions, and geography problems that have led to a large sense of vulnerability and insecurity .
 President Putin has enacted his entire strategic plan around defense . This sense of vulnerability has led President Putin to enact his entire plan arounddefense .
 He believes the way to secure his regime is to become a great power again and become a pole in a multipolar world .
 The U.S. is trying to diminish the reputation of 40 U. S. allies, enhance Russia’s power projection, and push back against NATO encroachment .
 Russia has taken multiple types of warfare and combined it into what it calls New Generation Warfare, which has been executed successfully in multiple areas . Russia has been successful in several areas.
 The key to NGW is information or disinformation and its use in propaganda and psychological operations . NGW has been accused of using propaganda and disinformation in the past . It is also known to be used in psychological operations.
 It is during the first two phases of NGW that information and psychological operations are employed . NGW is the first part of the first phase of the project .
 Total success in NGW means that military employment is never reached . NGW has never been a success in the country .
 Russia’s entire strategy is based on regime survival, and offensive measures are taken to ensure the regime lives to see another day . On the surface, this appears to be offensive in nature .
 The U.S., its NATO partners, and the EU can all take steps to mitigate Russia’s actions . The United States, the European Union and the United States can take steps.
 The first step is to counter Russia’s first and second phase NGW, the disinformation and psychological campaigns in target countries . NGW is a first step to counter the disinformation, psychological campaigns.
 The recommendation section list multiple options available to democracies in Russia’s crosshairs .
 The United States and NATO can take additional steps to deter Putin while simultaneously reassuring him that his regime is not under attack . The U.S., NATO can also take more steps to protect Putin's regime .
 The United States and Russia could find themselves able to work together on some initiatives, or at least not let tensions rise to the level of armed conflict . If carefully and masterfully played, the U.S. and Russia can work together.
 The measures outlined in this paper will deter Putin from further aggression and reassure him that the U.S. is not his enemy . The measures will also reassure Putin that the United States is not the enemy .
 Failure to incorporate any or some of these actions will result in continued disinformation campaigns aimed at Western democracies . Failure to include any or any actions will lead to continued disinformation campaign .
 Russia's tactics will only evolve, and if the U.S. does not get a handle on how to counter Russia’s disinformation campaign, it could result in such internal strife in the United States that the democratic institution as a whole is called in to question .
 The U.S. does not need to crumble for Putin to get the effect he is looking for. The United States does not needs to crumble.
 The U.S. is losing its global hegemon status and providing the opportunity for other nations, like Russia, to rise in its place . President Obama is looking to sow enough doubt into our democratic institution .
 The United States needs to engage in its own defensive campaign in order to keep Russia in check . Russia is playing the long game, and its strategy is ultimately a defensive campaign . The U.S. needs to do more to stop Russia from using its own defense .
 Michael Kofman, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, Olesya Tkacheva and Jenny Oberholtzer are among the group .
 Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 2017, 19.5 years .
 Report on the Investigation into Russian Interference in the 2016 Presidential Election, 1.1. Report on Russia's interference with the 2016 presidential election .