Georgia and Ukraine have been on the receiving end of this strategy for most of their post-Soviet history . Georgia and Ukraine are on the receive end of the strategy for the past two decades .
 Russia's sovereignty has been systematically and repeatedly violated by Russia . Russia has repeatedly violated the sovereignty of both Russia and Russia .
 Georgia as an ancient and unique nation located in the crossroads of three continents . Ukraine as a fellow Slavic country with a shared Russian history fighting to create its own identity . Georgia is an ancient nation.
 Russia has struggled to achieve its long-term goals of limiting Western influence, creating a Russian hegemony, and restoring Russia to great-power status . Russia has successfully weakened Georgia and Ukraine through these six strategic methods .
 Russia has damaged ethnic relationships in Georgia and Ukraine, but also severely tarnished its international reputation . In pursuing these goals, Russia not only irreparably damaged ethnic relations in Georgia but also damaged its reputation .
 A massive data dump into what I hope is a thought-provoking and helpful work of research and analysis. They provided invaluable insight that turned this work from a massiveData dump into a useful work .
Georgia and Ukraine are both Georgia and Ukraine . I have been immeasurably lucky to be given the chance to travel to both countries .
 The experience, and the wann people I met in each country, gave me precious insights . I hope to enhance the effect of this thesis .
 I am in incredible debt to my wife, Lena, my wonderful traveling companion and executive editor . I am also in great debt to her husband, Lena and her wonderful traveling partner .
 Without her, this project would have been nothing like the adventure it became, says author .
 In his research I have been moved by the plight and struggle these nations have suffered in their respective wars against numerous destabilizing forces . In my research I've been moved to the plight of these nations.
 West has abandoned the proud people of the steppe and Caucasus. Both countries face threats that the world cannot ignore, says Peter Bergen .
 It is too late, politically at least, to provide decisive assistance to these citizens, says David Frum . We can't deny further opportunities to distort and destroy their sense of identity, he says .
 Ukraine and Georgia have to offer their freedom to choose their own destiny . I wish anyone who reads this thesis will come to better understand what Ukraine andGeorgia have to do .
 Its people are welcoming and friendly, as well as eager to be perceived as modem and European . The country's people are friendly and friendly. It is also welcoming to the European community .
 Georgia's existence comes into focus outside the capital, Georgia's capital .
 Its infrastructure is in disrepair, its economy still heavily dependent on agriculture, and its territorial integrity at risk . Its territorial integrity is at risk, according to experts .
 Despite almost a quarter century of independence, large swaths of Georgia are occupied and divided, primarily along ethnic lines . Georgia is still divided, mostly on ethnic lines.
 Ethnic Ossetian and Abkhazian minorities hold sway over large portions of the country’s north and northwest . They are supported diplomatically, militarily, and economically by the Russian Federation .
 These ethnic minorities fought two wars, one in the early 1990s and a second in 2008, to gain their current status as de facto independent states . Both were supported by Russia, both supported by the Russian government .
 Despite their victory, today these people live in limbo, according to the Russian state . "Pawns in a greater game characterized by an exploitative Russian state," says the author .
 Another former Soviet Socialist Republic, Ukraine, also exists in a state of ethnic dishannony .
 Tbilisi is also lively, immersed in a festival-like atmosphere where merrymaking can be heard until early morning hours .
 Ukrainian language and culture is slowly replaced by Russian . But as one moves further east, the Ukrainian language, culture and culture are slowly replaced .
 In Kyiv, the geographic, political, and cultural center of the country, the Russian language is just as common as Ukrainian . Post-Soviet construction in Kyiv evokes a renewed sense of shared ethnonationalistic identity .
 Ukrainian-Russian cultural and linguistic rupture intensified following the chaos of the Euromaidan . The chaos that allowed Russia to annex or directly influence large swaths of Ukrainian territory .
 Today, the Republic of Crimea is a de facto member of the Russian Federation . ProRussian separatists still control two of Ukraine’s provincial capitals, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The Russian Federation's divisive and exploitative methods rapidly eroded Ukraine’s sovereignty in just a few short months . Like in Georgia, the Russian Federation’'s divisive methods quickly eroded Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Ethnic conflict broils at the heart of both crises, but escalation in violence seen in Georgia and Ukraine was not solely a domestic phenomenon .
 The Russian Federation fans the flames of ethnic division in Georgia and Ukraine, inciting Ossetians and Abkhazians to fight against the Georgian majority . Ukrainian and Russian speakers are also driving a wedge between the two countries .
 This thesis explores the nature of Russia’s exploitation, and how in the last twenty-five years Russian ethnic policy has affected the modem Georgian and Ukrainian states .
 Russia has overcome its comparative military and economic weaknesses in the international arena and capitalized on regional strengths . By focusing on a population-centered strategy rather than one based on firepower.
 Russia has engaged in a war of identity, pitting ethnicities against one another . Russia is actively shaping the internal politics of Georgia and Ukraine, but not the war of steel .
 Russia has achieved real political victory in the post-Soviet space. By driving a wedge between ethnic groups in Georgia and Ukraine, Russia has won political victory .
 Georgia and Ukraine share a unique historical relationship with Russia . Georgians and Ukrainians have been trying to redefine their futures as Western-aligned states . Russia has been driving Russia to a consistent Russian strategic approach to ethnic 2 conflict .
 The study of Georgian and Ukrainian cases represents a dichotomy . The study is similar in many ways to the study of the Georgian and Ukraine cases .
 The Georgians are an absolutely distinct people with a language and writing system unlike any other in the world . They also live side-by-side with other unique ethnic groups with roots in the Middle East, Europe, and Eurasia .
 Ukrainians share close Slavic ties with their Russian neighbors . Many are fighting to break free of centuries of Russification and build their own unique Ukrainian identity .
 Ethnic conflict in Europe is not a problem now relegated to the annals of history . Ethnic conflict remains an issue central to European security .
 The Abkhazian, Ossetian, Crimean, and Eastern Ukrainian cases are just four examples of unresolved ethnic conflicts simmering within the region .
Highly publicized incidents of ethnic conflict in the Balkans are well documented in contemporary academic publications . But studies of other European ethnic conflict zones have all but disappeared .
 The European Union, in particular, posits itself as the post-nationalist solution to all of Europe's problems .
 The EU literally lacks the vocabulary to talk sensibly about ethnicity or ethnic conflict . Reality is something very different, of course, but for having declared the matter done and dusted, the EU is still not ready to talk about it .
 The Yugoslav experience doesn't lie nearly far enough back in human memory to have been so resolutely forgotten . As a consequence, it also has no real strategy for it, says the author .
 U.S. and Europe will continue to be caught off-guard by Russia’s exploitation of ethnicity as a pretext to act unilaterally within the post-Soviet space . If the West continues to undervalue ethnicity, then the West will continue.
 The West has much to lose if Russia's ethnic exploitation baiting gets out of hand . A better understanding of its nature can lead to more enlightened strategic approaches to Russian brinkmanship .
 Russia can pursue its foreign policy in innovative (and dangerous) ways designed to exploit ethnic divisions and Russia’s cultural and institutional knowledge of the post-Soviet space .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is a military alliance of twenty-eight states that make decisions by consensus . The alliance is poorly suited for responding to Russian exploitative strategies aimed at attacking identity, enhancing the potency of Russia’s coercive foreign policies .
 Russia has outmaneuvered the West and tempered European and American responses to unilateral aggressive actions in the post-Soviet space . Russia, however, has also outmanoeuvred the West, and tempered the U.S. and Europe's response to unilateral actions .
 Academic studies on the subjects of ethnicity, Russian foreign policy, and Georgian/Ukrainian history are plentiful and immensely beneficial to the research of this subject . Few draw together the disparate aspects of ethnic division and Russia foreign policy .
 The thesis will combine and modify several conclusions of the authors in the fields of history, anthropology, and foreign relations . To show a consistent use of specific Russian exploitative tactics, this thesis will show the use of Russian exploitation tactics .
 The thesis cites the writings of Caucasus specialist Thomas De Waal and Ukrainian historian Andrew Wilson . The thesis is based on historical and ethnic background .
 An Introduction focuses mainly on the roots of modem conflict of the Caucasus following the collapse of the Soviet Union . Also ties in the complicated and interconnected ethnic roots of the region .
 The author pays special focus toward the roots of conflict, both in 1991-1994 and in 2008 . The author identifies specific and consistent destabilizing Russian actions, including supplying anns to separatists .
 Unexpected Nation provides a detailed view into the development of the modern Ukrainian State . The state was formed from the legend of Gog and Magog, to Kyivan Rus, on through the Soviet Union .
 Wilson's work illuminates Ukraine and Russia’s shared history and closely linked Slavic identity . Both concepts that 4 underlie the root causes of the Ukraine Crisis.
 This book also illustrates the blended nature of Ukrainian ethnic identity and its weakness under constant Russian influence .
 Both works tell the narrative of ethnic struggle, and provide vital context to understanding how past identity conflicts have affected the modern Georgian and Ukrainian states .
 The books do not adequately address the specific ethnically exploitative character of Russian policy in Georgia and Ukraine . They do not discount the ethnic dimension of conflict, but due to the fact that these books are concerned with history, they do not.
 Ethnic conflict is generally characterized by societal cleavages in underdeveloped or destabilized states . Ethnic conflict today is generally defined by societal Cleavages .
 In most cases, ethnic violence is easy to define and interpret, and is fueled by domestic struggles among internal groups . The origins of ethnic violence are easy to identify and interpret .
 Using ethnic groups against each other was a principle means of colonial control . But few all-encompassing and analytical studies of the topic exist today .
 Russia has developed a consistent and narrowly effective strategy using ethnicity as a means of identity manipulation . Russia is using ethnicity to take group differences and foster internal division .
 Understanding the nature of ethnicity, division, and ethnic conflict is vital to the analysis of Georgian and Ukrainian cases . The analysis of the Georgian and Ukraine cases is important for the analysis .
 Walker Conner discusses ethnicity extensively in chapter four of his book Ethnonationalism . Conner covers the word in current usage and parsing out what separates ethnicity from nationality .
This understanding is key in achieving the analytical objectives require for this thesis . This understanding is important in achieving this thesis, says the author .
 Ethnicity, when defined narrowly, is simply a group of people with a sense of common ancestry .
 Ethnic conflict theory goes far in clarifying the research direction of this thesis . The thesis is based on the theory of ethnic conflict .
 Donald L Horowitz penned a robust study of ethnic conflict and unified theories in his work Ethnic Groups in Conflict . The study was based on the work of Ethnic Groups In Conflict .
 The section “Conflict Theory and Conflict Motives’s” is especially relevant . The section is especially important .
 Ethnic divides can seriously weaken a society and leave it vulnerable to exploitation, says Horowitz . Horowitz does not explicitly analyze how ethnicity can be exploited in international relations .
 This knowledge is critical in identifying Russia's strategic methods, discussed in the hypothesis section to follow .
 Horowitz provides a holistic study of ethnic conflict theory . The following articles delve into specific aspects of the ethnic conflict, which will pertain directly to Georgian and Ukrainian cases .
 Each country provides an additional framework of understanding critical to the study of the ethnic aspect of conflicts in each country . Each provides an extra framework for understanding of the conflict .
3 Max Weber, Economy and Society, ed. ed. They find that likely causes of conflict are “conditions that favor insurgency,” such as politically weak 3 Max Weber .
 These conditions allow groups with specific ethnic, nationalistic, or religious goals to justify their initiation of conflict . These conditions are often used to justify the start of conflict.
 Several of the conditions described by Fearon and Laitin resemble the state of affairs in Georgia and Ukraine .
 Russia can ignite ethnic conflict because of the country's ability to identify and exploit state weaknesses. This article provides a framework for the argument, allowing the construction of the argument that Russia can ignited ethnic conflict .
 Russia has used this reasoning to validate its intervention in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and its support of Crimean and Eastern Ukrainian separatist movements . Russia has also used the reasoning to justify its intervention and support of Ukrainian separatists .
About 250,000 ethnic Georgians fled their homes in Abkhazia in the 1992-1993 conflict . Disaggregation was a major feature of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict .
 Four fifths never returned, allowing ethnic Abkhaz to exert greater political control over the region . The region was an 18-percent minority before the conflict .
 Crimea’s independence referendum and subsequent annexation represented a partition resolution to a conflict, although not one the Ukrainian government or its constitution supported . Alternatively, Crimea's independence referendum was an independence referendum .
 International Studies Quarterly 41, : 181. Transnational Ethnic Alliances and Foreign Policy Behavior .
 Zvi Gitehnan’s ‘Nationality and Ethnicity in the Post-Soviet Republics’ offers a more specific view into ethnic conditions found in Georgia and Ukraine .
 Gitelman includes data and analysis of the 1989 Soviet census, including discussion on language and ethnic groups . The Soviet leadership vacillated between embracing ethnic differences and attempting to squash them .
 The author also studies the civic nature of Ukraine and Georgia . States that lacked a coherent ethnic identity were ostracized by foreign regimes .
 Tartars an independent state, the Ukrainians to remain with Ukraine, and the Russians a return of the peninsula to Russia . Tartars are a state of independent state and the Ukrainians are to remain in Ukraine .
 Gitehnan’s analysis correctly identified the similar characteristics of both Georgian and Ukrainian identity . Russian exploitation in the region made Russian exploitation a viable foreign policy strategy .
 The thesis focused on Georgian and Ukrainian identity and fit the struggles of those countries into a context centered on Russian strategic methods and objectives . These theoretical examples provide context to the historical view taken in this thesis .
 Russian Foreign Policy Goals. This thesis proposes that Russia’s exploitation of ethnic divides is used to achieve its long term foreign policy objectives .
Political scientists and area experts often refer to three strategic objectives . They may state each objective differently .
First, Russia intends to create a regional hegemony, which would likely encompass most of the fonner Soviet territory . First, Russia wants to create regional hegemony .
 John J Mearsheimer's book The Tragedy of Great Power Politics and his article ‘Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West’s Fault’ would increase Russia’'s relative level of power and security and encapsulates the ultimate realist interpretation of Russian international diplomacy
 Russia seeks to decrease influence of the West, specifically NATO and EU expansion, but also western liberal ideals and pro-democracy movements . Second, Russia wants to decrease the influence of West, especially NATO and European expansion .
Third, Russia wishes to regain “great power’s status, thus reversing two and half decades of humiliation at the hands of the West . Third, Russia wants to regain "great power" status, according to Russia .
 Russian specialist Richard Pipes says Vladimir Putin's speeches are a constant theme of speeches given by Vladimir Putin . This goal is consistent with the views of Russian specialistRichard Pipes .
 Continued belief of Russia’s ‘great power’ destiny has a definite domestic, public approval dimension important to the continued existence of the Putin 15 .
 These three objectives color the decision-making of Russian leaders within the Georgian/Ukrainian comparative context explored here . They provide the major analytical modality against which Russian exploitative strategic methods are compared .
 Luke Coffey analyzes the characteristics of Russian foreign activity in the Caucuses within the context of the U.S. and NATO policy . Coffey also analyzes characteristics of Russia's foreign activity.
 Coffey’s observations are consistent with broader historical accounts by De Waal . He says they fill several gaps by looking at the problem from an international relations perspective .
 Allison's insights on Russia’s goals forms the basis that led to the development of the three strategic objectives . They refer to more specific policy objectives, however, but this thesis takes a broader opinion of Russia's goals .
 There are two major ethnic characteristics of Russian foreign policy, says Allison . Allison argues that there are two key ethnic characteristics.
 Allison's thesis expands upon the Ukraine crisis and applies it to a wider historical perspective of Ukraine, as well as the Georgian case .
 Additional research by Allison is central to her goal of linking Russian strategy and exploitation of ethnic division . She also complements historical viewpoints expressed by Wilson's historical perspective .
 The thesis has identified six specific strategic methods Russia uses to exploit ethnicity in its “near abroad,’s ‘near abroad’ A phrase coined in the early 1990s to refer to the other 14 fonner Soviet Socialist Republics .
 Similar tactics repeat in both cases, revealing a cohesive and continual Russian strategy aimed at driving a wedge between people of different ethnicities in countries outside of Russia .
Russian language in post-Soviet space gives government-owned Russian media a distinct propaganda advantage . The Kremlin can imprint subtle messaging upon Georgian, Ukrainian, and Russian populations .
 Russia finds ways to exploit what it means to be Georgian, Ukrainian, or Russian . The use of anthropological treaties, ethnonationalistic appeals, or free citizenship, is part of Russia's strategy .
 Weakening identity is a key means of attacking fragile bonds connecting different people . It's a key way to attack fragile bonds that connect different people.
 Most 21 Allison, ‘Russian ‘Deniable’ Intervention,’s most 21, “Russian “Deniable ‘ Intervention” 1282. Anning insurgents.
When arms are not enough, providing the manpower to fight becomes necessary . When arms aren't enough, the manpower is needed .
 Russia often employs its own disaffected population, its Muslim minorities, unemployed veterans, and naive ideologues, as a fighting reserve for separatist forces . Russia often uses its own Muslim minorities and unemployed veterans.
Proximity to the battlefield is a key advantage Russia can exploit in Georgian and Ukraine . Russia has a strong advantage in the region of Ukraine and Georgia .
 Russia has enjoyed the unparalleled ability and freedom to station troops directly within the territory of Georgia and Ukraine . The country has nearly instantaneous access to vital strategic assets .
After the hot war ends, Russia has mastered the tactic of “piece keeping,” where the country usurps control of the post-conflict phase .
 A cursory examination of these methods is listed in the following subsections . A complete examination is contained within each case study .
 Exporting Propaganda Modem Russia propagandists benefit from the vast trove of experience acquired during the Soviet Union .
 Most Russians and millions of Russophones outside of Russia receive a startlingly high amount of propaganda-laden media from various Kremlin-owned corporations . The media is concentrated around the television broadcast industry .
 Russian networks dominate the infonnation space, and corrupt Russian-speaker’s understanding of both domestic and international events . The use of Russian media is most evident through the continuing prevalence of the Russian language in the breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia
 These lightly populated regions lack the wealth or capacity to produce substantial media in their native languages . They are dependent on Russian 12 language news sources .
 Russian news outlets have often repeated Russia’s reason for supporting the breakaway regions as their effort to protect the rights of ethnic minorities against genocidal Georgians .
 The country is not clearly divided like Georgia’s quasi-stable border with South Ossetia and Abkhazia, nor is the division purely ethnic in character .
 Russian language media outlets outnumber Ukrainian language outlets, even within the borders of Ukraine . The similarity of both languages, and the comparatively larger worldwide Russianspeaking population, makes Russian language outlets more popular .
 Ukrainian speakers in their native language are dependent on predominantly Russian language media . The majority of Russian media is published in Russia, laden with propaganda and then exported to Ukraine .
 The 1999 Compatriot Act did expressly extend Russian citizenship to all Soviet citizens living outside Russia’s borders .
 Russia uses this interpretation of its constitution as a means of undermining states with large pro-Russian populations . Russia could offer citizenship retroactively to justify intervention .
 Russia’s occasional issuance passports to citizens of another country. One particularly nefarious means to exploit Article 62 is Russia's occasional issuance of passports to another country .
 Russian citizens may be recognized as “citizens of Russia’s” Russian government can claim their interference in the territory of another state is a measure to protect them .
 The Russian government used this method with great effect in South 9Q Ossetia and Abkhazia . The method may have replicated it in Crimea and the Donbas .
 Russia manipulates identity through the export of their propaganda and “academic’s interpretative studies of history, ethnicity, and culture . Russia also manipulates Identity through their propaganda, says the author .
 Dissemination of these academic approaches to ethnicity are aimed specifically at Ukraine . They include analysis of Russia’s “neighborhood policy,” ethnonationalism, and Novorossiya .
 These manipulative interpretations are designed to undermine Ukrainian identity and exploit Russo-Ukrainian ethnic divisions . These manipulativeinterpretations are meant to undermine Ukraine's identity, exploit Russian ethnic divisions.
 Russia’s arming of pro-Russian forces in separatist regions remains a favorite, enduring tactic . Arming Insurgents not as subtle as exporting propaganda or manipulating identity .
 Russia routinely provides weapons to the ethnic minority forces . Russia routinely cuts off arms sales to legitimate governments concurrently .
 This distinguishes conflicts in 22 The Constitution of the Russian Federation . This distinguishes the conflicts in the 22 Constitution of Russia .
 Russian forces supplied South Ossetian separatists with military aid early in the Georgian crisis . Russian military forces supplied S. Ossetians with military help early in Georgian crisis.
 The officers of local Soviet and Russian military units tended to turn a blind eye to raids on their depots by separatists and their sympathizers . They felt compassion toward the Ossetians and supported their desire for greater autonomy .
 T9 When the focus of the conflict shifted to Abkhazia, Russian support notably increased . T9. T9: Russian support for the conflict increased when the focus shifted to the region .
 Aid ranged from captured or gifted Russian heavy weapons to the permissive use of Russian military bases and weapon depots . Aid ranges from captured to gifted RussianHeavy weapons .
 Abkhazian militias renewed their attack on the Georgian-occupied regional capital of Sukhumi . The arms situation in Ukraine snowballed in a similar manner .
 In April and May of 2014, pro-Russian separatist made due with weapons provided by local oligarchs and captured from Ukrainian weapons depots .
 Russia began to supply arms and equipment directly after success of the Ukrainian government’s Anti-Terrorism Operation in the mid-summer .
 Independent sources captured images of equipment crossing into Ukraine at separatist-controlled border checkpoints . The exact quantity of military equipment the Russian government provided to the pro-Russian separatists is difficult to quantify .
 Russia has routinely facilitated the recruitment and insertion of “foreign fighters’ to conflict zones . Russia has also facilitated the insertion of foreign fighters to conflict areas .
 This essay defines “foreign fighters’ as free Russian citizens participating in fighting within Georgia and Ukraine . It also defines ‘foreign fighters' as free Russians participating in fight within Georgia.
 Russia has streamlined and improved its system to supply fighters to Ukraine, creating training bases and tapping into several sources of manpower among its own citizenry . Russia has also tapped into several source of manpower.
Fighting broke out in 1992 in Abkhazia, South Ossetia . A large influx of ethnic Russian and Chechen volunteers flowed into the region .
 Abkhazian forces at a desperate point in 38 the battle over Sukhumi . Georgian ultra-nationalists such as President Zviad Gamsakhurdia have lent significant weight to the fighters .
Foreign fighters played a much larger role in the conflict in the Donbas . Foreign fighters played much bigger role in conflict in Donbas.
 These recruits were promised high pay and were eager for the opportunity to export their nationalistic ideology . They were promised a high pay.
 As the conflict sank into stalemate after the capture of Debaltseve, the supply of fighters grew to a trickle . Russian regular soldiers pressed into “volunteer service’s’ service .
 The presence of well-armed and equipped Russian regular forces was essential to the accomplishment of Russian aims in both the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and the ongoing Ukraine crisis .
 The Journal of Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and Society 1, no. 1, is published in Russia's War in the Donbas .
Russian forces used this infrastructure as a launching point during the armed fighting phases of both conflicts . Russian forces used it as a launch point during both wars .
 Russian peacekeepers have been present in Georgian territory since the early 1990s . First in former Soviet bases in Georgia proper through ongoing basing deals, then in new Russian bases established in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 The Russian lead peacekeeping force following the ceasefires in 1991 and 1993 was instrumental to this strategy . The fonnation of a three-way but Russian peacekeepers was instrumental.
 Russian forces stationed in Crimea were there based on mutual Russian-Ukrainian agreement . The situation in Ukraine was slightly different, as Russian forces were there .
 Ukrainian political decision making was also effected by regular Russian units operating close to its borders during the hard summer fighting .
 Russia has made prolific use of frozen conflicts as a means to control regional politics . The unusually high number of such conflicts clustered around Russia’s periphery .
Russia's influence in contested regions is seen as a means to exert leverage and foster instability . Russia's influence is characterized by ongoing influence of Russian leadership .
 The ceasefire agreements ended the South Ossetian and Abkhazian conflicts . Georgia’s sovereignty in both regions was essentially subordinate to Russia .
 Russian military and security forces built strong ties with the breakaway regions . By using their role as peacekeepers, Russian military, security forces build strong ties .
 By 1994, Russia had “succeeded in reasserting its power over 42 De Waal, The Caucasus,’s Caucasus, 164 .
 This was accomplished through the unorganized self-interest of local military leaders and parties in power back in Moscow . This was done by the un organized self- interest of local political leaders .
 Russian peacekeepers are still present and the conflict remains frozen . The conflict has been frozen since 2008 .
 The creation of a sustained frozen conflict in Ukraine is not yet established . Russia and its proxies are laying the groundwork for the conflict . The conflict has not yet been established .
 The Normandy Five continue to negotiate the revision of Ukraine’s constitution . Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts would have greater autonomy .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine seems to be cooling. Though this is unacceptable to the Ukrainian government and people, it is not unacceptable .
 Ukrainian forces retreated from Debaltseve in February 2015 . Pro-Russian forces have decreased their artillery barrages of Ukrainian positions and small-arm attacks on Ukrainian checkpoints .
 If the Ukrainian parliament approves an amended constitution, the Donbas will become another frozen conflict . The separatists deny Ukrainian governmental access to their borders with Russia and threaten to rebel given the slightest provocation .
 Russia can wager its ongoing political, military, and financial support to the Donetsk and Luhansk governments to influence the government in Kyiv . This course is decidedly in Russia’s interest, as it can wagers its ongoing military, political, financial support.
 Russia can redouble its support for outright separatism in Ukraine’s east as a counter move . If Kyiv affronts Moscow again, like what happened during the Euromaidan, it could be counter move.
 Conner and Weber’s definition of ethnicity is beneficial in defining the divisive nature of ethnicity . But does not provide sufficient theoretical insight to this thesis’'s core concept: ethnic division .
 ‘ethnic division’ is defined as the state in which two or more ethnic groups exist in the same general area . It includes the checkerboard nature of Ossetian and Georgian villages in South Ossetia to the ambiguous Russo-Ukrainian communities of the Donbas
 The phrases "ethnic division" and "ethnic conflict" were used to signify different concepts . The phrases were also used to indicate different concepts, such as “ethnic conflict’s”
 Language provides a final wrinkle to this thesis’ discussion of ethnicity, especially in Ukrainian case .
 The close relationship between Russia and Ukraine linguistically, culturally, and ethnically, greatly complicates any ethnographic study . The relationship between the two countries is linguistically and culturally .
This understanding of ethnicity and ethnic conflict is reflected in the method of analysis for this thesis . This understanding of ethnic conflict was reflected in this thesis, says the author .
 This thesis is designed to tie together an ethnic and foreign policy dimensions of Russia’s exploitation of division in Georgia and Ukraine . It uses the three foreign policy objectives and six strategic methods discussed previously as an analytical guide .
 It looks at methods of ethnic exploitation through historical comparison of both countries . It focuses specifically on events since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The study of each case focuses on strategic choices made by Russian leaders at various critical points in the history of Georgia and Ukraine . This fonnat establishes Russia's use of each strategic method as a cogent Russian policy designed to exploit ethnic divisions .
 In researching each case, this thesis combines several academic fields . It focuses on anthropological research on the origins of ethnic conflict, historical studies of ethnic groups in Conflict .
 Each case study concludes with a summary of the various ethnic exploitative measures used, and an evaluation of Russia's foreign policy success .
 These conclusions rely on the expertise of several preeminent scholars in the field of foreign policy and international relations, as well as leading institutions .
 Polling data also provides a unique perspective on the degree of Russian policy success, especially in pro-Westem or pro-Russian leanings, or patriotism .
 The final chapter summarizes the similarities and differences of each case . It focuses on the six strategic methods as the principle analytical tool .
Russia's success in exploiting ethnic division to achieve foreign policy goals, includes specific policy suggestions . It also includes predictions for the future of Russia's post-Soviet space .
 Choice of spelling is based on the transliterations for the home language . The home language is the most popular home language.
 The exception to this rule is the use of South Ossetia in place of Shida Kartli, its Georgian name . The exception is the name Shida.
 The region is most commonly referred to in academia and the media by its South Ossetian place name . This choice is not intended to imply a preference or political view. This choice was made for the reader's ease .
 Russians have always feared foreign penetration, feared direct contact between Western world and their own . They feared what would happen if Russians learned truth about world without or if foreigners learned truth of world within .
Georgians, Abkhazians, and Ossetians are wholly distinctive ethnic groups . They are unrelated to Russian Slavs .
 52 the actual Russian population is far smaller than in Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, or the Baltic States . Russia often evokes its obligation to protect Russian minorities as a pretext to intervention in the Caucasus .
 Russia exploits tensions between Georgia’s distinct ethnic groups . Russia supports South Ossetian and Abkhazian separatists politically, economically, and militarily .
 Russia maintains a strategic advantage over Georgia. By taking advantage of these ethnic divides, Russia is driving the wedge deeper through force and coercion .
 Georgia's recent history provides an organizational framework to analyze Russia’s policies piecemeal .
 Russia, as the heir to the Soviet empire, desperately fought to maintain 5 Allison, “Russia’s Deniable Intervention,” 1262 . Soviet imperial collapse at the end of the Cold War marked the beginning of the first phase, where Russia desperately fought
 This phase occurred between 1989 and 1992, and was indicative of ethnic tensions broiling throughout the Caucasus, from Nagorno-Karabakh to Chechnya . This phase of the period was between 1989-1992 .
 Georgia, once a prosperous Soviet Socialist Republic, could not escape the chaos . Georgia, now a former Soviet Socialist republic, was once prosperous .
 During this first phase, individual Soviet leaders acted in disparate and unorganized fashion to undennine the young Georgian state . The Soviet state was laid the foundation for future conflict .
 The second phase, from 1993-2000, bore witness to the stabilization of the conflict in line with Russian objectives . The first phase was the second phase of the Russian conflict in the 1990s . The second was the first phase, the third, the second.
 Russia's peacekeeping regime was established by the establishment of a Russian-dominated regime .
 The third and most coercive phase of Russian exploitation occurred between 2000 and the outbreak of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War . The third phase of Russia's exploitation occurred in 2000 and 2008 .
 This phase was defined by a continual, systematic ratcheting up of tensions . Georgia's Western-leaning policies and Moscow’s coercive responses were part of this phase .
 The fourth and final phase is marked by Russia’s recognition of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states, along the Kosovo model, and the slowing of Saakashvili era Western progress in the region .
 The end state of the fourth stage has yet to be detennined, landmines and detours riddle South Ossetia and Abkhazia’s future path . Both de facto states continue their search for sovereignty, stability, prosperity, and international recognition .
Only a handful of countries officially recognize the breakaway regions as independent states . The uncertainty of sovereign identity of South Ossetia and Abkhazia hangs heavily over the Georgian people .
 Each of these phases mirrored Russia’s domestic economic and diplomatic struggles since the end of the Cold War . The chaos of Soviet collapse in the 1990s to the economic “miracle of the 2000s.
 Russia’s attempts to achieve its 22 strategic objectives of hegemonic dominance, anti-Western policies, and a return to great power status, masquerade as an eternal peacekeeping mission in an ethnically divided state .
 In the Caucuses, conflicts of the post-Soviet era have left ethnic groups divided across heavily policed but internationally unrecognized borders .
 Ossetians are concentrated in the north-central part of Georgia, abutting the Caucasus . Abkhazians are clustered along the Black Sea coast in the far northwest of the country .
 Ethnic Map of Georgia The Ossetian population is located in north-central Georgia north of Gori . It is based on the ethnic map.
 The Abkhazian population is located in the northwest extreme of the country, along the Black Sea coast . The population is in the north-east of the nation .
 Large populations of Armenians and Azeri's are also present in the country’s southcentral region .
 In addition to the Ossetians and Abkhazians, Greeks, Armenians, and Azeris all called the current area of Georgia home .
 The ethnic Georgian nation-state of modern times traces its lineage back thousands of years, to the ancient kingdoms of Colchis and Karli-Iberia .
 David the Builder unified the disparate regions of Kakheti, Kartli, Imereti, and Mingrelia in the eleventh-century . The Georgian people are conventionally called the Georgian people that exist today .
 Ethnic Georgians of every sub-group currently make up 83 percent of Georgia’s 4. million population . EthnicGeorgians of all sub-groups make up 80 percent of the state's population .
 Ethnic Ossetians are closely related to ethnic Iranians and Scythians from the Caucasus region . Ethnic Ossets are closely associated with ethnic Iranians, Scythian people .
 Ossetians first settled north of the Caucasus Mountains before moving southward over the range in the eighteenth century . They established villages alongside the local Georgian population in the Shi da Kartli region .
 The Ossetian population in Georgia, roughly 65,000, is rather small compared to the 450,000 Ossetians that live within the Russian Federation in the North Ossetia-Alania Republic .
 Ossetians fought for the tsar and later Soviet dictatorship . Unlike the Circassians of the Black Sea coast, they chose to integrate themselves into Russia .
 Ossetians also tended to speak Georgian language better than any other minority . 24 ultranationalists like Zviad Gamsakhurdia drove the wedge between the Ossetian and Georgian people .
 The Abkhazians of Georgia’s Northwestern region were related to several other Circassian groups of the Caucasus, such as the Kabardins and the Cherkess . They shared a close historical bond with the Georgian people .
 The Abkhazians resisted Russian rule following the Tsar Alexander I’s 1810 invasion of their region . Unlike the Ossetians, the Abkhazarians resisted the Russian rule .
 The Abkhazian population fought with fellow Circassian tribes against tsarist annies for decades . When Russian generals finally rooted out and defeated the rebellion in 1864, they deported much of the Ab Khazians population .
 This act depopulated much of the Black Sea coast, and prompted immigration other ethnicities into Abkhazian territory . Svans and Mingrelians, two Georgian subgroups, were among those moved into the territory .
 The remaining Abkhazian population suffered greatly at the beginning of the twentieth century . The remaining population suffered much at the start of the 20th century .
 The Menshevik government of Georgia “waged brutal campaigns to incorporate Abkhazia and South Ossetia into their state’s state,” 63 culminating into the killing of thousands of Ossetians by the Mensheviks .
 The alliance between the Bolsheviks and Abkhazians was short-lived . The earlier pattern of forced migrations repeated itself in the 1930s under Joseph Stalin’s totalitarian regime .
 By the 1990s, the ethnic Abkhaz numbered only 95,000 out of approximately 525,000 residents of their region . By the 1980s, they had been deported and marginal status .
 South Ossetian and Abkhazian want to remain independent of Tbilisi and strengthen their resolve in the conflict .
 Hints of Russia’s exploitive ethnic policies began to surface almost immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union . These policies did not initially represent a cogent international strategy .
 Russia was unilaterally initiating all the processes that developed in Georgia and its breakaway territories . It would be unfair to argue that Russia was unilateral initiating all of its processes .
 At least in the beginning of the 1990s, Russia was subjected to internal turmoil . Russia was reacting to events in Georgia rather than initiating them .
 Russia had never, even in the worst times, abandoned the idea of maintaining a special influence outside its borders . Even then, Russia was never unresponsive, because it had never been unresponsive .
 Russia’s various ministry and military leaders took the initiative . Only to a limited extent in the South Ossetian conflict of 1991-1992 at first . More predominately in Abkhazian Conflict of 1992-1993 .
 The individual goals of various members of the Soviet, then Russian, government and armed forces are listed . The list includes members of Russia, then Russia, and The Caucasus .
 South Ossetia War and Invasion of Abkhazia erupted in 1991 after two years of hostility . The ethnic conflict in South Ossetsia erupted into violence in 1991 .
 Armed Georgian bands stalked the Ossetian countryside terrorizing villages, ultimately provoking revenge attacks .
 The simmering conflict came to a boil in January 1991, when Georgian militias took control of several critical supply routes into Tskhinvali, cutting off electricity, water, and food from the South Ossetian capital .
 Ossetian villagers armed themselves in response, fighting Georgian bands with weapons scrounged from abandoned Soviet military bases .
 The fighters from both sides were predominantly amateurs . Even the Georgian militias were under control of the young Georgian government only in theory, not in practice .
 Undisciplined and poorly lead groups only increased the level of violence . Undiscipline and poor lead groups increased violence, according to the report .
 Georgian aggression eventually provoked fighters in the North Ossetian SSR to come to the assistance of their southern brethren, further destabilizing the region . Georgian aggression.
 Ossetian fighters acquired more advanced weaponry and equipment from corrupt or sympathetic Soviet and Russian military officials .
 The conflict cooled, however, in June 1992, after a Russian-brokered ceasefire . The conflict ended in June 1993, after the ceasefire was reached .
 Georgian officials agreed to a tri-lateral peacekeeping force composed of Russian, Georgian, and South Ossetian troops . At least until the opposing sides could strike a lasting deal .
 Russia influenced this conflict more in its inaction than its action . Russia influenced the conflict more than its inaction rather than its actions .
 Russia ultimately supplied a majority of Ossetians anns, and allowed the free movement of 69 De Waal, The Caucasus .
 Russia was able to dictate tenns at the ceasefire negotiations, enabling later Russian leaders to exploit foreign policy objectives . The conflict foreshadowed the looming Abkhazian conflict .
 Russia took a more active role in the Abkhazian conflict, which directly followed the violence in South Ossetia . Russia also took more active roles in the conflict in the region, according to reports .
 Periodic exchanges of fire between Georgian and Abkhazian militias characterized a conflict that had been brewing in the region since April 1989 .
 The city’s defenders and provincial government fled north as intense fighting rippled through the countryside .
 Georgian forces initially pressed their advantage, but experienced series of military setbacks in mid-September . Abkhazian resistance was sure to collapse, just when they believed it would collapse .
 Russian leaders renewed interest in the region by Russian leaders in both the government and armed forces . Support Mustered in Moscow.
Abkhazia is part of a larger foreign policy shift from focus on Central and Western Europe to securing the rapidly dissolving post-Soviet space . The decision makers chose to provide more direct support to Abkhazian.
 This renewed interest in the Russian ‘near abroad’ provided critical motivation for the deepening of Russian involvement in Georgian domestic affairs .
 These Communist “hard-liners’ blamed Gorbachev, and by extension Shevardnadze, for collapse of Soviet Union .
 The Abkhazian separatists hoped to destabilize the young Georgian state and strengthen Russian control in the region . Through their support of the separatists, the “hard-liners’s” hoped to undermine the young state .
 Shevardnadze’s former position as the Soviet Foreign Minister was now an albatross, gamering the Georgian leader's credibility in the West . But derision in Moscow where support for the fledgling state was critically needed was needed .
 Russian parliament also supported intervention in Georgian domestic politics . In addition to leaders in the defense and foreign ministries, the Russian parliament supported intervention .
 Conservative Nationalists used the “external threat’ from nonRussian republics of the fonner Soviet Union to try and direct the debate over Russia’s national interest towards a more confrontational angle .
 The threat to Russian security was perceived to come from ethnic conflicts in the republics of the fonner Soviet Union, rather than from the old Cold War enemies .
 Conservatives accused of neglecting Russian relations with republics of the former Soviet Union . They demanded that Russia reassert power there .
 Conservative politicians and resurgent armed forces increasingly utilized ethnic issues . Conservative politicians are increasingly using ethnic issues as a political tool .
 Evgenii Ambartsumov vociferously advocated the creation of a Russian vital sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space . He was a member of the Russian parliamentarians who helped create the Russian state of Russia .
 Russian President Boris Yeltsin initially wished to leave the conflict in Abkhazia up to those with a 'special interest in it' But opposition demands eventually elicited a Kremlin response .
 The various North Caucasian nationalists, supporters of the restoration of the USSR, and ‘red and brown’ patriots wore down Yeltsin, forcing him to take a more hardline stance .
 Arms and Volunteers Emboldened by enthusiasm in Moscow, local and central military authorities in the Caucasus increased their support of Abkhazian forces in late summer 1992 . Abkhaziian forces were on the brink of defeat in the summer 1992 when they were on brink of
 Aid first arrived in the form of ‘captured’ or “gifted’ Russian heavy weapons as well as the pennissive use of Russian supply depots and operating bases within Abkhazia .
 Russian military officials allowed the unrestricted flow of Russian mercenaries and Chechen Muslim fighters over the Russian-Georgian border . Most damaging to the long-term stability of Georgia, Russian officials say .
 fighters sought to aid the Abkhazians in their struggle against Georgian forces . They lent significant weight to Abkhazerian militias at a desperate point in the battle .
 Abkhazian victory in the conflict was pivotal to the victory . The mercenaries were also indiscriminately violent and undisciplined .
 They were accused of raping and pillaging both Abkhazian and Georgian populations . They were also accused of rape and pillage both Ab Khazian, Georgian populations.
 Abkhazian forces, now bolstered by Russian equipment and volunteer fighters, counterattacked in September 1992 . The Georgian Army retreated to the capital of Sukhumi and several key chokepoints in the south and east .
 By the fall it became obvious to the Georgians that the Abkhazians were receiving prolonged and sustained assistance from Russia .
 Continued Russian military assistance resulted in the escalation of conflict in spring 1993, most ostensibly in the form of Russian close-air support .
 Abkhazian militias, bolstered by Russian weapons, volunteer fighters, and SU-25 bombers, renewed their attack on the regional capital of Sukhumi .
 By 1993 the Abkhazian conflict was essentially a war between Russia and Georgia . Shevardnadze himself claimed that by 1993 the conflict was basically a war. Russian support of Abkhazi separatists was clear and pronounced .
 Russian political and military support was instrumental to Abkhazian success, leading to the collapse of the poorly trained and lead Georgian forces .
 Similar to the Ossetian conflict, the armistice in 1993 lead to the fonnation of a Russian-backed peacekeeping force . Similar to that in 1993, the conflict was similar to the 1993 conflict .
Without control of the vast majority of Abkhazian territory, Georgian government could not rightly declare legitimacy in the region .
 The War’s Aftermath By the annistice of 1993, Georgia was on the verge of complete political and economic collapse . Georgia was in the midst of a political and financial collapse .
 Hard-liners in the Russian foreign and defense ministries took advantage of Georgian weakness . They were determined to defend ‘national interests’ in the former Soviet South .
 Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, a key player during the final ceasefire 87 Morris, “Ethnicity and International Relations,’s” 85 .
 Georgian, Abkhazian, and Russian forces would create a three-way peacekeeping mission . Georgia’s sovereignty is severely undennined .
 Russian access to Georgia proper to “assist’s” in destroying the last vestiges of Zviadist rebels in Mingrelia . Russia’'s right to name Georgia's Defense Minister, and Russia's right of the Defense Minister .
 Grachev's intent to punish Georgia was pervasive, and set the tone for Russian-Georgian relations for the rest of the decade . Grachev’s intention to punishGeorgia was pervasive .
 Russia had “succeeded in reasserting its power over Georgia’ by using a separatist region as a means to pry the country apart . By 1994, Russia had used a separatist area as a way to reassert its power.
 Moscow ministers and parliamentarians exerted on President Yeltsin in Moscow . This division was accomplished primarily through Russian military assistance .
 Arming insurgents and supplying fighters resembled classic Cold War methods of destabilization through the export of violence . The follow-through, establishing frozen conflicts, was a new invention .
 Russia laid the groundwork for future conflicts, and further exploitation of ethnic divisions . By stoking violence and enforcing destabilizing peace agreements, Russia laid groundwork for further exploitation .
 The presence of Russian peacekeeping forces and slow “freezing’ of both conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia is a chief characteristic of the second period of Russian exploitation of ethnic divides in Georgia .
 Russian diplomats and politicians sought normative appeal to Western practices of peacekeeping, while simultaneously fulfilling Russian strategic objectives . By using this method, Russian diplomats sought normality appeal to West .
 The ceasefires that froze the South Ossetian and Abkhazian conflicts, and Russian-dominated peacekeeping mission established after the cessations of violence, violated Georgia’s sovereignty and left the country essentially subordinate to Russian influence .
 Russia has maintained its hegemonic dominance in the region for at least for the 1990s and early 2000s . These and other measures allowed Russia to maintain its dominance for years .
 Russian military and security forces built strong ties with the breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . The Russian military has been involved in peacekeepers in both regions .
 The ongoing presence of peacekeepers is pivotal to the sustainment of Russian power in the region . The presence of Peacekeepers is crucial to the stability of Russia's power .
 Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev played a critical role in the establishment of persistent Russian presence in Georgia . Russian foreign minister AndreiKozyrev has been in charge of Russia's foreign minister for years .
 Minister Kozyrev argued that forces from his country were simply “filling a vacuum...which otherwise quite different forces might rush to fill,’
 The Russian Foreign Ministry countered Georgian claims of bias by extolling the international nature of CIS peacekeeping forces . Other members of the commonwealth provided only token support .
 Security Council resolutions mandating Russian control of forces in South Ossetia and Abkhazia . This abdication of Georgian and Western responsibility for peacekeeping operations was a result of several Security Council Resolution resolutions .
 UN, NATO, EU, and U.S. all provided cover for Russia to exploit its peacekeeping mission in South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russia is trying to exploit the peacekeeping missions in the region .
 Oversight of peacekeeping mission and reconciliation councils was deeply flawed, favoring Russia and the secessionist members of the councils over Georgian interests . Oversight of the peacekeeping missions was flawed.
 In South Ossetia, this manifested itself in the day-today administration of the Joint Control Commission, set up as a forum for negotiation .
 Georgia received only one of the four voting seats in this council . Russia, North Ossetia, and South Ossetsia, all three clearly aligned against Georgia .
 Russia further controlled the process by enforcing bylaws that required every member to be present to vote for new resolutions . Russia also enforced bylaws.
 Russia has been unable to slow any progress toward reconciliation by neglecting to attend . This requirement gave Russia the ability toslow any progress by not attending . The other three parties actually agreed on any particular measure .
 Russian weaknesses economically and diplomatically coupled with a decline in the strategic advantages South Ossetia and Abkhazia provided . The maintenance of this status quo waned in the late 1990s, due in part to Russia's weaknesses economically .
 The collapse of the ruble in 1998 gave the appearance that Russia was weakening . Several conflicts of the mid and late 1990s, specifically the first Chechen War, gave the impression of Russia's weakening .
 Russia under heavy pressure to withdraw its forces in Georgia . At the 1999 OSCE Istanbul Summit, Russia found itself under pressure to pull its forces .
 Russian neoimperialists and former Communists began to lose power in the government . Former Communists and ex-Communists lost power in government .
 Russia's peacekeeping forces and strategic objectives in Georgia remained unchanged . Russian policy focused on maintaining the status quo in Georgia .
 The rise of Vladimir Putin, first as the Russian Prime Minister and then as the President, jumpstarted a new approach to Russian-Georgian relations .
 Putin and his cabinet favored an increase in antiGeorgian policies and rhetoric, while simultaneously pursuing further exploitation of the frozen conflicts . Putin's cabinet also favored an increased in anti-Georgian policy and rhetoric .
 Putin and his regime responded to the rise of Mikheil Saakashvili by stepping up punitive measures . The measures were designed to both injure the Georgian state and increase Russian domestic standing .
 Russian strategic methods used during this phase of Russian exploitation . Exploiting presence through peacekeeping and freezing conflicts were the major Russian methods used in this phase .
 Similar to the first phases, this phase was based on Russian inaction as much as Russian action . The first phase is based on the first phase, based on Russia's inaction .
 Russia did not recognize South Ossetia or Abkhazia’s declarations of independence . It did not acknowledge Georgian complaints about violation of its sovereignty .
 The rise of Putin and Georgia’s desire to build closer ties with the West characterized the third phase of Russia's rise .
 The desire to break out of the post-Cold War system and reestablish a hegemonic empire within Russia's former area of influence dominated the Putin Administration's strategic thinking .
 Putin perceived NATO and EU expansion as threat to Russian power . He sought to politicize any further expansion of either organization as evidence of continued Western anti-Russian aggression .
 Russian diplomatic and military influence remained limited, however, only occasionally manifesting itself in covert uses of force . Russian diplomatic, military influence remains limited, but only occasionally manifests itself in secret .
 The United States' war on terror is dominated by military deployments in Afghanistan and Iraq . The U.S. could not embark on military campaigns without upsetting global strategic balance .
 Putin regime carefully weighed its strategic options and molded them into specific political objectives . Instead, the Putin regime chose to exploit the frozen conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Russian policy during this period demonstrated patience and willingness to take advantage of political and diplomatic opportunities through the strategic methods of exporting propaganda .
Revitalizing Russia’s Great Power status became the leading motivator of Russian policy objectives in Georgia . Revitalizing the country's great power status was the leading motivation for Georgia's policies .
 Putin addressed this goal directly in his May 2004 address to the Russian Parliament . Putin addressed the goal directly.
 Russia would continue to exploit ethnic tensions to maintain influence in Georgia . The country sought closer ties with the West when it deemed necessary .
 During this phase Russia’s policy implementations were based largely on pretexts . Russia's policy implementation was largely based on pretexting.
 Russia would respond to Georgian actions, each one ratchetting up already tense relations . Russia would be responding to each one, and each one would ratchet up tensions .
 Georgia's NATO and EU accession aspirations provided a perfect pretext for further exploitation of both conflicts . Georgia’s NATO and European Union aspirations provided the perfect pretext to further exploitation, according to reports .
 The first such pretext was Georgia’s desire to pursue a Western alignment with the EU and U.S. The Alignment Pretext was a pretext for Georgia to pursue Western alignment . Georgia's desire to be part of the European Union and United States.
 Georgia voiced interest in joining NATO for the first time in 2002 . Georgia sought U.S. military aid through the Georgia Train and Equip Program .
 Georgia's defense forces were under attack by separatist bands . This first step was important for the professionalization of Georgian defense forces . Georgia's Pankisi Gorge and other regions that were under periodic attack by separatists .
 The EU and Georgia intensified relations in 2003 after the Rose Revolution and the election of President Mikheil Saakashvili .
 NATO and Georgia began an Intensified Dialogue in 2006, further strengthening military ties . In part, as a response to Russian policies, NATO andGeorgia began anIntensified dialogue in 2006 .
 Western aspirations were a key component of Saakashvili’s leadership platform . The actions would motivate Russian leaders to act against Georgia . Georgia is a small Caucasian country .
 Georgia's Western aspirations angered and dismayed Russian leaders, who saw NATO and EU expansion, especially into Russia’s area of interest . Russia's goals of hegemonic dominance and the creation of a pro-Russian economic and political structure were among the concerns .
 Military Alliances and Aid First, Moscow encouraged military and diplomatic unions among the separatist states . The first major agreement in September 2002 was the first major deal between the two countries .
 This 2002 agreement cemented an alliance between South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the event of Georgian aggression . Also acknowledged need for continued Russian leadership and military support .
 Additional agreements between South Ossetia, Abkhazia and Moldova’s breakaway region of Transnistria were signed in 2006 .
 Both agreements included a statement acknowledging the region’s loyalty to Moscow . Both agreements were dismissed as a final dismissal of Georgian sovereignty .
 Russia acted as both arbiter and mentor during these negotiations, seeking to isolate Georgia and strengthen the bonds between the breakaway regions and their pursuit of autonomy or eventual independence .
 Russia rewarded South Ossetian subservience with direct military aid, primarily in the form of heavy equipment, basing deals, and financial assistance .
 Between February 2003 and June 2004, the Russian government supplied South Ossetia with twelve T-55 and seventy-five T-72 battle tanks . The Russian government provided South Ossetsia with 12 T- 55 and 70-five battle tanks.
 The military academy in Vladikavkaz has opened a special department for cadets from South Ossetia . Several dozen Russian military instructors have been sent to the territory .
 Russian officers are transferred to South Ossetia for routine military service . The move includes the appointment of Russians to head the ministries of defense, security and law enforcement .
 Russia supplied South Ossetia with “Grad’s multiple-launch rocket systems, self-propelled artillery systems, and anti-aircraft weapons . In addition to tanks, on June 2-6, 2004, Russia supplied S.O.
 The region has been in a deplorable state of development in both regions . Enforcing compliance was easy, but it was not easy, due to continued deplorable development .
 A region once populated by 525,000 inhabitants had been reduced to 240,000 . A slight majority ethnic Abkhazians are desperately impoverished and widely unemployed .
Both South Ossetia and Abkhazia are wholly dependent on Russian financial support . Both are dependent on Russia's financial support.
 The breakaway regions have surrendered their independence to Russian benevolence . Russia's foreign policy strategy has not been seen as a major foreign policy policy strategy .
 Russia also sought to muddy the waters of citizenship within the region . Coercive Diplomacy Russia sought to muddle the waters in the region.
 Russian Parliament passed law exempting South Ossetian and Abkhazian residents from Russian visa requirements in 2000 .
 In June 2002, Russia expanded this policy to direct issuance of passports to residents of both regions . In May 2 0 04, Moscow accelerated this program in June 2002 .
 Russia's exploitative measures were not limited to the punishment of Georgia, but were focused on the breakaway regions themselves . Russia’s exploitative Measures were not only limited to Georgia but also focused on breakaways themselves .
 This manifested itself first in South Ossetia during the 2001 presidential elections . This was the first time the country had held a presidential election in 2001 .
 Chivirov was the incumbent president, and was pursuing a settlement with Shevardnadze that would normalize relations and put an end to the conflict . He was avidly pursued a settlement that would end the conflict.
Georgia's Eduard Kokoity is a member of the “Meeting of Four’s Four” The region is now on a course of further separation with Georgia and Russia .
 The first-ever contested presidential election in Abkhazia was marred by the Kremlin’s open support for one of the candidates, Raul Khadzhimba .
 Abkhaz voters rejected Khadzhimba in favour of the more popular opposition leader Sergei Bagapsh . Two months of political crisis verged on the brink of mass violence .
 Moscow exerted enormous direct pressure, sending officials to Sukhumi and even blackmailing the population by closing the border . As Bagapsh announced his forthcoming inauguration, Moscow exerted huge pressure .
 Russia does not act solely as the legitimate protector of South Ossetia's and Abkhazia’s independence . Russia seeks to manipulate all sides of the conflict for Russian gain .
 Georgian troops shelled Tskhinvali on the night of August 7, 2008 . Following a Russian provocation of dubious origin, Georgian troops said to have fired .
 Georgian troops occupy several Ossetian villages with the stated goal of forcefully reuniting the breakaway region with the Georgian state . The next day, Georgian troops launched their invasion, occupying several villages .
 Russian combat forces quickly mobilized, and launched a rapid counteroffensive through the Roki Tunnel . Russian peacekeepers already present in the region .
 Russia initiated a second offensive through Abkhazia . With overwhelming air support, Russia was able to push Georgian forces out of the Upper Kodori Gorge .
 The Russian military completely routed the Georgian anny after just five days of fighting . The military occupied roadways, railways, and ports throughout central and western Georgia .
 The Russian propaganda machine kicked into high gear almost immediately . The Russian government has been accused of using its propaganda machine to stifle opposition .
 Russia claims that it was forced to respond to the Georgian attack in order to defend Russian and Ossetian citizens in danger of becoming victims of genocide .
 Russian media outlets were quick to report the Georgian shelling of Tskhinvali had resulted in more than two thousand dead . Russian media reports that more than 2,000 people were killed .
 In this case the displacement of ethnic Georgians from South Ossetian territory, further homogenizing the breakaway region and limiting Georgian power during post-conflict negotiations .
 This phase of Russian ethnic exploitation was characterized by those methods used in the first two phases . These methods include arming insurgents, supplying fighters, exploiting presence, and freezing conflicts .
 This phase then holistically captured the full force of Russian exploitation of ethnicity, and a crystallization of a cohesive Russian strategy aimed at accomplishing Russian strategic objectives . This phase was captured by the Russian army and the Russian military .
 The status quo established following the 2008 War has changed little since the short but brutal war . Russia's recognition of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states have changed little .
 Russian engineers have also recently completed numerous additional military housing facilities within the region . Base construction is ongoing, as Russian engineers are also working on a new base .
 Russian troops have even taken over control of the Abkhazia’s single link to Georgia, the bridge over the Inguri River .
 This crossing had been manned by Abkhazian militia, but in September 2012, Russian border guards replaced them . This crossing was manned by the Abkhaziian militia .
 Abkhazia's government receives annual financial aid packages from Russia . Sukhuymi has grown dependent on Russia's money .
 Russia also seems poised to officially annex both Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Russia also appears to be poised to annex both the two countries .
 Some clear areas of discord exist between the Abkhaz and Russians as well . Some clear Areas of discord exists between the two countries .
 Russia would like more opportunities for its citizens to buy property and invest in the development of tourist infrastructure . Russia has faced legal obstacles and public discontent .
 Relations between the Orthodox Church in Moscow and Sukhumi, the capital of Abkhazia, are strained .
 Disputes over territory and a new road to the North Caucasus demonstrate Abkhaz leadership’s unwillingness to hand over all authority. Disputes.
 Recent protests in Abkhazia show the country is continuing to experience domestic schisms . In June of 2015, protests took place in the country's capital Abkhazi .
Every method Russia has undertaken in Georgia in the last twenty-five years has been implemented with those three goals in mind . Every method that Russia has done in Georgia has been carried out in the past 20 years .
 There is no evidence that Russia will give up achieving these goals anytime soon . Russia has not yet achieved these goals.
Anning insurgents and supplying fighters along its frontiers is the most aggressive course Russia has taken in Georgia in the last quarter century . Anning insurgents have been supplying fighters to Russia in the past quarter century.
 Russia has perfected these strategic methods during its nearly constant involvement in the Georgian crisis . Russia's use is neither nuanced nor particularly innovative, though its use of these methods is not innovative .
 Russia enjoys an enonnous military advantage along all its western borders . Russia possesses enough military hardware to provide South Ossetian and Abkhazian separatists with marginal military advantage over their Georgian rivals .
 Georgian defeat in the disastrous 2008 war cemented the realization that the country could no longer hope to unify its territory by force . Georgian defeat was the first time the country had ever lost a war .
 Russian military interventionist policy has proven to be overwhelmingly effective, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Russia's military interventionists have been overwhelmingly effective .
 Russia’s second major avenue of coercive foreign policy in Georgia . Exploiting presence and freezing conflicts, through the use of peacekeeping forces, has been Russia's second main avenue of coercion .
 The presence of ground forces in disputed territories, especially if those forces are better trained and equipped than locals, gives Russia greater regional control .
 The longer these forces are in place, the more the local inhabitants become accustomed to the status quo . The longer they are there, the longer the longer they become accustomed.
 Russia can also call upon these forces on short notice to intervene in defense of Russia’s own self-interests, not necessarily in the interest of maintain unbiased peace . Russia can call upon those forces.
 In Phase Three, coercive policies of propaganda and identity manipulation typify Russia’s patient, long-term approach to maintaining their power over Georgia . In Phase 3, Russia's patient, patient approach to maintain their power.
 In the 2000s, Russia implemented a series of policy changes that slowly ratcheted up tensions between Russia and Georgia . While building stronger ties with South 46 Ossetians and Abkhazians, Russia also built stronger ties.
 Economic subsidies, military training, and travel privileges were all carrots Russia provided to South Ossetia and Abkhazia as a means of securing their loyalty .
 The added supply of Russian passports, along with coercive in divisive manipulative policies, further destabilized the region . Russia has been accused of using Russian passports as a tool to destabilize the region.
 Russian support of local political campaigns further ensured Moscow's choice of South Ossetian and Abkhazian national leaders took precedence over possible future conflict resolution .
 Georgia's postSaakashvili government continues to drag its heels on issues of reform and European integration . For now, crisis seems distant, especially if Georgia’s post SaakashVili government is dragging its heels .
 Russia’s actions in the 2008 War were largely in reaction to Georgian attempts to align closer to the West and forcefully re-assume its sovereignty . If Georgian progress towards further Western ties slows, then so should exploitative Russian actions .
 Russian goals of hegemonic dominance, countering pro-Westem sentiments, were largely achieved in the Caucasus . But achievement has become harder to quantify since Putin’s rise to power .
 Georgia may have to accept the permanent loss of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . But the remaining Georgian territory is far more cohesive then it was in 1989, politically and ethnically .
 The Georgian people feel their country's future will suit them best, according to the country's president . The country has struggled against Russia in recent years .
 All persons with grievances, whether economic or racial, will be urged to spelt redress not in mediation and compromise, but in violent struggle for destruction of other elements of society .
 Ukraine is a state with a weak nationalistic identity with ambiguous lines of ethnic division . It has been strengthened following subsequent Orange Revolution and Euromaidan . First, in contrast with the Georgian case, Ukraine has a weak Nationalistic identity .
 Ukrainians share substantial ethnic and nationalistic ties with Russia, along Slavic, historical, and linguistic lines, unlike Georgian case . Second, Ukrainians share significant ethnic, nationalistic and historical ties to Russia .
 Both conditions make Ukrainians vulnerable to ethnic exploitation by Russia, especially in areas with large ethnic Russian populations .
 The remaining subsections analyze Russia’s exploitative methods from a resent historical perspective . This interwoven cultural relationship, and the theories which attempt to explain the consequences of that history, are discussed in the first subsection .
Several distinct phases of operation characterize Russia’s exploitative strategy in Ukraine . Like in the Georgian case, several distinct phases are described .
 Phase Two begins immediately after Yanukovych's late-night flight, and deals exclusively with Russia’s intervention in Crimea . The annexation of Crimea culminates in the annexation of the peninsula March 18th, 2014 .
 The Third Phase encompasses the uprising in the Donbas and ends following the signing of the Minsk II agreement . The uprising is the third phase of the uprising .
 A long historical perspective is the key to understanding the complicated ethnic, cultural, and linguistic relationships that exist within Ukraine today .
 Russia and Ukraine’s conjoined history essentially begins with the founding of Kyivan Rus, an early medieval kingdom with a primarily Slavic population that reached its height in the eleventh century .
 Kyivan Rus flourished for two centuries under the rule of provincial princes . The Mongol invasion of the thirteenth century effectively dismantled the kingdom, setting Kyiv and Muscovy on divergent developmental paths .
 By the time the Mongolian Horde’s power had withered in the fifteenth century, Kyiv and what today is western Ukraine was integrated into the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth . Muscovy, and later the Russian Empire, slowly expanded throughout the Eurasian ste
 Most of eastern Ukraine was finally absorbed into the Russian Empire in the eighteenth century . Most of Ukraine was eventually absorbed into Russia in the 18th century .
 Colonial rule and policies of Russification characterized Tsarist Russia’s administration of Ukrainian territory. Colonial rule, policies ofRussification characterized the Russian government of Ukraine .
 The 'terror famine' of 1932-1933 punctuated the process of Russification in dour terms . The ‘terror famine’ of 1932 -1933 marked the end of the Russification process .
 The death of six to 11 million Ukrainians served as an effective deterrent against defiance of Soviet power, as well as a means to dilute the Ukrainian majority in the Soviet Socialist Republic .
 Ukrainians of the Soviet era were tom over how to respond to Soviet rule . Despite these tragedies, Ukrainians were tom-over-how-to-respond, despite these tragedies .
 For Ukrainians, the privileging of Russian was both attractive and repellent . For the Ukrainians, “for the Ukrainians the privileges of Russian were both attractive, repellENT.’
 Ukraine’s second glimpse of freedom in 20 years came following the Red Army’'s disastrous retreat ahead of the Wehnnacht onslaught in 1941 . The Red Army was forced to retreat from WehNNacht in 1941.
 The newly “liberated’s’ka Povstans ’ka Armiya, or Ukrainian Insurgent Anny. Anny . The region was under Gennan control . The newly-liberated regions are now known as �
 Vestiges of this force fought the returning Soviet anny for almost a decade . But ultimately their resistance failed, resulting in the death or deportation of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians .
 Russian was the dominant culture of the east and south, while Ukrainian still survived in the west . Russian was a dominant culture in the east, while Ukraine was the west.
 Russia’s Neighborhood Policy, Ethnonationalism, and Novorossiya Russian politicians and academics have produced numerous strategic, philosophical, and historical models to explain the relationship between Russia and Ukraine .
 The Neighborhood Policy, Slavic Ethnonationalism, and Novorossiya are three examples of Russia’s 21st-century strategic approach . Russia's 21st century strategic approach is clearly influenced by Russia's approach .
 Russia’s strategic methods of manipulating identity and exporting propaganda. They fully embody Russia's strategic methods. They are known as ‘the Russians’
 Russia's Slavic brother had an increasing desire to Europeanize, says author . These Russian tendencies grew especially pronounced after the Orange Revolution in 2004 .
 Russia devised its Neighborhood Policy to cope with Ukraine’s perceived ‘Western’ treachery . Russia's Neighborhood Policy was designed to help Ukraine's perceived “Western” treachery.
 The Neighborhood Policy was a popular, coercive strategy that appealed to a wide audience of Russian scholars and political leaders . It appealed to many of Russia's top leaders and scholars .
 Neighborhood Policy leaders believe they can influence countries in their ‘near abroad’ by creating geopolitical instability and coercion . Unlike Western policy initiatives which focused on soft power diplomacy, Russian adherents to the Neighborhood Policy believe they could influence their countries .
 Russian leaders could exert power by attacking weak points in Ukrainian identity, effectively demonstrating Russia's soft power prowess .
 Slavic ethnonationalists emphasize the strong ties between all Slavic people . The Eastern Slavic nations of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, and their eventual unity under one nation-state .
 Russian leaders, academics, and media repeated ethnonational ideals throughout the spring of 2014, during the turbulent months between Yanukovych's departure in February and Petro Poroshenko’s inauguration on June 7, 20 1 4 .
 A Ukrainian Marine says he continues to believe in a fraternal bond between Ukraine and Russia . He calls Russians his Slavic Brothers, despite their coercive actions .
 The same Vice News reporters also interview a group of Serbian volunteers who have come to Crimea to show their support for the referendum .
 Serbian volunteers often repeat their ethnonationalistic desire to support their Slavic Russian cousins and counter the forces of Western Fascism by which they meant the Ukrainian government .
 Russian leaders, academics, and media outlets also repeated the concept of Novorossiya during the chaotic spring of 2014 .
 Novorossiya, or simply “new Russia,’ is a nationalistic concept which came into common usage during the reign of Catherine the Great . It is loosely referred to the region conquered under her rule, specifically the northern coast of the Black Sea .
 The tsars opened this sparsely populated region up to Russian settlement in the 1780s . They encouraged migration through remittances from serfdom and promises of tenable land .
Common usage of the term Novorossiya dwindled during the twentieth century . It came back into common Russian parlance following annexation of Crimea .
 Failure of pro-Russian forces to replicate Crimea-like rebellions in central and southern Ukraine effectively ended any real possibility of creating a new Russian contiguous territory . This would have connected another breakaway region in Moldova, Transnistria, to the Russian Federation .
 Support of Russia’s Neighborhood Policy, ethnonationalism, and Novorossiya cut to the core of Russian President Vladimir Putin's vision of a Russian-dominated pole in post-Soviet space .
 Tens of millions of our co-citizens and compatriots found themselves outside Russian territory .
 Russia's separation from the Russian homeland is an international humiliation Russia continues to suffer . The annexation of Crimea and return of one million of these waylaid citizens was alleviated following the annexation .
 Putin’s statement fully embodies the appeal of ethnonationalism and Novorossiya . The power these concepts have over those who are now determining the future of the Ukrainian state .
 The ethnic makeup of Ukraine is not clearly divided along defined borders . This chapter includes the introduction of a Blended State .
 In between these two poles, the country is a mix of ethnic and linguistic groups of primarily composed of Ukrainians and Russians . The predominance of the Russian language among ethnic Ukrainians is making the mix more confusing .
 Russia can more easily export pro-Russian propaganda and manipulate Ukraine’s weak sense of identity. By exploiting these characteristics of Ukrainian society, Russia can use these characteristics to exploit Ukraine's weaknesses, says Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine’s European northwest and Eurasian southeast forms the foundation of Ukraine's ongoing identity crisis . The definitive existence of geographically separated political and linguistic poles, between Ukraine's northwest and southeast, forms thefoundation of Ukraine”s ongoing identity Crisis .
 central Ukraine acting as a mixed buffer of identity and political ideals . Political preference becomes less defined as one moves away from the extreme northwest and southeast regions .
 Russia’s constant attacks on the identity of the country along this ethnic no-mans-land is critical to the understanding of this thesis . Russia's constant attacks are critical to this thesis.
 Ukraine’s blended nature is also apparent in the ongoing prevalence of spoken and written Russian .
 As of 2011, the top eight TV channels only had 22% of their primetime content in Ukrainian . Only 30% of the total newspaper circulation was in Ukrainian.
 Spoken Ukrainian is more prevalent in the northwest while Russian language dominates in the country’s southeast .
 The language is underserved in visual, audio, and print media, making Ukraine dependent on information sources published and exported from Russia in the Russian language . Even in the Ukrainian-speaking west the language is under-served in visual and audio.
 Russians take full advantage of this access by inundating Ukraine with propaganda-laden Russian language media .
 Both fall under the manipulate identity strategic method and fonn the foundation for Russia’s exploitation strategy in Ukraine . Both fall in the manipulation of identity strategic methods .
 The pull of Russian language and culture reaches into Ukraine through its airwaves, cables, and newsreels .
 58 controlled news corporations bombard vast audiences of Ukrainian citizens with propaganda . The Ukrainian government has been accused of using propaganda .
 Infonnation warfare as a form of ‘soft power’ is wielded differently in Russia than it is in the West .
 Oversimplification, embellishment, or simple fabrication of complicated Ukrainian political and social issues is a common Russian tactic . Russian tactic, effectively bombarding the target audience with a corrupt and distorted message, creates tension and division .
 Russia's constant denigration of Ukrainian people as unique ethnic group. Another example of divisive media bombardment is Russia’s constant denigrations of the Ukrainian people .
 Unexpected Nation, 301. 59 messaging, which is repeated on Russian language media and often by President Putin, attacks the already weakened bonds of identity that hold the Ukrainian nation together .
 Russia’s belittling of Ukrainian ethnicity is an enveloping maneuver that targets the flanks of Ukrainian identity . The Russian government has been accused of supporting ethnonationalism in Ukraine .
 One seeks to deny a people’s existence, and the other to unite it with a greater whole . One tries to deny the existence of a person, and one seeks to unite a people's existence .
 By using both in tandem, Russia can strengthen its support within Ukraine . Russia can use the two in tandem .
 This cultural denigration also creates toxic in-groups and out-groups, and serves to dehumanize Russia’s political and civil opposition within Ukraine . This culturalDenigration also serves to dehumanize Russia.
 The Ukrainian government would repeal a 2012 law that allowed regions to make Russian an official second language .
 Russia media outlets seized on the legislation's passage in the Ukrainian Parliament as evidence that the Ukrainian government was trying to forcibly assimilate its ethnic Russian minority .
 The narrative of threatened ethnic minorities resembles Russian justification for its intervention in the 2008 Russo-Georgian war . Russia plays into a common appeal painting Russia as the victim of Western aggression, and not the aggressor itself .
 Ukrainian state makes it incredibly vulnerable to Russian exploitation . All these unique characteristics of the Ukrainian state make it extremely vulnerable to Russia exploitation .
 The societal splits, illustrated in a distinct divide between the northwest and southeast, are dulled by the vast area of central Ukraine . It represents a mix of both Ukrainian and Russian political views and language usage .
 The political chaos of Yanukovych’s departure combined with a weak and divided sense of identity assisted Russia in its exportation of propaganda and manipulation of identity . Russia's political chaos combined with the weak and divide of identity helped Russia, says CNN.com .
 Yanukovych's four years as Ukraine's president laid the groundwork for Russia’s mostly successful attack on ethnic divides within the country . Yanukovych's failed direct control through the corrupt politician ultimately failed .
 Yanukovych and his allies received substantial political support from the Russian government, including cash payouts and reciprocating clientelistic schemes, mostly regarding Natural Gas industry .
Russia essentially used Yanukovych to weaken and corrupt the Ukrainian government, and keep it on track for continued support of Russian foreign policy objectives . Russia essentially used the Yanukovych government to weaken, corrupt the Ukraine government .
 Identity manipulation and propaganda were also central tenants to the Yanukovych Administration’s hold to power, as its leaders succumbed to Russian usurpation of the Ukrainian state .
 Yanukovych's family background perfectly embodies the diverse cultural, ethnic, and linguistic character of Ukrainian society . Yanukovych’s family background embodies the diversity of Ukraine's society .
 Yanukovych descends from Russian, Polish, and Belarusian ancestors . Although born in Ukraine, he is a native Russian speaker .
 He grew up a criminal and local tough in eastern Ukraine, involved heavily in the ethnically centered gang wars which raged across the region in the 1970s and 1980s .
 By his thirties, Yanukovych began working for legitimate enterprises in the transportation industry . He eventually took up politics following the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The party “bribed, blackmailed, or coerced opposition deputies into defecting to the government coalition’s coalition. Well known cronyism and criminal behavior, the party says .
 The party acted as a pro-Russian megaphone, allowing Russian propagandists to gain access to the Ukrainian people through ostensibly “legitimate’s governmental institutions. In this way, the party acted in this way.
 The Yanukovych crime family which developed around the party network was instrumental in achieving Russia’s goal of cutting off Ukrainian support for Western integration . The Yanukovych Crime family also helped Russia cut off support for the West .
 The ‘family’ consisted of Yanukovych’s kin and many of the key power brokers in eastern Ukraine . The “family” consists of Yanukovych's kin and some of the top power brokers .
Political and entrepreneurial compatriots created a clientelistic system based on the region’s industrial resources of coal, steel, and gas .
 Yanukovych's family increased their wealth through various forms of government theft and bribery . During Yanukovych's presidency these “family’s” members increased their money through government theft, bribery .
 Several gangs of local toughs, or titushki, stirred up violence in the Maidan in late 2013, appearing as counter-protestors and provocateurs .
 Russia’s support of Yanukovych politically empowered the “family,” which continued to eat away at the country's economic livelihood through corruption and clientelism . Russia's support of the Yanukovych politically ultimately empowered the "family," according to the Russian media .
 The protests of the Euromaidan represented many aspects of Ukrainian life . The protests were an outlet of severe frustration and disappointment with the Yanukovych Administration .
 Orange Revolution was an extension of the feelings of the Orange Revolution in 2004 . It was an Extension of the feeling of thefeel of the revolution in 2004, and a clear vote for closer ties with the West .
 Ukrainian people united as one majority, not a Russian one . It represented the Ukrainian people’s ability to unite as a majority, a majority of Ukrainians who supported Western-aligned future .
 This was a dangerous proposition for the Putin Administration, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says it could have been the catalyst for Ukraine to solidify its national feeling .
 Mykhailo Dobkin won just three percent of the national vote during the 2014 presidential elections . Dobkin's presidential candidate won just 3% of the vote in 2014 .
Much of Yanukovych's family followed the ex-President's lead and fled the country . Much of Yanukovych’s ‘family’ followed the former President’'s lead .
 Yanukovych’s networks, and their Russophile culture, had weakened Ukraine through “heightened regional and ethnocultural tension,” creating regional rifts that were exacerbated during the Euromaidan .
 Russia could not prop up Yanukovych’s faltering regime with the networks of support it laid in place during most of the 2000s .
Foreign armed and financed guerrillas are a favored weapon of states wishing to wage war below the radar of armed conflict . The guerrilla are a favoured weapon of countries wishing to Wage war below armed conflict.
 Russia's exploitative ethnic strategy went into full swing in early 2014 . It creates ambiguity and plausible deniability, key components to Russia’s exploitativeethnic strategy .
Russian strategy was focused on exploiting presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet . In Crimea, Russian strategy was focus on exploiting its presence .
 The sudden appearance of “little green men’s throughout Crimea in February and March 2014 provides a fitting example of the sudden appearance .
 President Vladimir Putin claimed they were merely local defense militias, organized by concerned Crimeans .
 In Crimea, "little green men" undermined the Ukrainian Anned Forces’ ability to respond decisively to protestor occupations of key administrative centers . The protests prevent the staging of a separatist referendum .
 When the time was right to occupy a Ukrainian military base, protestors and “little green men’s’ joined forces .
 armed men used the chaos of the crowd as cover to secure the compound . The armed men destroyed security gates or other obstacles .
 The coordination between the ‘little green men’ and pro-Russian protestors is a key component of Russia’s exploitative strategy . The tactic helped establish a consistent storyline of an organic, cohesive, and detennined pro- Russian movement .
 Thousands of Russian troops were able to rapidly deploy to trouble spots thanks to Russia’s basing agreements . Thousands of well-trained and equipped Russian troops had access to the region .
 In January of 2014, approximately 35,000 Russian Federation troops were stationed in Crimea . 20,000 Ukrainian service members were also stationed on the peninsula .
 The presence of major Russian military installations on Crimea proved instrumental to Russia’s exploitation of ethnic division in Ukraine .
 Proximity to major metropolitan areas allowed swift movement of Russian forces . It provided cover for those forces among the friendly ethnic Russian population .
 Using masked and unidentified “little green men’s” in combination with close proximity to regular Russian troops, gave pro-Russian forces decisive local superiority .
 Bluntly denying that these men were regular Russian forces was an audacious touch aimed at degrading the ability of the West to effectively intervene . Bluntley denied that they were Russian forces.
 Russia could not replicate the same strategy of using “little green men’s’ in the Donbas .
 Russian troops did not enjoy the same level of access and legitimacy they did in Crimea . Russian forces were authorized to enact protective measures if the local commander deemed it necessary .
 Russia has turned to a more classic mix of irregular warfare tactics . In the Donbas, Russia used to use propaganda, arming insurgents, supplying fighters and exploiting presence .
 In the early days of unrest in the Donbas, the initial agitators were genuine Ukrainian citizens . They received some assistance from Russian government advisors .
 Most of the separatists were ethnic Russians, who made up approximately 38. percent of the population of the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The separatists are concentrated primarily in larger urban centers .
 The Russian language also dominates, with 72 percent of residents reporting their “native language’s’ native language is Russian .
Anti-Ukrainian Russian media served a central role in motivating a minority of the eastern population to rebel . Russian media has been a key factor in the Ukraine crisis .
 Irrational terror has become the main source of the renewal of separatist sentiments in the Donbass region throughout April-May 2014 . The region has seen a rise in separatist sentiments since the start of 2014 .
 These forces managed to capture several cities and towns in the region, relying on arms provided by local oligarchs and captured weapons depots .
 Ukrainian forces achieved several embarrassing successes in the early spring, including surrender of an entire platoon of Ukrainian armored personnel carriers to an unarmed crowd of pro-Russian protestors .
 The early pro-Russian separatists rallied around the belief that they were fighting against an illegitimate fascist government in Kyiv . The separatists were motivated and idealistic, the early separatists said .
 The wholesale influx of Russian equipment, and later personnel, did not begin until summer 2014 . It began when Russian equipment began to be used.
 In the months of June and July, the Ukrainian Government offensive started to build momentum, capturing Slovyansk and besieging separatist strongholds of Donetsk and Luhansk .
Evidence began to mount of vast quantities of Russian equipment flowing into Ukraine through checkpoints not controlled by the Ukrainian government .
 Several examples of Russian-supplied heavy equipment now sit in Kyiv’s Museum of the Great Patriotic War . placards indicate their manufacturing numbers as proof of their Russian origin .
 Without additional military equipment the rebellion would have fallen apart . Without additional equipment, the rebellion could have fallen Apart .
 Russia maintained a steady stream of material support for the separatists . But even that was not enough to prevent their capitulation .
 There simply were too few Ukrainian fighters to stand up to the government forces. There simply weren't enough fighters to fight for the government.
 Russia sent its own citizens into the breech. When local manpower could no longer fill the requirement for fighters, Russia sent it into the air .
 Russian volunteer fighters flowed into the Donbas in the summer of 2014 . They were made up of both disgruntled Russian veterans and radical political ideologues .
 Many were veterans of Russia’s wars in Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Georgia . Others were politicized rightist nationalists eager to export their ideology .
Volunteers were invaluable in the early stages of Russia’s wholesale commitment to the rebellion . These volunteers were invaluable.
 The ideal candidate was a seasoned and battle-hardened veteran who was now eking out a living as a security guard . He was experiencing difficulty in re-adjusting and finding a niche in the civilian world .
 The recruits were promised high pay, the equivalent of hundreds of U.S. dollars a day, to fight and operate heavy weaponry that began to flow into Ukraine from border checkpoints .
 Russian soldiers make up approximately one-third of the fighters in the Donbas . The prevalence of veteran and ideologue fighter networks continues to diminish .
 The Russian strategic method of exploiting presence was also in play during this phase . The Russian strategy was also used to exploit presence during this period .
 42,000 Russian troops participated in exercises mere miles from the Ukrainian border in the summer of 2014 .
 Russian regular forces operating along Ukraine’s borders during the insurgency played a deterrent role . The presence of regular forces in Ukraine's borders played a conventional threat .
 Russia's presence aggressive and decisive military action on behalf of the ATO, thus enabling Russia to extend the conflict and draw effective forces away from the Donbas . The ATO's presence has enabled Russia to extended the conflict, so far .
 Ukrainian state is unstable and reactionary, unable to coalesce effectively and fight an urban insurgency . These methods, though less covert as the conflict dragged on, kept the Ukrainian state unstable .
 Russia was able to exploit linguistic and ethnic divides in Ukraine systematically . It was a wide-ranging infonnation warfare campaign composed of both ideological and propaganda elements .
 Russia successfully knocked Ukraine off its balance in early 2014, allowing it to easily annex Crimea in March . By using these methods, Russia has established a powerful foothold in the Donbas .
 Russia’s approach also knocked the West off-balance., Russian and pro-Russian forces blended sufficiently within the background of legitimate public discontent to create a situation that stymied the West's ability to act decisively . Russia”s approach to the West.
 Russia created enough doubt and ambiguity to discourage an early unified Western response, and more comprehensive sanctions were leveled only after separatists brought down Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 .
 The long-tenn consequences of Russia’s exploitative ethnic strategy in Ukraine are yet to be seen . Minsk II and Beyond and Beyond are still to be heard .
 As of the beginning of September 2015 it appears as though violence in the Donbas is subsiding . Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko begrudgingly accepted the terms of the Minsk II agreement .
 The predicted separatist counteroffensive toward Mariupol and Slovyansk has yet to materialize . The predicted counteroffensive is yet to Materialize .
 NATO's initial refusal to become directly involved in the Ukraine crisis may end up being a stroke of incredible luck . The most likely result of the current stalemate is another frozen conflict along Russia's periphery .
 Western sanctions remain in place, and oil has fallen well below the $110-a-barrel price tag required to keep the Russian government solvent .
 As Russia drifts into recession there may be enough impetus to spark another round of anti-Putin demonstrations, endangering the regime .
 The Ukrainian crisis shows that the West is not well suited to counter Russian exploitative attacks . Both the Ukrainian government and the West must spend vast resources in both time and treasure to counter every Russian method .
 Defensive strategies, if forced into play in this manner, are time consuming and inefficient, according to experts .
 Russia has a decisive advantage as it can use its local, cultural influence, specifically the prevalence of the Russian language, as a means to manipulate foreign populations in real time and from within those populations .
 Western failure opens the way for those using Putin’s tactics to use them ever more widely .
 This exploitation of ethnic divides can be, and has been, countered, countered . But this exploitation of racial divisions can be seen as a way of exploiting ethnic divides .
 In the Baltic States, governments have established their own media networks designed to satiate the need for Russian language media in their Russian-speaking citizens .
 This counter-‘end around’ circumvents the ability of Russian news outlets to penetrate other countries . This counter,’s ‘counter-’ end-around’circumvents a Russian news outlet's ability to penetrate.
 NATO and other international organizations can assist Ukraine by providing a means of establishing Russian content media for the Ukrainian population that fulfills the need for information, while screening out Russian propaganda .
 The ethnic dimension of the Ukraine Crisis makes the understanding of Russia’s involvement of Russia's involvement of major difficulty for outsiders to comprehend .
 The Ukraine Crisis falls under the category of ethnic conflict, according to the research . The author might expect the author to argue that the Ukraine crisis falls under ethnic conflict .
 The disparate fighting groups in the country are often ethnically vague, adhering to no strong “code’ or pure concept of self .
 There is no clear distinction between the “us’s and the ‘them’ which divides ethnic and nationalistic identities .
 It is simply unclear, making the labeling of the conflict as an ethnic war dubious . It is just unclear.
 Language and identity do play a major role in the reasons for fighting, but not to the extent of which it can be defined as an ethnic conflict . Despite this ambiguity, what is apparent is that language and identity play a key role in fighting .
 If the orchestrators of the Ukraine Crisis were Ukrainian citizens, then this definition would fit perfectly within the context of an insurgency . However, Russia is attempting to use violence to change the political order .
 The Crimean Republic, Donetsk People's Republic, or Luhansk People’s Republic, share few common characteristics with the guerrilla organizations established by Mao, Min, or Che .
 The tenn “hybrid war’s” ballet is being performed in Ukraine today .
 This thesis focused on at least four of these modes and means, and additional study of the conflict would uncover evidence of the remaining three . This thesis would focus on four of the modes, means and means .
Russia is engaged in hybrid war where exploitation of Ukrainian and Russian ethnic and linguistic groups is a key element . Using this definition, it is clear that Russia is engaged to hybrid war with Ukraine .
 Russia’s ability to wage hybrid war would have been severely limited, possibly resulting in a more dangerous, at least for the international world, conflict . Without the already present divides in Ukraine, Russia's ability to Wage hybrid war could have been limited .
 A thorough discussion of the power of each Russian strategic method to exploit ethnic divides will be revealed in the following chapter . Russia’s ability to achieve its strategic objectives are illuminated bellow .
 Russia was able to build a slight increase in regional hegemony through their assault on Ukraine . Russia was allowed to build an increase in its influence in the region .
 Neither Omnipotent Nor Unbeatable,’s ‘Olympic’ is ‘unbeatable’ .
 Russia is setting itself up as the arbiter of peace in the region, similar to the end result in Georgia’s ethnic conflicts . Russia now, especially after Minsk II, exercises incredible influence over the fate of the DNR and LNR .
 Ukraine remains an unstable country, still fighting rampant corruption and outdated institutional structures . Ukraine also remains a unstable country.
 All signs point to a new frozen conflict in Ukraine, which will increase Russia’s power and control within its area of interest .
 Russia did not decrease the Ukrainian government and people’s desire to more closely align with the West . As in the Georgian case, Russia didn't decrease Ukrainian government .
 Russia's aggression has actually done more to accelerate this move, at least in the short term, then to stymie it . Russia, through its aggression, has actually been accelerating this move. Russia has been doing more to speed it up in the long term .
 Ukraine is experiencing a painful but promising period of nationalism and unity, potentially unlike any other period in the country’s short history .
 By annexing Crimea, Russia has absorbed the most pro-Russian region of the country, one that proclaimed unceasing support for Russia . The Crimea region is one of Russia's most popular regions .
 Crimea is more unified without representatives of Crimea in the Ukrainian Parliament . Without representatives of Ukraine's Parliament, the country is more united .
 Russia decreased its perception as a great power, at least internationally . Russia actually decreased its view of the world, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Russia is more isolated than at any other time since the Bolshevik Revolution . Russia is now moreisolated than ever since the Revolution .
 This can no more clearly be seen as through the ongoing sanctions and Russia’s ejection from the G8 . This can be seen through the continuing sanctions and the ejection of Russia from G8.
 The Putin regime continues to ride a wave of popular support and revived national pride . Domestically, however, the Putin regime remains to ride the popular support .
 The costs of Russian intervention in Ukraine will outweigh the benefits, it will prove to be a culminating point in Russia’s ability to shape world and domestic affairs .
 The country’s strategic objectives of creating a regional hegemony, decreasing Western influence, and regaining great power status are by no means within grasping distance .
We must formulate and put forward for other nations a much more positive and constructive picture of sort of world we would like to see than we have put forward in past . We must formulate, put forward, for other countries a more positive picture of kind of world.
 It is not enough to urge people to develop political processes similar to our own . It's not enough for political processes to be similar to those of our own. It's time for people to think about their political processes .
 Many foreign peoples, in Europe at least, are tired and frightened by experiences of past . Many foreign people are less interested in abstract freedom than in security .
 Russia has used consistent strategic methods in both the Georgian and Ukrainian cases . Russia has shown a historical perspective and an ability to replicate the successes of the past .
 Russia's use of these six strategic methods in both the Georgian and Ukrainian case demonstrate Russia’s consistent and quantifiable exploitation of ethnic divides as part and parcel to its achievement of its strategic objectives .
Long-term impact of this approach to foreign policy is problematic. Russian policy makers' use of strategic thinking on behalf of Russian policymakers is problematic .
 Exporting propaganda is Russia’s most efficient, affordable, and impenetrable means of achieving its three main strategic objectives . It has been exercised in a way that puts independent and democratic Western media at a distinct disadvantage .
 Russian propaganda is efficient in that Russian remains the lingua franca of a large diaspora of post-Soviet peoples .
 Russian media outlets release anti-Western or anti-Georgian/Ukrainian stories . Efficiency reflects the short time it takes for Russian media to release an anti-West story .
 The need to fonn a cogent and reasonable response often slows effective Western counterpoints from reputable media sources .
 As long as the governments opposing Russia remain in a reactive posture, Russian outlets will maintain a distinct strategic advantage .
 The Russian Government pays approximately $8 billion a year on its government-owned news networks . This money goes to serve numerous purposes .
 The Russian government is trying to maintain an air of purpose for the Russian population . It represents a coercive/cooptive tool in the ‘near abroad’ surely, surely .
 This is an important means of creating the impression that Russia remains a great power, crediting the Putin Regime with repeated international successes . This is a important way to create the impression Russia remains great power.
 exporting propaganda is impenetrable, in that it alone does not elicit a powerful or united diplomatic counterattack, especially from the Western powers . Finally, exporting propaganda, in which it alone doesn't elicit a strong or united counterattack.
 The EU and NATO are trying to justify counter-messaging campaigns, essentially their own propaganda, which does not endanger the Russian government in the same manner Russian propaganda weakens Georgia's or Ukraine’s society .
 The cost of creating falsehoods and mischaracterizations is considerably cheaper than the cost of refuting them . This is primarily because the cost is lower than the costs of refuted them .
 Vitriolic rhetoric alone does not justify any sort of coherent international response to Russia’s revanchist storyline .
Russian-speaking populations weakened by a poor sense of identity, authors say . In these contexts, exporting propaganda to Georgia and Ukraine is and will remain a powerful and consistent strategic method, they say .
 The export of propaganda has created pockets of pro-Russian sentiment outside of Russia proper, according to Russian media . The export has helped in the establishment of a regional zone of influence .
Russian media has expanded its status as a regional hegemon and limited Western influence . By dominating the message in these areas, Russian media has dominated the message, with consistent anti-Western rhetoric .
 The manipulation of Ukrainian identity is mostly a condition of similar culture and shared history . The manipulation is mostly the result of similar cultures and shared histories .
Ukrainian society has a weakness to identity manipulation, says the author . Novorossiya is a clear example of the penneability of Ukrainian society, he says .
 Russian propagandists focused on the Crimean referendum as its precedence . They used the Crimean popular support for unification with Russia as a manipulative tool to undennine Ukrainian identity .
 Manipulating identity serves the purpose of gaining an axis of attack or casus belli, but does not necessarily facilitate the achievement of Russia’s three main objectives .
 Russia placed itself at odds with those countries that feel most threatened by Russian revanchism . Belarus began taking coercive measures designed to manipulate the definition of a Russian citizen . The Baltic States, Kazakhstan, and to some extent Belarus, took coercive measures .
Russophile strategy does not work if the goal is ultimately to recreate a multinational sphere of influence with some claim to general credibility . More generally, a Russophile strategy doesn't work if it's ultimately to create a multinational spheres of influence .
 Russia’s strategy of manipulating identity has served as a warning that their own Russian populations may be targeted in similar fashion . Georgia and Ukraine have been targeted by Russia in similar ways .
 There is also a weak case that manipulating identity degrades pro-Western sentiment . There are also weak cases that manipulating identities degrades Western sentiment .
 Most citizens in the Donbas preferred reimagining part of Ukraine . Even during the takeover of eastern Ukrainian administrative centers, polls of the general population revealed .
 Polling has shown Russian manipulation of identity in Georgia and Ukraine have unified the majority populations of each country . Russia has accelerated their desire to align with the West .
 Russia has not been able to translate the possible inclusion of small populations of new citizens into an increase in their great power status . Russia has been unable to translate small populations into a rise in power .
 Had these regions remained part of their mother countries, they could have acted as powerful political blocks that promote pro-Russian policies . The regions could have been more powerful if they remained in their mother nations .
 Russia no longer wields that ability to influence internal politics of Georgia and Ukraine . Once separated, Russia no more wields the ability to control internal politics.
 This particular strategic method is considerably less effective than many of the others in a broad foreign policy perspective . It is better at influencing Russia’s policies in the Russian diaspora, though better than many others .
 Arming Insurgents Anning separatists alone has not been a successful method of achieving Russian strategic objectives . Arming insurgents alone is not a successful way of achieving strategic objectives.
 In both cases, the Russian-armed separatist forces were unable to defeat Georgian and Ukrainian government troops without additional support from regular Russian military units .
 Anning separatists do not provide enough cover to allow Russia's actions to fly under the radar of Western willingness to decisively respond to aggression .
 It is difficult to postulate what the Western response would have been if Russia unilaterally and conventionally invaded either country without first establishing enough “cover’ for their action’s action .
 Superior arms do grant the ability of one group to monopolize the use of force within a territory . This gives separatist regimes the appearance of unified legitimacy .
Where those groups received their weapons does not mean much to the civilians living under them. Where those groups receive their weapons doesn't mean much for the civilians, it does .
 Russia has allowed Russia to expand its area of influence into the regions held by its proxies . Anning insurgents has allowed the country to expand. Russia’s status as a regional hegemon, and limiting Western access to the region .
 Russia's forces in Ukraine number less than 20,000 fighters . But influence over armed men of a few breakaway regions does not bolster Russia’s power status .
 The drain on finances over the long run may have a negative effect on Russia’s ability to demonstrate its power . Instead, the drain on money may have an impact on Russia.
 The Russian government hemorrhages a bit more treasure. With each new frozen conflict the Russian government has more treasure .
Russia has acted to confuse the true nature of Russian assistance by providing plausible deniability . Supplying Fighters has not substantially contributed to any direct gains in Russian strategic objectives in Georgia or Ukraine .
 Russian leaders can claim they are taking no part in the conflicts . Those doing the fighting are not under their control or jurisdiction once they cross Russia’s borders .
 This gives Russia sufficient cover to use violence without serious Western military retaliation . Again, this gives Russia enough cover to take action without serious military retaliation.
 Russia has facilitated the influx of foreign fighters to serve as a coercive measure meant to destabilize another country, not necessarily as a means to achieve a decisive outcome . Russia has a history of using foreign fighters as coercive measures to destabilise countries .
 The likelihood any of the separatist armies to win outright military victory in Georgia or Ukraine is low . But by keeping the manpower tap open, a trickle of trained and experienced foreign guerrillas could indefinitely prolong a conflict .
 Foreign fighters do help to increase Russia’s regional influence and undermine the pro-Westem governments under attack, according to CNN .
 Sending citizens abroad to fight in foreign conflicts may actually weaken Putin’s Regime in the long run .
 As these Russians, especially the politicized ideologues, return home from the fighting they bring with them numerous useful tools for a possible future insurgency .
 The Russian government has chosen to ignore the issue, which has been a factor in Russia's decision to ignore .
 Many of the same soldiers recruited to fight in the Donbas were radical rightist nationalists protesting Putin’s third presidential run in 2011 . They clearly do not demonstrate any particularly strong allegiance to the regime .
As Russia's economic situation worsens, the likelihood of more protests and instability increases . In turn these possibly disillusioned radicals may take the lessons they learned fighting in Georgia and Ukraine and apply them to a future struggle against the Russian government .
 Russian military forces granted Russian forces a decisive advantage in both the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and in the Crimean Anschluss .
 Russian troops were able to take key objectives and reinforce pro-Russian resistance within short timeframes . Russia’s unique ability to project power was demonstrated by Russian troops .
 South Ossetia’s control of the Roki tunnel and the RussianUkrainian border gives Russian forces a decisive logistic advantage, one that can be leveraged at any time .
 Russia's rapid deployment capability also supports the viewpoint that Russia has increased its hegemonic power in Eurasia . Russia’s rapid deployment capabilities also support the viewpoint.
 Presence of Russian forces has effectively limited the West’s ability to penetrate these regions . Presence of Russia forces has also effectivelylimited the West.
 Not even the Organization for Security Cooperation in Europe has access to hundreds of miles of the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 By dominating the security environment on the ground through proxies, Russia essentially controls the leavers of power . Russia essentially control the leaver of power through proxies .
 Russia also leverages its peacekeeping mission as a means to insert combat forces on to adversary territory . Russia also uses peacekeeping as a way of inserting combat forces into adversary territory.
 Russia's continuing contribution to South Ossetia and Abkhazia gives credence to Russia’s claim as a great power . Russia has been able to “stabilize” countries through the provision of security forces .
 The ability to provide peace keepers is generally seen in the international community as a means to enhance one's country's status . In the Georgian case this may be a significant effect among Russia’s allies and its own loyal people .
 Russia achieved its primary goal of building a regional hegemony by creating frozen conflicts . Russia can leverage its control over breakaway governments in response to actions by Georgia and Ukraine .
 Russia can also use continued economic and military superiority to back separatist anned forces . Russian hegemonic dominance in the region will be at least for the foreseeable future .
 Russia failed to decrease Western influence in Georgia and Ukraine by perpetuating frozen conflicts . Despite this advantage, Russia failed significantly in its attempt to decrease western influence in both countries .
 Russian meddling has solidified the anti-Russian and pro-Westem leanings of a majority of each country’s population . Instead, Russian meddling is solidifying the pro-Russian leanings.
 Both governments have expressed their desire to align their political future with the West . The desire is a far cry from assuring either government's ascendance into the Western security and economic order .
 Unless serious electoral upheaval occurs, there is little chance either country will begin to drift back into Russia's orbit .
 Russia's great power status remains unseen. What long-tenn effect sustaining frozen conflicts has had on Russia’s power status is unseen .
 None of Russia's satellite regions contribute to Russia economically, all draining funds from Moscow’s already overstretched treasury . Moscow's already over-stretched treasury.
 The regions’ attitudes toward Russia also waft from full allegiance to temperamental insolence . Russia has had to intervene into South Ossetian and Abkhazian affairs directly on several occasions .
After Russia has frozen a conflict, it no longer has much direct effect on the power equation . Each region is so small and contributes very little economically, since each region is very small .
 Crimea never entered the lexicon as a frozen conflict . Crimea's annexation contributed greatly to heightened Russian nationalism and impression of Russian power .
 The annexation of Crimea and support of South Ossetian and Abkhazian independence are seen favorably in Russia . By supporting these policies, the Putin regime has been able to demonstrate power at home .
 Putin has achieved his goal of regaining the trust of the Russian people and depicting himself as a leader who can bring honor, power, and dignity back to the country .
 Exploitative policies in Georgia and Ukraine have served as a unifying force, solidifying the anti-Russian opinions .
 Georgian and Ukraine continue to drift West, despite Russia’s vast investment of diplomatic, military, and economic capital . Russia's vast investment in military, economic capital, and diplomatic capital .
 Russia’s divide and rule ethnic exploitation strategy has not been paying off . Russia's divided and ruleethnic exploitation strategy is not paying off, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is suffering under the heel of economic sanctions and the global slump in oil prices . Russia today is more isolated than ever, and is suffering from economic sanctions .
 The Kremlin is doing its part in maintaining its seat in the Kremlin, says the Russian president .
 Further isolation of Putin's regime may cause it to lower the bar for provocation, increasing the possibility of another dangerous Crimean adventure .
 Exploiting ethnic conflict can only produce results through sustained and enthusiastic support of local populations. Exploited ethnic conflict only produces results through enthusiastic support from local populations .
 Crimea is the exception, and not the rule. Support in Crimea was more than sufficient toward the relatively peaceful transfer of sovereignty from Ukraine to Russian .
 South Ossetia and Abkhazia do not bend in every Russian wind, study shows . As shown in the case studies, they tend to defy Moscow occasionally .
 South Ossetia and Abkhazia do not necessarily crave Russian citizenship . They are dependent on Russia’s financial and military backing .
 Russia does not exploit ethic conflict elegantly, like a doctor with a scalpel . Russia doesn't exploit ethic conflicts elegantly. Russia does.
 Russia uses it like a blunt object, bashing their foes over the head, then jollily pointing out their deeds to a minority international and majority national audience . Russia is known for its use of the blunt object as a weapon .
 Russia’s exploitative policies will have limited effectiveness outside the former Soviet Bloc . Russia's exploitative policy will be limited to outside the ex-Soviet Bloc, says CNN .
 The Baltic States, Belorussia, and Kazakhstan are all at risk of the same ethnic manipulation . It not likely the world will see similar tactics used in the near or medium tenn .
 NATO will meet any influx of Russian insurgents and weapons along the hybrid warfare model of the Donbas crisis with armed force . NATO will be able to fight any Russian insurgents or weapons in the region .
 Belarus is safe as long as Alexander Lukashenko remains in power, but could be vulnerable after his departure . Belarus remains safe as well as Lukasenko remains in charge .
 Kazakhstan’s native population is outgrowing its Russian minority by a large margin . The government has undertaken a program of volunteer internal migration .
 Russia’s exploitation of ethnic division is systemic, it is not unstoppable, says the author . The intent of this thesis is to show that while Russia's exploitation of Ethnic Division is systemic.
 Leaders in the West, as well as Georgia and Ukraine, can implement policies to counter subversive Russian strategic methods . Russia and Ukraine can also implement policies that counter Russian strategic tactics .
 Russia's move to invite Ukraine and Georgia into a closer relationship with Europe and the West should have been tempered . Russia’s obvious tendencies to use and abuse international law, engage in realist discourse, and treat its ‘near abroad’ with open contempt, says Peter Ber
 The U.S. and its European partners could have achieved their nonnative goals without unilaterally declaring Ukraine and Georgia inevitable members of Western institutions . The United States and Europe could have reached their non native goals, such as the spread of democracy and nonnalization of markets .
 Russia's war on ethnicity and identity is a non-military approach to strategy . In the future, proactive action can limit the effectiveness of Russia’s war on ethnic and identity .
 Strengthening of Georgia, Ukraine, and other post-Soviet states’ sense of civic nationalism, over regional or ethnic nationalism, is the single best means of preventing further Russian interference .
 A state of state could take years, if not decades, of competent civic leadership . But achieving such a state is easier said than done than done, and could take many years .
 countries in the post-Soviet space can strengthen their sense of civic pride. This is an area where future Western aid should focus, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says.
 Georgia and Ukraine have both began to tackle corruption and government waste . There is some momentum for internal change, so there is a momentum for change .
 No other entity has the same level of interest in the European portion of the post-Soviet space . No other entities have the same levels of interest.
 If the situation in Russia destabilizes disastrously, NATO must stand ready to respond to future hybrid threats . NATO must be prepared to respond.
 Putin may try to boost his popularity by inciting Russian patriotism . The quickest way of which would be uniting another group of ‘lost’ Russians with the Russian Federation .
 Russia has clearly demonstrated that it does not intend to align to the Western way of the world . Russia has shown that it doesn't want to align with the West .
 Russia has succeeded in the near term with what appear to be fewer negative repercussions . But few paths toward a fruitful future remain .
 NATO must be prepared for the possibility of not only a revisionist Russia, but a massive collapsed state . NATO must also be prepared.
 The better the pretext, the more legal ground countries like Russia have to interfere in foreign policy . Russia has to interfere with foreign policy. The better pretext is the better the better pretext .
 Such an action, at least in Russia’s eyes, would result in decisive Western action . Such a decision would be made in Russia's eyes, according to the Russian government .
 The West has an opportunity to shape events by being proactive in the region, and denying any attempts for Russia to claim casus belli. This gives the West an opportunity for its own role in the world, and denies any attempts to claim it .
 The general approach in Washington is to appease Russia by trying to find a common ground . But this approach is not sustainable as Russia’s international goals of great power status and regional hegemony are not compatible with the current status quo which the United States and Europe are seeking to uphold .
 The West should send clear diplomatic, military, and economic messages to the Russian government that their provocative actions will be met with decisive action. Instead the West should sent clear diplomatic and military messages .
 It is also critical for Western policymakers to confront Russia’s role as a mediator in Georgian and Ukrainian negotiations .
 Instead of viewing Russia as a concerned outsider, Western powers should refer to their representation at the negotiation table as one of the belligerents in an armed conflict . Russia is straightforwardly and unrelentingly.
 Evidence of their instigation of both crisis, as shown in this thesis, is overwhelming and unquestionable . It is therefore procedurally incorrect to treat Russia as a mediator .
 Georgia's secessionist regions may be all but lost to Russian influence, as no solution appears immediately apparent . There is room to use the lessons learned in the Georgian case and apply them to other potential conflict zones around Russia’s periphery .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea exemplifies a modified and evolved dimension to its exploitation of ethnic division, but it is too late to change the outcome of the 2014 Anschluss .
 Ukrainian leaders may be able to learn from the Georgian case, and apply these historical lessons to the ongoing conflict in the Donbas .
 Ukrainian leaders can act to counter two of Russia’s strategies, that of peacekeeping and identity manipulation .
 Russia's direct military interference in the South Ossetia and Abkhazia conflicts can be applied to the Ukrainian case .
 Russia is simply too powerful and controls too much of the Ukrainian side of the Russo-Ukrainian border to prevent continued Russian military assistance to Ukraine . Russia is just too powerful.
Only after Ukraine, Luhansk and Donetsk establish their dividing lines can Ukraine regain the initiative . Only after Ukraine's two cities establish dividing lines, Ukraine can regain its initiative .
 As long as Russian-backed separatists and pro-Ukrainian forces remain engaged in active combat operations, little can be done to limit Russia’s exploitation of the conflict .
 Russia froze conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia primarily through their control of peacekeeping forces in both regions . Russia froze the conflicts in the two regions through the control of the peacekeepers .
 Russian forces, and their secessionist proxies, outnumbered Georgian forces . They established a status quo where Russian forces and their proxies were outnumbered by Georgian forces.
 Any peace deal struck to bring a more-permanent end to fighting in the Donbas must be negotiated with this reality in mind .
 Russian influence in any peacekeeping process causes a dramatic decline in the possibility of eventual agreement . Russian direct influence in the peacekeepers process causes dramatic decline .
 Ukrainian negotiators must do everything they can to stave off the legal stationing of Russian peacekeeping forces in Ukrainian territory . Russian peacekeepers have been stationed in Ukraine since 2007 .
 The Donetsk and Luhansk Republics and their armed forces are unlikely to willingly lay down their arms . As long as Russian peacekeepers are kept off of Ukrainian territory, the Ukrainian government has a chance of avoiding a status quo situation .
 Diminishing the power and strength of Russia’s coercive tactics should be another key goal following the secession of armed conflict .
 In the Georgian case, the Putin regime was able to continue to support Abkhazia and South Ossetia after relative stability was established .
 This military, economic, and political aid served to bind the breakaway regions closer to Russia . It made them entirely dependent on Russia .
 Ukrainian officials should do all they can to limit Russian military support of the Donbas . Ukraine should secure their own borders if possible, says Ukrainian official .
 Economically, Ukraine should spearhead the reconstruction of the Donbas, and take the lead on repairing the devastation there . The Donbas was devastated by the shelling of the city in 2004 .
 With 89 Western help, this could undennine Russian efforts to appear as the guarantor of economic aid . With 89Western help, it could appear as a guarantor.
 Ukraine should take every step to limit Russian efforts to absorb the Donbas civically, says Ukraine . Ukraine should also take every steps to limit Russia's attempts to absorb Donbas.
 Kyiv should carefully monitor the issuance of passports, and circumvent Russian attempts at issuing their own passports to Ukrainian citizens .
 This once again counts on Ukraine’s ability to secure its own borders and prevent the infiltration of Russian passport-issuing bureaucrats . This onceagain counts on the Ukraine's ability to protect its own border .
 There are numerous reasons to be optimistic about the future of humanity . There are many reasons for optimism about humanity .
 More people have been lifted out of poverty in the last quarter century than at any other time in history . More people were lifted from poverty than in the past quarter century .
Every person on the planet to each other, allowing near simultaneous communication to every comer of the globe . Advances in telecommunication technology have li nk ed essentially every person on each other .
 There will always be an “us versus them’s mentality in the human condition, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says there will be an "us vs. them" mentality.
World leaders should seek out ways to prevent the calamities that take place because of this lack of trust, says John Sutter .
 There will always be those that will exploit what makes humanity diverse . They should find ways to understand and minimize needless violence, because, unfortunately, there willalways be those who will exploit it .
 There will always be those that manipulate what humanity is to achieve their own nefarious goals . There will be those who manipulate what humans are to achieve.
 To make a better world, global leaders must strive to understand the motivations behind ethnic conflict . To counter those that manipulate it, world leaders must make better world .
 The United States Naval War College, Joint Military Operations Department, is the largest military college in the U.S. Navy .
 Makarychev, Andrey, Alexandra Yatsyk, Kornely Kakachia, Anar Valiyev, and Vahram Ter-Matevosyan. Makarychechev, and Andrey Yatsyev, are among the six members of the
 Smith, Graham, Vivien Law, Andrew Wilson, Annette Bohr, and Edward Allworth are among the seven members of the team .