 A recent Russian news broadcast added an entirely fictitious phrase supposedly spoken by Ukraine’s President . It is the latest attempt to push the Kremlin line about alleged discrimination of Russian-speakers .
 A survey has found only 19% support for Russian becoming a State language . A survey, for example, has found just 19% Support for Russian.
 Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko said only that Ukrainian would continue to be the only state language . This was noted by Radio Svoboda .
 A single State language in no way prevents people from speaking Russian freely, the presenters decided to invent the words about only speaking Ukrainian .
 The Kyiv International Institute of Sociology has just released the results of a survey carried out in February on attitudes to the Russian language .
 Respondents were from throughout Ukraine, except Crimea . Respondents included people from areas under Kremlin-backed militant control in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The survey found a significant decrease in support for Russian being made a second State language . 52% believe that Russian should be made the second official language only in those areas where the majority of the population want this .
 There is a fairly predictable geographic divide between western and central oblasts on the one hand and southern and eastern Oblasts . On the other, there is a relatively predictable geographical divide between the two .
 Majority in eastern oblasts are in support of Russian being made the second official language in areas where the majority are in favour of this . Not of Russian becoming a second State language .
 People were asked what the state policy should be with respect to the Russian language . 37% in southern and 31% in Donbas said Russian should become a second State language . 24% in central oblasts thought Russian should be removed from official life .
 There was less difference regarding the possibility of local populations deciding to make Russian a second official language . 44% in western oblasts, 57% in central, 43% in southern and 61% in Donbas .
 The problem is that when the facts don’t suit, they are ignored or distorted, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The KIIS survey results are so bad for Russia that they will probably not be reported at all . The survey results were so bad that they won't be reported by Russia at all.
 The Ukrainian government took over on Feb 22, 2014, immediately brought in a law restricting people’s right to use the Russian language . It is absolutely standard for pro-Kremlin media to claim that the Ukrainian government who took over in Feb. 2014 immediately brought
 Ukraine's new parliamentary majority did indeed blunder in where care and sensitivity was required by voting to revoke the 2012 language policy law .
 Russian is the main language in a number of regions of the country . The law claimed to protect the rights of any minority ethnic group comprising 10% of the population of a region .
 In pushing the 2012 law through, the then President Viktor Yanukovych ignored not only widespread opposition within Ukraine, but the opinion of the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission and the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities, Knut Vollebaek .
 The fact that the law was vetoed is consistently muffled in the Russian media . The law was vetoed by the Russian government in 2012 .
 Back in 2008, Russian foreign ministry statements claimed that Russian-speakers were facing discrimination in Ukraine aroused mainly mirth . Back in early 2008, Russia's foreign ministry said that Russians faced discrimination in the Ukraine .
 Moscow claimed supposed danger to Russians and Russian-speakers as pretext for its invasion and annexation of Crimea . Moscow, for example, claimed to be a threat to Russia and its citizens .
 Propaganda about the conflict in Donbas and about the tragic events on May 2, 2014 in Odessa also speak of discrimination or even persecution of Russian-speakers .
 At the end of September 2014, Russia’s Investigative Committee initiated a criminal investigation . It accused Ukraine of seeking the total annihilation of specifically Russian-speakers in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 This is no longer the fiction of fairy tales, but a narrative aimed at sowing division, stirring up hatred and causing maximum suffering and destruction . This is not the fiction, but the narrative aimed to sow division, stir up hatred .