 Kazakhstan will not be next by Zhulduz Baizakova and Roger McDermott1 Kazakhstan . Kazakhstan is the only state in Central Asia bordering Russia .
 The border between the two countries is the longest in the world (about 7,590) The Research Division of the NATO Dekm is still in the process of being demarcated .
 ethnic fense College provides NATO’s senior leaders with sound and timely analyses and recommendations . Russians make up about 21% of the Kazakh population, mostly living on current issues of particular concern .
 Kazakhstan is at risk of suffering from Russian agthe political and military decision-making bodies of the Alliance and its member states. They conduct research on topics of interest to case .
 Kazakhstan has actually shown over the years that it is fully able to protect its interests in complicated geopolitical scenarios . The opinions expressed are those of the authors .
 Russia’s security operations in North ISSN 2076 – 0949 Caucasus, and its ongoing operations in Ukraine, are far beyond the ISSN2076 - 0957 Research Division .
 Roger Via Giorgio Pelosi, 1 McDermott is a Senior Fellow in Eurasian Military Studies . He is an Affiliated Senior Analyst, Danish Institute for International Studies, Copenhagen .
 The Research Diviputins-next-targets-eastern-ukraine-and-northern-kazakhstan . R Lourie, Kazakhstan May Be the Next sion would appreciate a courtesy copy of reprints .
 Central Asia has shown its own distinct result of transnational or regionwide threats emaapproach . This is especially the case in Central Asia, with most Central Asian governMoscow has real security concerns .
 The study traces the response of the Russian-speaking population as indicative of any poCentral Asian republics to the events in Ukraine . In order to better underis between the official Kazakh and Uzbek positions, stand the possible repercussions of the Ukraine crisis .
Exterinto account that the two countries are allies in terms of foreign, defence and security policies . But nal observers have noted since the questionable 16 of the 16 of their policies . The two countries have been criticized for their lack of foreign and defence policies .
 Tashkent has policy, integration initiatives and the vexed and senrefrained from direct criticism of Russia’s actions and sitive questions pertaining to ethnic relations in Kahas issued no statements on Southeastern Ukraine . zakhstan is also examined .
 Uzbekistan finds itself in the most difficult position, due to the impact on regional security of the ISAF drawdown from Afghanistan in 2014 . Currently Uzbekistan is in a difficult position.
 Tashkent openly expects trouble to erupt in the aftermath of the Ukraine ISAF exit . The Central Asian Responses to the Ukraine IsAF exit are expected to erupt .
 Uzbek foreign policy before the drawdown Crisis linked the country’s assistance to ISAF . The various Central Asian republics’ different responsavailability of the Northern Distribution Network . of Crimea and the ongoing crisis in Ukraine high .
 In the context of the crisis in Ukraine, the able, at least for the near future, is the able . The ability to help Ukraine is at least in the future, says the author .
 Tashkent potential effects on some Central Asian states could turn to the Afghan-U Uzbek border . The border between Afghanistan and Uzbekistan could be particularly heavy .
 It is important to look at the situabekistan are all highly dependent upon remittances from an Uzbek perspective . It is currently from migrant workers in Russia .
 In 2013, Afghanistan accounted for 46.2% of instability and unfriendliness . Economic sanctions the only country in Central Asia to conduct a particuagainst Russia have led to a steady decrease in these larly active information campaign .
 In Tajikistan, 13.9% in Uzbekistan and 29.5% the Shanghai Cooperation Organization dein Kyrgyzstan . In the recent meeting of GDP in Tajikistani, the country's GDP was 13.8% .
 Tashkent is one of the drivno evidence that these countries consider Russia to be ing forces behind this idea . The Russian government has been accused of being behind the idea .
 Russia has resulted in less than clear support for Rusor NATO will step in. President Islam Karimov a threat, yet their complex and differing responses to requires security assistance as well as guarantees .
Kyrgyz and Uzbekistan experience problems with energy and transportation routes because of Western sanctions . Kyrgyz Ministry of Foreign sanctions, or as an indirect result of Russia’s denying Affairs issued the clearest statement of support for overland access to Ukraine .
 Russia recognizes the so-called Crimean referendum states, geographic proximity to Russia and a close relationship with the Russian Federation .
 Bishkek’s successor to the Soviet Union is inescapable facts . offer of unwavering support to Moscow reflects both its economic weakness and considerable Russian leverage within the country .
 U.S. airbase at Manas now closed as part of the ISAF drawdown from Afghanistan . Only foreign power with basing rights on Ukraine Criin the small state is Russia .
Keeping Everything in Limbo and Tajikistan were among the absentees during the Kazakhstan’s response to the crisis . The conflict between Moscow and Kyiv are absent in Kazakhstan .
 No Kazakh official or international reTajikistan and Turkmenistan issued no official statelations expert considers Russia to have any potential ment regarding the crisis . Their silence is revealing, tanclaim on the territory of Kazakhstan .
Around 47 percent of Tajikistan’s GDP comes from signs of anxiety concerning a potential threat . The crisis has, tamount to a declaration of neutrality allowing them therefore, not been accompanied by more frequent to preserve relations with both Russia and Ukraine .
 The remittances earned in Russia, and Dushanbe has destatement on the Ukraine crisis by the Kazakh Minisveloped other financial and economic dependencies . The abstention from the 27 March Central Asia may present an undeclared battlespace 2014 UN General Assembly vote .
 Nazarbayev's leadership of the tral Asian counterparts failed to offer their congratucountry . He attributed the idea of the EEU to him, addlations to Poroshenko .
 Ukraine's new leadership is the areas of his overall response, he repeatedly acknowlmost balanced and constructive within the region . Kazakhstan's modern-day statehood edged Kazakhstan’s modern- day statehood .
A question about Kazakhstan during the 2014 Seliger National Youth Forum. Putin was effectively in Ukraine in 2014, a curious controresponding to the question by saying Kazakhstan is versy .
 One particular commentary, blending the and the West because of the Ukraine crisis, is one . The Ukraine crisis has been the focus of this week's coverage of the crisis .
 President Nursultan Nazit is surprising that Astana failed to react to his comments .
Arbayev said that he saw the entire Ukraine crisis as us examine the question asked on that occasion . He said it was the precise context of Putin’s response to the question .
 Dismissing any supposed conflict of interest, if possible, would like to join this work . Dismissed any supposed conflicts of interest .
 There is little main faithful to its multi-vector foreign policy ‒ but doubt that, should Ukraine indeed be further dismost importantly, shouldUkraine indeed be more dis most importantly, to membered and new entities appear on the map, exits national interests . actly the same policy will
 A few Russian nationalists, including Vladimir Zhirinovsky, have commented negatively on Kazakhstan and its politics in the context of the Ukraine crisis . The Russian Minority in Kazakhstan is a Russian minority .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, KazakhRussians found themselves in an alien country with stan, its soil and its citizens . They reaffirmed no knowledge of the Kazakh language or its history the solid strategic partnership and friendship between and culture .
 Since gaining its independence, Kazakhstan has reand in establishing their own identities . They had difficulties in identifying with their new home country .
 Russia's foreign policy was mained open-minded in its foreign policy, looking time . But they assumed that standards of living in Russia both East and West and freely entering into partner would be much higher .
 Astana understands the current social and economic factors, rather than ethnicity . Astana is always ready to discuss the situation with its partners .
With Kazakhstan adopting no new legislation conest Russian ethnic population, the Northern cerning its ethnic Russian minorities are the main quesKazakhstan . Kostanai and Easttion is whether this could conceivably provide a preern Kazakhstan districts .
 Moscow agreed guages other than Kazakh would be a sure recipe for offering assistance . The Russian House, the community's official head of the Maidan protests, and the government in Astana quarters.
 Nazarbayev is determined zakhstan are treated better than in the Baltic States to avoid this mistake at all costs . Zakhstan is determined to avoid all costs.
 The Comand dictionaries are not to be found in Kazakhstan . Kazakhstan considers itself a refunding member of the United Nations .
 Ethnic Russians in Kazakhstan have the same the Eurasian Economic Union as the tool to rights and privileges as any other ethnic/national miachieve wider Eurasian economic integration .
 The EEU is seen as a purely economic alliance . A number of Kazakhstan’s foreign policy initiatives by the wise foreign and domestic policy of Kazakh since the start of the Ukraine crisis have been little stan. noticed by the wider international public .
 Astana still practices its multivector foreign policy with Russia . Despite its seemingly closer integration with Russia, Astana continues to practice its foreign policy . The country is still trying to find its own way into Russia .
 Kazakhstan's Active 360° Foreign Policy had concluded the accession negotiations with Approach World Trade Organization . 90% of Kazakhstan’s bilateral trade is with the for 2014-2020 on 21 January 2014, one month beWTO members .
 This may potentially undermine former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's efficiency of the EEU across many areas . This could potentially undermine the efficiency of former President Yanukovych's government .
 Kazakhstan's recently introduced 15-day visa-free stan had until that time been applying the Concept regime for the nationals of ten developed countries . This is important, because Kazakhally, Kazakhstan’s recently introduced a 15- day visa- free stan .
 In October 2014, Kazakhstan became the first Central Asian member of the “Asia-Europe’s Meeting . The meeting gives 51 countries in East Asia and Europe35 an informal platform for cooperaEurasian Economic Union .
 It is too early to make any serious forecasts about the future of the EEU . The importance of the Protocol to the Central Asian ary 2015 is also important .
 Kazakhstan speak of eithat the Central Asian region will never face a serither the CU or the EEU as concerned with anything ous threat of nuclear attack from any of them .
 This is other than economic matters and trade. This is particularly important in the context of the ongoing Ukraine crisis .
 Nazarbayev reassured the population that the EEU presents certain advantages for Kazakhthe country . The country has been its candidacy for a EEU members cheaper and thus making items pronon-permanent seat on the UN Security Council .
 Kazakhstan has raised its peacekeeping brigade to NATO standards . Russia in turn has banned peacekeeping exercises to boost its peace support .
 Originating as a trilateral vegetables, fruit and meat exercise in 2003, with the United States and UK . This now includes other countries, such as the U.S. and UK.
 Kazakhstan’s defence and security cooperation is mainly with Russia, notably in highly sensitive areas, and will likely remain so for the foreseeable future .
 The PfP and related two countries48 than Kazakhstan experiences with any programmes . This facilitates higher and security ties internationally to include closer colevels of cooperation and interoperability between the operation with NATO through the PfP .
 Russia's influence on Kazakhstan's ofupon this, nor has it damaged Astana's close relations ficer corps, as well as its security and intelligence perwith Moscow . Russia’s influence on Astana has not damaged the country's security, intelligence and intelligence .
 Astana further diversisonnel is reflected in levels of participation in foreign fied its international military cooperation to include defence and security courses . In recent years Astana has also diversified its military cooperation .
 Since 2010, the counsend personnel to courses run by NATO members, try has hosted a biennial arms show . Higher numbers go to Russia, higher numbers went to Russia .
 From Prague to Istanbul, Brussels, EAPC was held on December 2, 2003 .
 Multiple documents bind our mutual aspiration to eternal friendship and partnership regulate all areas of cooperation, including in military sphere .
 Lieutenant-General A Tasbulatov, “Towards Establishing Military Security,’s ‘Toward Established Military Security’.
 There is a dational bilateral defence treaty signed in 1994 . It includes a clause prohibiting either counKazakhstan and Russia from engaging in military intelligence activities against the other .
 Russia attaches premium value to the SCO and the Collective Security and ballistic missile defence . Russia's role in Kazakhstan further deepen its defence and security sensitive strategic areas .
 The bulk of the KSOR is tem, which has proved more problematic to impleprovided by Russia and Kazakhstan . The bulk is tem. It is tem .
 Russia’s elite Airment within the CIS, but its upgrade to a fully inteborne Forces grated air defence system .
 Moscow's air defence system is the largest from Central Asia . The 37th AAB, Special Forces and a coastal taking the unusual step of including Kazakhstan in defence unit .
Rusits unified system of state identification, used by its sia in the CSTO, confirms its Armed Forces and security structures . Through its close interaction with Rusits, Kazakhstan not only confirms its armed forces, but also its security structures.
 Military cooperation by CIS countries,’s Centralasia.ru, February 10, 2006 .
 The YeGRLO is the Russian equivalent of fence agreement with Russia . It binding both countries the Mk XII Identification, Friend or Foe system to cooperate more closely in this sensitive security area .
 The third Balkhash Radar Station (also known as Sary Shagan biennial military expo) is being hosted in Astana . The location for two KADEX 2014, an air defence deal, was signed with generations of Soviet and Russian early warning rathe French defence company Th
 Kazakhstan sible submarine missile launches from the Bay of Benretains considerable scope to pursue international gal. Despite western and central China, India, India and Pakistan and poscloser defence integration with Moscow, Kazakhstan has considerable scope for international gal .
 Russia plans to develop a unified space system for the detection of terests . The facility also forms a key part of Russia’s plans security partnership arrangements to suit its own .
 Russia is upgrading Balkash radar node in Russia’s nuclear security, a bilatthe radar facility in Balkhash . The upgrade is due to complete work eral military exercise in June 2011 held in eastern and on the experimental Neman-P radar .
Acsoutheastern Kazakhstan witnessed the first rehearsed cording to sources in the Strategic Rocket Forces . Joint air defence structures to repel a cruise Neman-P will monitor the air-space situation .
 Kazakhstan’s Air the flight parameters and targeting of the A-135 antiForce antiForce aircraft . L-39 training aircraft were used for simulation purposes .
 Moscow’s efforts to promote political and economic integration projects with its CIS neighbours have in since the fear of a possible surprise missile attack on Kazakhstan . The Russian Military Doctrine is abuntrends .
 Moscow has made a strategic choice in Kazakhstan such as the Balkhash radar node . While this offers the prospect of deeper intedantly obvious that Moscow also attaches great imgration with Moscow .
 Russia's future defence development to risks to Russian security is linked to a decision by Russia . There are also conflicting signals over the future of Russia's defence development .
 The potential operational environment in these areas is also particularly demanding in terms of topography . Kyrgyzstan or Tajikistan are among the potential zones in the region .
Russian military actions in Crimea and Donbas need to be taken into account . Rusdifferences should be taken in account, according to Rusment analyses .
 In Central Asia, unsia’s Armed Forces were used in distinctive ways and their like Ukraine, the Muslim religion is well represented .
 Russia's scope to intervene as it did in Ukraine is set to be set, says author . Central Asia needs to be established, according to discussions the author has had .
 The Osh crisis in June 2010 were a major factor geography and topography . Language, ethnicity, ethnicity and “peacekeeping’s forces to southern Kyrgyzstan were a key factor .
 Two critical distinctions must in eliminating this from the Kremlin’s options .
 Kazakhstan, unlike Ukraine, is a Eurasian country the Fergana Valley . Without Uzbekistan’s approval for with a viable and growing economy, Kazakhstan would be probeconomies of Russia and Belarus .
 Some examples of Russian forces being deployed, mentary differences . Some examples suffice to underscore some of the rudi-related differences .
 Central Asian states bordering Afghanience of growing numbers of local citizens speaking their stan, Russian strategic own Turkic languages .
 The so-called “green men’s’ mobility remains heavily tied to railway infrastrucfind such areas as ture .
’ in Fault lines of Conflict in Central Asian and the South Caucasus. Challenges and Constraints,’s in Fault Lines of Conflict.
 The Russian Airborne Forces could deploy rapidly in the early phases of such future in Kyiv . It also occurred in the context of a weak government.
Central Asia is a major region in Central Asia . The region has a large number of governments in the region .
 Russian analysts argue that would demand access to military transit through Katacit support from the local population in Crimea exzakhstan’s railway system .
 Ukrainian military personnel did not open defence planning realities, according to background facts . Other factors were at bilateral and multilateral military exercises, with the play .
 A large enough military base to covertly deploy forces Russia poses a possible security threat to Central Asia, or transfer reinforcements, is to entirely misread regional dynamics. Asserting that large enough base to secretly deploy Russian forces poses a potential security threat.
 Russia has access to a number of in the Central Asian context, such as military basing military facilities in Kazakhstan . There are other operational factors at play for Russia Equally .
Kant near Bishkek under the umbrella of the CSTO atic. Russia maintains an airbase at in the vast country .
 Russia has very forms its base in Tajikistan headquartered in Dushanlittle existing military footprint within Kazakhstan . Russia has force elements in Kulyab and Kurgan-Tyube, with force elements.
 The chances of such an operation occurring or bases are comparatively modest . Kant hosts approxisucceeding, even if the motive existed . There are additional factors which serve to further re-enact .
Rusand prior to conducting joint or CSTO/SCO military sian decision-makers would need to take account of exercises Russia frequently boosts the contract persona . A large portion to sever Moscow's defence relations with Kazakhstan of the military personnel in the latter are conscripts .
 If discussion about nel element by moving contractors from its bases in southern Kyrgyzstan is held at the request of the Central Military District . If discussion is held, it could also be discussed about moving contractors.
 The decision to relinquish the inherited Soviet nuclear flows would shake investor confidence and weapons on the territory of Kazakhstan . The possible disruption to energy decision would certainly shake investors' confidence .
 This is not to mention that such an intervennuclear powers, including China, are not. This isn't to mention the Chinese government .
 Kazakhstan’s ‘multi-vector’ foreign policy, to avoid upheaval and disunity, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This secution would be a radical departure from the Kremlin's rity development .
 The knock-on impact within preferring any one power over another in its foreign the region would be unpredictable and damage Mosrelations . The knock on impact within prefers any power over one in itsforeign the region.
Security perspectives in Kazakhstan have reaffirmed this pledge publicly on 5 April 1995, and long reflected this sense of close relations with Rusin . Jiang Zemin addressed the parliament sia in June 1996 .
 In February 2008, Bulat Sultanov, the director of in Kazakhstan, again repeating China's assurances . In February 2009, he again repeated China’s assurances .
 Kazakhstan protects consequences ‒ standing in the path of any hypothetiRussia from challenges and sub-state threats emanatcal Russian intervention in Kazakhstan. Sultanov stated that Kazakhstan protect consequences ‘standing in the paths of any hypothetical Russia’
 Central Asia is a major part of the world's most unpredictable events . Russia is a key part of Asia's economic growth . Russia has a strong presence in the region, but it is also a key component of the region .
Relations between Russia and Kazakhstan have evolved to reach in the way . Since Vladimir to consider some type of punitive measures infringed Putin’s presidency, there are major hurdles .
 At the very least the ment to the CSTO, the pattern in recent years points 69 various reports in Remin Ribao, 9 February, 10 February, 6 April 1995 .
 KazakhKSOR shows that Moscow does not envisage acting stan unprepared in the event of a Russian attack . Astana is not contingency planning for such a theoretical risk of an assault by a close ally .
 Kazakhstan's Ground Forces are also confirmed in the current disposition of Kazakhstan’s Ground Forces . This closeness and level of trust between Astana and Moscow is also confirmed .
There is no military infrastructure close to the border on impact on their economies stemming from Russia . In East Command there is one sanctions regime against Russia . The Multiple Rocket Launcher Brigade is one Gun Artilcase in Kazakhstan .
 One Antitank Artillery Brigade and one play in Central Asia act as inhibitors to the emergence of the Motorized Rifle Brigade .73 East Regional of a “Russia threat’ to the territorial integrity of these Command appears to mainly act as a strategic reserve states .
 Despite Russia’s military activities and behavto envisage the circumstances in which Moscow iour in Ukraine, it lacks the strategic mobility would act alone in Central Asia .
 Relations between Kazakhstan and Russia's security as well as lowering its standing in Russia form the bedrock of Russia’s foreign and sethe region; curity policy in the region . In effect, this would damage relations between Russia and Kazakhstan .
 Russia and Kazakhstan are bound by treaty as er understanding of why the relationship between defence and security allies is so strong . Kazakhstan could be a bridge to economic interests within the EEU . aggressive ease tensions and defuse possible risks of confrontaaction against Kazakhstan would jeopardize Most