 The projected map was a subliminal reminder of the stakes of the speech Vladimir Putin delivered to the Federal Assembly . It allowed him to present a ‘State of the Nation’ that projected the future global dominance he foresaw .
 Putin’s involvement in aggressive actions beyond the borders of the Russian Federation is all distracted national bounds . Putin's involvement in Crimea and Ukraine has been unclear, if of unclear scope .
 Russia is a vision of Russia as a state of the twenty-first century . But all were presented, in a cartographic sleight of hand, as a vision.
Current maps no longer follow the ‘jigsaw puzzle’ of the map that the icon of the luminescent map recalled . The global reach of Russia’s missiles that he claimed could not be intercepted, he claimed .
Russian Federation was the central take-away from Putin’s speech to the Duma . Russia faced a significant turning point in its history, which would alter its relation to space .
 Russia has caught up with U.S. military mapping systems since 2003 Iraq War, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia has a lack of clear limits to frontiers, or anti-missile rockets .
 A statement of the resurgence of Russia–and a renewed defense of the foreign policy of the Russian Federation–all but erased or whitewashed Russian military presence in Georgia, Ukraine, and Crimea . A holographic map of Russia presents the arrival of Russia on a global stage .
 The map offers a reassuring image of Russia’s prominence on the global map . Despite the fairly dire state of domestic affairs and the limited plans for expanding national employment or social welfare . The map offered something of a ‘warrant’ or guarantee of
 The value of the map, mesmerizing in its illustration of the entirety of the Russian Federation, provided an illustration of foreign policy and argument of expanded powers of global intervention . Putin, former head of state security, sought to suggest its arrival as a ‘strong state’ despite the
 The map met the need to bolster Russian self-esteem, and indeed identifying esteem with the territorial protection of ‘Russian rights’ The map was designed to bolster the country's self- esteem .
 The map sought to project an image of the consolidation of Russian abilities for ‘global governance’ as an extension of Russian sovereignty . Chechnya, Georgia, Crimea, Kyrgyzstan, and Ukraine are among the countries on the map .
 The map was a reflection of the manner in which Putin had long understood or seen the invasion of Iraq in 2003 as an extension of American claims to sovereignty, in violation of international law .
 The map affirmed the arrival of a new consensus in the Russian states and ethnic republics . Russia could occupy and occupy in the global map .
 Putin has violated the sovereign rights of Ukraine, Crimea, or Syria . Putin has also violated Russia's sovereign rights in Crimea, Syria, and Ukraine .
 The broadcasting of Russia’s possession of a new generation of intercontinental ballistic missiles, unable to be intercepted, as well as designed to frighten the United States or a feign to enter into an arms race, were presented .
 Russia's future positioning on a geopolitical map appears to be on the point . But his discussion of how “turning points’ in history determined the foundation of cities in Russia and its relation to “space’s relation to "space” seems on point .
 The glowing image of the Russian Federation lit by glowing centers of population echoed Putin’s discussion of stability . But he cautioned that the failure to create technological changes would lead to potential erosion of its sovereignty .
 The glowing national map dominated the room overwhelmingly in which the three-term President spoke . He spoke as he aimed to win an election to continue his Presidency through 2024 .
 Putin solemnly addressed the nation as if he were its architect and the protector of its bounds . The projection of the fixed bounds of the Russian Federation onto a set of screens behind him seemed to celebrate its continued power vitality .
 The continued coherence of the nation reminded viewers that, notwithstanding threats of dissolution after the fall of the Soviet Union two decades ago, the Russian state was back .
 The map of Russia was projected in isolation from the world, but the image became a basis for projecting the power Russia had regained on a global stage .
 The iridescent blues, splotched with centers of population, called attention to the permanence of the Russian Federation's borders .
K Kushner seems to have revealed his hazy purchase on a site dear to his father Charles . His parents had once been members of the city's large Jewish community .
 Kushner’s admission to receiving a ceremonial ‘bag of dirt’ from Russian banker Sergey Gorkov played down its ceremonial status .
 The path of her flight from Novogrudok in the underground tunnel she dug commemorated by an overground path and in the Museum of Jewish Resistance situated in the tunnel .
 Rae arrived in Czechoslovakia months after clawing her way through the tunnel with her brother . Rae used hand-made instruments to tunnel to escape Novogrudok’s ghetto .
 Charles Kushner, Jared's father, preserved the memory of Rae’s escape on family journeys there with his sons . Most Belarusian media openly crowed over the arrival of Jared Kushner, given his ties to Belarus, in the Trump White House .
 Kushner’s testimony to Congress described his family as hailing from the authentic-sounding but imagined hybridized non-place of Nvgorod . The city is much closer to Minsk, Belarus’ capital, than Moscow, and pronounced quite differently .
 The notion that Trump is closer to Russia seems likely to emerge. Eager for how Trump has been portrayed in Russian media that is widely consumed there, even while noting the clear similarities between local strongman Lukashenka and the prominence of faux populist themes.
 Rae's hat-maker father shared a particular antipathy to Poles, who treated the family badly . Rae understood her own town as in north Poland in a community of 6,000 integrated but religious Jews .
 Rae intensity in digging that tunnel to safety and survival from the Novgrugok ghetto may reveal the intensity and tenacity of the Kushners . Rae intensity was intense in digging the tunnel tosafety and survival, says Rae . Rae .
 Jared's geographical vagueness ended up trying to place this ‘village’ in a major Russian city . The intent of the gifts was basically to suggest his ostensibly Russian roots .
 Jared Kushner tried to cast the arrival of a bag of soil from Belarus as “the normal course of events in a unique campaign,’ it fit into a plan to encourage US-American friendship . But it was cast by the not-so-quick-on-the-
 The imperial imaginary that the trans-Atlantic transportation and presentation of soil from Mother Russia must have had some meaning for Gorkov or his compatriot Kislyak . Gorkov remained but a “banker” and Moscow existed as a Trump-friendly place, rather than ever having been an
 Trump's cultivation of the legend of the ‘assassination attempt’ seemed a media ploy, and appeared conveniently timed, it seems to have been interpreted in some circles as a benefit of a back-channel Jared had opened by gaining the blessing of the immortal Rebbe .
 The Russian VEB, or state-owned Vnesheconombank, or ‘Bank for Development and Foreign Economic Affairs,’ still under U.S. sanctions for its involvement in Ukraine .
 Jared Gorkov took care to communicate to young Jared, though what it said hasn’t been clear . If only mentioned in passing to show their lack of any suggestion of collusion, the specificity of these gifts revealed the research .
 Vnesheconombank has long focussed on Russian exports . Gorkov, deeply tied to the Russian FSB, apparently cut a deal with them, in December, 2016 .
 Jared Kushner's sense of innocence is not only an odd contrast to Gorkov’s tenacity, it's also a contrast to his tenacity .
 He seems to have been played with through the promise of ties to Moscow for the incoming administration . He has ambitions for a Russian Reset through his own backchannel .
 The bag of soil from the land of Kusher’s forefathers was rich with a symbolism that didn’t grab Kushner's attention or his sympathy .
 Belarus is not in Russia, but in the former Soviet empire . Even if it was “close to Moscow’s” and militarily tied to Russia, their bonds aren’t clear .
Reclaiming land outside of current state boundaries is closely tied to the mission statement of the VEB . Estonia, Lithuania, Belarus, and Latvia are central as part of the Baltic States . Latvia is part of Latvia and Lithuania .
 The presentation of this earth was part of a geopolitical vision, as well as providing an oddly off-beat appeal to the Jewish origins of Trump’s most trusted Presidential advisor .
 The Special Assistant to the U.S. President only remembered the considered gift as a “bag of dirt’s’ gift .
 The gift seems to have been carefully selected by Kushner’s visitor, probably with high-level approval . It seems intended as an attempted tie of affection .
 Russia's newly expansive claims over areas of central Europe once part of the Russian Empire . It also might reveal a bizarre post-Cold War political geography .
 Belarus is not eager to accept Russian annexation of Crimea . The centrality of Belarus to the Eurasian Economic Union has become increasingly clear . Belarus has not agreed to accept Russia's annexation of the Crimea .
 VEB described the meeting as part of its ‘development strategy,’ rather than an innocuous encounter .
 Gorkov seems to have been sent to meet Kushner as something of an analog–a modern businessman . Gorkov is both more worldly, down-to-earth and western than most oligarchs, and closely tied to IT .
 The VEB presents a unique view of the Russian Federation, as well as the Eurasian Economic Union . It is closely tied to the Eurasia Economic Union, which is closely linked to the European Union .
 Belarus sought to position itself with new alliances. The relations between the two countries were not easy, and long fraught .
 Belarusian neutrality has been criticized by Gorkov for its neutrality . Gorkov would have been familiar with the same sentiments in December .
 Lukashenko may not have much choice, even if he is one of the world’s few remaining dictators . But he may not be able to choose.
 Putin's attempt to influence the former Soviet republic run by the former leader of a Soviet, who has maintained his power while affirming independence from Putin’s Russia .
 Belarus is treading a fine line of independence . Russia would also very much like to see the EU sanctions lifted on trade .
 Lukashenko’s nationalist proclamations, and rejection of Russian as a state language and use of Belarusian. “We are not Russian — we are Belarusians’“–heightened tensions around trade disputes on energy pipelines, prices, and transit of
 The question is not whether Jared Kushner colluded, but how he failed to pick up on an invitation for colluding, and why he missed it .
 The mention of "Nvogorod" was more than a slip, and a signal of some sort of rejection of a proposal that didn’t seem worth the attention Gorkov had hoped .
 Kushner's title as Senior Advisor was made official on January 9, reportedly without salary, before being named to head an Office of Innovation . The Russian government seemed to anticipate his unexpected role as a sort of “Shadow Secretary of State” far more powerful in the administration than a Special
 The bag of Belarusian soil might be questioned beyond its symbolic value .
 President Gorkov's mission on December 13 would have been delicate, probably involving the immediate loosening of sanctions .
 The absence of any actual meaning in criminal law of a term like “collusion is a way of dancing around the issue, or just of keeping the conspiracy vague .
 Leviev is a partner of the Russian Prevezon Holdings . He recently settled a money laundering case in the U.S. on light terms .
 VEB feared facing the continued imposition of sanctions over Russia’s invasion of Crimea . The bag of soil somehow procured from Belarus .
 The anthropological oddity of the offering of earth, as much as a considered gift, fell on deaf ears . It seems to have misread the ties to Novogrudok.
 VEB's activities are not those of a regular bank or even a bank . Jared Kushner's relationship with VEB had little propriety at any event .
 The new descriptor diminishes its symbolic significance, and paints Jared as having made time in a busy schedule for an amicable meeting .
 Jared could even consider placing the Belarusian earth atop Rae's grave . But it's hard to believe that the symbolism was not lost .
 Rae’s grandson placed earth reminiscent of the very earth through which she had clawed out of the ghetto over her final resting place in New Jersey . The hopes of the higher-ups of VEB have escaped Kushner .
 The late Rae Kushner had quite vividly recalled the shooting of the Novogrudok suburb where many of the 30,000 men and women brought from a ten mile radius around the city .
 Jared's wife would probably have scolded him wordlessly for accepting the bag of earth as if it were a friendship offering .
 The location of the earth was very significant to the Russian Federation higher ups, if its significance or sybmolism may have passed Jared by .
 Russia seeks to expand its imperial past, presenting the gift of a bag of earth from the old empire . Russia wants to recognize the new geopolitics they intend to pursue .
 Such are the perils of having advisers without experience in international politics. Such is the case in the world of international politics .
 VEB hopes to forge ties to a new U.S. administration by offering something close to a spiritual attachment to a place of origin in the service of expansionist ends . Such is also the bizarrely shifting map of a post-Cold War world .
 The notion of appealing to Kushner’s alleged Belarusian roots seems a poorly judged symbol . But it was a potent one for a Russian Federation eager to remap broader European influence .
 The longstanding exercises of the Russian military in the ‘Russian West’ have acquired increasingly offensive tones . Russia's military exercises in the 'Russian West' have become increasingly offensive .
 The European Union is a pet-project of Putin from 2015 . The expansion of Russian military presence seems an open reclamation of Russian earth .
 Regional maps of Ukraine and Crimea are filled with their own narratives, most usually of the ethnic and cultural division of the region .
 Maps of the region's populations implicitly pose the question of where the region’s unity in fact lies, or where derives, or from where derives .
 The map of Ukraine’s population becomes a mirror of disunity, by mapping the linguistic and ethnic groups in the region . The map was designed to promote an image of national unity for Russians that is manufactured as a retroactive justification for invasion .
 The veneer of democratically determined ethnocentric or linguistic parcels that they create are a false mapping of the regional divides or sovereign boundaries of a state .
 The increasing number of visualizations mirror the disunity of the region in ways that have an oddly libertarian undertone . It is particularly pernicious to the sovereign unity of a state .
 Even if they don’t all explicitly advocate or question secession, the explicit fracturing of Ukrainian unity, such as it is, exploits the importance of ethnic-regionalism .
 Ukraine provided something of a start for Vladimir Putin’s regime to stoke separatists and racialists in Ukraine . The Anti-Globalization Movement of Russia held annual conferences since 2014 .
 The Right of Peoples to Self-Determination and Building of the Multipolar World . The right of People of the World is a group of people who want to change their views on the bipolar world .
 Russia has sponsorship of Donald J Trump and Russian Ukraine, or Novorossiya, in addition to the Brexit movement . Such hopes to champion regional interests under the banner ‘self-determination’ constitute a sustained subversive regional nationalism .
 Russia's smaller states are increasingly stoking their own divides . The Russian Federation keeps in its orbit effectively by stoking its own divides. It includes Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova and Azerbaijan .
Russionationalism is often invoked to justify the invasion of Ukraine, and the overturning of a democratically elected President . The seizure of Crimea is unwarranted and unwanted justifications, says the author .
 The steady cross-border entrance of support for the separatist pro-Russian rebels over the summer of 2014 proceeded largely from military bases located on the border . A stream of military support to rebels in Ukraine undermined the question of its national sovereignty .
 Russia made its military presence increasingly known to Ukraine, in an openly bullying manner of shooting jets, supplying separatists arms, and crossing the Ukrainian border at several undefended sites . Russia's military presence has become increasingly known in Ukraine, and crossed the Ukraine border .
 Questions of what are the actual “true borders of Ukraine may ignore the question of its tactical importance as an area of contesting global energy flows .
 Ukraine's political debate over Ukraine's politics seems to have served as a smokescreen to conceal . As much as there existed any enmity or opposition for many to Ukraine as a political entity, the region occupied in the energy reserves may have made it increasingly desired as a site of political
For the manufactured war against Ukrainian independence seems to proceed less from the protection of ethnic Russians, or the survival of the Russian language and cultural groups, than the cold economic interests of securing a continuous pipeline for oil transport on the ground .
 The Ukraine's political and economic stakes have directed new global attention to that region . The redrawn boundaries of Ukraine might take into account where the Ukraine actually lies .
Ukraine's borders and borders are more unclear than one would expect, says U.S. envoy . Ukraine's border posts are physically abandoned by soldiers and undefended . The hold of the Ukrainian government over these borders is difficult to assert, says the UN .
Ukrainian border checkpoints became porous to Russian troops . Increasingly, Ukrainian border checkpoints become porous to Russia .
 The bleeding crimson boundaries of the Russian Federation are more prominently highlighted than any city, region, or old soviet state, as if to insist on the naturalization of its borders, and erase any other borders .
 Putin has shown considerable affection to romancing the map as a fiction of state boundaries . He recently presented Moldova’s President, Igor Doyon, with a late eighteenth century map of Moldova .
 The image of the President before the map suggested a sense of restoration of past borders . Putin’s caution that the anger of the Ukrainian government at Russia for its loss of Donbas in the southeast were related to Moscow .
 The claims for Russian ties to Crimea and Ukraine have been used as a basis for Russian military might in Ukraine’s invasion . But the claims for Russia's ties to Ukraine and Ukraine are not true .
 Putin’s topographic map is displayed in his residence in Russia . It includes striking national borders, but is oddly without any clearly visible names .
 The relation of Ukraine to the Russian Empire and nation is complex, and goes back to the secession during the Revolution . The region has become less clear in its national or linguistic autonomy .
 The Ukrainian Republic that seceded from the Russian Empire had been significantly “Russified’ as a Soviet Socialist Republic, whose ethnic or linguistic autonomy was attempted to be erased . The region had been splintering from the Soviet state and from “European Russia’s
 Ukraine has much to do with the geography of energy and oil pipelines for Gazprom and the Russian state . Russia's claims of Russia to the region are tried to be magnified more than are seen as a part of Russia's identity .
 Putin gazes quite icily if somewhat longingly at the regions that extend to the Black Sea, but excludes Crimea . Putin is pressing to consider what sort of region he saw, and what continued Russian presence–cultural or linguistic–existed in the region he was so ready to invade
 The renaming of the region not only absorbed Ukraine as a territory, but tired to erase Ukraine’s cultural memory . Ukraine's cultural memory has been erased.
 Putin seems to want to keep ties to former Soviet military bases as a buffer zone . The renewed economic importance of the region’s stability has produced the increased insistence on the integrity to Russia .
For the fraudulent claims to ethnic protection conceals the emergence of a new global geography of the energy market . The claims are not based on the demarcation of united ethnic units or political bodies .
 Mapping the region of Ukraine and nearby lands demands situating the region’s boundaries in a global context of economic value . Economic transactions and activity are often bound up in the growing value of the gas pipelines .
Russian regions of the post-Soviet state have been redefined on a map . The region's political divisions are a basic fault line that seems to threaten its integrity and division .
Clear lines drawn between dominating parties and political persuasions in these choropleths draw far clearer divisions in the integrity of the region than might be useful as tools of analysis .
 maps place their viewers at a distance and remove from the increasing strategic importance of Ukraine’s boundaries in a post-Cold War world .
 maps of regional divisions oversimplify the potential reasons for military invasion, as do analyses that seem to privilege fears of Russian deployment of ICBM’s within Cold War scenario .
 The annexation of Ukrainian land is striking since not really about geography, or territory, in ways that are able to be quickly reduced to the surface of a map .
 Russia’s Federal Border Guard Service continues to insist that it allows no one to enter Ukraine illegally . But the Ukrainian post sits some two miles within the official border .
 To effectively carve up a country in a delicate balance of power and global economy is exceptionally dangerous . To effectively carving up a nation in a balance ofPower and global economic power is extremely dangerous, says the author .
 The variety of choropleth maps depict the ethnic, linguistic, and electoral divides across Ukraine . The data visualization needed to understand the political situation in Ukraine has distracted us from the situation on the ground .
Data visualization seems to replace real reporting with stories of deeply set national fracture-lines, says John Sutter . Sutter: Our love of infographics might become a form of disinformation that migrate from the television screen across the internet .
 For the infographics define and restrict the questions that might be asked about the situation, dangerously removing the issue of Ukraine’s sovereignty or politics from a globalized context of financial capital .
With the closure of many U.S. news agencies abroad, and shrinking of foreign bureaus, mapping Ukraine is an increasingly important means for grasping the political effects of shocks in a global inter-connected economy .
 For the projection of strategic value in Ukraine is replaced by images leaving viewers dumbfounded at the messiness of mapping electoral or demographic divisions or synthetic charts .
 The narrative needs to be recuperated in a broader map, perhaps one synthesizing less information on its surface . The narrative need to be re-imagined in a wider map .
 Ukraine is a country that carves up the country into distinct sectors . The country is in the continuity of a spectrum of corruption and authoritarianism in post-Soviet republics .
 The so-called ‘civil war’ in Ukraine is clearly exacerbated by the increased eagerness of Russia’s interference with the nation's sovereignty . The charting of the area as a longstanding ‘geopolitical prize’ might reveal .
 Putin's odd re-use of a long dead name to hide his quite pragmatic interests in making it part of Russia once more .
 For the discovery of a range of gas fields in the country, gas fields have shifted the geopolitical meaning of the frontiers by which the country is mapped . The discovery of the gas fields and the inherited gas lines that run underground through Ukraine, have changed the country's geopolitical meaning .
 Ukraine’s contested sovereignty or rights to sovereignty can be succinctly mapped by a variety of simple tension lines that exist in the region crisscrossed by a dense network of pipelines .
 The control over the pipelines speaks volumes about the mobilization of military forces along the borders of this relatively recent country .
 The value of the land for laying pipes and creating new sources of multinational investment have suddenly involved globalized economies in regions that were, until incredibly recently, rarely considered of value or easily on the map .
 The new constellations of interests appear to be configured around the Ukraine in ways that questions of political annexation cannot come to terms with . The new Constellation of interests seem to be configurations around Ukraine .
 The explosion of Ukraine as a sudden hotspot of the global map might be explained by maps of its status as a nexus of economic networks . Many current infographics fail to register, since they are foreign to most of our cartographies.
 The concealed motivations for militarization in Ukraine seem to reflect the pipelines that are concealed underground or just above its surface . Gazprom identifies with their flow–in ways that have little to do with local sovereignty in ways that it is often considered .
 Ukraine's geopolitical situation reflects the rising stock of the region's value for economic resources, says David Frum . Frum: It may well be that in mapping divisions in Ukraine as if condemned to irresolvable quagmires of disunion and political dissent.
 Infographics that parse space by either ethnicity or electoral divides conceal and bury the geopolitical interest of Ukraine beneath data as if to mask the global strategies being played out on the ground .
 Putin branded Ukraine’s government as a ‘junta’ and announced cryptic “consequences’ should the actual government–whose authority he denied– purportedly “threaten Russian lives’, the rhetoric of Russia jumped borders.
 Putin duplicitously presented as a defense of human liberties or civil rights . The place of a mythical unity of "Russia" echoed the geographers of Peter the Great .
 Putin has balanced his threats with the double-speak accusation that places direct responsibility at the U.S. for the United States .
 The motives for its radical redrawing cannot be so easily attributed to a purported desire to protect human rights . Redrawn boundaries to forge new networks would meet economic aims and guarantee a monopoly on gas .
 Russia’s open contesting of the sovereign independence of Ukraine is not so much about political sovereignty, it is about economic dominance, it says .
 Putin’s openly Machiavellian rhetoric intentionally creates confusions between sovereign identity, national divides, and the strategic value of political control . Putin's openly Machian rhetoric createsconfusions between sovereignty and national divides .
 The problem may lie in how Putin maps Ukraine, how many news maps map Ukraine in the United States and world media, and obstructions that both maps create in understanding what is at stake .
 We are, perhaps, in danger in assuming identities and divisions are synthesized and captured in maps, says David Frum . Putin's government seems to expect we’ll accept as credible, he says .
 The new geography of Ukraine might, not be so readily understood, it is true, or its strategic importance incompletely grasped .
 Ukraine's status as a border into which the EU or NATO appears ready to poach . Ukraine is defined by the Dnieper, Dniester and Bug rivers that run through it to the Black Sea .
Pro-Russian nationalists have been eager to imagine the region’s incorporation into the Russian Federation for reasons far removed from ethnicity .
 Most reports have been oddly silent about the webs of international traffic that run across Ukraine . It ties it to a larger picture of economic transactions that are as determinant of Russian attitudes to the region as the internal composition of the country .
 Ukraine's gas fields in much of Ukraine borders the East and Crimea, and potential areas of future exploration, are key routes for the transit of Russian gas .
 Russian CEO Alexei Miller has cut off gas shipments to Kiev and Ukraine . Russia seems confident that it can continue to funnel gas to the EU through Ukraine, the company says .
 Ethnic rights of return seem less the point than controlling both oil reserves in the Black Sea and shipping lanes for valuable exports .
 Ethnic Russian groups encouraged the fostering of economic ties to specific regions . Perhaps the ethnic Russian groups were encouraged to foster economic ties.
 The wells in the Crimea and Black Sea and in the shale sands of Eastern Ukraine have determined the value of the region’s annexation . Even if anti-Russian sentiment is strong in the “ethnically Ukrainian” western regions of the country, as if to prompt the
 The constellation of pipelines situate Ukraine in a global energy market, revealing a web of ties linking Russia to Ukraine . The pipelines lie on significant pipelines that route supplies from Siberian gas fields to the West .
 The futurology allegedly based on CIA information and geopolitical experts in the USA predicted both a division of Scotland from England, the separation of the Basque region, division of Italy and the emergence of Wallonia and Lorraine .
 The premise of Russian “rights’ to these lands may mask a deeper sense of the continued economic coherence that they present to Putin’s revision of Russia's economical relations to the perhaps-to-be-soon-disolved European Union .
 Lack of stability has been a source of banks’ continued concerns and increased financial concern of the energy industry . Lack of financial stability is a cause of banks' continued concerns.
 The annexation of Crimea continues to play out quite uneasily on the ground and local politics .
 The actual interests involved in this power game are so removed from those of local inhabitants or a hope for ethnic tranquillity . The real interests are more guided to restore harmony in a balance of the gas trade–or allow its manipulation and orchestration .
 maps that projected the future remapping of the region helped to create its coherence . The emergence of maps that predicted the future of the area helped to make it more complex .
Max Fisher may have been duped by data of social divides, he says . It may make sense to ask whether he was duped, he writes .
 Russian forces to the East seem to respond to the Soviet-era placement of military arms in Ukraine to the far West . tanks and mechanized infantry were intended to serve as an effective balance to NATO .
 The old term of “New Russia” or “Novorossiya,’ evokes an imperial term and eighteenth century legacy to designate the lands that the Empire conquered . “God knows’s why it rejoined Ukraine, after which ‘God knows
 The area was widely colonized by Russians, particularly in its urban centers, after being taken from the Ottomans . The sparsely populated region included a plurality of ethnic groups, and Russian became the language of its cities . Ukrainian dominated the countryside, but was resettled and developed
 Putin promoted an inflected Newspeak of the Cold War to argue that Russia had the “right’ to invade the province . Russia also “hoped that such an unwanted act would be unnecessary’s “unnecessary’
 By reclaiming sovereignty over an area of Tsarist heritage as a “natural right,’ the invocation of “Novorossiya’ re-brands a borderland . Catherine the Great invited Europeans to settle and over which Prince Grigori Potemkin presided
 Putin wants to redefine the geobody that he wants to reinvent . But it has served as a sort of screen to project new identities in maps .
Political divisions do not exist, but that the attentiveness to dividing the region into its constituent parts may go back to the positivistic origins of regional geography .
Long hopes for creating a clear picture of the region is something of a geographic dream of clarifying the ethnic divisions . Cossack is now presented not in the division between Christian and Islamic towns, and political parties that seem all too rooted in ethnic divides .
 The mythic-historical construct ‘Novorossiya’ is not a myth, but rather defining “a country of 20 million people, with industry, with resources,’ may in fact conceal that the resources are what military intervention would allow the Russian government access
 The newly resurrected language of borders created an alternative nation-state . The language was used to create a new nation- state .
 Eastern Ukraine has many coal fields and iron ore beside the Donetz River . There is little coincidence that the wealth of Eastern Ukraine would itself make it a profitable site of resources .
 The region’s considerable wealth seems to have solidified the deep ties of the region to Soviet Russia .
 The reclaiming of this region that existed in a historical imaginary alone is an idea of an imaginary heritage of a past frontier to disguise the protection of economic resources in an age of globalization .
 Putin seems intent on enlarging the historical boundaries of Novorossiyain his current land grab .
 Ukraine's borders have been redefined by mapmakers . The region is less as a bounded territory in the manner it is so often mapped . It offers access to the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, and to the network of pipelines Gazprom .
 National Review's Alec Torres worried about National Geographic's decision to quickly recognize Russian annexation of the region . Wikipedia's hemming and hawing about how to acknowledge the disputed relationship between Crimea and Russia in its maps .
 Colbert wondered about odd clusterings of imagined notional Ukraines in South Asia, Greenland or Canada . One response near Iowa suggested the belief of one polled respondent that in invading Ukraine, Putin might be entering himself .
 The notion that Russia might be fighting a war far from its borders is somehow a part of the odd mental baggage most Americans have about being stationed in Iraq or Afghanistan . The recent toponymic mutation of ‘Chiraq’ to describe the surge of violence in the city in
 Ukraine crisis has led to crisis in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Unless we return Ukraine to a sense of geographic place, our understanding of the crisis is needed . He says that unless we return to Ukraine, we will not be able to
 You might do well to take care to map the dynamic to understand how its frontiers are in danger of being redrawn .