Russian President Vladimir Putin's March 18, 2014 speech to both chambers of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation . The speech refers to a request for admission by the Crimean parliament of the republic in the Russian federation .
 Putin delivered another speech on December 4, 2014 that also picked out the Crimea as a central theme . In the same place, Putin delivered a speech on the Crimea in December 2014 .
 Putin said that a referendum was held in full compliance with democratic procedures and rules of international law . Putin said the numbers support the entry of Crimea in Russia were very convincing .
 Putin recalls the ancient Chersonesos where Prince Vladimir was baptized . He was baptized on the graves of Russian soldiers on Sevastopol, the home of the Black Sea Fleet .
 The Crimean Tatars suffered cruel injustice in Soviet times, together with the other peoples, including the Russian people . Noted that the Crimean Tatar suffered cruel injustices in the Soviet times .
 Crimean Tatars have returned to their land. New solutions for rehabilitation of the Crimean Tatar people are required .
 He proposed three equal official languages for Crimea Russian, Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar . He also proposed three separate official languages. He is also proposing three equal languages for Ukraine and Crimea .
 The President stressed that Crimea has always been an integral part of Russia . He stressed that in the heart of the Crimean people, Crimea is a part of the country .
 Bolsheviks included a significant amount of historical Russian southern land into the Ukrainian SSR without taking into account the national composition of its population .
 In 1954, the Crimea and Sevastopol in the Ukrainian SSR passed. Further, in 1954, in the Ukraine's Crimea and Crimea and the Crimea in the Crimean SSR in the Crimea passed .
 The decision was taken in violation of constitutional norms, behind the scenes, in a totalitarian state residents of Crimea and Sevastopol nothing asked . The decision is taken in breach of the constitutional norms.
 The territory was transferred within the same country . That decision was seen as a formality, since the territory transferred in same country.
 Putin condemned the West’s reaction to the events in the Crimea and sanctions against Russian and Ukrainian politicians .
 Russian President expressed gratitude to the people of China . He praised the restraint of India .
 The Crimean population is the same value as the U.S. freedom-loving people, says the United States. Appealed to United States freedom- loving people .
 Putin said that not all allies sympathized with Germany in 1989, it merged with the German Democratic Republic . Putin said the USSR supported the Germans sincere desire for national unity .
 President expressed confidence that German citizens support the aspirations of the Russian world to restore the unity of 'Crimea will remain Russian and Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar'
 It will be home to the representatives of all the peoples living there . It will also be the home to all the people living there.
 Putin assured that Russia will not seek confrontation with the West and the East . He stressed that Russia and Ukraine — are one people .
 Ukraine will continue to live millions of Russian citizens, which means that Russia will always defend their interests . Russia will still defend its interests, according to the Ukrainian government .
 During the speech, Putin used the term "natsional-predateli" which is a calque from the German term Nationalverräter .
 Nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes and anti-Semites executed this coup . The coup was carried out by a group of pro-Russophobes .
 He expressed appreciation to those protesting peacefully against corruption, inefficient state management and poverty . Nevertheless, he expressed appreciation for those protesting against corruption .
 The audience has been applauding Putin for over 5 minutes at the beginning of the speech . At least 2–3 minutes thereafter, the audience is applauding him for at least 5 minutes .
 UK government's response to points made by President Putin lists 7 points, among them the crimean ""referendum" The accusation of terror, pogrom and murder as well as the legal status of the Ukrainian government .
 Hillary Clinton has compared events in Crimea to the Czech Crisis of 1938 . She has compared Russia’s Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler .
 Other politicians and journalists have done the same and have compared Crimean speech of Vladimir Putin to Hitler's speech .
 Barack Obama gave a speech on March 26, 2014 to counter many of the arguments made by Putin .
 Obama stated that the historical relations between Ukraine and Russia did not give Russia the right to dictate Ukraine’s future .
 He also denied Putin’s claim that the Russian minority in Ukraine was in danger . He argued the Russians actions against Ukraine were undemocratic and constituted brute force .
 According to him, this speech played key role in starting the war in Donbass .
 The issue is of vital, historic significance to all of us . We have gathered here in connection with the issue .
 A referendum was held in Crimea on March 16 in full compliance with democratic procedures and international norms . A referendum in Crimea was held on March 17 .
 The decision was made in clear violation of the constitutional norms that were in place even then . What matters now is that this decision is that the decision is made inclear violation of constitutional norms .
 Crimea and Sevastopol are in a totalitarian state . In the totalitarian state, nobody bothered to ask the citizens of Crimea and Crimea .
 People wondered why Crimea became part of Ukraine after Crimea became Ukraine .
 The territory was transferred within the boundaries of a single state . But on the whole, we must state this clearly, we all know it, and we all knew it .
 Ukraine and Russia may split up and become two separate states . Back then, it was impossible to imagine that Ukraine and Russian states would split up .
 Things developed so swiftly that few people realised how dramatic those events and their consequences would be . Few people realise how truly dramatic these events would be.
 Many in Russia and Ukraine hoped that the Commonwealth of Independent States that was created at the time would become the new common form of statehood . Many people in Russia, in Ukraine, as well as in other republics hoped that it would become a common form.
 They were told that there would be a single currency, a single economic space, joint armed forces . But all this remained empty promises, while the big country was gone .
 Crimea ended up as part of a different country that Russia realised that it was not simply robbed, it was plundered . It was only when Crimea was part of the country that it became part of Russia that it had been robbed .
Residents of Crimea say they were handed over like a sack of potatoes in 1991 . Now, many years later, they say that back in 1991, they were given over like potatoes .
This country was going through such hard times then that realistically it was incapable of protecting its interests . This country was in trouble when it was unable to protect its interests. This country is now in trouble again.
 People could not reconcile themselves to this outrageous historical injustice . However, people could not reconcil themselves to the injustice .
 Crimea is historically Russian land and Sevastopol is a Russian city . Crimea is historic Russian land . Sevastop is a city .
 Ukraine's relations with independent Ukraine are on a new basis, says the Ukrainian government . Ukraine's government says it will continue to build relations with Ukraine on the new basis .
 Ukraine's fraternal Ukrainian people have always been and will remain of foremost importance for us . Meanwhile, our relations with Ukraine, with the fraternal Ukrainians, will remain a priority .
 The Crimean self-defence units had not taken the situation under control, there could have been casualties as well . I will state clearly if the Crimean local self- Defence units did not take the situation.
 There was not a single armed confrontation in Crimea and no casualties . No one was killed in Crimea .
 The Ukrainian military has 22,000 fully armed servicemen . The Ukrainian army is the largest in the world .
 I would like to thank those Ukrainian service members who refrained from bloodshed and did not smear their uniforms in blood . I would also thank those Ukrainians who did not smear their uniforms .
 Crimea and Sevastopol authorities set aside group and political interests and made the people’s fundamental interests alone the cornerstone of their work .
 Crimea would have had disastrous effects on people’s lives. The particular historic, population, political and economic circumstances of Crimea would make any other proposed option tempting .
 The people of Crimea decided to put the question in firm and uncompromising form, with no grey areas . The Crimea people decided to decide on the issue .
 The referendum was fair and transparent, and the people of Crimea clearly and convincingly expressed their will and stated that they want to be with Russia . The Crimea referendum wasFair and transparent .
 President Vladimir Putin has signed a treaty to incorporate Crimea into Russia . The treaty was signed in the last hour of the day .
 Putin signed the law after a speech to Russia's parliament, in which he hit back at his critics .
 Sunday's referendum in Crimea saw overwhelming support for a union with Russia . It comes after Sunday's vote in Crimea, which saw overwhelmingly support for the union .
 He condemned Ukraine's "so-called" authorities . He said they had stolen power in a coup and had opened the way for "extremists" who would stop at nothing to determine the future of the country .
 Moscow sees Western attempts to frighten Russia with sanctions as aggression and will retaliate . He said Moscow sees western attempts to scare Russia as aggression as aggression .
 Putin signs decree recognises Crimea as a sovereign and independent state . Earlier Putin signed decree recognising Crimea as sovereign andindependent state .
 President Vladimir V Putin asks it to ratify the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol to Russia .