 The Ukrainian cities of Donetsk and Luhansk are making global headlines . The Ukrainian city of Donetsk is making headlines in Ukraine .
 Shelling near Luhansk a day after Russia recognized east Ukraine's breakaway republics . The significance of the Kremlin's move should not be underestimated .
 Russia has drawn a line under what has been its policy for nearly eight years . By recognizing the independence of eastern Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk separatist-held regions and by deploying Russian troops to these areas.
 The self-proclaimed 'People's Republics' of Donetsk and Luhansk were formed in spring 2014 . Follows Ukraine's pro-Western opposition protests and a change of leadership in Kyiv .
Today, these areas take in about a third of the Donbas region and the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk . Today, these regions take in a third.
 Both areas have been shaped by the coal and steel industries, but there are also stark differences between them .
 Luhansk was generally held to be Ukraine's poorest region, but Donetsk was relatively wealthy . The city of Donetsk is relatively wealthy.
 In 2012, it was one of the hosts of the Euro 2012 football championships . It was also the host of the European Championships .
 Since the conflict broke out, millions of people have left the separatist areas .
 A majority of the civilians fled to Russia, hundreds of thousands to Russia . A majority fled to Ukraine, many to Russia.
 There were barely any signs of separatist strivings after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 until 2004 .
 The Orange Revolution overturned the presidential victory of Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian politician and former governor of the Donetsk region, in 2012 . Back then, the Orange Revolution overturned the presidential election of Yanukovych .
 His final abrupt shift towards Moscow sparked opposition protests in the winter of 2013/2014, and he fled to Russia . He fled to Moscow in 2013-2014 .
 The Kremlin took advantage of the power vacuum in Kyiv to annex Crimea . The Kremlin has taken advantage of a power vacuum.
 In eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian sentiment was not as strong as in Crimea, according to reports . In Crimea, there was not a strong anti-Russia sentiment in Crimea .
 skepticism about new leaders in Kyiv was strongest in Donetsk and Luhansk . However, skepticism about the new leaders was strong in Donetsk.
 Some in Donbas region also perceived Yanukovych's flight to Moscow as a defeat . Some in the Donbas area also perceived the flight as a loss .
 Some 20% of Donetsk residents said they were prepared to welcome Russian troops as their liberators .
 In spring 2014, several urban centers were occupied and police stations were stormed to seize weapons . The administrations of several cities were occupied .
 Russian citizens with apparent links to the Russian secret services were the driving force . Russian citizens had apparent ties to the secret services .
 Ukrainian army managed to regain control over most areas by summer 2014 . The Ukrainian army regained control of most areas in the country .
 The Ukrainian army suffered a defeat after being encircled in the battle of Ilovaisk, southeast of the city of Donetsk . But in August, the Ukrainian army lost the battle in the city.
 Since then, there has been a shaky ceasefire between the Ukrainian army and the Russian separatists . The ceasefire has been shaky since then .
 It began with the introduction of Russian textbooks in schools and the Russian currency . It is the first time Russian textbooks have been introduced in schools .
 Russian advisors allegedly helped build up the separatists' forces . Moscow denies the allegations .
Industry in the region has suffered significantly as a result of the split with Kyiv . Industry in the area has suffered from the split .
 Putin's move seals a long process of creeping Russian influence in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk . In 2019, Russia began to distribute Russian passports to the area's inhabitants .
 Some 800,000 eastern Ukrainians are said to have Russian citizenship . An estimated 15 to 25% of the population is said to be Russian .
This is the central argument behind the Kremlin's recognition of the independence of the separatist regions . This is the main argument behind Russia's recognition.
 Ukrainian parliament declares Donetsk and Luhansk are occupied regions . Later, the Ukrainian parliament declared that Donetsk andLuhansk were occupied .
 Russia has long criticized the Ukrainian government, saying it discriminated against Russian speakers .
 The use of Ukrainian, as the country's only official language, has increased in the media and in written communication . Ukrainian is the only language in the country .
 Russian is spoken primarily in the cities of eastern and southern Ukraine . Ukrainian or a mixture of the two languages is spoken outside those urban centers .
 Two thirds of the inhabitants of the separatist regions say Russian is their mother tongue .
 About one in three people said they spoke both languages . Only 3.5% said Ukrainian was their mother tongue .
 The current mood among the population of the two regions can only be approximately gauged . The current Mood of the population among the populations can be only gauged.
 A third of Luhansk and Donetsk residents were keen to gain autonomy within Ukraine or Russia . About a third of the inhabitants of the two cities are three years old .
 Almost 20% wanted to return to how things were before the split . Just as many were in favor of becoming part of Russia without autonomous status .
 EU leaders have "unanimously agreed" a list of measures against Russia over its recognition of Ukrainian separatist regions and deployment of troops . EU agrees to Russia sanctions package with Russia .
 Russian lawmakers greenlight Putin's troop deployment . Moscow recognized two separatist regions in Ukraine as independent .
 Germany's historic Russia policy has been struck a blow by Russia's escalation . Germany's Russia policy focused on diplomacy and economic ties rather than confrontation .
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, separatists, Russia, people's republic, Donetsk, Luhansk, Donbas. Send us your feedback to the Daily Discussion .