 Pakistan slipped away from the clutches of the British crown as a determinant country in 1947 . Despite Herculean struggles while attaining independence in 1947, Pakistan slipped out of the UK's clutches .
 Pakistan is a non-collapsible state, and thus cannot be failed, frailed or fractured by the external flirtations of the black-eyed states . Pakistan is the non-Collapsible states, and so cannot be failing, frailing or fractured.
 Atal Behari Vajpayee wrote musings in the quest of better Pakistan-India relations at the dawn of this millennium .
Hate mongers on both sides tuned up relations back to the old symphonies . However, hate monger on both side tuned up.
 India needs to stop wild goose chase while holding hostile, historic sentiments against Pakistan for today’s synchronised and moving relations .
 Islamabad has gone extra miles to call for repeated dialogues which are no less than an embarrassment now. Lately, Islamabad has been an embarrassment .
 For sanity to prevail, truth has to be given a nod to extricate from the current tailspin between the two countries .
 Pakistan has a je dure to consider Indian occupied Kashmir incumbent to move forward with the peace process . India winks at the Kashmir issue, and instead tags terrorism as the real cause of halt in the dialogue process .
 Pakistan did not start the recent uprising in Kashmir and cannot stop it either . India must stop taking the mince out of Kashmiris, Pakistan must stop it, says India .
 In the current insurgency, about 30,000 Kashmiris have been injured, maimed or bruised in the state-sponsored terrorism .
 The more New Delhi grinds down the suppressed Kashmiris, the more azadi slogans will zap against Indian defiance . The more Indian defiance will be the more Kashmiris.
 Kashmiris appear to have voted with untiring throats, with eyes destroyed or deformed by pellets, and with bodies willing to fall to the ground for what the heart desires . Kashmiris seem to have vote with untired throats.
 Pakistan and India will not be a workable solution for the two countries . The two countries have not agreed to hold talks for years .
 Indian-occupied Kashmir must be accepted as a political problem by India in the first place . The South Asian gridlock would remain in a criss-cross .
 India must remember that terrorism is an external conspiracy and not the cause of standstill between both countries . India must also remember that terrorists are not the reason for standstill .
 In the 1970s, original sin was committed by India when terrorism was first entrenched to ignite the separatist movements against Pakistan .
 Even today this monster is being fed by India to destabilise Balochistan and the rest of Pakistan, while supporting extremist organisations like the Tehreek-eTaliban-Pakistan .
 No other state in the world like Pakistan is undergoing the test and trials against the horrible and horrendous acts of terrorism . India should realise that no other state like Pakistan has undergone the tests and trials.
 Pakistani nation has epitomised that extremists can only be curbed by standing against them with undying wills and valour .
 Pakistan's success has been widely acknowledged by the entire globe . But India has not yet been acknowledged as a nation .
 Islamabad does not shy away from talking about terrorism with New Delhi . But compromise on eroding loK and other core issues drag the current state at sixes and sevens .
 Pakistan has garnered untold lessons from its mistakes of Islamic extremism . Pakistan has buried the concept of ‘strategic depth’ to anchor peace in the region .
 extremism and jingoism are frequently reflected in the Indian civil society, the media, military and political parties, says Ravi Agrawal .
 India’s proxy with the former against Pakistan can turn the whole region into a terrible turmoil . Afghanistan could have become a bridge of peace between both countries .
Despite the prevailing grumpy situation between Pakistan and India, constructive cooperation in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor can carry the seeds of immense potential to change their fortunes . The Bangladesh-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor is a key part of the Chinese-India Economic Corridor .
 Economic trajectory of CPEC can knit together South Asia, Central Asia, Africa, Middle East and Europe .
 Afghanistan and lran are also dreaming to partake in CPEC . Bangladesh and Nepal will likely get a boost from this game changer project, too .
Historic opportunities are on offer for both countries, as economic transition is taking place from the west to the east .
 Pakistan, India, and China can surely stoke tangible prosperity to South Asia and beyond . It is high time to rid from hysteric world of Pak-India hostility as tri-Star economic chain of Pakistan, Indian, and Chinese .
 India has been opposing Saarc which surely breeds more antagonism in the region. Regional guild must harbour some sanity, says India .
For peace to make inroads between Pakistan and India, back-channel diplomacy must be restored . For peace to be made between the two countries, it must be made inroads .
 Pakistan and India have a peaceful and welcome settlement of issues between the two countries . Pakistan's relationship with India has been described as a "peaceful and friendly"
 Recent positive developments in Pakistan are a reflection of the growing confidence in the country by major powers . Pakistan's relationship with Russia is growing in confidence.
 India’s deliberate efforts at isolating us have not succeeded. It is also a manifestation that India's deliberate efforts to isolate us haven't succeeded .
 China is Pakistan’s closest ally and the huge investment and involvement of it in China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is a demonstration of this unfolding reality .
 China’s expanding role in world affairs that owes largely to its fast growing economy and domestic political cohesion .
 China’s confidence is reflected in its staunch support of globalisation and the flagship role it has undertaken in promoting a green economy .
This is in sharp contrast to Trump’s current policy of undercutting globalisation and thwarting measures to reduce global warming . This is in stark contrast to his current policy.
 Turkey finds Pakistan its most reliable political ally. While facing trying regional and internal challenges, Turkey finds it's most reliable ally .
 The two are also working towards enhanced cooperation in defenceand securityrelated fields . The two have also been working to enhance cooperation in the defence and security related fields .
Major differences in weapon systems stand as an impediment to closer cooperation . But major differences in weapons stand as a impediment.
 The best of political relations when it comes to joint production or development, countries find it difficult to collaborate . Experience has also shown that, despite the best of the political relations, countries often find it hard to collaborate.
 The European Union is an exception because it is an economic and political union and is not facing any external threat . The EU is currently not facing a threat from external threats .
 Most European countries despite these advantages prefer to produce as much in the country to provide employment to their people . Most European nations despite advantages.
 Pakistan and Turkey should be made to give an impetus to mutual trade and economic relations . In case of Turkey and Pakistan, serious efforts should be make to give a impetus to the relationship .
 Pakistan needs larger investment in fields of infrastructure and industry and could benefit from Turkey’s vast experience in the manufacturing and construction sector .
 Former army chief General Raheel Sharif's appointment to lead the 40-state strong Saudi-sponsored “Islamic military alliance to fight terrorism” is a reflection of the confidence reposed in Pakistan and its armed forces .
 It is another matter that it has generated controversy due to its political and strategic overtones . It is also a matter that the political overtones of this issue have generated controversy .
 New chapter of better relations between Pakistan and Russia seems to be in the offing . As referred earlier, a new chapter of good relations between the two countries appears to be on the way .
 Pakistan was closely aligned with the Americans against the Soviet Union . It is the most dramatic turnaround since the Cold War when Pakistan was close to the U.S.
 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 . Several factors seem to have contributed to this encouraging development .
 Russia has shown interest in joining CPEC and this provides an opportunity for China, Pakistan and Russia to enhance cooperation . Russia has also shown interest.
 Russia has been showing interest in utilising the Gwadar port for some time . Pakistan has willingly agreed to use the port to which Pakistan has agreed .
 Pakistan expects to benefit from Russian investment and technical expertise in the development of the Gwadar port . Pakistan expects the Russian investment to help develop the port in Pakistan .
 Russia becomes an active partner in the CPEC project. It is in mutual interest that Russia becomes a partner in CPEC .
 Astute observers of Sino-Russian relations are of the view that Russia’s participation in CPEC and use of Gwadar port would enhance cooperation between the two countries .
Russia and China are founding members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and members of BRICs . Already, Russia and China have been members of Shanghai Cooperation Organization and are also founding members.
 Pakistan, along with India, has recently become a full member of SCO and Russia’s membership of CPEC . Pakistan and Russia's membership should facilitate in bringing these regional countries closer .
 Russia has been facing intense pressure from the U.S. and the West since its annexation of Crimea and break-up of relations with Ukraine . Russia will find this cooperation a counter move against its isolation, says Russian official .
 Russia realises Pakistan’s pivotal role in the Pak-Afghan theatre and wants to revive its interest in the region . Russia also realises the role of Pakistan in the theatre .
 The hosting of the third regional conference on Afghanistan in Moscow with supposedly 12-member countries as invitees is proof of its growing interest . The hosting is a sign of Russia's growing interest in Afghanistan .
 Afghanistan is challenging the hegemony of the U.S. in the region, especially with reference to Afghanistan . In a way it is challenging America's hegemony, Afghanistan is also challenging it .
 U.S. troops and its defence assets in Afghanistan would not be easy to deal with . It is a different matter that this is not easy, considering the significant presence of United States troops .
 Moscow is seeking help from the Taliban to counter the emerging threat of Da’ish in Afghanistan and the Chechen Republic .
 Afghanistan is deeply interested in the end of civil war and return of stability in Afghanistan . Like other regional countries, it is also interested in ending civil war .
 Pakistan’s special forces and Russia held a joint military exercise in northern Pakistan last year .
 Pakistan Army Aviation has been using Russian helicopters for many years . It is possible that we will see more induction of these weapons systems . Pakistan Army aviation has used Russian helicopters.
 Russian sale of military equipment to India is on the decline as it switches to the U.S. and Western sources for its new acquisitions and modernisation programme .
 India has widened its options and leaned heavily on the U.S. to maximise its economic and overall strategic capability to counter China . India maintains close relations with Russia .
 Pakistan’s position that peace could return to Afghanistan only if there is political reconciliation between the Taliban and the Afghan government seems vindicated .
 Afghanistan convergence is emerging between Pakistan and U.S. thinking. This shows that the mantra of “Do more’ is gradually subsiding. This is not surprising, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A balanced and equitable political outcome of the Afghan conflict should contribute significantly in improving Pakistan-US and eventually Pakistan-Afghan relations . Pakistan-U.S. relations should be balanced, equitable.
 Islamabad is gradually coming out of the woods and must maintain momentum of building bridges with global and regional powers for internal stability and peaceful borders . Islamabad must maintain the momentum to build bridges.
 Ties between Islamabad and Kabul have never been smooth . There have always been issues in mutual relations due to historical distrust between them .
 The distrust is rooted in their respective national narrative, which has historically been dominated by their undemocratic and non-representative power elite . The distrust has been rooted in the nation's national narrative .
 Pakistani power elite is composed mostly of its civil-military bureaucracy and the agriculture and industrial classes . The power elite are mostly of the agriculture, industrial and agriculture classes .
 The Afghan power elite have traditionally been composed of its civilmilitary-intelligence establishment and so-called politicians, mostly members of Communist groups, without having a political constituency .
In order to have legitimacy, the undemocratic power elite in Afghanistan have been fanning sentiments of hatred among Afghans against Pakistan .
 Afghanistan has been raising irridentist claims on large tracts of Pakistani territory since 1947 .
Before getting independence Muslims of areas comprising Pakistan had had a great reverence and emotional attachment with Afghans . Otherwise, before getting independence, Muslims had had great reverence.
 The name PAKISTAN included Afghania or Afghan as a main component in the terms or concept of Pakistan . For instance, Chaudhry Rehmat Ali while proposing the namePAKISTan included Afghanistan or Afghanistan in his proposal .
 Pakistan has been trying to locate strategic depth in Afghanistan by making the state its virtual dependency . Since the early 1970s Pakistan was without any legal justification .
 Afghanistan initiated issues between the two countries, thinking Pakistan as one of the successor states of British India would be weak . However, one aspect of these relations is quite clear that it was Afghanistan which initiated issues .
 Afghanistan and Pakistan have also been creating and supporting proxy militant and terrorist groups to create conditions for realisation of these objectives .
 Afghanistan started by hosting and cultivating Pakistani Pashtun separatists by forming a terrorist group ‘Zalmay Pash Tun’ to carry our terrorist attacks in Pakistan in the 1970s . The group was formed to create conditions for secession of Pashton areas of Pakistan
 Pakistan hosted anti-government Afghan clerics in Pakistan and militants trained them to create trouble in Afghanistan . Pakistan responded by hosting, training and arming anti-Soviet Afghan Mujahideen and the Taliban .
 The undemocratic and unrepresentative power elites of Pakistan and Afghanistan have been formulating policies regarding the other state . The policies have been to the detriment of common Pakistanis and Afghans .
 Pakistan and Afghanistan have been pursuing their perceived national interest rather than having friendly or good neighbourly ties with the other . The realities of international politics also played a significant role in the relations between the two countries .
 The Democratic Peace Theory of International Relations contends that two democratic states do not go to war and create conflict and try to resolve their disputes pacifically . The theory contends that the two countries do not try to solve their disputes.
 The theory of liberal economic interdependence argues that trade between states creates economicinterdependence and disincentives war and conflict between states .
 Another theory argues that groups resort to violence in order to get material incentives . Another theory is Material Incentives as Drivers of Political Violence .
 All these theories are quite relevant to the undemocratic power elite-dictated relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan .
 To sort out distrust between Pakistan and Afghanistan there is a need for continued democratic institutionalisation, says the author .
 The trans-boundary water and energy projects in Pakistan and Afghanistan are mutually beneficial . They must be supported, therefore they must besupported .
Little development is taking place in Afghanistan regarding democratic institutionalization . Unfortunately, little development is happening in Afghanistan .
 Kabul is still refusing to recognise the Durand Line as the permanent border between the two countries . Pakistan has shunned its policy of locating strategic depth in Afghanistan .
 India welcomes international pressure on Pakistan to address India's complaints of militancy and terrorism against Pakistan . In essence, the Indian position is that dialogue on matters that concern Pakistan should be bilateral .
 India is not even willing to engage in bilateral dialogue currently . India's position is one-sided and self-serving as the Indian position is .
 The State Department has reiterated that it desires “direct dialogue’s between India and Pakistan . India has been criticized by the U.S. State Department in response to intense complaints .
 Mr Trump's early remarks also drew a strong reaction from India .
 India’s objections do not undermine the logic of the U.S. offer, says India . But India's objections don't undermine the United States offer.
 India resists so-called hyphenation by the United States . Such an approach could have beneficial consequences for both countries and further peace in the region .
 It is difficult to argue that even the softest of U.S. mediation would undermine India’s stance against terrorism and militancy .
 Pakistan could be encouraged to find a regional solution to the use of proxies and militants by all sides that has so destabilised the neighbourhood . If anything, Pakistan could find a solution.
 History has proved that there is an alternative, especially now that war has become unthinkable .
 The Pakistani military leadership has been clear it does not seek conflict, and the political leadership that it wants dialogue . The military leadership is clear it doesn't seek conflict.
 India must recognise the desirability and inevitability of dialogue soon, says Ravi Agrawal . India must also recognise the need for dialogue.
 In recent years, it has become more complicated both in dimension and intensity . In the past few years, the situation has become even more complicated .
 The energy crisis did not take us by surprise, says David Cameron . It was long enough for us to have taken action, he says .
 Senior Wapda officials were raising the alarm as early as 2003, only to be snubbed by key decision-makers . Senior WAPda officials raised the alarm in 2003 .
 The Nandipur power project is a classic example of how successive regimes have jeopardised it . The project was set to become operational in 2007, when it was due to be operational .
 The energy crisis has cost the national economy dearly, not only the loss to GDP in terms of missing energy due to the demand-supply gap . The loss to industrial and commercial activities due to loadshedding and flight of capital from the country .
 Safe estimates suggest that it has cost the national economy over $100 billion . The cost is estimated to be more than $100billion .
 Thousands of factories have shut down or are operating at the bare minimum level in industrial cities such as Karachi, Lahore, Gujranwala and Faisalabad .
 Bangladesh and Sri Lanka saw a major influx of Pakistani investors . Canada, Malaysia and UAE also saw a big influx of investors .
 The crisis has heavily dented the socioeconomic fabric of society, reportedly resulting in the loss of thousands of jobs . The crisis is mainly due to skewed industrial and commercial activities .
 The situation has led to dire socioeconomic implications for millions of people . Those affected often are the sole breadwinners of their households .
 In the absence of any social welfare support, being pushed towards crime and other forms of moral corruption has been the unfortunate, inevitable outcome for many .
 With vision and commitment, challenges can be turned into opportunities, says the author . With vision, challenges are turned into opportunity, says author .
 opportunities have definitely arisen, but only for certain individuals rather than the masses or the country at large. And opportunities have certainly arisen, according to experts .
 Many argue that the energy crisis is another example of how crises are crafted to serve vested interests . Many who have been observing closely argue that it is a sign that crises are designed to serve their interests .
 The entire energy sector, in terms of administration and functions, needed to be overhauled . malpractices and wrongdoings that caused the crisis to be corrected, says the author . The energy sector needs to be reformed, he says .
 The state of affairs shows that little has changed, but strong efforts are needed to ensure transparency and merit, says the U.S. State of affairs .
 Powerful lobbies still appear to be dictating key energy decisions. It is unfortunate that powerful lobbies are still dictating energy decisions . It's unfortunate.
 Various ministries, dep-artaments and cells still work haphazardly without any meaningful coordination .
 An imbalance in the energy fuel mix is a problem, says the author . The lack of cheap and indigenous hydropower and renewable resources do not appear to be challenges that cause concern to the authorities .
 Pakistan has the potential, capacity and opportunity to overcome this challenge . Pakistan has a potential to overcome the challenge, according to experts .
 Our existing power plants, currently underperforming for a wide range of administrative and technical reasons, need to run optimally . Our current power plants are underperforming.
 Vast, untapped indigenous resources including hydropower, renewables and fossil fuels can help with energy security and affordability . Vast is a resource for renewable energy and energy security .
 Energy conservation has to be embedded in the national energy fabric, not just in letter but also in spirit . Energy conservation is the cornerstone of energy strategies across the world .
 What is really missing is the combination of vision, strategy and commitment on the part of policymakers. What is also missing is a lack of vision and strategy, says John Sutter .
 A nuclear weapons ban reflects misplaced idealism and an underappreciation of fundamental strategic issues and concepts . A nuclear weapon ban reflects a misplaced idealist and underappreciated of strategic issues .
 It addresses symptoms of a problem, not underlying problems, not the underlying problems themselves . It addresses the symptoms of the problem.
 A ban would not help alleviate states’ security concerns. This is not to say that a ban wouldn’t help alleviate state security concerns . It would not be the first time a ban has been introduced in the US .
 nuclear issues can be tackled separately and independently from broader military issues and conventional force imbalances . It may well be well, but it is seriously misguided to think that nuclear issues are separate and separate .
 A ban that doesn't involve the states that possess nuclear weapons makes one question the effectiveness of such a ban . The ban doesn’t involve states that have nuclear weapons .
Conventional arms imbalances generally, and U.S. conventional military superiority, are as much a potential driver of nuclear proliferation and geostrategic instability as nuclear weapons .
 American preponderance in power projection capabilities has influenced some countries to acquire nuclear weapons as a deterrent against U.S. intervention .
 A nuclear weapons ban addresses symptoms of a problem, not the underlying problems themselves . A nuclear weapon ban addresses problems, not symptoms, according to experts .
 Historically, Pakistan has been a strong proponent of nuclear disarmament . Pakistan is a strong supporter of nuclear weapons .
 This acquisition of nuclear capability was an internal balancing instrument against Indian conventional military preponderance and revisionist mindset . This acquisition was aninternal balancing instrument.
 Before nuclearising, Pakistan kept proposing development of a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in South Asia .
 India's conventional superiority had historically culminated in dismemberment of the eastern half of the country in the 1971 war with India . The threat perception was solely driven by India’s conventional superiority .
 The rationale is deeply rooted in the agreed framework that founded the First Special Session of Disarmament . SSOD-I led to the founding of the Conference of Disarmedament .
 The agreed framework of SSOD-I clearly stipulated that nuclear disarmament should be carried out on balanced reductions of armed forces and conventional armaments based on the principle of undiminished security of all parties .
 P-5 states must fulfill their end of the bargain in the NPT, says Pakistan's nuclear disarmament advocates . The current ban would not be successful, especially as it fails to elicit the support of states that are in possession of nuclear weapons or are under a security guarantee .
 A ban that doesn’t involve the states in possession of nuclear weapons would carry no weight . A ban would also not include the states that have nuclear weapons .
 Pakistan has accused the U.S. and other countries of nuclear hypocrisy . The Pakistani ambassador to the United Nations said that a handful of nuclear weapon states advocate abstinence for others .
 The international community does not give enough attention to the issue of vertical proliferation, according to the Pakistani perspective .
 Pakistan continues to stress the importance of nuclear weapons in acting as a deterrent to perceived Indian conventional military superiority .
 Pakistan in the past has made efforts at addressing issues of conventional force imbalances with India . New Delhi has traditionally dismissed these efforts, instead focusing on its larger regional competitor, China .
 The issue speaks to a much larger problem, and that is multilateral arms control . But the issue is more complex than conventional arms control, says the author .
 If the India-Pakistan strategic situation offers any lesson, it is that weaker states may have to develop a "great equaliser" to offer security that they cannot find through conventional means .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif stated that Pakistan would sign the CTBT if the Kashmir dispute was solved first .
 morality has its place in strategy, but moral absolutes do not, according to the law .
 Many proponents of nuclear disarmament have the “luxury of sitting in a strategic vacuum’ Many argue that states should simply learn to get on with one another .
 Government leaders and military planners do not have such a luxury, and have the responsibility of developing policies aimed at deterring conflict and minimising destruction .
Deterrence remains a fundamental part of how the international system works. Deterrence is a key part of the world's international system .
 The two communities, instead of engaging in meaningful dialogue, seem to still be talking over each other . The two are in different communities .
 For the process to ban nuclear weapons to be successful, it must address the motives that drive states to acquire them in the first place .
 The existence of unresolved disputes also underlines discrimination in the application of international norms and laws .
 Absent strong and reliable external security guarantees to states that face hostile adversaries with conventionally strong militaries, these weapons would remain to guarantee national security .
 Pakistan offered to sign the NPT, while it was still developing nuclear weapons . India would also propose the creation of a regional nuclear weapons free zone .
 India again linked refusal to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty with demands for India to sign . Later it again linked the refusal to signing the Treaty, with demands to sign it .
 A successful nuclear ban would be one that demonstrates a serious commitment by nuclear weapon states to disarm in a reasonable time frame . The ultimate objective is to establish a collective security system for states on an equitable basis .
 The local government banned social media sites for one month “or until further notice’ in India-held Kashmir . A Coalition of the PDP and BJP has banned Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp in Kashmir .
 Farooq Dar, a young shawlweaver tied to the hood of an army jeep as a human shield from stone-pelting locals while it patrolled Kashmiri villages on voting day .
 India is using the oldest, and most feeble, pretext in the book to suppress public dissent . India's use of public order to suppress dissent is an old pretext, India's most feeble.
 This is not how a country that markets itself as ‘the world’s biggest democracy’ behaves. This is how a nation that market itself as a democracy is behaving .
 Saudi Arabia, China and Egypt wield control over their people . This is how undemocratic states such as Saudi Arabia and China wield control of their people.
 Kashmir protests are driven largely by the youth, the demographic that is most active on social media . As is the case in most rebellions, the youth is the most active in Kashmir .
 Burhan Wani, the young separatist leader whose assassination last year in July triggered the ongoing wave of unrest in the valley, also used such sites to mobilise his fellow Kashmiris towards joining the resistance .
 India has already done its utmost to prevent the issue from being internationalised by refusing the UN access to the area to investigate the excessive use of force by security personnel .
 respected voices in India are speaking out against rights violations . Rights violations have become so egregious that respected voices are speaking against them .
 As many other countries have discovered before, a people’s cry for justice cannot be silenced. As many others have found before, many other nations have discovered that the cry can't be silenced .
 The general phenomenon upholding till date by our old and current generation is the issue of separatist movement going on in Balochistan .
 If we meet common folks belonging to Punjab, Sindh or KPK, they would be complaining about Baloch’s inadequate and superfluous behaviour towards the government .
 From Pakistan’s inception till date, this province hasn’t been given equal rights. From Pakistan's inception to date, the province hasn't been givenequal rights .
 Lack of infrastructure and development led tribal lords to play their cards well, according to reports . Lack of development and infrastructure led tribal Lords to play well, they say .
 Balochistan people remain ignorant of their due rights . They have now become puppets in the hands of tribal lords and enemy states .
 There is no denial that India played a central role in 1971 war in dividing Pakistan through propaganda and by accelerating and catalyzing anti-Pakistan movement .
Pakistan's government's imprudent policies to manage this insurgency in the 1970s are till date a stigma on the history of Pakistan .
 The story in Baluchistan is taking shape, more or less, in a similar way to the East Pakistan .
 A number of players had increased with the increase in their interests in Baluchistan . However, a number of people had increased in their interest in the region .
 There are many strategic goals underlying for India to interfere in the matters of Balochistan . Other than political goals, there are also strategic goals.
 Baluchistan’s rich mineral and gold resources have now become an open secret to the international community .
 Baluchistan would not only lose its part located at an important geopolitical location but also its natural resources .
 Oil has become more a curse for the Middle East than a blessing for the region, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. and Europe have played dirty politics in the Middle East, according to some scholars . The argument in support of this statement is derived from international scholars, they say .
 The Middle East is trying to capture its large amount of oil reserves . The region has seen an increase in oil production in recent years .
 The pursuit of democracy is used as an instrument to invade these states . However, a pursuit ofdemocracy is not used as a means of invasion .
 West believes that, monarchs and dictatorship in the states of Middle East has taken away the right of self determination from its people .
To restore this believe, they are intervening in these states to establish peace in the name of human intervention . To restore this belief, they're intervening in those states to set up peace .
 There are many human rights violations occurring in parts of the world . There are also human rights abuses occurring in other parts of world .
 States like the US, Russia and others invade only those states which are rich in resources .
 Baluchistan has become an epicentre of international attention, fortunately or unfortunately due to its largest reserves of copper and gold . The country has become a major destination for international attention .
 Its instability is the greatest challenge which requires a systematic resolution . It is the biggest challenge which needs a systematic solution .
 A step by step systematic approach is needed to produce an environment of peace and stability in this region . The region is in need of a stable environment and peace, says the UN .
 stability could only be established if its borders are well monitored and secured . There is also need to develop relations with neighbouring states sharing borders with Baluchistan .
 Iran is a major stakeholder in our foreign policy, says Iran's foreign policy . "It becomes more important when we know that future of many international pipelines is highly dependent on our good relations with Iran"
 India is another border country and is taking advantage of the situation . India is also a border country .
 Pakistan needs to adopt prudent policies, not only to improve security situation in Baluchistan, but also to improve our unimpeded trade growth . Pakistan's economic growth is the gateway to improved security, says the writer .
 By improving relations with Iran, we can have multiple advantages at our end, says Iran .
 First, it will improve the security situation in Baluchistan and help in its development . It will help in the development of the country's security situation .
 It will boost confidence building measures among Balochs and government of Pakistan and Pakistan . Second, it can initiate its long promised pipelines through Iran . It will also boost confidenceBuilding measures.
 India is also eyeing the benefits of TAPI and IPI to fill its thirst for energy resources . India is concerned, and is also interested in the benefits.
 India has resumed many insurgent operations in Baluchistan . While eyeing on its rich oil and gas resources, India wants to destabilize the country .
 declaration of Indian spies of sabotaging Baluchistan through suicide bombing is now an open secret . The declaration of spies of sabotage is now a secret .
 At this hour, government of Pakistan should move forward with a better narrative to bring improvement in Baluchistan, says CNN .
 The situation in Baluchistan needs a policy plan which brings amelioration economically, strategically and socially . The situation needs to be more economically, economically, and socially, says the author .
 We should unite as a nation to safeguard our national interests in Baluchistan. We should abandon every possible interference from Indian or western side through strong plan of action .
 Pakistan needs to develop its health and education department first . For that government of Pakistan need to develop health department first.
 It’s not important that mega projects should be launched, but rather small steps towards infrastructure development in health and health . 24 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 education department could cover miles of restoring confidence and trust upon each other .
 The writer is freelance columnist based in Islamabad . A decision made in time saves nine people .
 The emissary communicated to his Pakistani counterparts to come clear and clean on all types of militants including the Haqqani Networks . The American emissaries communicated to Pakistan to come clean on militants including militants .
 General McMaster had earlier expressed similar sentiments during his sojourn in neighbouring Afghanistan . General McMaster has also expressed his similar sentiments in Afghanistan .
 U.S. has established strategic relations with India and Pakistan . Pakistan has fully embraced the Chinese, and is pursuing the Russians . This American visit is extremely critical for both the Islamabad and Pakistan.
 The United States still is a superpower with its economic, military and epistemic superiority over China, Russia and Europe . The U.S. still is an economic and military superpower .
 The Trump Administration, being conservative, is all clear on the question of militancy emanating from the Middle East, Africa and South Asia .
 Trump-led USA attacked Syria, dropped the Mother of All Bombs on Afghanistan and its military might be encircling North Korea for a possible attack .
 China is walking cautiously and is unlikely to confront the U.S. on the North Korean issues .
 Pakistan-India relations are at an all-time low these days due to the Jadhav episode . Pakistan- India relations are also at a low, according to the report .
 Pakistan ought to open up all channels of communication and diplomacy with the U.S. and work in tandem to eradicate extremism and terrorism . For the latter to happen, Pakistan should open up communications and diplomacy .
 Mashal Khan’s brutal murder and the confession of Noreen Laghari regarding her links to the Islamic State are only the tip of the iceberg .
 The United States on it part should appreciate Pakistan’s stance on Kashmir and play a mediatory role to resolve this lingering conflict once and for all .
 The arrival of the U.S. national security advisor is probably the last opportunity for Pakistan . Pakistan has not had a national security adviser for years .
 If lost, it is the latter that will suffer economically and strategically for critical junctures are rare . "If lost, the latter will suffer economic and strategically"
 Despite onslaughts and intrigues this article has survived for 45 years. Despite on slaughts, this article still has survived .
 Dictators, usurpers and their rogues have all done their best to manipulate this agreement between the rulers and the ruled . Dictator and usurpers have alldone their best.
 When the people’s mandate was over ruled civil war started in the Eastern Wing and Quaid's Pakistan was dismembered . The people's mandate is over ruled.
 Pakistan has a very checkered history mainly because of Establishment incursion in the democratic process .
 Before its complete implementation it was abrogated in 1958 followed by martial law . Before it was complete implementation, it was followed by Martial law .
 Suharwardy’s Awami League was now under the leadership of an ordinary worker Mujib-ur-Rehman, who wanted complete autonomy under a confederal arrangement .
 The fall of the dictator paved the way for democracy and elections in 1970 . Elections were held on the basis of one man one vote .
 A lot has been written about the break-up of Quaid’s Pakistan . What was left of it needed a constitution was a constitution .
 In 1972 Yayha’s martial law was lifted to be replaced by an interim constitution . In 1972, the law was replaced by a constitution .
 As the establishment was beaten and bruised the comrades like Mahmood Ali Kasuri and Hafiz Pirzada had a free hand . The establishment was beat and bruised.
 The right wing parties were not comfortable with some of the clauses and there was a deadlock . There was a 'deadlock' on some clauses .
 By the time the students reached there, ZAB had left after arriving at a compromise . The students had left at the time of the meeting .
 Pakistan finally had a constitution that was agreed to by all the parties . Pakistan's constitution was agreed by all parties . The constitution was signed by the Pakistani parliament .
There was a concurrent list of departments that had to be devolved to the provinces in ten years . There was a separate list of department departments that were devolved in 10 years .
 Instead of the Martial Law and its Jungle Rule, the country was now under the constitutional rule of law in which the establishment was contained .
 ZAB called for elections in 1977 one year ahead of schedule . Beaming with confidence ZAB calls for elections one year before schedule .
 The establishment had already laid a trap for him. While he wanted to surprise the opposition by snaps polls the establishment had also laid atrap for him .
 Considering his popularity ZAB allowed the political parties to contest against him as a joint opposition . ZAB's popularity has led him to be considered an opposition leader .
 The entire electoral exercise in 1977 was disputed by the mischief of the few . The electables who had managed to get PPP tickets indulged in their old tricks.
ZAB was physically eliminated through judicial murder on April 04, 1979 . ZAB was not only removed from power, he was also physically eliminated.
 The usurper openly expressed his disdain of the document saying, 'Can tear and trash it' The usurp said, 'You can tear and Trash it'
 He introduced his own brand of religion through illegal and unwanted amendments . He introduced the religion through legal and unwanted changes . He also introduced himself himself as a Muslim .
 It was the darkest period of history from which recovery has been very difficult. It was a very difficult period for many of the world's most successful years .
 The 1973 Constitution has saved the federation despite several unholy onslaughts by the Khaki dictators and their political rogues who ruled after them .
 Today USA leads the world in technology and democracy and is the lone super power . Today USA is the only super power in the world .
 Pakistan is a constitutional democracy, largely due to the efforts of the truly elected assembly of 1970 . Pakistan's first elected assembly was in the 1970s .
 The Lawyers Movement in 2007 was supported by the civil society for the rule of law . In 2007, the Lawyers Movement was backed by the legal community .
 The 1973 document has to be restored to its original form, all martial amendments should be annulled to cleanse it . The 1973 version of the document must be restored.
 April 10, 1973 produced a miracle for Pakistan, a Constitution that is democratic, 23 THECSSPOINT.COM APRIL 2017 global Point parliamentary and federal it is time to uphold, defend and follow it if progress is desired .
 The rulers and the ruled have to work in unison under an agreed framework . The rulers, the ruled and the rulers must work together under a framework .
 Constitutional rule of law is the way forward as envisioned by the Quaids . Constitutional rule is a way forward, according to the quaids.
 daytime temperatures become unbearable and incessant outages of power cause life to be piping hot yet again .
 In all honesty, the Sharifs don't give a fig about the emergent situation . The Sharifs aren't sure about the situation .
 The ace politician has been too busy defending his money stashed at the May Fair, London .
Excessive load shedding may knock the Sharifs off their perch . However, excessive load shedding could knock them off theirPerch .
 The energy crisis was as threatening back then as it seems to have become now . The energy crises were as threatening as they became now .
 A lot of compulsive chatter, coupled with faithful acolytes, had yielded them a victory in the 2013 general elections . The 2013 general election was held in New Jersey .
Power tripping lingers on in the UK government. But it is sure to lose their way into another term in 2018 .
 Load shedding has once again infested Pakistan like a plague, devastating economic life across the country . Pakistan's economic life has been hit hard by load shedding .
 Demand for power in the country wobbles in the range of 18,000 20,000 MW during peak summer months . The country's demand for power is up in the middle of the summer .
The power sector remains as cash starved as it was in the beginning of the N-league tenure . The power sector is still in the middle of the season .
 Pakistan's power distribution utilities periodically determine their tariffs . Pakistan's electricity distribution utilities have to decide their tariffs.
 The NEPRA sends it for the government's approval . Once a rational, cost reflective tariff has been determined, the NEPra sends it to the government .
 The government, in violation of the NEPRA Act of 1998/99, frequently lowers the tariffs . The government notifies uniform tariffs across all the utilities in the country .
 The difference between a cost reflective tariff and a government notified by the government is then paid by the Ministry of Finance as tariff differential subsidies .
 This has serious ramifications for the government's already edgy fiscal purse . The government is already in trouble with its fiscal purse.
 Pakistan has low tax-to-GDP ratios and an ugly external debt profile . Having circular debt on your books can be ravaging .
 Pakistan's transmission and distribution infrastructure is in complete tatters and sorely in need of repairs . Pakistan's generation capacity is below par, but its transmission and Distribution infrastructure is under repair .
 The clamour about adding more general capacity to the national grid makes little sense . No capacity enhancements are made in the already bloated 30 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 transmission lines .
After all, what good is additional power is extra power, if it cannot be transmitted to the end user. After all, the power is added to the user's device .
 Pakistan recurrently hauls back to frequent and unscheduled load shedding . J Sadiq says the persons in charge of the situation have not had a good handle.
There is clearly a strong case for off grid solutions to the country's power crisis . As successive governments have made a hash of the national grid, there is clearly an off grid solution .
 Pakistan is located in a region exposed to considerable sunlight around the year . Pakistan is situated in a area exposed to much sunlight in the region .
 Analysts well-versed in the engineering details of such a scheme have repeatedly harped on going off grid .
 Load shedding, if not controlled, will continue to be a drag on the economy . The economy will be affected by the lack of control .
 Economists and rational thinkers, endowed with brains, estimate that the economic cost of load shedding runs into billions of dollars . Economists say load shedding costs could run into billions.
 Senior U.S. and Pakistani officials met in Washington last week to review their relations . They discussed both “difficult and less difficult issues, as an observer said .
 Ambassador Chaudhary said that both sides showed a desire to strengthen their ties . He spoke at a seminar on US-Pakistan relations at the Harvard Kennedy School on Thursday .
 Pakistan hopes new U.S. policy for Afghanistan will protect its interests in the region . Pakistan's relations with the United States began to strain in May 2011, when Americans discovered Osama bin Laden in a compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan .
 The U.S. has accused Pakistan of allowing terrorists to use its tribal belt to attack targets inside Afghanistan .
 Pakistan rejects these charges as incorrect and says it launched two major military offensives in the area . Pakistan says it killed hundreds of terrorists and eliminated militants’ sanctuaries .
 The United States acknowledges the success of those operations but says some elements of the Haqqani Network are still operating from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas . The U.S. acknowledges that some parts of the network still operate from the tribal areas .
 Pakistan expressed desire to reboot ties with the U.S. at a time when the Trump administration is reviewing its policy for the South Asian region . Pakistan expressed interest to reboot relations with the United States .
 U.S. sources say the review process foc-uses on Afghanistan, not Pakistan or the greater South Asia .
 The team making the new Afghan policy is expected to complete the task by mid-May . The team made the new policy will be made by the end of May .
 Pakistani Taliban had fled after the launching of Operation Zarb-i-Azb, a former Taliban spokesman said . Pakistani Taliban were now encouraging them to attack targets inside Pakistan .
 The United States wants enough stability in Afghanistan to allow a peaceful disengagement . The U.S. concern revolves around the militancy in Afghanistan .
 The Americans want the set-up they established in Kabul to continue after their withdrawal . The Americans also want to continue their set- up in Kabul .
 China and Russia have encouraged two other international players to claim a role in Afghanistan . Washington also notes that their apparent failure to contain the Afghan insurgency, and continued terrorist attacks inside Pakistan, have encouraged other players to take part .
 U.S. does not want Russia to re-enter Afgha-nistan after its disastrous withdrawal from there in 1989 . It's suspicious of Islamabad’s growing ties with Moscow .
 President Donald Trump's April 6-7 meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping. But it is more comfortable with China, particularly after President Trump's meeting with Xi Jinping .
 It is the need of the hour, while looking at the growing Indian aspirations of becoming a giant South Asian nuclear power .
 It includes both the nuclear weapons development and the missile development . The missile development includes both nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons .
 The number of nuclear weapons has continued to trouble nuclear deterrence theorists, strategists and policymakers since the post-Cold War period . The number is enough to maintain nuclear deterrence, enough to keep nuclear deterrence .
World's nuclear weapons stockpile is estimated to be at 16,000 approximately . All states possessing nuclear weapons, in one way or another, are constantly modifying and modernizing their nuclear inventories .
 No state will place a number or cap on what it considers to be a sufficient nuclear force for credible deterrence . The U.S. has no plans to place a cap on the amount of nuclear force it considers sufficient .
 Both countries have committed policies of minimum nuclear deterrence and no-nuclear arms race . Both countries are committed to no- nuclear arms race and minimum nuclear deterrent .
 India seeks to maintain a nuclear force sufficient to deter mainly China and Pakistan . Islamabad maintains that it seeks a deterrent equilibrium vis-a-vis New Delhi and not nuclear parity .
 Amb Akram says threats are growing in the region due to large scale acquisition of military hardware by India . India's rejection of No First Use of nuclear weapons, determination to carry out disarming strikes against Pakistan, and its espousal of dangerous and destabilizing doctrines like the Cold Start
 The revolving ongoing speculation on the transformation of NFU policy of Indian Nuclear doctrine is getting a lot of hype nowadays . Ironically the revolving ongoing debate on the changing policy is getting more hype now .
 The strategy might be to keep all options open by putting ambiguity in its nuclear doctrine .
 Diplomatically, the Indian doctrine is only to show the international community that New Delhi has maintained a responsible use of its nuclear weapons .
 'This has required us to move towards Full Spectrum Deterrence for 35 THECSSPOINT.COM.COM global Point APRIL 2017 responding to threats at the tactical level, the counter-force level, and thecounter-value level .
 The strategic stability in South Asia was not just about Pakistan and India, but also involves China and the U.S. in the sphere .
Former Indian National Security Adviser Shiv Shankar Menon says Pakistan never believed in an Indian declaratory statement of No-First Use . Narang says Pakistan's security quarters never believed the statement .
 India is the largest arms importer, and is engaged in several nuclear deals worldwide . U.S. is the biggest helper in nuclear deals for India .
Evidence estimated that for the U.S. it would be desirable if a friendly Asian power beat Communist China to the punch by detonating a nuclear device first for which the very likely country was no other than India .
 The U.S. assisted by helping India acquire nuclear explosive, for balancing communist China . The United States helped India acquire the nuclear explosive in 1961 .
 There were various national and international factors behind the Indian nuclear program . There were several national andinternational factors behind it .
Pakistan's posture of Credible Minimum Deterrence has remained a principle option of Pakistan’s nuclear policy . Pakistan's nuclear policy is a key part of its nuclear program .
 Pakistan’s nuclear policy is driven by its perceived threat to its security from India . This principle is based on the concept that Pakistan's nuclear policy was driven by the perceived threat from India and is therefore India-centric .
Deterrence is the sole aim and a small arsenal is considered adequate for satisfying it . Deterrence is a small aim and the only aim is to make it feel like a small weapon .
 Tactical Nuclear Weapons in the region or with the introduction of battlefield weapons is actually a modernized advancement in the inventories . But ironically this is also a fact that with the Introduction of Tactical Nuclear weapons in the area is also an advancement in inventories.
 It is only when states feel threatened they opt for defending their territory and sovereignty that actually compels them to maximize their security measures under the perceived threat of vulnerability .
 The possession of a nuclear weapon is itself enough for crafting 36 THECSSPOINT.COM.COM global Point APRIL 2017 deterrence .
Even by possessing one nuke, the nuclear aggression from the other state can be discouraged . Even by possessing a nuke.
 The question of numeric parity or nuclear sufficiency does not make sense. So the question of numerical parity ornuclear sufficiency doesn't make sense .
 It would not be in correct to conclude that credible minimum deterrence is not the same as nuclear parity and nuclear supremacy .
This restraint was due to the deterrent effect of nuclear weapons that come along with the massive destructive capability of nuclear fission . This restraint was because of the huge nuclear capability of the nuclear weapons .
 India and Pakistan are close to each other, but two unfortunate developments happened . Pakistan and India are both located in the same region .
 India discovered a threshold below nuclear level in the shape of Operation Parakaram . India aimed at extracting its adventurism at a conventional level .
Cold Start Doctrine was realised to quench its historical enmity with Pakistan . Second, Cold Start Doctrine is realised to Quench its history with Pakistan.
 India kept on advancing its nuclear and conventional arsenals quantitatively as well as qualitatively . As a result, India keeps on advancing nuclear and traditional arsenals .
Recent Indian Defence budget 2017-18 witnessed a hike of 6 percent in Indian defence budget . This translates into approximately Rs..74 laky core, including a massive amount of Rs.,488 core .
Since 2009 to 2016 India has increased its defence spending so much that it has moved from 7th to 5th position in international ranking . The report was published by Stockholm International Peace Research Institute .
 Pakistan does not even be counted in the first fifteen defence spenders due to its belief on minimum credible deterrence . Pakistan more and more vulnerable on its Western front with the increase in Indian arsenals .
 India spends seven times more than Pakistan on its military than Pakistan . The gap between arch rivals on military spending has widened to 1:7 .
 Pakistan's economy is comparatively much greater in size than India's . It is hard for Pakistan to match India’s spending as later economy is bigger .
 Islamabad believes that India is disturbing balance of power in South Asia . Islamabad believes India is a disturbing balance.
Unbridled spending in defence sector has augmented especially during the last three years . This unbridled spend has increased especially in the past three years.
 South Asia's arms race has resulted in deterioration of strategic stability between India and Pakistan . India's military modernisation and arms accumulation has led to an unending arms race .
 Western governments and private arms manufacturing companies are rushing towards India with the hope of landing multi-billion dollars . New Delhi is aiming to leverage some of that buying power to get transfer of technology .
 India’s heavy military spending and acquisition of weapons threatens Pakistan and its efforts for regional peace. In this sense, India's heavy military Spending and acquisition is a threat to Pakistan .
 India’s adventurism threatens security and survival of Pakistan and other small neighbours . India has substantive territorial and resource sharing issues with all its neighbours .
 India and Pakistan are nuclear armed and cannot live in an environment of hostility towards each other forever, especially when both are fighting terrorism on their soils .
 The rational way forward is to sit on the seats of dialogue to talk about peace and find real solutions, says John Sutter . Sutter: "We need to talk to each other about the future of peace"
 World powers might be cooperating with India on defence and nuclear weapons, but their discriminatory attitude against Pakistan must stop . Pakistan has already destabilised the strategic stability of South Asia, says CNN .
 What does need to be increased is the funds for the development of downtrodden. What does needs to be increase is the money for development of the downtrdden.
 Millions of Indians do not have access to safe drinking water and to washrooms . Millions of Indian people do not know how to drink water and washrooms.
 It is not only a South Asian issue but also should be the concern of the International community for peace and security of the region .
What could be suggested is that India should start thinking rationally, according to the author .
 It should cut its booming military spending, educate its youth, feed its hungry and feed its poor . It should also elevate its poor and cooperate with its neighbours for regional peace .
Economic activity between India and Pakistan with very strong relations is key to success for both . Pakistan and India have strong relations, but India has a very strong relationship .
 Mikhail Gorbachev: ‘We could only solve our problems by cooperating with other countries.’
 The LHC direction had come in the wake of a Supreme Court ruling in 2015 that called for Urdu as the language for running the affairs of the state .
 The latest order was passed last Wednesday on an appeal by the Federal Public Service Commission . The next hearing is fixed for April 20 .
 The FPSC echoed the views that were widely expressed in the public domain after the court order to make Urdu the medium for the CSS examination .
 Talk of Urdu as the language of power typically stirs up sensitivities . Urdu is often used as a way of expressing power .
 Urdu is the state of the Urdu region in the north of the country . Urdu has the capacity to cater to the state, but it's not quite as well as many native tongues .
 It is commonly and controversially contended that a switch to Urdu will bring CSS standards down . However, it is commonly contended that it will bring down CSS standards .
 The language lacks in certain essential expressions. It is said to be because of a sheer absence of sufficient exposure to modern subjects such as science .
 This often charged debate will continue as the LHC sits down to deliberate upon the matter . The LHC will continue to deliberate on the matter as the debate continues .
 The decision will be eagerly awaited by not only the aspiring CSS candidates but Pakistanis at large . It is an important case and the decision is eagerly awaited .
 There is no Urdu syllabus and no experts around who are trained to measure just how competent the CSS’s Urdu-medium candidates are .
 Urdu is the medium of learning at all levels to enable both the language and the candidates required to take this high-efficiency test in Urdu . This would entail, first, implementing Urdu as themedium of learning .
 Rather than an abrupt transition, there must be a gradual, phased approach towards the creation of a system where the candidate can choose from multiple language options .
 During Fiscal Year 2016, Pakistan celebrated a tax collection of over $31 billion . Pakistan's tax collection was a total of $31billion .
 The Federal Bureau of Revenue surpassed its own target, but also managed to increase revenue collection by $7 billion .
 This is laudable, but only until we don't consider the mechanisms of tax increment . This is a laudable move, but we need to consider the mechanism of tax increments .
 The brazenly unethical structure of our economy prevailed as always, and the tax burden was yet again shifted towards low income households . The tax burden is yet again shifting towards low incomes households .
 The state continued to rely on intensifying tax collections through indirect means such as increasing sales taxes on petroleum products, which favoured the elite .
 Last year, the country collected over 60 percent of its taxes through unfair methods . The country collected more than 60% of its tax revenue through such unfair methods.
 The government is working on increasing the share of direct taxes . But progress is slow and remains biased towards the rich .
 An overwhelming majority of direct taxes are collected through withholding taxes received from salaried individuals . The elites contribute less than 5 percent to the revenue at a time when it controls 44 percent of the wealth .
 Wealthy businessmen have found inventive methods to dodge taxes . Most individuals engaged in property and construction businesses prefer to operate from outside the tax system .
 Pakistan’s tax-to-GDP ratio hovers around 10 percent, which is comparable to other countries such as Haiti and Gabon .
 The ratio is much lower if we account for the 36 percent of our economy that remains undocumented . This ratio is more than half that of the nation's economy .
Less than half a percent of our population pays taxes which is a mere 0. million out of 4 million potential taxpayers . According to Research and Advocacy for the Advancement of Allied Reforms .
 Pakistan is in an abysmal fiscal state, which desperately needs to increase its tax base . It is an open secret that Pakistan needs to raise its taxes .
 RTOs collect a mere $68 million in taxes, while the cost incurred by the FBR to maintain these offices is $78 41 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 million .
 In other words, the government would be in a better financial shape without them . The government would also be in better financial form without them.
 Countries around the world are moving towards a centralised structure based on the type of taxpayers, rather than the region they belong to .
 Advancement in Information Technology has contributed to this move that allowed taxation departments to process data at centralised locations .
 The Internal Revenue Services of the U.S. adopted such structure back in 1998 through four divisions . The IRS adopted such a structure in 1998.
National offices deal with taxpayers based on their specific needs . These divisions operate through their national offices, dealing with taxpayers .
 Catering to specific customers means that each division is defter in handling and aware of the laws that govern them . Catering for specific customers is a key part of the process .
 The needs and laws governing a self-employed doctor, for example, would be different to that of a vegetable whole-seller .
 Operating at scale and providing specialised services decreases the cost by streamlining the process . The process reduces direct contact with taxpayers by reducing direct contact.
 modern data management techniques have made it possible to easily detect tax evasion .
 FBR synthesise data from the National Database and Registration Authority with its own tax return database to identify non-filers .
 consolidating data from airline companies, private schools and banks can help generate algorithms to single out individuals for tax audit .
 If properly implemented, such systems can substantially reduce, if not eliminate, corruption and illegal wealth accumulation . Such systems can significantly reduce corruption, if they are properly implemented , if not eliminated .
 This isn’t rocket science and is already being used by states around the world to combat such practices . This isn't rocket science, it is being used to combat these practices .
 The question remains is whether the government has the political will to implement these reforms . The government has not yet implemented the reforms .
 Finance Minister Ishaq Dar has tried to institute some reforms such as introducing withholding taxes on banking transactions and new property taxes . In recent years, Dar has been trying to introduce some reforms .
 The reforms were met with tough opposition from traders and property dealers . However, they were met by tough opposition to the reforms .
 The government has no option but to take on their vested interests and ensure fair and effective tax collection . The government must take on its vested interests.
Desperate monetary measures are required to provide services such as policing, education and healthcare that have deteriorated owing to lack of funds .
There are high chances of unrest should such matters aren’t resolved duly . In addition, there are high chance of unrest if matters aren't resolved duly.
 Pakistan is already under tremendous pressure from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank due to an annual fiscal account deficit of over 4 percent . Pakistan is under pressure from both the IMF and World Bank .
 42 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 and viability of the country . We'll have to make sure that the rich and influential pay their due tax shares for there is no alternative .
 An economist, most likely, will reply by pointing to macroeconomic indicators such as slow GDP growth, lower investment, higher fiscal deficit, lower tax collection, weak export competitiveness .
 Some may highlight rampant corruption and microeconomic foundations of key economic and social sectors . Some may highlights rampant corruption in key sectors .
 Often, economic dialogue is narrowly confined to these indicators and sectoral reports . Often, the economic dialogue has been limited to indicators and sectors .
 Most of the economists cannot unearth the societal and cultural foundations that may be constraining economic growth and prosperity in the long run .
 Pakistan's economy sporadically achieved GDP growth higher than 5% during military governments in 1960s, 1980s and 2000s . Since independence, Pakistan’s economy has achieved growth of 5% .
 Pakistan achieved higher economic growth due to support by international players . Pakistan achieved high economic growth thanks to international players' support .
 We have rarely made efforts to reform institutional architecture, strengthen state capacity, foster a culture of knowledge creation and diffusion and harness human resource potential . We have often failed to improve institutional architecture.
 Pakistan's chief executive of every public or private sector organisation considers themselves final authority in a range of issues .
 There is generally no appreciation of diversity of opinions and ideas. Hence, there is no appreciation.
 Cultural attributes such as openness to new ideas and honouring transaction-commitments feed into overall economic performance . Cultural attributes are important to economic performance, such as open-mindedness .
 It is important to appreciate that these policy and cultural attributes cannot be transplanted in a vacuum . It is also important to appreciate that these policies and culture can't be transplants in the vacuum .
Political leaders can influence societal and cultural changes to advance economic and social transformation agendas . Sometimes, visionary political leaders are able to influence social and economic changes .
 The transformation is organic in nature and requires a society-wide response . But little attention is paid to the fact that, more often than not, the transformation is Organic in nature .
 The respect and influence that Francis Bacon and Newton gained was perhaps unmatchable in any other society at that time . The respect that the entrepreneurs like Bacon, Newton gained is perhaps un matchable.
 The Republic of Letters fostered competitive market for ideas in philosophy, physics, medicine, mathematics, and other fields . The transnational and virtual community of intellectuals fostered competition .
 Many of the ordinary technicians and workers turned themselves into inventors of technology by exploiting the existing knowledge and favourable patent structure .
 The society was open to new ideas and knowledge coming from Islamic, Indian, and Chinese civilisations .
 If we try to find such things in today’s Pakistan, we will certainly be disappointed. If we tried to find them, we would be disappointed .
 GDP numbers will occur occasionally, but it would be hard to create and sustain any economic transformation .
 Bureaucratic structures are prevalent in universities, scientific organisations, research centres and business organisations . Bureaucrats are prevalent.
 Most business corporations have raised empires through an insidious nexus with the state . Most business firms have raised their empires through a nexus with state .
 The prevalence of ‘Seth Culture’ and intergenerational businesses don’t promote creativity, innovation and competitiveness .
 Instead of a rhetoric of security challenges and political instability, the answer to many of the questions lies in the absence of market for talent, ideas, and knowledge .
 The aforementioned weaknesses and constraints rarely attract the attention of policy makers and popular economic writers .
 Pakistan will continue to rely on “borrowed growth’ with the change of one lender after another . Without addressing these fundamental issues, Pakistan will still rely on "borrowing growth"
 More deep rooted reforms are required to develop and attract talent to serve in the public sector and businesses .
 community leaders, academics and intellectuals should have a greater role in societal transformation . Instead of politicians, community leaders and academics should have more role in society's transformation .
 The writer is a public policy practitioner, researcher and researcher .
 Pakistan’s trade deficit widened to a record high of $23.385 billion for the first nine months of the fiscal year . Data shows that Pakistan's trade deficit has widened to record high .
 Arresting this trend, and eventually reversing it, ought to fast become a crucial policy priority for the country . But the options are limited, and there are no options for reversing it .
 The trade deficit owes itself to the imports of machinery and infrastructure equipment . The imports will also help plug Pakistan’s energy shortages .
 The argument is partially valid, but it is disingenuous to rely on it beyond a certain point . The argument was partially valid but it's disingenuous.
 Imports of oil and associated products are the largest share of the increase in imports . Imports are the biggest share of imports of oil, associated products .
Oil imports declined by 35 per cent last year, according to State Bank data . This year they grew by 10pc in the first half of the fiscal year, the bank says .
 Much of this reversal owes itself to the rising price of oil in international markets . Some amount of quantitative increase is also a factor .
 The second reason why the machinery argument must be received with scepticism is because we have heard it before .
 Once the Musharraf regime reached their peak, around 2004-2005, the same situation materialised . Once the boom years of the MushArraf regime were at their peak.
 Widening imports led to a growing current account deficit, says regime . The regime said this was due to machinery imports which would boost exports once installed .
 The boost in exports could not keep pace with the import growth, leading to a blowout in the external account . The rapid depletion of reserves, ultimately forcing a return to the IMF in 2008 .
 The same story a second time round is necessarily going to meet with more scepticism . It's not the same story as the first time the story has been told .
 The problem is a total absence of thinking on trade matters at the top levels of government . The lack of thinking is the problem, says the government .
 Pakistan has a history of treating trade casually, or treating it as part of our overall push to constantly seek ‘assistance’ from the world for one reason or another .
 What our trade policy suffers from is too much strategic input, and not enough economic thinking, it's not enough. What we need is more strategic input than economic thinking .
 The previous government tried to push through a normalisation of trade ties with India . But it failed due to pressure from the military, which would prefer to keep our relationship to India .
 The present government made a second attempt to push through that initiative, but failed for the same reason . The government made another attempt, but it failed for a second time .
 Most trade around the world is regional first and long distance second . Most trade in the region is Regional first and short distance second.
 Neighbouring countries with long histories of animosity and outstanding border issues have managed to keep their strategic and economic interests separate .
 China and Japan are one of the largest economic relationships in the world . They have a depth of animosity towards each other that rivals, if not surpasses that of India and Pakistan .
 Pakistan’s economic ties with three of its four neighbours are grossly underdeveloped, despite strong affinities . Pakistan's economic ties to three of the four neighbour countries are underdeveloped .
 Many imported products can be substituted for cheaper alternatives from India if trade can be normalised . But in the present climate this is difficult to imagine in the current climate .
 The window was open a few years ago, but shut at the moment . Lran has massive energy surpluses and a food shortage, but food shortages .
 Iran and Saudi Arabia have a natural affinity, partly due to the sanctions, but in equal measure, due to our place in the larger Middle Eastern rivalry. This natural affinity has not been tapped, partly because of the sanctions .
 Afghanistan provides us natural access to the markets of Central Asia . Afghanistan also provides us access to Central Asia's markets .
 CPEC is being presented as some sort of 'game changer' for the country . This was seen with disdain in the years before CPEC, but now suddenly with the arrival of Chinese investment in our transport and communications infrastructure .
 Rivalry rather than cooperation with our neighbours is the primary lens through we view all regional relationships . Rivalry is the main lens through our regional relationships, says the author .
 India's economic rivalry is our own, such as with India, we are quick to subordinate economic issues to it . India's relationship with the U.S. has been a long-running rivalry with India .
 Where we have no rivalry, such as with lran, we easily import it from the Middle East, where disputes have little to nothing to do with us .
 That policy envisioned providing some cash support to a few areas in a puny attempt to boost exports . That policy was intended to help some areas in an attempt to bolster exports .
 Nobody in the exporting community even applied for the benefits on offer . It is evident that nobody in the export community applied for benefits on Offer .
 The new secretary of commerce is not in a position to rectify this imbalance in our trade outlook, says David Frum . Frum says the new secretary commerce is "not in a positions to rectifying this imbalance"
 All commerce secretaries have been left with little more to do other than tinker at the margins, says John Sutter . Sutter: Without addressing this imbalance in our policy priorities at the top, we are driving us inexorably deeper into the quicksand of growing deficits .
 The secretary cannot change this by himself, but perhaps he can do something to sensitise the government and the military to the enormous price that Pakistan has always paid . Pakistan continues to pay today for its failure to put trade on top of its external policy priorities .
 This constant refrain, of a steadily growing economy with strong caveats hanging over it, is now becoming ubiquitous . It's now becoming commonplace.
 Almost every entity other than the government is qualifying its assessment of the growing economy with the observation that the risks are growing alongside as well .
 The World Bank has presented its assessment in a report titled South Asia Economic Focus . South Asian economies have registered the highest growth rates in the world in recent years .
 Pakistan tracks the rest of the region in its developments, but the risks it faces are unique to it . Pakistan tracks its developments in the region.
 The report notes South Asia may even stand to benefit from the backlash, due to fortuitous circumstances . But in the case of Pakistan, the approach of elections could cause the leadership to take its eye off the ball .
 The fiscal framework is also taking some pressure, with the deficit widening by 0. percentage points in the first half of the fiscal year compared to the same period last year .
 The World Bank says the risks facing the economy are significant . Headwinds expected from the global economy depending on how Brexit works out .
Almost all institutional assessments of the economy, and its seemingly comfortable position, are in agreement on this point . It is worth noting that by now almost all institutional assessment of the Economy is in agreement, and it's in agreement .
With high reserves and growth ramping up, perhaps the greatest risk facing the economy is complacency at the top .
 Fitch Ratings gave ‘B’ rating to Pakistan which denotes prosperity . The rating was given to Pakistan in early February .
 The report predicted a GDP growth rate of 5. % during the current financial year registering more than 2% raise since 2013 .
 Pakistan would not face external liquidity problem in the coming years, report says . Report issued by the agency on the basis of the review concluded .
 The agency attributes the strengthening of the economy to phenomenal raise in the foreign exchange reserves, reduction in the fiscal deficit, structural reform and soundness of the banking sector leading to fall in non-performing loans .
 Moody’s, MCI and global lending institutions including IMF, World Bank and ADB have acknowledged the turnaround in the Pakistan economy .
 Wall Street Journal says poverty and terrorism in Pakistan are on the decline . Consumer spending is leading to a burgeoning middle class, it says .
 The fact is that the Chinese investment in CPEC and the booming economy have given confidence to the foreign investors .
 Dutch dairy company Royal Friesland Campina recently paid $461 million to buy control of Engro Foods in Pakistan .
 China's Shanghai Electric Power agreed to pay $ 1. billion for KESC shares last year .
 Turkish Electric appliances company Arcelik paid $258 million for Pakistan appliance maker Dawlance . Pakistan had an increasingly prosperous working and middle class, Dawlance acknowledged .
 Ishaq Dar deserves unqualified compliments for winching the economy out of the economic mess and putting it on the path of sustained economic growth .
 Management of an economy, particularly a developing country like Pakistan, is an arduous task due to international linkages . Pakistan's economic and social situation is a major challenge .
 Fiscal deficit stood at 8.8% and inflation was in double digits . Foreign exchange reserves were at $ 6.008 billion .
 The fiscal deficit has been reduced to 4. % and further squeeze is expected during the current year . The deficit is expected to remain at 4.4% .
 Foreign exchange reserves stand at $24.258 billion which represent almost four times more than the present government has taken over .
 The revival of the economy has been orchestrated in spite of heavy drain on resources due to the operation Zarb-e-Azb, rehabilitation of the displaced persons of North Waziristan .
 The energy crisis was attributable to the negligence and criminal indifference of the previous governments to the growing energy needs of the country . It was hampering progress in the industrial and agricultural sectors, causing difficulties for millions of households .
 The power outages have been considerably reduced owing to the addition of 3000 MW of electricity to the national grid .
 CPEC power projects with a cumulative production capacity of 10,640 MW have been set rolling . The energy crisis will not only have been overcome by then but the country would also have enough electricity for the new industrial projects .
 The government also envisages the addition of another 30000 MW by the year 2030 .
 The government has also concluded an agreement with Qatar for import of LNG and a similar agreement with Azerbaijan for importing LNG . The deal is in the offing.
 The initiative to diversify the sources of import of LNG is a visionary move to avoid any disruption or crisis due to dependence on a single source .
 The PML-N government has also been giving top priority to the development of infrastructure . The PMN government very rightly has also given top priority.
 The fact is that all modern growth models rely on development of infrastructure . Infrastructure is considered as an indispensable ingredient of industrialisation and economic growth .
 The phenomenal economic prosperity and industrial development in Asian countries such as China, South Korea, Singapore and Malaysia during the last three decades is a testimony of this modern reality .
 The establishment of Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank by China with the objective of 52 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 development of infrastructure in the Asian countries .
 Pakistan has failed to achieve rapid industrialisation due to wrong approaches and policies of the successive governments . Pakistan's economy has been divorced from the emerging economic compulsions and variables .
 PML-N government has adopted a pragmatic and visionary approach to economic development through building of necessary infrastructure . However, it is heartening to note that the PMLN government is taking a pragmatic approach to development .
 Peshawar-Karachi motorway expected to be completed by 2019 . Network of roads being built across the country will surely act as catalyst to nudging economic growth .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was right on money when inaugurating the first phase of Karachi-Hyderabad motorway in February .
 The CPEC is also about building infrastructure, which holds the promise of enabling Pakistan not only to make up for the lost opportunities but also to become an economic power house .
 Spring meetings of the world's finance chiefs in Washington have been brimming with an optimism worthy of the season .
 The IMF’s confidence is fuelled by improving performance in most of the major world economies .
 The fund has raised its forecast for global growth for the first time in six years based on a stronger China . China's economy grew at an annual rate of 6. per cent in the first quarter, and improving economies in Japan and Europe .
For the IMF, which is predicting 3. per cent global growth in gross domestic product this year, the stronger outlook is the fruit of broad-based recoveries .
 The global economy is at its most robust since the financial crisis, according to analysts . In short, politics in much of the western world is being overwhelmed by the builtup angst from low growth .
 If the pattern of the post-crisis years holds it could all go horribly wrong, and quickly. Which means, of course, that if it does, it could go horriblywrong .
 The early looming threat is this weekend's first round of the French presidential election . Opinion polls have made even the IMF nervous .
 Marine Le Pen's promises to exit the euro and the EU ‘would certainly entail major disorder’
 Mr Trump is launching a national security investigation into steel imports, which appears likely to lead to new tariffs .
 Mr Trump has given some signals economic nationalism is fading as a force in his administration . But his instincts on trade and immigration still appear distinctly protectionist .
 The IMF and the World Bank have been much debated this week . The question is what the Trump administration might mean for institutions such as the IMF and World Bank .
 Steven Mnuchin, Mr Trump’s Treasury secretary, disputes that assessment .
 The election of either Ms Le Pen or the far-left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon would see them confronting a legislature with a hostile majority and struggling to deliver on promises .
 Even Trump is likely to be able to do little, leaving North Korea aside, he says .
 China’s growing debt pile and the authorities’ inability to rein in credit growth still cause shivers among fund economists .
 Brazil's largest economy continues to struggle with corruption scandals . So too does the procession of corruption scandals in Brazil, where Latin America’s largest economy is struggling .
 Nigeria and South Africa are languishing in Africa, where hopes for a new growth-fuelled reality were so prevalent just a few years ago .
 Maurice Obstfeld says the present optimism should be tempered by the lower potential growth in productivity . He says governments have been too ready to accept since the crisis .
 Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, is among those who points to a gap between so-called “soft’s confidence data and “hard” economic results .
 The National Federation of Independent Business’ survey of bosses’ optimism hit its highest reading since 2004 in January .
 Atlanta Federal Reserve’s “GDP Now’ tracker points to annualised GDP growth of just 0. per cent in the first three months of 2017 .
 Retail sales dropped 0.% in March, following a 0. per cent February decrease . Retail sales fell 0. percent in March .
 The significance of soggy first-quarter numbers should not be over-dramatised . The significance is not over- dramatized .
 Trump administration can deliver sustained growth of 3 per cent or more. But heady predictions from the Trump administration still appear far-fetched . The president's administration has said it can deliver growth of 2 per cent .
 Mr Trump has fallen further behind in attempts to deliver his economic agenda . That will stay true if Mr Trump falls further behind.
 Healthcare reform was meant to pave the way to significant tax reform, but talks in Congress remain snarled on both fronts .
 European officials insist that a region that has become a byword for high unemployment and persistent disappointment is on the mend . European officials say that the region is on a better track.
 John Rice argues that the last piece missing from a global recovery would be a bounce in commodity prices that would help many emerging economies .
 The new U.S. administration is just like any of the 20 to 30 new governments that GE deals with around the world in any given year .
 The country is strategically located in the crossroads of Asia with China as its neighbour in the north, India in the east and Iran and Afghanistan in the west .
 The country lies in a region which has great political, economic and military importance . The region has great economic, political, military importance.
 Being in the same vicinity as two major powers, China and Russia, adds to its position . Being in same vicinity adds to the position.
 Pakistan has access to the six Muslim central Asian states through Afghanistan . Similarly, Pakistan has an access to six Muslim states.
 Pakistan can provide a link between the Gulf States as well as African, European and Central Asian countries . These states are landlocked and Pakistan is landlocked . Pakistan can be a link to the Gulf states as well.
 Its sea-route remains open throughout the year due to moderate temperatures . The sea- route remains open through the year .
 There are a series of Muslim countries from the Middle East to the African continent which are easily accessible from Pakistan .
 The Arabian Sea connects almost all Muslim countries of the world from the Atlantic Ocean to the Arabian Sea .
 Almost a majority of the population is living in rural areas . However, this vast population is unevenly distributed, with almost a majority living in Rural areas .
 Over the past few years, many rural residents have been migrating to cities in search of better paying jobs . Many rural residents are moving to cities to find better jobs .
 We have the potential to develop a transit economy on account of our strategic location . We have a potential for a transport economy based on the location of our location .
 landlocked Afghanistan is currently under a phase of reconstruction . It is linked to the outside world mainly through Pakistan .
 China is developing southern provinces because its own port is 4,500 kilometres away from Xinjiang, but Gwadar is only 2,500km away . China, with the fastest economy growth rate of 9%, is developing its own southern provinces .
 Pakistan offers Central Asian regions the shortest route when compared with Iran’s 4,500 kilometres or Turkey’'s 5,000 kilometres . Pakistan also offers Central Asia's shortest route.
 The Gwadar port, with its deep waters, attracts trade ships from China, Central Asian Regions and South East Asian countries . The port's deep waters attract ships from South East Asia and China .
 The coastal belt of Balochistan can provide an outlet to China’s western provinces . It will have access to Middle Eastern markets with development of coastal highways and motorways .
 China and Korea are both considering Pakistan for their respective economic ventures . Pakistan is considered to be one of the two countries in the world .
 Hyundai is entering in a joint venture with Nishat Mills to assemble cars in Pakistan . The South Korean company, Hyundai, is entering into the joint venture .
 Hyundai's return will boost the government's efforts to shake up the Japanese-dominated car market . Toyota, Honda and Suzuki assemble cars in Pakistan with local partners .
 The market structure of the automobile industry in Pakistan is concentrated . Pakistan's automobile industry is concentrated in the country .
 In economic terms, we could say it's an oligopoly which is characterised by the imperfect competition in which the industry is dominated by a small number of suppliers .
 This is because the auto industry is highly capital-intensive and requires high investments, and the products are also expensive . This is due to the car industry's high investments .
 The barriers for entry are high, resulting in the presence of a limited number of suppliers .
 Chinese companies are also interested in investing in the cement, steel, energy and textile sectors . Pakistan's $270 billion economy is the backbone of Pakistan’s $270billion economy .
 Analysts say Chinese firms are using Beijing’s ‘One Belt, One Road’ project to help expand abroad at a time when growth has slowed down at home .
 Some political entities are adamant to challenge the political stability of the country without realising the negative repercussions for the economy . However, there are some political entities that are adamant that they will challenge the country's stability .
 The Fund is at great pains to emphasise that gains were made during the duration of the programme . The reason, so it is argued with a degree of validity, is because the caveats continue .
Three outstanding and need one add extremely disturbing elements that steadily worsened during the EFF and continue to do so till today . There are three outstanding and one need one added to the list of disturbing elements . The EFF is still trying to find a solution to the problem .
 Exports have been steadily declining since 2014 and declined from 25 billion dollars in 2014 to 21.billion dollars in 2016 . Exports are declining each month since then and have been declining each year since then .
 The decline in value terms in imports of oil and products between the two years was 5.65 billion dollars . The decline was a whopping 5. 65 billion dollars.
 The rise in imports of power generating machinery would not lend a comfort level to the general public . The government departments including National Transmission and Despatch Company have reported poor performance of the sector .
 The IMF made mention of the overvalued rupee and made some half hearted attempts to convince finance minister Ishaq Dar to allow the real effective exchange rate to prevail . The IMF had considerable 60 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 leverage .
 Fund staff focused on timebound reduction in the budget deficit, rather than external borrowing . Fund staff were unconcerned with the resulting escalating reliance on external borrowing, directly from multilaterals and/or issue of Eurobonds/sukuk .
 The mission leader did acknowledge that the country's rising foreign exchange reserves were largely from borrowing . He did acknowledge in a press conference that the rise in the reserves was mostly from borrowing.
Energy sector's performance has not improved, claims to the contrary are easily dismissed . The energy sector has seen a rise in unscheduled load shedding .
 The Fund during the three years of the EFF simply insisted on a do-more mantra which effectively implied raising the power tariff . But actual billing was less with the decline in the international price of oil .
 The IMF and the government must be held accountable for the tax structure which accounts for heavier taxes on existing tax payers’ a situation that the IMF together with the government should be held responsible for .
 In the past, the Finance Minister opted to reduce development as opposed to current expenditure to meet the requirement of slashing the budget deficit at the cost of growth .
 The Finance Minister has overstate growth rate for the first time since 2010 . The growth rate is the highest in the country's history .
 The IMF's conditions and its monitoring of the EFF leave a lot to be desired . The IMF and the government side are negotiating the terms of the deal .
 The national domestic debt portfolio as part of the total public debt portfolio is much bigger than the external debt portfolio . Domestic debt does not carry a very high risk.
 The debt management strategy clearly sets target ranges for currency, refinancing and interest rate risks . However, a few indicators are currently in red, they still fall within the limits prescribed in its Medium Term Debt Management Strategy .
 NPV of our debt spending comes out to be much lower than that of European Debt spend . For example, NPV is much higher than European debt spending .
 support over the years to sectors like health, housing, utilities, education, social benefits, etc. Even for intangible assets our deficit/soending does not match results, says author .
 It can dramatically add to debt and contingent liabilities, if not allocated prudently and with clear surety on sustainability/feasibility of the projects under implementation . It can also add to debts and liabilities if not allocation prudently .
 Also, repercussions to domestic manufacturing pose some serious concerns . Also, there are concerns about the impact on domestic manufacturing .
 Government has been on a borrowing binge, and in the process resorted to acquiring expensive foreign and domestic debt . Government has repeatedly claimed that it is increasing its credit only to the extent of the budget deficit requirements .
 Domestic debt in one year, December 2015 to December 2016, grew to 14.54 trillion or by 10.3% further raising dependence on commercial banks . In its own report the finance ministry has conceded that Pakistan’s debt sustainability indicators have worsened .
 Now borrowing in itself is not essentially a bad thing as long as it can be spent in a productive manner . Now borrowing in itself isn't a bad things, but it's a good thing to borrow in itself, says the author .
 In the Budget 2016-17: Projected annual economic assistance $8 billion . Our External Debt returnable over the next 15 months: $6. billion .
Recent CSS written examinations have found serious issues of intellectual ineptitude and quality control .
 Those mentioned below are faithfully reproduced without correcting for errors of spelling, capitalisation, punctuation or grammar which the alert reader would spot easily . Those below are reproduced without corrections for errors.
 Commentary is avoided for lack of space leaving the reader to identify problems which range from amusing to the highly problematic .
 Some would merely confuse applicants while others might force them to dissemble or risk being failed . Some would only confuse applicants . Others might force people to dissemble.
 Some questions reveal a sloppiness that comes in the way of a proper understanding of the question . Some questions have been asked about how to answer questions .
 More problematic are questions that really allow only one answer to avoid putting a candidate’s chances at risk .
 The Spanish Muslims established the foundations of Knowledge which become the mile stone of progress in Europe .
 “Muslim culture in Pakistan is being dominated by European and Hindu Culture.’s ‘Muslim culture’ in Pakistan has been dominated by Europe and Hindu culture, according to a report .
 The questions exhibit very poor command of the English language and manifest thinking in Urdu while transcribing in English . The questions are very poor.
 Applicants are asked to write their answers in a language over which examiners have poor control . It is ironic that applicants have to write answers in such a language .
 Most importantly, there are questions with only one safe answer and where matters of faith are asked to be scientifically proved . There are questions that can only be answered with a safe answer .
 This kind of examination would rule out the dull, the timid, and the clever . Those who memorise appropriate answers, refrain from speaking their minds, and say what would curry favour .
 A selection mechanism cannot identify selectees wiser than the selectors . The selection mechanism can't identify the best people in the world .
 The civil service in which each cohort is weaker than the one it succeeds. That might explain the dilemma of the civil service, which is in which every cohort is stronger than one succeeds .
 This is the state of the premier examination in the country. And consider that this is theState of the top examination in country .
 What might be the fate of the testing of lesser mortals is best left unexplored.
 The writer is a fellow at the Consortium for Development Policy Research . He is also a fellow of the same group of researchers .
 It is the ultimate destination of many in pursuit of a knowledge upgrade . It is also the ultimate goal of many people in pursuit.
 In most developed countries the number of graduates who reach masters and then doctoral level of education is a direct indicator of a country’s progress and prosperity .
 Harvard, Stanford and Oxford are brands associated with top class education . They offer an opportunity to explore, discover, debate and share diverse ideas .
 The story of the deterioration of Pakistan's economy is that of the country’s education system . Pakistan's education system is the country's biggest problem with its education system.
 The condition of primary and secondary education in Pakistan has been a topic of serious debate . But little has been done to improve it, according to the Pakistani government .
 Higher education never received the attention it should and the resultant damage has almost gone unnoticed . The damage has gone unnoticed.
 The recent spate of violence on university campuses in Punjab and Mardan are evidence of the fact that how far spread and complex this desecration of learning has become .
 The traditional perception of the poor and illiterate men in remote areas is no longer the story . The traditional view of poor men being easily brainwashed is no more the story.
 This segment of young educated and exposed middleclass males and females, who ‘volunteer’ to join extremist organisations, is far more dangerous .
 The socio-cultural influences traditionally were dominated by family and community interactions . Family and community interaction traditionally dominated by community interactions.
 In this age of information, the influence of what you see, hear, debate, question and respond has a much greater impact on your thinking than just family and surroundings .
 Amongst the educated youth the time spent online is between six to nine hours per day, and hardly one to three hours with family .
Hardwiring of the brain is now based on a huge variety of uncontrollable sources . This is an indicator that the hardwiring is based on uncontrollable source, says Dr. John Sutter .
 MMRT generation has given rise to what is known as the Millennial Mobile Restless Tweens . This generation has been dubbed the MMRT Generation .
 This is a generation born in a world where the globalisation’s goods and ills have been felt with equal velocity . The globalisation of the world's goods and ills has been felt by a generation .
 Cold wars turned to hot wars and capitalism lost its shine as a solution to world’s economy .
Parents teach their children traditional values as a way of life, while they see the opposite all around them .
 Their textbooks tell them about the glorious history and their Facebook tells them about it . Their Facebook is also a bad reality .
 They read about the fall of communism and the rise of capitalism, and see the slide of capitalism . They also see the slides of capitalism and the Rise of materialism .
 Neither universities or families are able to bridge this disconnect . This disconnect starts to bother them and neither universities nor families can bridge it .
Doctors, engineers or business graduates find these jobs unfulfilling . They may become doctors or engineers because of parents' wishes or because it will pay their bills .
 They have a lot of information about the outside world but little about the inside world within them . It causes restlessness and an intense desire to escape the normal routines .
 They feel a lack of meaning and purpose in life and in this restive mindset start considering themselves as misfits .
 They tend to change their education fields, jobs and hobbies in search for identity, purpose and direction . They also change their jobs, education fields and hobbies .
 Terrorist organisations such as the ISIS are much more diverse than al Qaeda and have done their homework on this generation .
 Their target is 18to 24-year-olds for whom they use the social media extensively . Their targets are 18 to 24-years-old.
 Twitter accounts have an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 followers . They have guides for discovering true meaning of life, carrying out jihad and how to join the Islamic State .
 Noreen Laghari will receive videos on how unfair the West is to Syrians, and how she is empowered to do whatever she can to Christians in Pakistan . She will also receive videos of how she does what she can in retaliation for what Christians are doing to Muslims in Syria .
 These videos are based on clever facts and appeal to the restive nature of MMRTs to stand for a cause and have a unique identity .
 Universities in Pakistan need a complete overhaul of curriculum, teaching methodology and student relations .
 Vice-Chancellor appointments in universities are now in political hands . However, like most institutions in the country, they are still in the political hands.
 The National Accountability Bureau is already investigating the appointment of its VC and his subsequent illegal appointments on key posts . The NAB is also investigating the appointments of VC and other illegal appointments .
 Universities need to have psychologists, specialising in student therapy, according to a report .
 The incidence of drugs, depression and suicides even in the best private universities is alarming, says professor .
 Colleges and universities need to have talent aptitude tests that can guide the MMRTs to find their passion and direct them to follow it .
 Parents need to understand this social networked generation, discover ways of communicating with them rather than rejecting their desire to be pursuing different careers and do more meaningful work .
Without these changes, we will be widening the gap between this young, smart and extremely disenfranchised generation and society . Without these changes we will not be able to bridge the gap.
 We need to understand them better, communicate and connect differently, says author . "We need to create an enabling environment in their learning places to control this mass social disruption"
 Any decision or changes being suggested in the process of evaluation or assessment will have long lasting effects on all education in the country .
 The imposition of Board exams in the name of Assessment for Grade V should be discussed at length with all the stake holders and all aspects of the decision should be studied in advance .
 The haste in which this naively planned program is being imposed on private schools is questionable . The haste to impose the program is questionable, says the author .
 The Examination Boards in KPK have proposed that the students of Grade V will be required to appear in an ‘Assessment’ that will be summative in nature .
 The exam will create unforeseen damage to the creativity and emotional well-being of the children . The ground realities indicate that the implementation of this exam will cause unforeseen damage .
 The government of KPK is very easily neglecting important components of education like curricula, textbooks and teachers training . KPK has been accused of neglecting the education system for years .
 A mere focus on changing the pattern of exams from Formative Assessment to Summative will hardly play any role in improving the standards of education . Private Schools where very well planned Assessments of children are carried out.
 After the 18th amendment in April 2010, the development of curriculum was made a provincial subject . The development of the curriculum is now a provincial topic .
 The National Curriculum made by the Federal Ministry of Education in 2006, has neither been upgraded by the Government of KP nor are there any plans underway to do so in near future .
 The task of creating textbooks based on the curriculum of 2006 has not even been completed . The task has not been completed.
 The curriculum suggests that lesson plans should be developed by teachers on the basis of Student Learning Outcomes enlisted in the National Curriculum .
 Neither the Government gave any importance to this idea of teachers’ training, nor encouraged Private sector to take any initiative .
 Board Exams in Class V will emerge as an example of lack of consistency between the teaching and evaluation process . With semi-trained teachers, there is a great possibility that introduction of board Exams will emerge .
 The classroom is tantamount to destroying the atmosphere conducive to acquisition of quality education . For too little learning, too much evaluation will take place in 72 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 .
 The pressure from parents to succeed with high grades in Board exams will increase anxiety in students .
 The summer and winter breaks of young children will be devoted to preparation for board exams .
 The concept of school being a happy place will slip away from our own hands, says the author . The idea of being happy will slip from our hands.
 Tuition academies, claiming top positions in board and 100% success rate will surface in every street . Tuition academy academies claim top positions will be in board positions in every school .
 The children will be forced to join academies or have personal tutors at home in afternoons .
 The writer is an educationist based in Abbottabad, Abbottabad . Who will be responsible for the further addition to the already alarming dropout rate of students from schools at Primary level?
 The persistence of these issues is weakening not only the state but also the cultural values of the centuries-old social fabric . It had used to strengthen relations among diverse communities living in the territory .
 A weak political structure and inconsistency in public policies including foreign policy has left the state with little focus on the most important sector of education .
State-run schools, religious seminaries, private schools following the Cambridge GCE/IGCSE system and private mushroom schools growing on a dailybasis in residential areas .
 The standard National Education System is a continuation of the colonial-era British system . The standard national education system is the same as the British National Education system .
 Religious seminaries are regulated by the Wifaqul Madaris . Schools preparing pupils for Ordinary-and Advanced-level are affiliated with the CIE and Cambridge Assessment Board .
 The syllabus taught at mushroom schools is a blend of that taught at these schools . It is prepared keeping in consideration the need of that particular area or vicinity .
 The first factor about these multiple systems of schooling is that they cater to different classes, and contribute to further stratification along class lines .
 The second most important factor is that curricula taught at these multiple systems varies . The third key factor is regarding human resources involved in these systems, according to experts .
 The curriculum needs to be revised and updated every five years, as per international standards . Being a living document, the curriculum must be updated every 5 years .
 Our national curriculum has been in the process of reforms including those that may promote tolerance and cohesion . The curriculum is in theprocess of reforms.
 The core issue has remained provision of appropriate training for text book writers to ensure that their products reflect the required reforms .
74 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 prohibited, intentionally or unintentionally, at all levels of education . It ends up making machines out of pupils who're taught rote learning and memorisation .
The content and scheme of studies imparted at seminaries is approved by the Wifaqul Madaris . The content and schemes of studies are imparted to seminaries .
Pakistan Studies curriculum of respective education boards up till grade-VIll is taught at seminaries . Pakistan Studies curriculum is taught by seminaries.
 CIE emphasises conceptual learning and critical thinking . Students studying in this stream are far ahead in learning, and get a totally neutral version of our history .
 Students have to come back to compulsory subjects of Pakistan Studies and Islamiat if they opt for admissions in Pakistani colleges/universities .
 The kind of trainings offered at times are insufficient and do not practically support the teaching staff in actual class room situation where they may need to deal with large number of students .
 teaching staff may transfer their personal biases and unauthentic information on faiths, sects, religions, norms, values and culture, to students . Students may be more important for students than a Pakistani identity .
 Most seminaries have proper criteria for selection of teaching staff . There are instances where those recruited as teachers have completed schooling only up till the primary-level or have dropped out of school .
 These teachers uncritically promote among their pupil the school of thought they have been taught. These teachers are unhelpful to their pupils .
 The facts about private schools mushrooming in residential areas are more serious . The fact that private schools are mushropping in residential area is more serious than the truth .
 We can very well understand what would be the quality of education given to students at these schools . We can also understand what is needed to be given to these schools.
 The state needs to take the most critical component of education more seriously to control growing intolerance and extremism in the society, says the author .
 The current multiple systems of schooling are creating different socio-economic classes and pushing us towards a more segregated and frustrated society, rather than a more cohesive and tolerant one .
 At provincial level, 75 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 governments are taking initiatives to cope with the areas highlighted here yet we still need a comprehensive and focused plan .
 The number of Pakistani children not attending school has dropped from 24 million to 22.6 million over the last year .
 The UN Millennium Development Goals for Education include primary universal education . It makes a mockery of the country's supposed commitment to the UN Millennium development Goals .
 Pakistan had just entered the Enlightened Moderation era, where progress was measured by the number of imported luxury car showrooms .
 The UN painted a damning picture of the education crisis threatening Pakistan . The MDGs deadline approached some 15 years later .
 More than a quarter of students enrolled at the primary level did not complete their education . More than half of students did not finish their education, the report says .
 The state apparatus continues to demonstrate how very little it cares. The unfortunate answer is that the state apparatus is still showing how little it care .
 British Council insists on pedalling the O Level system, here in the developing world that it discarded at home from 1988 onwards . It cannot simply continue to outsource responsibility to institutions like British Council .
 The Council had a point when it advised the then government to reverse its stipulations that English be the medium of instruction .
 Better to adopt mother tongue teaching, it recommended, to boost functional literacy retention, it said .
International donors have little faith in governments of the day. The intermittent practice of calling on local beat reporters to track cash flows to sponsored schools .
 Given the above, we must look elsewhere to have the responsibility shouldered, at least in the short-term .
 For he who holds the power in an unfair system ought to be duty bound to redress the balance somewhat. For he holds power in a unfair system, he should be dutybound to redress it somewhat .
 The International Baccalaureate is a competition for the O Level, GCSE, O Level and GCSE . It is the first time the system has been dedicated to competing exam certificates .
 Maketh is an education activist of one. This might also mean no more pretending that going abroad to secure a foreign degree before returning to teach at private schools and universities .
 This message was meant for the elite, foreign educated leaders of political parties supposedly representing Pakistan’s vast working class . This message is especially for the 77 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 .
 The development took place during a meeting of SUN Assistant Secretary General Gerda Verburg at the Commission Secretariat on Wednesday .
 HEC chairperson Dr Arshad Ali said nutrition and food security were very important regions that required to be focused on during research activities . HEC had been promoting research based on solutions to social matters .
 He guaranteed that the SUN team of full cooperation in advocacy in advocacy as well as promotion of nutrition through the higher education zone . The SUN team also promised to promote nutrition through higher education .
 He stressed on the requirement for coordination among academia as well as the private sector with respect to the importance of nutrition, especially for women .
 Arms control advocates have consistently pushed for adopting a treaty to ban all nuclear explosions . Arms Control advocates have been pushing for a ban on nuclear explosions for years .
 To date, more than 2,000 nuclear tests have been carried out in 60 different locations across the globe . To date.
 A new momentum is gathering for a worldwide ban on nuclear testing . North Korea conducted four nuclear tests in the last century alone .
 The treaty bans nuclear explosions in all environments as a prerequisite to ban nuclear testing . The treaty also bans nuclear blasts in all areas as a requirement .
 The treaty remains in limbo due to the political processes in some countries . Some countries have adopted 'after you' policy adopted by some countries.
 CTBT was opened for signature 20 years ago . It has now been more than 20 years since the CTBT opened for signatures .
 A deadlock exists because one of the treaty’s clauses — known as Article XIV — makes the ratification by 44 states with commercial or research nuclear reactors a necessary requirement .
 Of 44 specified states, China, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, North Korea, Pakistan and the United States have so far been reluctant to ratify . The United States has so far refused to ratise .
 The chances of CTBT being ratified by unwilling countries appear to be slim . Under the present circumstances, the chances of the CTBT are slim .
 China linking its ratification process to that of the U.S. and Pakistan waiting for India to ratify the treaty first . The CTBT has been a daunting challenge .
 The CTBT was defeated by the United States Senate in 1999 . The Bush administration made little effort to promote it even though United States ratification could have spurred Egypt and Israel to sign and ratify the treaty .
 Non-nuclear weapon states are considering the option of the ‘provisional application’ of the CTBT until the Article XIV conditions are met . In order to break this deadlock, many non-nuclear weapons states are consider the option .
Without violating Article XIV of the treaty, this approach is likely to increase pressure on other countries to accelerate their ratification processes . Without violating the provisions of Article XIV, it would be unlikely to violate the treaty .
 CTBT will have an enhanced legal status after it has been applied provisionally by a large number of states .
 The treaty will provide a stronger legal basis for collective UN action against violators . There will also be a glimmer of hope to prevent failure of the ‘test-ban’ norm .
 The idea of provisional application was discussed by many states as a way to prevent a handful of other states from exercising a veto .
 CTBT could thus take legal effect for those who wish to abide by the agreement . The CTBT would be able to take effect if those who abide by it will do so .
 The treaty in provisional application will be more likely to act as a brake on further ‘copycat’ testing . It is not binding on those who remain outside .
 The U.S. contributes a fifth of the overall costs of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation . A major criticism levelled against the provisional application of the CTBT is based on the apprehension that the United States may oppose this step
 CTBTO will be far more costly to Washington in terms of political influence against nuclear proliferation . Such fears are exaggerated because any such decision to cut down funding will be more costly than any decision .
 Pakistan has tied its stance on CTBT to New Delhi's future course of action . Since May 1998, successive governments in Pakistan have tied their stance on the CTBT.
 Pakistani analysts have frequently commented that in a nuclearised South Asia, the CTBT will have relevance only if both India and Pakistan are parties to the treaty .
 In 1998, Pakistan responded to India’s nuclear tests by conducting its own underground explosions .
 Pakistan fears India even harbours plans to conduct additional nuclear tests in the future . Pakistan fears that India even has plans to carry out more tests .
 Pakistan has repeatedly made it clear that it will not be the first to resume nuclear testing in the region . But it has repeatedly said it won't be first to restart nuclear testing .
 Pakistan's government in Pakistan maintained that its ratification depended on India’s future course of action .
 Pakistan will be able to access CTBT monitoring data if it joins CTBT . Some people have argued that if Pakistan joins the CTBT, it will be easier to access monitoring data .
 Pakistan's position as a responsible nuclear state willing to accept real restraints — unlike India . In addition, signing the CTBT will be the perfect tool to promote 81 THECSSPOINT.COM .
 Pakistan’s willingness to join the CTBT might also prove to be instrumental in securing cooperation in civilian nuclear technology from the U.S. and other major powers .
 technological advancements in the global nuclear test monitoring system have already made it easier to detect underground nuclear tests with a yield of less than one kilotonne .
 CTBT's entry into force will also make on-site inspections possible . CTBT’s entry to force will be made possible .
 Russia and the U.S. have spent billions of dollars on modernising their nuclear forces .
 CTBT could be a major contribution to nonproliferation goals by restraining countries with nuclear weapons capabilities . The CTBT, after taking full legal effect, has taken full effect .
 British government has formally notified the European Council of its intention to leave the European Union . The UK has passed the point of no return to the EU .
 It could well turn out to be the biggest act of self-sabotage in modern political history .
 The UK will not be able to have its cake and eat it, too, says Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson .
 The rest of the EU is determined to show that leaving the club has negative consequences . The rest. of the European Union is determined that leaving. the club will have negative consequences.
 The United Kingdom has relinquish significant control over its own economic future . The UK has chosen to relinquish control over the economic future of the country .
 New trade deals are uncertain and the centrifugal forces of renewed jingoism are beginning to challenge the historic union between England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland .
 The United Kingdom is bound to lose influence on the world stage. As a result, the UK will lose influence in the world.
 The United Kingdom will lose some autonomy in economic and financial affairs . The UK will lose control of the economy, but it will have some autonomy .
 The biggest barriers to a truly "global Britain" are not trade tariffs, but non-tariff regulatory barriers . They require either harmonization across trade partners or mutual recognition .
 From that point of view, the EU single market was the most ambitious free market experiment in economic history . The EU singlemarket was the largest free market Experiment in history .
 UK will no longer be able to influence future decision-making in its largest market, let alone shape future regulatory standards .
 EU Customs Union is bound to introduce new barriers to trade . The EU is turning its back on the European Union .
 The United Kingdom will also lose influence over European foreign policy and see its global clout wane further . By leaving the EU, the U.S. will lose influence on foreign policy .
 The U.S. has a special relationship with the United States . It was sustained by the illusion that the country served as a bridge between Washington and the rest of Europe .
 Officials of the country's new Department of International Trade call is delusional for the simple reason that there is absolutely no demand for it . The Brexiteers’ dream of the United Kingdom reclaiming its rightful place as leader of the Commonwealth or the English-speaking nations is delusional .
 The United Kingdom will continue to try to punch above its weight in international affairs through an outsize role in NATO . The United States President 83 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Donald Trump and his administration toward the Atlantic alliance makes even that a rather precarious proposition
 British voters have put a dark cloud over the future of the United Kingdom itself . The UK is leaving both the EU Customs Union and the single market .
 Scottish independence is now more likely than in 2014, and the possibility of a united Ireland is less far-fetched than it once seemed . Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland have a hard border between the two countries .
 Prime Minister Theresa May has an even more difficult task before her . May is trying to steer the country out of the EU unscathed .
 Cameron's idea that she will succeed where Cameron failed seems naive at best . The idea that Cameron will succeed is naive atbest, says the writer .
 The U.S. had anxiously waited for a similar attack in Syria to provide a legitimate cause for its direct military intervention against the Assad regime .
 The recent chemical attack in Khan Sheikhoun in Idlip has provided a cover to the U.S. to employ firepower against the Assad regime in Syria .
All this is designed to outsmart Russia and foster the security of Israel in the oil-rich region . All this is aimed at outsmarting Russia and fostering Israel's security .
 The U.S. has made the Assad regime responsible for the deadly chemical attack . Without any impartial investigation, the United States has not been able to investigate the attack .
 The Syrian warplanes pounded a large terrorist depot and a concentration of military hardware in the eastern outskirts of Knan Sheikhoun . Russia’s defence ministry says the Syrian war planes pounded the depot .
 The attack dispersed the lethal chemicals in the air, suffocating large number of people near the epicentre of the attack .
 The U.S. launched 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles against the Al Shayrat air base in Homs from the destroyers . The USS Porter and the USS Ross are currently stationed in the eastern Mediterranean .
 Some early reports indicate that the airfield’s planes and support infrastructure were severely damaged or destroyed . The airfield's planes, support infrastructure and infrastructure were destroyed or damaged .
 The direct U.S. military intervention in Syria is not an attempt to protect the suffering Syrian people from the continued oppression of the brutal Assad regime and ragtag terrorist outfits. What should not be forgotten is that the direct United States military intervention is not a bid to protect Syrian people .
 The U.S. does not sincerely aspire to see democratic norms flourishing in Syria .
 Washington's main target is to dethrone Russian regional client — the Assad regime — and replace it with an American puppet .
 The U.S. has a long list of military and economic objectives to maximise after ousting President Assad from the strategically important Syria .
 The US has failed to end the simmering civil wars in Syria and Yemen . Washington's major regional allies have slowly started tilting towards China and Russia .
 The U.S. sells arms and warfare technology worth billions of dollars to some Arab monarchies . The United States sells arms, warfare technology to some monarchs .
 The Chinese display of military power in the South China Sea and the Russian application of modern aircraft in Syria and Crimea have attracted some Arab countries to purchase weapons from these two countries .
 King Salman of Saudi Arabia signed a deal with Beijing to set up a factory in the kingdom to produce Chinese hunter-killer aerial drones . During his visit to 85 THECSSPOINT.COM.COM global Point APRIL 2017 China.
 The United States seems to have decided to employ firepower against the Assad regime . Washington’s major regional arms importer will not fully jump on the Chinese and Russian bandwagon .
 U.S. missile attacks against Assad forces will also assure Arab countries that Washington can militarily intervene in the Middle East .
 The Assad regime has provided Russia the Tartus naval facility and the Khmeimin air base . Russia has also provided Russia a naval facility in the region .
 Russia has increased its naval presence in the eastern Mediterranean Sea . These bases have immensely helped Russia continue its annexation of Crimea and increase its military presence . Russia has also increased the presence of its naval bases in the region .
 The U.S. recourse to missile attacks stems from the fact that Western-funded rebels have proved ineffective to oust Assad from power .
 Despite Turkey’s resistance, the United States has continued to provide military hardware to Kurdish fighters against Daesh in Syria .
 The Turkish government is fearful that the U.S. will use the Kurds of Irag, Syria and Turkey to carve out an independent Kurdish state in the future .
 The hostile attitude of the U.S. towards Turkey has made the latter reset its fractured relations with Russia . The hostile attitudes of the United States towards Turkey have made it easier for Turkey to get back on track .
 Both Russia and Turkey are currently sharing intelligence information and coordinating with each other against Daesh in Syria . Both countries are currently coordinating against the terrorist group in Syria.
 Turkey has lately shown its interest in purchasing advanced S-400 air and missile defence systems from Russia . More importantly, Turkey has shown its desire to purchase advanced air and defence systems .
 Such Russian missile technology will help Turkey get rid of the Nato-deployed missiles on Turkish soil . Such Russian missiles will be used in Turkey, according to a report .
 The United States is aware that Russia will capitalise on its partnership with Turkey to augment its naval and military presence in the Mediterranean Sea and Eastern Europe . The U.S. is aware of Russia's plans to increase its military presence with Turkey .
 If Moscow succeeds in bringing Ankara under its regional fold, the United States will lose its most powerful Nato partner in the region .
 To prevent Turkey from jumping into Russian bandwagon, U.S. will find more pretexts to attack Assad regime .
 Washington will slowly keep itself aloof from Kurdish fighters in Syria in a bid to appease Turkey . Washington is also trying to appease the Turkish government .
 The Trump administration is also concerned about the increasing support of Hamas, lran and Hezbollah to the Assad regime .
 If President Assad remains in power for a long time, this will probably help Iran forge a strong regional bloc with Hamas, Syria and Hezbollah against Israel .
 The Trump administration has decided to inhibit the lranian-sponsored alliance against Israel by further weakening the Assad regime in Syria .
 The latest missile attacks were designed to strengthen the position of rebels against the Assad government in the raging civil war .
 President Trump was hosting Chinese President Xi Jinping at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida .
 China is the major diplomatic, military and economic supporter of the North Korean regime . North Korea has constantly threatened the U.S. and South Korea with nuclear attacks .
 U.S. has indicated to China that it can resort to limited attacks which are geared towards neutralising North Korea's nuclear threat .
 Syria is only regional country hosting some Russian naval and military bases . Moscow will employ all possible means to militarily protect the Assad regime from the US and the ragtag rebels .
 Russian military support to Assad is likely to increase the divergences between Russia and the U.S. in terms of bringing a lasting end to the Syrian war .
 The helpless Syrians will continue to reel from the brutalities of the Assad regime and insurgent groups . The Syrian people will be able to fight back against the regime and insurgents .
 States were considered the most powerful actors in the international system by both neo-realists and neo-liberals . U.S. was considered the world's most powerful actor by both the neo- realists and Neo-Liberals .
 Both the liberal and realist schools of thought agreed that anarchy was inherent in the international system . The liberal andrealist schools agree that anarchy is inherent.
 The lack of a central authority was keenly felt by both paradigms . It encouraged states to generate a self-help system and act unilaterally .
 Anarchy is derived from the view that the absence of an overarching global authority in the Westphalian nation-state system leaves states with no option but to resort to war to resolve their mutual disputes .
 Any understanding of global politics must flow from an understanding of the anarchic international structure, scholars say .
In the early 1990s, the constructivist approach emerged as a challenge to the state-centric paradigms . In the 1990s it emerged as an overwhelming focus on the material aspects of the structure of the international system .
 Constructivist scholars argue that the world is not objective . They argue that social construction of reality is not an objective .
 IR scholars say the variables of interest to IR scholars are important not because they are objective facts, but because of their social meanings . In their view, they say military power, international institutions are important because of social meanings.
 France and India are probably equally destructive, but have very different meanings for the outside world . For example, the nuclear weapons of France, India and France are equally destructive .
 Constructivists contend that the intersubjectively shared ideas are as important as military capabilities in any empirical analysis . Constructivist: Intersubjective shared ideas as important to military capabilities .
 Realists emphasise the role of the balance of power in global politics to minimise the possibility of future wars . Realists say the role is key to minimising the potential of future conflicts .
 The equilibrium of power among all major powers in the world is difficult to achieve . The theoretical approach rests on the idea that security is enhanced with an equitable distribution of military capabilities among nations .
 states resort to employing different tactics to sustain the balance of power and achieve their desired strategic goals . States resort to using different tactics.
 constructivist scholars argued that power and anarchy do not define whether the international system is peaceful or conflictual at a particular point in time .
 Instead, it is a function of the shared culture created through discursive social practices . It is a form of a shared culture, rather than a social practice .
 States do not have to worry about relative power and security dilemmas. This is very important because if constructivist scholars are correct, states don't have to worried about relativePower .
International politics should be guided by shared values and intersubjective norms held by both state and non-state actors . International politics should also be guided to shared values.
 The focus on the intersubjective dimensions of knowledge makes the structure of the international system look like a causal force . The proposed role of values as an ideational structure determining the strategic behaviour of states.
 In a socially constructed world, this ideational structure has both a constitutive and regulative effect on all actors in the international system .
 constructivists do not hold identities and interests as constants to understand how the ideational structure determines the way all actors identify their position and interests in the international system .
 This leads to an interesting question about the ‘agent-structure problem’ in international relations theory .
 Realist scholars define the international structure in terms of the observable attributes of states as primary actors . The structure constrains the choices of state actors.
 constructivists believe that both actors and structures co-determine and even constitute each other .
 In their view, ideational structures constrain the behaviour of actors in terms of their identities and interests . In their views, they say they should not be able to make decisions based on their interests .
 These ideational structures are also created through the discursive practices of agents . But they are also also created by the discourses of agents, such as agents .
 We cannot treat identity and interests as a given because they also keep changing with the passage of time . We can't treat identity, interests as given because we keep changing, says author .
State sovereignty should also be considered a social construct, says author . State sovereignty should be considered an important social construct .
 There are no objective threats because they are always socially constructed . And there is no objective threat because there are no objectives .
 Constructivists highlight how the nature of global politics has changed because of the role that norms play in the equation . Constructivist also highlight how political norms have changed in the past .
Norms are collective beliefs that regulate the behaviour and identity of all actors on the world stage . Norms are collectively believed to regulate behaviour and identities of actors .
 The structure of the international system is actually a human intellectual creation and it can be changed by introducing new norms .
 Even powerful states follow norms and international obligations because they are concerned about their outlook . Even powerful countries follow norms, international obligations .
 Norms strongly influence the way states think about their own security practices . Norms also strongly influence how state security practices are considered .
 Countries acquire nuclear weapons not because they face 89 THECSSPOINT.COM threats, but because building nuclear weapons is a means to gain prestige .
 The constructivist approach explains the complex political socialisation process involved in redefining the identities and interests of actors . The constructivism approach is based on the socialisation of actors.
 Some quantitative scholars argue that concepts like identities and interests cannot be studied through positivist approaches . However, some quantitative scholars say that concepts such as identity and interests can't be studied by positivism .
 There is an element of subjectivity inherent in these concepts because they are relative to different states, institutions and communities . There is a element ofsubjectivity inherent to these concepts .
 norms exist but are often violated by major powers. Another critique is that norms exist, but are sometimes violated by big powers .
 The idea of politics as a social construction continues to attract significant scholarly research in American academia . Despite this criticism, the idea of political politics is still attracting significant research .
Everything that America does is different or it does in a different way, or at least it appears different . Not just foreign policy, everything that America do is different, or it seems different .
 This is not an essay on the American society or an all-embracing review of the U.S. foreign policy that would be far beyond the scope of this article . It's not an essays on theAmerican society or a review of foreign policy .
 It is just a snapshot of the process of the making of U.S. foreign policy and the formative influences that impact its substance .
 It is the foreign policy of a highly open society with a powerful media and advanced civil society that demands answers . It is also the foreignpolicy of a very open society. It is a very important foreign policy for an open society to demand answers .
 The government is often informing its policies all the time, often informing but not revealing . The government has to explain its policies.
It is also the foreign policy of a highly complex and in many ways unique democracy under constant stress of domestic politics . It is also a very complex and very complex foreign policy.
 The government says different things to different audiences, sending mixed signals among the American public . That means the government saying different things. That means it is sending mixed messages among the public as well as people abroad .
 The media’s approach to foreign affairs specially that of the 24/7 electronic media . Adding to the welter of confusion is the media's approach to international affairs .
 The way it plays on foreign policy issues has created its own distortions . The way the U.S. has played on foreign policies has created own distortions, say experts .
 The social media which has made everybody an instant expert on foreign policy has made things worse . Opinion is moving faster than knowledge, says the social media expert .
 The net result is that foreign affairs have become action drama. The traditionally uninformed American public has become grossly misinformed and behaves as if it has become a protagonist in a conflict .
 And wants its voice to be heard which a politician cannot ignore because of its impact on his prospects .
 There are also multiple systemic issues in the U.S. foreign policy, including systemic issues . There are several issues that need to be addressed.
 The administration has to satisfy, specially on issues of critical national importance or of high public interest . Congress, the Pentagon, and the CIA and various lobbies and special interests.
 The president has to resolve the constant tussle between the electoral compulsions on the one hand and strategic imperatives on the other . President Obama has to make a policy that reflects America's own interests .
 Of particular importance are the tensions between public interest and national interest . The tensions between the public and national interests are the most important .
 The greater the public interest and its impact on politics harder it is to make 91 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 policy harder to make .
 The consensus has broken down on many issues because of polarised politics and media’s influence . Frankly, the consensus has been broken down because of the media's influence on many matters .
 Syria is a case in point where it has been difficult to align public opinion, politics and policy . Syria has been hard to align with public opinion and politics .
 Obama or Trump have no action as by Obama or adhoc action by Trump . So you either end up with no action by Obama.
 The challenges of making public policy in an advanced democracy in the U.S. are more complex than in the complex American system .
 Otherwise you will make the mistake of picking one fragment of a remark by an official or a politician, and reading a huge meaning into it .
 The United States does command an immense array of diplomatic, economic and political assets and military power . The U.S. does command a vast array of political and economic assets and power .
 To its credit, it has played a decisive role in international affairs specially in the last century . It has maintained some semblance of balance of power and international order and stability .
 There has been an obvious discrepancy between America's claims of a moralist foreign policy and the practice of a policy whose substance is not markedly different from the traditional power politics of any great power .
There have been great success stories in U.S. foreign policy but failures as well . There have been many failures in foreign policy.
 America has done very well in purely economic and military challenges such as the two World Wars . America has been successful in the economic, military challenges of the past .
 It has done well in dealing with other big powers despite the fact that they all have now risen and become competing powers . It has also done well with other major powers including Russia and China .
 It is just that other powers have come up challenging America’s primacy in the world .
 America generally fails here because the basic approach is mechanistic, practical and impatient . The basic approach to the U.S. is mechanism, practical, and impatient, says the author .
 It has had a varying degree of trouble either with the government or the people in two groups . The government and people in the two groups have been in trouble with each other .
 authoritarian regimes mainly from resource-rich countries who have needed Washington’s help in staying in power . That has included authoritarian regimes mostly fromResource-rich nations .
 Or, countries who needed economic and military assistance because of insecurity and poor governance . Or, nations who neededEconomic and military help because of security and poorgovernments . Or countries who need economic andMilitary assistance because they need economic, military assistance. Or, country who needed financial and military
 It worked up to a point but is having problems as the elite-based system is under challenge now . The elite- based system is in trouble now, according to a report .
Populations whose political self-consciousness has risen because of the new global forces are discovering that it has been a bad bargain. Populations whose self- consciousness has risen.
 The challenge is coming from two opposing forces — of democratisation and nationalism on the one hand and religious extremism on the other .
 People wrongly rely on conspiracy theories to explain what has happened. But people there wrongly rely upon conspiracy theories.
 The plain truth is if U.S. actions have caused problems it is not due to any malice or some grand design to create chaos and instability .
 U.S. has pursued flawed polices in which politics, ideology and corporate interests, especially of the military-industrial complex, often trump strategy, has made no small contribution . America has had bad partners in these countries, says John Avlon .
 Erodgan has always attracted a large, passionate following . 14 years after he first attained national power as prime minister, the strength of opposition to him is equally chargedup .
 The referendum itself was portrayed outside Turkey as an attempt by Erdogan to make himself a dictator . It was portrayed as a bid to make his own dictator .
 The current division of power in Turkey between the president and parliament was stifling and only empowered the bureaucracy . Turkey's current government was only empowered by the president .
 Some reform was needed, but it is unclear if moving to a presidential system was the best choice . The U.S. and France were the best countries to move to an authoritarian system .
 referendum will allow Erdogan to appoint more judges and let him stay in power till 2029 should he continue to win elections . The referendum will also allow him to appointed more judges .
 The instability caused by the closeness of the vote may end up weakening Erdogan . But the instability may not be enough to weaken Erdogan, says the Turkish president .
 The main opposition parties have denied the legitimacy of the referendum . They claim that votes on unstamped ballot papers were uncounted .
 The general clampdown on dissent after the attempted coup last year has also cast a pall over the referendum . Erodgan has also tried to expand his powers in the past .
 Erdogan’s declaration after the referendum result was announced that he would now seek a referendum on bringing back the death penalty . Equally dangerous is Erdogan's declaration.
 Turkey is seen as a dangerous tool in the hands of any government in Turkey . A ‘Yes’ vote on that issue would put an end to any chance of Turkey joining the European Union .
 Erdogan's duty to respect the independence of the judiciary and recognise that he is the leader of a country that is deeply divided . It is now Erdogan’s duty torespect the independence.
 Unfortunately, his record of going after political opponents is not encouraging . He has been criticized for not going after opponents .
 If reelected, Erdogan will return as a stronger president. All these changes mean that — if reelected — Erdogan will be stronger president, he says .
 He will have the power to make appointments to the Turkish higher judiciary as well as the ability to issue decrees . He will be able to issue orders to the higher judiciary .
 The hope is that the changes will result in a more stable Turkey . Turkey is able to maintain its commitment to basic democratic principles and human rights .
 The Trump administration has completed a policy review of how to manage the growing nuclear threat from North Korea .
 The new policy is a tepid serving of leftovers from the Barack Obama, George W Bush, and Bill Clinton administrations . The quiz was created of similar statements from all four administrations .
 As so often happens when reality disappoints, people turn to rumor and fantasy . People turn to rumors and fantasy.
Donald Trump faces the same lousy options on North Korea that hamstrung all his predecessors . The new Washington bedtime story is that the United States is secretly hacking North Korean missile launches .
David Sanger and William Broad say Obama administration launched cyberattacks against North Korea . Sanger, Broad: Obama administration had begun to launch cyberattacks on North Korea three years ago . Broad: The root of this particular bedtime story was a bit of reporting by David Sanger
 The U.S. is interested in penetrating Iranian and North Korean computer networks, and is doing a bit of mischief .
 A review of North Korea’s missile launches suggests that if the U.S. is hacking North Korean missiles, it is doing a crap job of it . Correlation is not causation, of course, but a simple review of the launches suggests it is .
 Since 2014, about three-quarters of Pyongyang’s launches have succeeded . About three- quarters of Pyongyang's launches have failed .
 My colleague Shea Cotton keeps a database of every North Korean missile launch . The North Korea missile launch database is compiled by his colleague .
Of the 66 missiles that North Korea launched during 2014 and after, 51 have succeeded . Of the 66 missile launches in 2014, 51 succeeded .
 If hacking is playing any role, it is defeating a trivial number of missiles, says John Defterios .
 North Korea's Scud and Nodong missiles worked just ducky. Overall, North Korea’s Scud & Nodongs missiles worked only ducky .
 ‘rocket science’ is popular as a metaphor for tasks that are complicated and difficult . There is, after all, a reason that “rocket science" is popular .
 The North Koreans learn from every flight, whether it works or not, says CNN's John Sutter .
Experiencing and overcoming failure is a normal part of building a robust and reliable rocket program . Experiencing failure is an important part of the rocket program, says NASA .
 It was America’s first large rocket, good enough to put Alan Shepard into space . The rocket was America's first large large rocket .
 Pyongyang’s finest were busy studying what went wrong and fixing the problems . We laughed every time a North Korean missile exploded or dropped into the drink .
 The last two North Korean space launches, in December 2012 and again in February 2016, were successful . North Korea's last two space launches were successful.
 North Korea’s Kwangmyongsong-2 satellite is still in orbit . Look up and you can still see North Korean satellite .
 North Korea is developing a wide array of new liquidand solid-fueled ballistic missiles . North Korea’s missile launches aren't failing because we are hacking them.
 Many of the new solid-fueled missiles are working just fine. Many of those systems, especially the new missile systems, are working fine .
 North Korean engineers will either figure out or learn from their mistakes and move on to more promising designs .
 The two countries cooperate closely in missile development, so much so that it probably isn't possible to hack one without hacking the other .
 The Stuxnet virus that crippled Iranian centrifuges was the original high-profile cyberattack . The virus was the first to cripple the nuclear program .
 The Iranian enrichment program has been slowed for a few months . It damaged a large number of centrifuges .
 Iran was installing thousands of centrifuges and developing new generations of devices before the program was constrained by the 2015 Iran nuclear deal . The United States is probably very interested in attacking the systems that control North Korea's new generation of computer-controlled machine tools .
 There just isn't any reason to think cyberattacks are more than a nuisance. But there just isn’t any reason. There is no reason to be concerned about cyberattacks as a nuisance or a nuisance .
 The evidence suggests that the U.S. isn't succeeding in this regard . At best, such efforts would be a nuisance to the North Koreans .
 In the wake of Stuxnet, there were reports that a similar program against North Korea had failed . In fact, in the wake, there was reports that the program had failed.
 Tehran and Pyongyang share cybersecurity tips . Iran and North Korea have been involved in a long-running missile program .
 It is hard to admit that political and coercive policies are not working. Political and coercive policy is not working, says David Cameron .
 It's hard to admit that we are approaching a point where we are going to have to accept something we have long said is unacceptable. And it’s especially hard to admitting that we’ve long said it is unacceptable .
 But for whatever reason, it is breaking into the popular consciousness now . It's breaking into public consciousness now, but for whatever reasons .
 People feel powerless, and they expect their government to do something . People feel helpless, and expect their governments to dosomething .
 They just aren’t prepared to accept that this particular something is, well, nothing. They just don't know what it is .
 There must be some secret government agency, one that doesn't look like the post office, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We live in a bizarre era where every issue becomes a referendum on Donald Trump . The president is expected to be a presidential candidate .
 Half of us are convinced he’s going to get us all killed, but half want to believe that he's not just some grifter in hopelessly over his head .
 The Drudge Report and his troll army on Twitter attribute the stroke of luck to Cheeto Jesus .
 The Trump administration has no idea what it is doing, opting for a “new’s strategy identical to the Obama and Bush administrations .
 The unifying feature of this approach has been desperate paralysis . Sorry, sorry, patiently hoping for a strategic miracle .
 missile failures are not growing pains of an evolving and dangerous threat, but evidence of our power, wisdom, and superior technology . It allows us to imagine that missile failures aren't growing pains. It is evidence of the power and wisdom of our powers, wisdom and technology .
 The idea that hacking can prevent North Korea’s missiles from working allows us to avoid coming to terms with the reality that our policies are failing . North Korea's missiles can be hacked to prevent them from working .
Political risk has been synonymous with developing countries and emerging markets in Africa, Asia and Latin America . For decades, political risk is synonymous with emerging markets .
 The rise of populism in the Western world redefines the notion of political risk . It teaches that risk has no permanent address.
 Mitigating the risk requires avoiding arrogance toward those embracing populism, says David Cameron .
 A dismissive response delegitimizes the phenomenon, leaving us unable to manage implications for democracy and all issues of economic development in poor countries, says the author .
Those who oppose populism must engage with it rationally in the political space with the force of their own ideas . Those who oppose populist populism need to engage in their own political space .
 Political populism, characterized by a desire to assert domestic democratic sovereignty, owes its rise to rejection of the “cult of the expert’s expert.’ The elite gained ascendance over the past 30 years .
 There was bound to be a reckoning between local and global forces for the control of the destinies of nations . The idea of a “borderless’ world diminished the voices of local populations and amplified the powers of bureaucrats .
Tensions have been long in the making, especially as they affect immigration, jobs and trade . These tensions have been brought to the fore in an explosive manner.
 The British vote to leave the European Union confounded conventional wisdom and strengthened the hand of the anti-globalists .
 The phenomenon of globalization, while not dead, is in decline in political and economic life . China’s Xi Jinping left as its unlikely champion, with Xi Jinping leaving as the unlikely champion .
For globalization, whatever its virtues, was neither a benign phenomenon nor an agnostic one . For globalization, what its virtues were neither benign or agnostic, it was not a benign thing .
 Large populations found themselves on the wrong side of globalization’s inescapable logic . The cost-benefit analyses of labor and supply chain costs and technologies are the chief culprit in the death of the salaryman with lifelong job security .
 Scholars such as Hedley Bull advanced the theory of international relations known as the ‘English School’ in the 1970s .
 In the international system, nations interacted in a formalistic manner, mainly through trade, military alliances and traditional diplomacy .
 The international society emerged in the late 19th century as technology broke down geographic distances, and maintaining global stability, not through a balance of power .
Despite the rhetoric, competition and threats to global order continued among nations inside and outside these frameworks for cooperation . The Cold War and the “unipolar world’s” world dominated by America after communism's fall.
 Aspirations to a cosmopolitan world society sought to limit sovereignty and create a “borderless’ world, a civitas maxima prioritizing human rights over national interests .
 Populism seeks to reverse the power of the international community by utilizing the democratic legitimacy of the majority to re-assert primacy of the national interest .
 Home-country multinationals that ship production — and jobs — abroad can anticipate a backlash . Home- country multinationals can expect a backlash.
 Multinationals will no longer receive benign preferences and protections in populist countries if they cannot prove their value to local economies, especially by creating jobs . The benefits of multinationals will not be given to populist countries, especially in the United States .
Designing corporate initiatives to curry political favor erodes the free enterprise ethic . Designing corporate projects to curryPolitical favor erode the free Enterprise ethic .
Business decisions may no longer be taken on the basis of market efficiency, as shareholders react and CEOs align with populist governments . Business decisions may not be taken as market efficiency is a political issue .
 Such trends hasten the decline of the global corporation as a business model. Such trends are seen as a sign of the decline in global corporation business .
 multinationals’ profits have dropped by 25 percent in the past five years . 40 percent of such firms now make a return on equity of less than 10 percent .
 Trump may have Trump to thank for providing cover for a retreat from the failing original logic of profits driving multinationals over the past half-century .
 Trump’s populist movement focuses on global trade as functioning to the detriment of American interests . This leaves the World Trade Organization squarely in the sights of populism .
Several European and Asian nations are guilty of protectionist policies, Ross says . The U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said .
 The EU will be hardest hit as populism rises in France, Italy and the Netherlands . The EU challenges domestic sovereignty, which will be hard hit by populism .
 The EU is the most radical embodiment of the cosmopolitan world society worldview . It is a political project masquerading as an economic one but primarily formed to advance the great-power aspirations of France and Germany .
For developing nations, especially those in Africa, populism's rise in the Western world may ultimately be beneficial, despite negative short-term impacts . For developing countries, populism’s rise in Western world might ultimately be helpful, says John Sutter .
 These countries will be forced to confront mistaken assumptions about development that relies on the “benevolence’ of foreign aid .
 They must reconsider unquestioning acceptance of the inevitability of globalization and their status as markets, not factory. They must also reconsider their status.
 The African Union has been trying to model the European Union on the basis of common currency . But it may not be wise in light of challenges facing the EU over the past decade .
 African nations must embrace an inside-out perspective on economic transformation rather than the exclusively outside-in model that, in reality, robbed them of opportunity to control their destiny . African nations need to embrace an outside-out view on economic change, rather than an exclusively outside
 Industrialized countries, aided by technological superiority, flooded the markets of developing countries, leaving them import-dependent . The WTO treaty regime, left countries import- dependent .
More than 50 percent of world trade is based on manufactured goods . The WTO treaty can apply to less developed nations to prevent dumping of Chinese goods in their markets .
 Africa’s intraregional trade is the lowest in the world compared to North America, Europe and other regions . At 13 percent of its total global trade, Africa's intraregions are the lowest.
 First, attempts to substitute facts and empirical foundations with conviction as a basis for public policy create sub-optimal outcomes . First, attempt to substitutefacts and empirical foundation with conviction. First, tries to replace facts with conviction .
 Electoral victories should not become mob rule or a tyranny of the majority . Electoral wins should not be mob rule, or tyranny of majority .
 Third, populism, based on its binary convictions about bad and good guys and nations, runs the risk of promoting instability in a nuclear world . Several weaker and irrational states possess weapons of mass destruction, says David Cameron .
 In some cases, autocratic corruption can be replaced with a similar weakening of institutions . But in some cases it can also be replaced by a similar weakenings of institutions.
Populism will likely co-exist uncomfortably with globalization, perhaps a scaled-back version . Populism may be colliding with realities of the world and public policy, say experts .
 One of these experts matter, even if they are not always right. One of them is that experts matter .
 He is the founder of Sogato Strategies, a global risk and strategy advisory firm . He is a former deputy governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria .
 In this day and age, these categories alone don't tell the whole story, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 A good number of folks on the left and right find some agreement that disagree with others on the right and left .
There are individuals on the left and right who disagree with California Democratic Congresswoman Maxine Waters’ Russia related comments .
 She’s known for making provocatively flippant remarks without much protest . She's known for her provocative remarks.
 Refer to her not so distant “scumbags’ remark on MSNBC, directed against some in Russia and the Trump administration .
 Bill O'Reilly felt compelled to apologize for his saying that she wears a James Brown wig .
 Russian Deputy UN Ambassador Vladimir Safronkov has been described as a “thug’ for his replies to the UK and U.S. ambassadors . Another double standard concerns the characterization of the Russian deputy UN Ambassador .
 Many Russians don't take kindly to seeing their country treated as a kind of punching bag . He's reflecting the many Russians who don’t take kindly.
 The Democrats want to poke at Russia, which is supporting the Syrian government as the best option in Syria . The latter involves the possibility of a false flag operation, that jives with the Democrats’ desire to poked at Russia .
 At present, there hasn't been conclusive evidence on what led to the chemical incident in rebel held Syrian territory .
 Anglo-American mass media hasn't been keen to challenge the Syrian government . Instead, there have been unsubstantiated statements claiming proof of Syrian government culpability .
 A Syrian rebel representative claimed to have the name of the pilot who dropped the sarin gas .
 CNN ran an unnamed source, claiming the existence of an intercepted communication of Syrian officials planning a chemical attack .
 The release of the anonymously quoted intercept claim hasn’t been provided . The release has not been provided.
 Some credible Americans cast serious doubt on Syrian government culpability in the recent chemical incident .
 Lawrence Wilkerson, former Chief of Staff to U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell and Theodore Postol are among them . Postol is an MIT emeritus, who has experience in dealing with the recent chemical incident in Syria .
 Postol and former U.S. President Barack Obama join others in doubting the claim that the Syrian government used chemical weapons .
 The United States president seems like he might have been conned into supporting the U.S. attack on the Syrian military position .
Several key individuals in his administration contradict some of his earlier stated views, that have included reluctance to go against the Syrian government .
 Trump might have assumed that the strike would benefit his ratings. In addition, Trump might've reasonably assumed that it would benefit him .
 A United States military attack on a humanitarian based claim, involving no U.S. casualties, can likely lead to an increase in popularity, as has happened in this instance .
 Trump tweeted about how US-Russian relations will improve after the U.S. strike in question .
 HR McMaster took a hardline, by unfairly putting the blame on Russia, while suggesting that the US-Russian relationship can improve on the basis that it's at a low point .
 The bar at a low point isn’t as good as seeking a higher standard from the get go . In terms of overall improvement, setting the bar at low point is not as good.
 The Kremlin told the White House to remove its personnel to avoid getting hit . McMaster wouldn't like a scenario where the Russian government initiated a debatable humanitarian military action against a perceived United States ally .
 The United States warned Russia to withdraw its personnel in the area just prior to the attack . The U.S. strike on the Syrian base included the United States warning Russia.
 It has been made less easier for Trump to improve US-Russian relations . Trump has made it less easier to improve relations with Russia .
 President John Kennedy mistakenly believed the hawkish wing that advocated the Bay of Pigs operation .
 The late Ronald Reagan, his immediate successor George HW Bush and Barack Obama are among the past U.S. presidents who took foreign policy stances that differed with some influential elements in their country .
 The Syrian and Russian governments haven't been shy in seeking an investigation on the recent chemical incident .
 Without counter-evidence, the false flag claimed by them isn’t so unbelievable, it isn't so unbelievable .
 Trump has a good enough base to take the initiative on what he campaigned for . Should this predicament remain, Trump has the good enough to take it on his own .
 One more shift on his part doesn’t necessarily rock the boat too much more than what has occurred .
 Trump won the U.S. presidency, unlike Hillary Clinton, Lindsey Graham, John McCain and Marco Rubio . The president was the first to win the United States presidency .
 The SCC captures the estimated costs of climate disruption from things like sealevel rise, storms, fires, crop failures and rising death rates .
 A federal court affirmed last August that the current SCC estimate ($36 per ton of CO2 emitted) is based on sound science . It is difficult to put an exact price tag on future costs from a disrupted climate .
 Mr Trump’s executive order would effectively reduce that figure to zero .
This will hamstring U.S. efforts to protect future generations from climate disruption . This will hamstring United States efforts to prevent future climate disruption.
 In 2018, scientists will discover an asteroid as big as the one that killed off the dinosaurs . It's headed our way, scientists say .
 NASA says there is a 25% chance the asteroid will collide with the Earth in 30 years’ time .
 U.S. waits to be sure that the asteroid will hit the Earth, it would be too late to nudge it from its path of destruction .
 Government economists conduct a conventional cost/benefit analysis . To decide what to do, government economists conduct an analysis .
 The cost side of the equation consists of developing and deploying the asteroid-deflecting spacecraft .
Benefits consist of estimated damages to human life, property, etc. that would be avoided if the project moves forward .
 Economists count only benefits to the US, heavily discount them because they accrue far in the future . Economists adjust them for the 25% probability of impact .
Politicians who are always reluctant to pay for benefits that accrue after they leave office. Based on this analysis, politicians decide not to act .
Cost/benefit analysis can be a useful tool, among others, for decision-making on climate policy . Today, we face a similar choice regarding global climatechange .
 President Trump’s executive order calls for federal agencies to apply the same constricted approach used by government economists in the asteroid analogy .
 Maintaining a robust SCC would help to ensure we do not discount the lives and well-being of future generations . The SCC has been criticised by some for its lack of transparency .
 If they could, they would likely argue that even a low risk of unacceptable costs warrants action . This is the same logic that guides expenditures around other threats to our national security, such as international terrorism .
 We do not know its exact trajectory, so we can’t be sure our interventions are needed to prevent disaster . We don't know the exact trajectory of the disaster .
 Future generations, looking back, may forgive us if it turns out we acted unnecessarily . If we instead fail to act when we should have, our children's children will be less charitable in their assessment .
 India has dismissed the renaming and . Union Minister M Venkaiah Naidu said ‘every inch’ of Arunachal Pradesh belongs to India and China has “no business’ to name any Indian place .
 The current spate of hard shouting between India and China appears to be a reaction to Dalai Lama's visit to Arunachal Pradesh . Sino-Indian tensions are a product of years of uneasy relations and an un-demarcated 4000 km border between both countries .
 Indian media regularly sounds loud anti-China rhetoric from the Indian establishment, opposition and mainstream media . Chinese forces of infiltrating the Line of Actual Control in the Ladakh/Aksai Chin region .
 Beijing on the other hand has remained cool and calm and has advised the Indian establishment to clear its position on the issue . Beijing has remained calm and calm .
 Indian military preparations to deal with Chinese military might across the Himalayas are no secret . The Chinese media has shown patience, however deliberate attempts by India to frequently showcase Dalai Lama in the disputed areas like Chinese South Tibet .
 Indian cabinet gave the go-ahead for the raising of the 90,000 strong China-facing Corps in 2014 .
 India's aim is to provide conventional deterrence against China, strengthening India’s hand in crises .
 The new corps will have two high-altitude divisions (59 Div at Panagarh and 72 Div at Pathankot) with their integral units .
 Indian frustration with CPEC is also one major factor affecting Sino-Indian ties . Indian establishment is mulling to include seats of Pakistani Kashmir into Indian legislature . Move to taunt China and make CPEC controversial .
 Chinese media has been sensitive to the issue of CPEC as well as the Sino-Indian border . The Chinese media is sensitive to CPEC and the Sinos border .
 Chinese Global Times commented on Dalai Lama’s visit in following words, ‘The Indian media have continuously created trouble for the Sino-Indian relationship.’
 The Indian policy toward China can be fickle, while China’s levers for balancing the relationship are much simpler and scarcer .
 India has maintained a very strange relationship with all of its neighbors . India's relationship with its neighbors has been very strange .
 Most of the time, this relationship has had been tailored to address the Indian anxiety derived from the past history of 2,000 years . More recently, more recently, for building a false clout of its greatness.
 Indian establishment and media have blamed India's neighbours for most of the ills related to security and poor governance in the Union .
 Analysts have blamed India for fomenting tensions in China's Sinkiang and Tibet . Some analysts have even blamed India.
 The Indian establishment played a dirty game during the Beijing Olympics by involving Tibetan dissidents when the Olympic torch passed through India .
 The Indo-China conflict dates back to British times when they arbitrarily demarcated the international border with China and vast swathes of bordering territory .
 British India and local Tibetan representatives unilaterally signed the illegal “Simla Accord’s‘McMahon Line’ The Chinese government has never accepted the line the Chinese government never accepted .
 The illegal deal ceded some 90,000 square kilometers of Chinese territory in South Tibet to British India .
 China has been making efforts to solve the territorial disputes with India . India has not only increased migration to the disputed area and boosted its military construction there . It also named “Arunachal Pradesh,’s South Tibet, as a formal state of India.
 Pundit Nehru’s forward policy in the Himalayas was effectively checked and rolled back by the PLA . Chinese forces not only destroyed the Indian military capability in Aksai Chin and NEFA, but also set the tone of future political discourse in this dispute .
 New Delhi has been putting the Dalai Lama into its toolbox against China . Global Times states that putting the Lama into the toolbox is another trick played by New Delhi lately .
 New Delhi would be too ingenuous to believe that the region belongs to India simply because the Dalai Lama says so . The Dalai Lama said so .
 China announced standardised names in South Tibet at this time . It is time for India to do some serious thinking over why China announced the standardised name .
 If India wants to continue this petty game, it will only end up in paying dearly for it . India will only be paying dearly if it continues its petty game .
 Indian establishment and head honchos of South block will be to stop interfering with their neighbors and solve their border disputes with China, Pakistan, Sikkim, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and even Bhutan through peaceful diplomacy .
 Authoritarian-leaning leaders are on the rise, and liberal democracy itself seems under siege .
 The post-World War Il order is fraying as fighting spills across borders and international institutions fail to provide solutions . The post World War I order is being built, at least in theory, to act as brakes on slaughter .
 Populist movements on both sides of the Atlantic are stoking fears of a religious “other,’ this time Muslims .
In its seventh year, this war allowed to rage for so long, killing 400,000 Syrians and plunging millions more into misery . The war has sent shock waves around the world, with the death toll in the past seven years .
 Millions have fled to neighboring countries, some pushing on to Europe . Millions have moved to neighboring nations .
The notion that the postwar world would no longer let leaders indiscriminately kill their own citizens now seems in full retreat . The notion that leaders would not let them kill their citizens is now in full retreating .
 The Syrian government’s response to rebellion, continuing year after year, threatens to normalize levels of state brutality not seen in decades . The government's response to the rebellion, which began in 2011, continues to be a problem .
 President Trump ordered a U.S. missile strike on a Syrian military air base in retaliation for a chemical attack on a rebel-held town . The strike is the latest unilateral intervention in the war .
 Syrian government backed by Russia continues its scorched-earth bombings . Two weeks later, the Syrian government, backed by the Russian government, continues its bombings .
 There remains no consensus on what should have been or could still be done for Syria, or whether a more muscular international approach would have brought better results .
 Syrian conflict could burn in isolation from their countries, says Western leaders . Western leaders surmised that unlike the 1990s civil war in Bosnia, the Syrian conflict is not like that .
 Syrian security forces cracked down, and with Western support stronger in rhetoric than reality, some of Assad's opponents took up arms .
 The government responded with mass detentions, torture, starvation sieges and bombing of rebel-held areas . The government has been accused of using torture and starvation as a weapon .
 Extremist jihadists arose, with the Islamic State eventually declaring a caliphate and fomenting violence in Europe .
 Hundreds of thousands joined a refugee trail across the Mediterranean Sea to Europe .
 Images of desperate refugees were used by politicians to fuel fears of Islam, and of Muslims .
Far-right parties already riding on resentment of immigrants, from Finland to Hungary . That lifted far-right European parties.
 It fed off economic insecurity and mistrust of governing elites that grew over decades with globalization and financial crises . It heightened anxieties over identity and culture, feeding off financial insecurity .
 European countries are erecting fences and internment camps to stop migrants . Suddenly European countries were erecting fence and camps to prevent migrants .
 While Germany welcomed refugees, other countries resisted sharing the burden . Germany welcomes refugees, but other countries resist sharing burden .
 Marine Le Pen could win the first round of French elections on Sunday . The anti-Muslim candidate wants Mr Assad to stay in power .
 The Syrian conflict exposed — and was worsened by — failures of the very systems the right rails against. The conflict exposed, and was worse by the failure of the right rail systems .
 The European Union and the United Nations were set up in the past century, after devastating wars, to keep peace, prevent persecution, hold leaders accountable and provide aid to the most vulnerable .
 The Geneva Conventions on protecting civilians in wartime are now openly flouted . The Conventions were never consistently enforced .
 Mr Saleh, the Syrian dissident, worries that “the Syrianization of the world’s could get darker still .
 He compares today’s populism and Islamophobia to the mix of fascism and anti-Semitism in World War Il. He compares populism andIslamophobia to fascism and Anti-Semitism .
 In the U.S. right-wing extremists are among those embracing authoritarian, indiscriminately violent responses to perceived Islamist threats . In Europe, right- wing extremists are also embracing authoritarian responses.
 White nationalists like Richard Spencer and David Duke post adoring pictures on social media of Mr Assad . Mr Assad portrays himself as a bulwark against extremism .
 Some in the West are pushing to normalize relations with Mr Assad . They hope that will help the fight against the Islamic State .
Without accountability or political reforms, those results are less likely . But without accountability or reforms, the results are likely to be less likely.
 In his decade of covering violence against civilians in the Middle East, mass murder by states has often seemed less gripping to Western audiences . The Islamic State and its Qaeda predecessors have often been more brutal than Western audiences.
 Many are willing to tolerate any number of deaths of Arab or Muslim civilians, and any abuses of state power, in the name of fighting it .
 Syria’s war broke out when the global stage was set for division and ineffectiveness . Then, too, Syria's war was set to be set for divisions and in effectiveness .
 Russia was eager for a bigger role, the U.S. was retreating, Europe was consumed with internal problems . The United States was retreating and Europe was experiencing internal problems.
 Russia and U.S. saw opposite interests in Syria, deadlocking the Security Council . Russia and the United States see opposite interests.
 The crisis exposed the flaws of the U.N. system, which gives a Security Council veto to World War Il victors and privileges sovereignty . No provision for states that kill their people, no provision for state that kill people .
 The "responsibility to protect" doctrine was tried in Kosovo and Libya, with deeply disputed results . The doctrine, a legal justification for military action to stop states from massacring their citizens, died in Syria .
 The “red line’s” incident in 2013 added to the sense of impunity. The strikes threatened by President Obama but not carried out in response to a Syrian chemical attack that killed more than 1,400 people .
 Mr Assad may not even have fulfilled his pledge to give up all chemical weapons .
 The United Nations can do little but document war crimes as they become more routine . The U.N. can do nothing but document War crimes as it becomes more routine, says the UN .
 Monzer Khalil, a health official in rebel-held Idlib, said a day after treating victims of the recent chemical attack .
 Xi has recently visited the U.S. President Xi visited the United States .
 The first summit between the two leaders has been highly significant given the size and influence of the two nations at the global stage . North Korean nuclear proliferation, East Asian maritime security disputes, bilateral trade and investment imbalances and the direction of the global economy are key issues .
 The meeting arranged between the two heads of states does release signals that a degree of candid pacification of disputes between Washington and Beijing might be dealt with mutual understanding and cooperation .
 Officials signalled that the trading relationship between the two countries and North Korea’s nuclear program were at the top of the agenda during the meetings . The meetings took place at Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate .
 North Korea agreed to increase cooperation and work with the international community to convince the world to peacefully resolve the issue and abandon its illicit weapons programs . They agreed to work to convince North Korea to peaceful resolve .
 President Trump pressed for more economic punishment against North Korea for its expanding nuclear weapons program .
 Trump showed his strong reservations over China against building artificial islands in the disputed South China Sea . He also questioned the ‘One-China’policy relating to Taiwan .
 The two countries’ common interests seem to have been expanding rather than shrinking, the joint statement said .
 The highly anticipated US-China summit was upstaged by U.S. missile strikes against a Syrian air base . Trump said a deadly chemical weapon attack had been launched .
 It was the first direct U.S. assault on the Russian-backed government of Bashar al Assad in six years of civil war . It was first direct United States assault on al Assad's government .
 The swift action in Syria is tantamount to conveying a message to defiant North Korea . China and other countries like Iran and Russia of Trump’s willingness to use military force if deemed necessary .
 China is pragmatically sided with Russia at the United Nations in opposing condemnation of Assad’s government . China has not become directly involved in the conflict .
 American experts see a positive outcome of the latest Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the two sides .
 Experts say China is not likely to shake its non-market economy status under the WTO’s rules .
 Campaign rhetoric suggested U.S. trade policy would be trending in the opposite direction . But the move still flies in the face of campaign rhetoric that suggested the policy would change .
Military options against North Korea are much riskier than those against Syria, expert says . Military options against the North Korean regime are much more likely than against Syria .
 The maritime dispute between the U.S. and China has become the most driving issue in their complex relationship . Today, the maritime dispute is the most important issue in the relationship .
 The larger conflict revolves around China’s emergence as a major regional power and U.S. insistence on policing the Pacific affiliated area .
 Chinese President Xi Jinping has had repeatedly pointed out this system . It favours America and prevents Beijing from taking its rightful place as the dominant power in Asia .
 President Xi seems to be under increased pressure at home to find other ways to demonstrate China’s advances under his leadership .
 The sinusoid ally growing US-China relationship shows some signs of global cooperation . However, the relationship is still not as close as the US .
 The core future relationship scenario between Washington and Beijing largely depends on the accommodation the two sides offer regarding the handling of the key issues . The two sides are the two leading world powers in the region and world at large .
 The United States Navy is expected to conduct sustained freedom of navigation operations to reassert its power vis-a-vis China’s claims in South China Sea .
 Trump is likely to put strategic pressure on regional allies to contribute more to multilateral efforts aimed at countering China's expanding maritime power .
 China's policy of peaceful coexistence richly reflected by Beijing’s praiseworthy role of expanding peaceful development . As for the global community, there is no shrouded truth about the country's policy.
 China's soft power doctrine is getting an encouraging pace by slowly leaving behind hard-power US’s role in global affairs . The writer is an independent ‘IR’ researcher-cum-analyst based in Karachi .
 The unfolding of recent events, including the US strategic bombing to ‘save’ human lives, is a classic Cold War era style of politics .
 We have seen this too many times before, during the Cold War in Afghanistan, Korea, Vietnam and Latin America . We have also seen this in Afghanistan and Korea, Korea and Vietnam, as well .
 What started as a movement for democracy in Syria back in 2011 became entangled into regional power politics between Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Israel on one end, against Iran, Assad regime and Hezbollah .
 The US, Europe and Russia are all densely involved in backing their proxies . Fast forward to 2017, the global superpowers, the U.S. and Europe, are all involved in back proxies .
Global powers locked down into impasse over post-ISIS power structure in the region . The problem is not defeating ISIS, the global powers are locked down in an impasse . ISIS has time to gain momentum, conduct propaganda, recruit militants and attack Western cities .
 Regional powers have been putting their own interests first, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Turkey has been more inclined to bombing Kurdish forces instead of targeting ISIS fighters . Turkey, for instance, has been less inclined to target Kurdish forces than ISIS fighters.
 Saudis have been aiding ISIS indirectly to thwart off growing Iranian influence in the region . Saudis have also been helping ISIS to thwart Iranian influence.
 Americans, on the other hand, are supposedly fighting against ISIS, yet supporting the Saudis at the same time . Americans are supposed to be fighting ISIS.
 The security emergency that ISIS has provided is helping both regional and global powers to reframe the post-ISIS power structure in their own favour .
 The events in Syria reveal a lot about the global power structure and the international order . The events also show a lot of the world's power structure .
 The global South continues to remain under the hegemony of the North. First, they demonstrate that despite all the advancement and progress of human society, the global South remains under the North .
 Any movement for self-determination or against foreign-sponsored rulers in those regions in the 21st century will be a direct threat to the ‘national security’ of such powers .
 The war as we see in Syria is really the war of foreign ‘national interests’ colliding with one another . The war is really a war of national interests, says the author .
 The priority of global powers isn’t to defeat the ISIS but to ensure that the ‘right’ power setup is arranged during the postISIS regional order .
 The security of ‘national interest’ somewhere in the rural Middle East is under threat . The innocent taxpayers have little clue that it's not their ‘security’ that is at risk .
 Third and very important lesson must be learnt, weakening down of institutions and governance setup through foreign occupation, bombing and destruction .
 Afghanistan, lrag, Libya, Sudan and now Syria all represent how the recklessness of superpowers have destroyed institutional structures .
 Syria is going to tread the path of destruction, and on its way may even trigger a wider war that may not just be fought in the Middle East, but also on the streets of developed countries .
 Trump has enunciated a clear three-part position on Russia, which contrasts strongly with that of most of the U.S. political elite . In fact, for all the confusion of his policies toward China, Europe, and the Middle East, he has en
 The last of these is an essentially realist position, and if coherently implemented, it could prove a tonic . If coherently implement, it would be the last of this type of position .
 Republicans and Democrats have acted in ways that look much the same to Moscow . For 25 years, Republicans and Dems have acted similar to Moscow.
 Washington has pursued policies that have ignored Russian interests in order to encircle Moscow with military alliances and trade blocs conducive to U.S. interests .
 The wonder is that the U.S. policy elite doesn't get this, even as foreign-affairs neophyte Trump apparently does .
 Most Americans appreciate the weight of past grievances upon present-day politics . U.S. interference in Iran in the 1950s, or in Latin America repeatedly from the 1960s through the 1980s .
 There is a blind spot when it comes to U.S. interference in Russian politics in the 1990s, says CNN .
 Many Americans remember Bill Clinton as a great benefactor to Russia . He helped build a market democracy under President Boris Yeltsin .
 Most Russians see the United States as having abetted a decade of degradation under Yeltsin’s scandalridden bumbling . But most Russians see U.S. as having Abetted 10 years of degradation.
 Washington, they believe, not only took advantage of Moscow's weakness for geopolitical gain but also interfered in Russia's domestic politics to back the person who best suited U.S. interests .
 Americans’ ignorance of this perception creates a highly distorted picture of Russia’s first postcommunist decade .
 Russia's misery during the 1990s is difficult for outsiders to comprehend . Russia’s misery in 1990s was difficult to comprehend.
 After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia’s economy entered a sharp slide that would continue for over eight years .
 Russia’s collapse of the 1990s was nearly twice as sharp, and caused far more severe health and mortality crises . Compared with the Great Depression, the collapse of Russia's collapse was nearly two times as sharp .
 Faith in free markets, and admiration for the U.S. fell sharply in Russia in the 1990s .
 The rush toward privatization and slashing of the state led not to self-regulating growth, but to a pillaging of national wealth by rapacious oligarchs, who flourished under Yeltsin . The failures of “shock therapy, or the rapid transition to a market economy, made
 American talk of a Marshall Plan for Russia proved empty, and U.S. aid was a paltry $ 7 billion . U. S. aid, particularly in the critical first years of transition, was $7 billion .
 Much of that was in the form of credits that came attached with strings requiring the purchase of U.S. goods or the hiring of United States consultants .
 America’s image was hurt by scandals involving insider trading, money laundering, and similar scandals . Also hurting America's image were cases of corruption on the part of some Americans .
 In 1993, hyperinflation and poverty led to protests, and the Russian parliament passed legislation attempting to block Yeltsin’s reforms . The Russian parliament tried to block the reforms .
 Yeltsin responded by deciding to close the legislature and redesign the political system to concentrate power in his hands . The political system was designed to concentrate the power of the government .
 Many deputies refused to disband. This was blatantly unconstitutional, and many deputies refused. This, however, was blatantly illegal .
 The Clinton administration regretted the bloodshed but blamed it on the opposition, while ignoring the illegality of Yeltsin's power grab . Clinton administration regrets the bloodshed.
 The U.S. supported Yeltsin again two months later, when a referendum on a “super-presidential’s constitution passed in a rigged vote .
 The worst incident was the “loans for shares’ scandal, a crooked privatization scheme . Yeltsin sold Russia’s most valuable natural-resource firms to oligarchs by way of fraudulent auctions . The fraud was matched by that of the 1996 election, when Yelts
 The United States was again tarred by complicity, by winking at such electoral violations . State media working to elect Yeltsin or the gross violations of campaign spending limits, and even by sending U.S. advisers.
 George Kennan, author of the Cold War containment policy, warned that pushing NATO toward Russia’s borders was “a strategic blunder of potentially epic proportions’”
 Other experts, such as Fritz Ermarth, issued warnings at the time over the United States’ complicity in Russia’s domestic corruption .
 Few Russians who endured this corruption and humiliation have much sympathy with U.S. anger over Russian meddling in the 2016 election .
 Western media often adopted the Clinton administration’s cheery narrative, downplaying negative phenomena as bumps in the road toward a democratic Russia . But such perspective among Americans is rare, in part because the media often adopts the cheery narratives .
 Putin merely coasted on the policies of Yeltsin, there would have been little tax collected on the oligarchs’ profits to pay for pensions, rebuild infrastructure, and create reserve funds .
Private land tenure would have remained illegal. And there would have been no agricultural revival, because private land tenure was illegal .
 In his first few years in office, Putin passed tax and banking reform, bankruptcy laws, and other pro-market policies that Yeltsin hadn't managed in a decade .
 Russian agriculture, manufacturing, and services grew even faster as oil boomed, Russian agriculture and manufacturing grew faster .
Male life expectancy fell by over six years, unprecedented for a modern country in peacetime . The first half of this period coincides almost exactly with Yeltsin’s leadership .
 Under Putin, both male and female life expectancy have made rapid gains . Their combined average recently reached 70 years for the first time in Russian history .
 VLADIMIR THE TERRIBLE Distaste for many aspects of Putin’s harsh rule is understandable .
 demonization that veers into delusion by denying him credit for major progress is foolish. But demonization of him for all problems is foolish, he says .
 Russians rating Putin highly because they value the stability and pride he has revived . Foolish because it widens the gulf between U.S. and Russian perceptions of what is going on in their country .
 If only Putin were removed then Russians would elect another liberal like Yeltsin, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says it encourages the illusion that everything bad in Russia flows from Putin .
 Former U.S. President Barack Obama said, “Russia doesn’t make anything.’s prospects, as former U.N. President Obama did when he said, 'Russia doesn't make anything'
 Russia has one of the higher birth rates in Europe . Russia’s population has been growing since 2010 .
 Russia is the world’s third-largest immigrant destination in the world, behind only the United States and Germany .
 Russian products include the rockets that ferry U.S. astronauts into space .
 Both Obama and Hillary Clinton were given to careless quips about Russia .
 Both mocked Putin, and Clinton compared him to Adolf Hitler- a comparison that would be laughable were they not so offensive to Russians . Russians lost 26 million countrymen in World War Il.
Both Obama and Clinton were subject to nastiness from Moscow . There is much to fault in Putin’s Russia, and both Obama and Hillary Clinton were subjected to nastsiness .
 The urge to answer taunts in kind cannot overpower regard for Russian public opinion, and so confirm Russian media’s portrayal of America as ignorant and arrogant .
 Putin's pettiness and demonization of Putin resonates with ordinary Russians, says CNN's John Sutter . But apparently it didn't resonate much with ordinary Americans, he says .
 These ordinary Russians are the forgotten people, the hard-working teachers, doctors, and mechanics . Their savings, careers, even health were destroyed by the 1990s catastrophe .
 Russia's new democracy was bought and sold by Yeltsin and his cronies . They are the fledgling voters who saw their new democracy bought and sell by Yeltin . They longed for a leader to restore their pride in Russia after a decade of humiliation .
 Claims that this was merely a defensive expansion were belied by NATO’s bombing of Serbia, a Russian ally, in 1999 .
 Bush, the U.S. further intimidated Russia by abrogating the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, imposing punitive tariffs, launching a reckless invasion of lrag . Bush also cozied up to Georgia and Ukraine, and further encircling Russia by cozying up to
 In 2008, Russia hit back, answering a Georgian strike in the disputed region of South Ossetia with a crushing counterblow . It is thus unsurprising that in 2008, Russian hit back.
 Putin's approval rating soared to nearly 85 percent, the highest it would reach until Crimea's annexation in 2014 . Putin’s approval rating would be the highest until Crimea is annexed in 2014.
 Bill Clinton ally with a corrupt Yeltsin to make a mockery of their new democracy . They had seen Bill Clinton's ally with the Yeltsins to make the new democracy a mockery .
 Vice President Dick Cheney faulted Russian democracy while praising Kazakhstan . They had fumed as vice president Dick Cheney faults Russian democracy .
 The U.S. was launching an invasion of Iraq in the name of democracy promotion that would set the Middle East aflame . And they heard their country criticized for interfering in the affairs of weaker neighbors .
 Russian media ever more frequently paired the term “double standard’ with America . Not surprisingly, the Russian media always more frequently pairs the term with America.
 Obama administration may have been unwise to pursue democracy promotion as brashly as it did . Obama administration criticized Russian elections and encouraged Putin's opposition .
 Democracy promoters may draw a distinction between policies aimed at advancing NATO and those aimed at promoting political liberalization in Russia . Obama enacted the latter but not the former former Soviet states .
 Putin's skepticism was easy to understand given the West's record of undermining Moscow’s allies, as in Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine, and then seeking to anchor their new regimes .
 As a senator, Obama was an early supporter of Ukraine joining NATO . Ukraine's integration with NATO continued throughout his presidency .
 Hillary Clinton also advocated a NATO ""open door" for Ukraine, and then incurred Putin's wrath by pushing humanitarian intervention in Libya .
 Russia's 2011 elections were most unwelcome. So demand for a full investigation of all reports of fraud and intimidation in 2011 was most unwelcome .
 Michael McFaul was Obama's ambassador to Russia in 2012 . McFaul is an expert on democracy promotion and a longtime critic of Putin .
 Neither should righteous indignation at Putin’s post-election crackdown prevent rethinking of the targets as well as the tools of American public diplomacy .
 Some fault the focus on Russia’s liberal opposition, a small number of Moscow-centered activists who best reflect United States values .
 Russians embody liberalcosmopolitan values alien to most conservative-nationalist Russians . But even if they weren't stigmatized by Putin or tarred by identification with the 1990s, they embody liberal cosmopolitan values .
 The West is the focus of democracy-promotion, but it also makes them a poor bet, says CNN .
 Some members of Pussy Riot were convicted of hooliganism in 2012 for staging a protest in Moscow’s Church of Christ the Savior . The group mocked the Russian Orthodox Church and its believers .
 Both activists and state officials in the U.S. praised Pussy Riot and demanded their release . Both activists in the United States praised the protest group .
 Pussy Riot as champions of free speech was disrespectful of Russia, says Julian Zelizer . But basic decency and respect for the values and traditions of others would suggest that it was disrespectful to Russia .
 Some 70 percent of Russians identify as Orthodox believers . It was also insensible if the U.S. is interested in cultivating sympathy among Russians .
 Russia is a conservative society that viewed the years of Yeltsin's rule, and its onslaught of pornography and promiscuity .
 Russians deserve as much regard as those of a minority of cosmopolitan liberals, according to the author .
 Hectoring by the West will hardly ease traditional Russian homophobia . But hectoring will not ease traditional Russia homophobia .
 Russians see a double standard in U.S. judgments about their country . Russia sees a prosecutorial stance that criticizes Russia for behaviors that go unnoticed .
 The Washington Post has closely covered Russia’s anti-LGBT policies but has paid scant attention to the same in countries such as Lithuania, Georgia, and Ukraine .
 Since 2014, the Western media has reported on Moscow’s alleged propaganda onslaught, while largely ignoring the brazen purchase of positive publicity by countries such as Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine . The Western media have also reported on Russia's alleged propaganda.
 The Parliamentary Association of the Council of Europe is funding research on a country by that country itsel . This is not the usual lobbying or public relations but the funding of ostensibly independent research on the country is paid for by such groups as the Parliamentary Association.
 Americans rarely hear of such activity, even as alarm over Moscow's subversion nears hysteria is raised .
 Russian diplomats carefully kept their distance from the 2011 Occupy Wall Street protests . In fact, unlike the 2014 Maidan occupation in Ukraine, Russian diplomats kept theirdistance .
 Obama's denunciation in 2014 of Crimea secession referendum preceded the peninsula's annexation by Russia . U.S. media ignored Obama’s denunciation of Crimea referendum, but noted overseas .
Obama said that Kosovo only seceded “after a referendum was organized ... in careful cooperation with the United Nations and with Kosovo’s neighbors. The West supported but Russia, along with Serbia, rejected as illegitimate .
 There was no referendum at all, just a vote by Kosovo's Albanian-majority parliament .
 It highlights an illusion about the free, democratic choice facing countries in central and eastern Europe as they are tugged between Washington and Moscow . It also highlights anillusion about theFree, democratic choices facing countries.
 The freedom of their choice belies the powerful political and economic levers employed to pry these countries away from Russia . In fact, the freedom of the choice is a key to Russia's power .
 Kosovo's neighbors were pressured by the U.S. and NATO to recognize the region's secession from Serbia . Kosovo's neighbor was pressured to recognize Kosovo's secession.
Eastern Europeans grew concerned about the higher than expected costs of joining the EU . Accession was sweetened for political and business elites while the masses were sometimes sidestepped with popular referenda replaced by simple parliamentary votes .
 Occasionally Brussels and Washington pulled in opposite directions, as with the International Criminal Court . The EU and Washington were opposed by the Administration of George W Bush .
Central Europe exercised its supposedly free choice under enormous political and economic pressure . In this, as in other cases, countries of central Europe exercised their supposedly free choices .
 The point is simply to grasp the legitimacy in Moscow’s perspective. The expansion of the Western blocs is not an organic, democratic process, but one engineered by the U.S. and its allies .
 The West must also see the costs to the countries involved in a payoff-driven, elitecentered process that shortchanges the concerns of majorities and is in key ways undemocratic .
Support for the EU in central Europe had already fallen because the costs were much higher than expected . The benefits seemed mainly to reward a wealthy business elite .
 The EU has supported local pro-European parties to help Moldova toward accession . Moldova is a desperately poor country that needs access to the EU .
 U.S. media focused on the struggle for influence with Moscow in Bulgaria and Montenegro . But just as in the cases of similar elections in Bulgaria, the United States media focus on Russia .
 The U.S. encouraged secession from Serbia to weaken the Serbian leader Milosevic . The Serbian leader is an epically corrupt boss, Milo Djukanovic . The United States encouraged secession for geopolitical goals .
 Djukanovic's Democratic-Socialist party exploits similar geopolitical tensions to engineer Montenegro’s accession to NATO . Montenegro is a step of doubtful benefit to either the alliance or Montenegro .
 Such alienation drives anti-EU sentiment in those countries and empowers demagogues like Hungary’s President Viktor Orban . Not some nefarious influence from Vladimir Putin but deep economic inequality and the manifest failings of European integration .
 The crisis erupted in 2013 when President Viktor Yanukovych balked at the EU’s harsh accession terms and opted instead to align with Russia .
 No matter how corrupt his rule was, he was elected democratically and had acted constitutionally in making his decision . No matter whether he was corrupt or how corrupt he was. He was democratically elected and acted constitutionally .
 The U.S. decided to abandon a power-transition deal that it had agreed upon with Russia . In 2014, as the protests in Ukraine grew, the United States supported the protests calling for Yanukovych’s ouster .
 Russians conclude that if the West could support an unconstitutional seizure of power in Kiev, then they could hold an unconstitutional referendum in Crimea . But this quickly boomeranged, as the Russians concluded that if they could support the seizure, they could back an unconstitutional vote in Crimea or support a seizure
 Putin's choice to hit back an easy one. There was a compromise path, but treating Ukraine as something to be yanked from Russia’s orbit . Ukraine's Crimean naval base was lost .
 Russia has abetted in fighting over the Donbas. Of course this hardly justifies the savagery that Russia has been involved in the conflict .
 U.S. and EU actions helped spark the conflict by treating Ukraine as a prize to be grabbed, rather than as a linguistically and ethnically divided country .
 Western policies recklessly ignored these interests and needlessly raised the stakes. Western policies needlessly raise the stakes, according to the author .
 Before the war, Ukraine had an annual income-per-capita of $4,000, on par with Albania and Kosovo . In corruption surveys it ranked below Russia and on the same level as Nigeria .
 Ukraine is still a corrupt, bankrupt mess, despite an Association agreement, billions in aid, and three years of EU-mandated reforms . Today, after an Association deal, billions of aid, the country is still in a corrupt and bankrupt mess .
 Scandals erupt daily, with an economic drain greater than the conflict in Donbas .
 Ukraine's pro-EU President Petro Poroshenko has a 17 percent approval rating, lower than the pro-Russian Yanukovych’s 28 percent on the eve of his ouster .
 The pro-Russian Yanukovych was the most popular Ukrainian president of this century . This means that the pro- Russian Yanukovych was most popular president of the century .
 Only 41 percent of Ukrainians still support the EU Association Agreement, the latest poll finds . The rejection of the agreement sparked the Maidan revolution .
 trends like these, along with a right-wing turn in Western European states that erodes their patience and generosity with troubled eastern neighbors, that should trouble EU leaders .
 Europeans are on high alert for Russians spreading anti-Western news, supporting anti- Western politicians, and deploying an army of antiWestern internet trolls . Instead, across the region, Europe is on high Alert for Russian internet trolls.
 Moldova could be Moldova, with the nationalist majority renewing a push to unite with their Romanian kin, thereby reviving conflict with the Russian minority .
 Hungary could leave the EU, delivering a critical blow to European unity . Hungary could be the first country to leave the European Union .
 Ukraine could also be where U.S. and Russia begin repairing ties . America and Russia could also start repairing ties.
 The Russian economy is down a third since 2013, and relief from Western sanctions is sorely needed . Russia's economy is weak, and the West needs relief from the sanctions .
 A deal between Russia and the West would build upon the stalled Minsk Accords . A deal would build on the stalled deal between the two countries .
 Moscow would withdraw from the Donbass and restore Ukraine’s eastern border . Kiev would grant local self-rule to this Russian-speaking region .
 Ukraine would get a treaty guaranteeing its territorial integrity as well as military aid . Russia would also get a commitment from NATO not to incorporate Ukraine .
 Purists will call such a deal a betrayal, as it would be a de facto recognition of the Russian annexation of Crimea . Purists would call it a betrayal.
 A large majority of Crimeans want to remain with Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "By democratic rights, it shouldn’t be that a large majority"
 Ukraine, moreover, would benefit from peace and investment, instead of diverting more resources into conflict . Ukraine, however, would also benefit from Peace and investment.
 Normal political and trade ties with Russia would also benefit Europe as a whole, according to CNN's John Sutter . Europe's relationship with Russia could slow and maybe reverse the current slide toward dissolution .
 Such diplomacy would test the mettle of the Trump administration’s foreign-affairs neophytes . But the greater unknown is Putin .
 A majority of the U.S. political elite believes that no deals are possible because Putin is irremediably hostile . A majority believes no deals could be possible because he's irremediable hostile .
 Many U.S. policymakers believe Putin simply has no interest in peace with the West .
 In their view, he is bent on expansion and will gladly endure sanctions as the price of fomenting discord in the West . In their views, he's bent on expanding and will happily endure sanctions .
 Another group of policymakers is skeptical of Putin, but do not blame him alone for the deterioration of relations . Another group is also skeptical of the Russian leader, but not Putin alone .
 Many analysts opposed NATO expansion from the outset, for the same reasons that Kennan did . Many of these analysts opposed it from the start, because it would become a selffulfilling prophecy .
 U.S. experts also criticize the United States’ misadventures in Iraq and Libya . They also criticize Russia’s red lines on expansion into Georgia and Ukraine .
 Putin’s recent actions threaten the postwar liberal order. But they mainly stand with first group now in believing that containment, not cooperation, is what the West must practice .
 NATO’s continual expansion is a mistake, some say, but not the U.S. must meet Russia halfway . Some say NATO's expansion is the result of double standards in the United States .
 Like realists such as Kennan or Hans Morgenthau, they are sometimes derided as weak (or Putin apologists) for cautioning against inflating foreign threats .
 Obama, reset or no, continued efforts to expand the Western economic and military blocs that had started under Clinton in the 1990s .
 America has steadily pushed Western military and political-economic power deeper into Russia’s backyard . In other words, for over two decades, the U.S. has pushed the West into Russia's backyard .
 If history teaches anything it is that any great power will, when facing the continued advance of a rival, eventually push back . If history shows anything it's that any big power will eventually fight back .
 Obama-Clinton defenders dislike being reminded of post-Cold War power . Any chance of U.S. being seen as uniquely benign ended in Serbia, Iraq, and Libya .
Two decades of ignoring Russia's interests have abetted Putin’s embrace of a deep-seated anti-Americanism . It may be that both sides are correct, that two decades of ignore Russia’'s interests are correct . It is impossible to
 The only thing not in doubt is that both U.S. and Russia need that détente . Europe and the wider world need it.