 This interview is being led by the Intelligence Committee in exercise of its oversight and legislative jurisdiction . The interview is part of a furtherance of the inquiry .
 The court reporter will be on the court for the first time in a year . He will be at the court in New York City, New York, on Thursday .
 The stenographer cannot record nonverbal answers, such as shaking your head, so it is important that you answer each question with an audible, verbal answer .
 We ask that you give complete replies to questions based on your best recollection . We ask you to give your best answers to questions that you can answer .
 It is unlawful to deliberately provide false information to Members of Congress or congressional staff. Now, finally, you are reminded that it is unlawful for members to give false information .
 In the countless number of transcribed interviews I have participated in before we have never seen the limitations placed on staff that you have done to the Oversight Committee and to the Foreign Affairs Committee .
 The trial is set to take place in New York City, New York, on Tuesday . The trial will be held in the U.S.
 The Department of State and the Department of Defense have conducted themselves with the highest degree of 25 13 1 professionalism, integrity, and dedication to the national 2 interest .
 I did not edit or clear on these 8 messages but told the reporting officers just to report as 9 they normally would . I didn't edit orclear on these eight messages.
 I felt that I would not be able to be effective as a 11 special representative going forward, and I thought it was 12 important that I was able to provide testimony as I have just 13 done . I felt it was12 important that he be ableto provide testimony.
Marik String is the acting legal adviser to the Secretary of State . He spoke with Marik String before he spoke with the Secretary. A I believe I spoke with String.
Marik String was not one of them - but with others over the course of May through August . A number of conversations with a number of people - including String - took place over May and August .
 The Presidential delegation all took part in the Presidential delegation . I know that those of us who were part of the delegation all take part .
 President said he believed Ukraine had a role in trying to help Ukraine. Q And what did you understand him, the President, to mean?
 President Zelensky was going to release a statement that he was to release . Q Why did you single out those two specific allegations? Q Why?
 We're going to do portions of the exhibit that we'll mark separately as separate exhibits . We'll mark portions of them that we will mark separately .
 The exhibit will be on page 36, as exhibit 2, 36, 37, 38, and 39 . It will be the first time the exhibit has been on the page .
 We want to work 22 with -that’s what the message should have been, and he just 23 didn't do it . We want the message to be what it should be, and the message was that he didn't .
 The President's perception that he has is important, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You don't want this dissonant information reaching the 14 President. I think 11 correcting that perception"
 Lutsenko may not have been a reliable, other than you had said earlier that he may not be a reliable . He may have been protecting President Poroshenko and friends of president Poroshenko in this case .
 We need to fix it. Give us time 81 2 3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 to fix the problem .
 Q And you assured them that -A I told them that is absolutely not the case. Q and Q And I assured them. Q And You assured them they that -a I tell them that that isabsolutely not a case.
 A -there's more of a record on that, 25 Well, this where it was a matter of U.S. policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine, he says .
 A Yes for a period of time, from -I had some initial contact when I heard that he was going to visit Ukraine in mid-May .
 Giuliani apparently had been in touch with Lutsenko. We saw in text messages that we discussed earlier, on July 10th .
 Lutsenko says Rudy Giuliani may be reinforcing a negative perception of the President . He says he could see a problem of this negative feed .
 The current prosecutor general said he would destroy any evidence that might exist from previous investigations . But he said he put less credibility into this explanation .
 A -I don't remember exactly how it was phrased, but a question mark saying . A -we should check our timeline, but I believe that's when they texted me with this article with, you know, a -I .
 Giuliani suggested he was going to be in Madrid the following week, or in the May 1 to 5 timeframe . Mr Yermak agreed to meet him there .
 A No, to the best of my recollection, it was purely just an introductory phone call . A No.
President Poroshenko met with President Poroshenko 23 dozen times, perhaps 10 times, 12 times, and I believe that 24 he did a very good job on introducing reforms in Ukraine but 25 not enough, I say .
 Yovanovitch became a wartime President as Russia attacked and took Crimea and took eastern Ukraine . And I also believe that he took office after the Maidan, and it was an optimistic time in Ukraine about change .
President Barack Obama played a role as a wartime President . He was forged by that, so he was really focused on fighting back, building the military, trying to stabilize the economy .
 President Trump believed that these ledgers were falsified like some allegations . There were allegations that they were .
 President Zelensky built a political party out of nowhere and won an absolute majority in the Parliament . He is congratulating him on that and reestablishing a relationship with him .
 The State Department read out a readout from the Ukraine, and you didn't hear anything about Joe Biden, says John Sutter .
 Q. But he's mentioned at the top of page four, so I just wanted to make sure that I wasn't underselling that. Q. Q: "I just want to makesure that I didn't undersell that"
 The 27th of July, is a Saturday, July 27, is the 27th July .
 I don't know the answer to 2 that, but I have never heard that they are . I don’t know the answers to 2, but it's not clear if they are. I've never heard of them .
 Ambassador: "It was not inappropriate for you to work with Mr Giuliani in the way that you did"
 It is not unusual for countries to have an investigation cooperation agreement, says Perry . He says it would be unusual to discuss specific investigations .
 A statement about Ukraine's commitment to fighting corruption and investigating things that happened in the past was released . The statement was a response to a question about whether it would specifically mention Burisma and 2016 .
 If you could skip down to August 10th, 2019, at 5:42m, the same day, as Mr Yermak wrote . And then if you could skipped down to July 10, 2019.
 Rudy or Gordon said that those additions were important additions to the team . Gordon says that's what he heard from either Rudy or from Gordon .
 This is a version that inserted Burisma and 10 2016 United States elections into the text that Andriy had provided . It was meant to reflect the conversation with Rudy that 12 we had just talked about .
 I think quite appropriately, that if they are responding to an official request, that's one thing . I thinkquite appropriately, if they're responding to a request, they're one thing.
 Vice President Biden was repeating all of the things that were in the media that we talked about earlier about, you know, firing the prosecutor general and his son being on the company and all that .
 Joe Biden would be influenced in his duties as Vice President by money or things for his son or anything like that, says Rudy .
 Ukrainians may have sought to influence our elections or sought to buy influence. On the other hand, that's entirely plausible, says Peter Bergen .
 He had the whole narrative that was in the media, he says . He says he had a conversation with the media .
There's another thing about Ukrainians trying to do bad things, and it’s appropriate to investigate the second . I’m separating the two, that there's one thing about the Bidens. I'm separating thetwo, thatthere's one things about the bidens,
 Rudy Giuliani says there is a negative narrative about Ukraine that is counteracting all the good things he is doing . He says that this is being amplified by Rudy Giuliani .
Q Kolomoisky went back to Ukraine after Zelensky was elected . But anyway, you get the nature of the situation .
 Danylyuk was becoming increasingly concerned that this is giving the appearance . Also there's a photograph of Kolomoisky meeting Zelensky in Zelenski's office .
 I suggested that he called 11 Secretary of Defense Esper, that he's a brand-new defense 12 minister . He's a new 12 minister, a new defense minister .
 There are still concerns at the highest level he needs to address proactively about Kolo, says Kolomoisky .
President Trump believes a lot of negative narratives about Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Zelensky is continuing to put out a negative narrative, and that that is probably influencing Trump's thinking .
 President Zelensky had a discussion on July 3rd with President Obama that we talked about earlier. So this is that discussion that I had with President Zelenky that we discussed earlier .
President Zelensky told Vadym Prystaiko what he had told to him the day before .
 President Zelensky read out a readout related to a telephone call that he had with Donald Trump .
Before I get to the next point, if we could go to 42, which I don't believe is an exhibit . Before I got to thenext point, I don’t believe it is a exhibit .
President Obama met with the others and the President in May . But even his own understanding of this is back to the Oval Office meeting .
 His views on Ukraine were so sharply negative, he says, that it makes more sense to me . He sees that we are about to launch a notification of millions of dollars to Ukraine, he adds .
 U.S. Ambassador Volker: "I don't think anyone here has any doubt that you were singularly focused on promoting the bilateral relationship between the United States and Ukraine" "I take it you understand is also in our best interest," he says .
Both Rudy Giuliani and President Trump have admitted as much as they have admitted . Giuliani and Trump have said as much.
I was a little surprised that this was still 23 going, so I'm sure you're exhausted . I was a bit surprised, but I was also surprised that it was 23 going .
 I don't know if that's an ambiguous statement or not, but, you know, reasonable people could equate very bad people . I'm not sure, but you know that reasonable people can equate verybad people .
 The delegation that had been 20 was Rick Perry, himself . The delegation was the president's delegation .
 It was about 2 days later it emerged that it was about Ukraine. And then I believe it was 2 days after it emerged the Ukraine issue .
 I have no reason to think that he would have been involved in that at all . I've no idea he would be involved in this at all. I'm not sure what happened to him .
 The password on the government phone always seemed to drop, and I couldn't get into it . The password was always dropped, but I could't get in it .
 I think you probably know better, having served in the State Department for a long time, he says . "I happen to know better," he says of his time in the department .
 Foreign aid is routinely held up while committees are waiting for authorizing committees to be notified for weeks .
President Obama's administration has been criticized for not giving credit to the administration . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday .
Q: I said we weren't going to go back to texts, but I have some more questions on your texts . Q: We were not going to return to texts. Q: What do you think about texts? Q: I have more questions to ask about your texts.
 Secretary of State Ulrich Brechbuhl had two attempted phone calls, his texts to me . His texts had gotten to the Secretary, which had got to her .