 The Russian annexation of Crimea stimulated the author's interest in researching the “little green men’s” that appeared at a decisive point in the coup de main .
 The intent here is to understand the capabilities and limitations of the Russian special operations forces . North Atlantic Treaty Organization members and Russia’s neighbors are at risk .
 Study uses Colin Gray’s strategic utility theory to understand why Russian leaders choose unconventional warfare over conventional warfare . The study also uses the Spetsnaz execute assigned missions .
 Soviet and Russian military doctrines constitute a baseline for the evolution of Russian strategy and of Spetsnaz in parallel . Soviet and Russia military doctrines are a baseline.
Operation Danube in Czechoslovakia, the first and the second Chechen wars, and the annexation of Crimea. Three case studies contribute to this research .
 Russian Spetsnaz per se are competent enough to fulfill their duties . However, they do not make up for poor planning, weak strategy, and general incompetence .
 When Russia has vigorous plans and a strong strategy, the Spetsnaz become an indispensable element . Russia has strong plans and strong strategy .
 The Spetsnaz will not surface in their nations’ capitals out of the blue . It behooves the decision makers of concerned countries to remain vigilant .
 Spetsnaz, spetsialnogo naznacheniya, special forces, special operations, special PAGES operations forces, SOF, Soviet Union, Russia, Prague, Czechoslovakia, operation Danube, the 89 First Chechen War, the Second Che
 The report was published by the National Institute of National Geographic . It was published in the summer of 2013 .
 The Turkish Special Forces B.S., Turkish Military Academy, 2010 Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER of SCIENCE in Defense ANALYSIS . Hy Rothstein, Ph. A. H.R. was a member of the
 The Russian annexation of Crimea stimulated the author's interest in researching the “little green men’s that appeared at a decisive point in the coup de main. D Chair, Department of Defense Analysis.
 Without their help and compassion, I would hardly achieve anything at all, says author . "Without their help, I wouldn't achieve anything," she says .
 The Defense Analysis Department faculty and all other people have provided the perfect environment in which to leam. Second, I would like to thank the Defense Analysis department faculty and other people who have provided a perfect environment .
 John Arquilla for canalizing me into the right track in the beginning of this research . He has been working on a new book called The Book of the Book of The Book .
 Frank B Steder wrote an article about the annexation of Crimea . The article eventually became a case study in this thesis .
 Mark Galeotti is senior research fellow at the Institute of International Relations Prague . Galeotti's prompt response to his request for a reading list was a good response .
 Much research has been conducted on Russia’s activities along its borders and its diplomatic and territorial gains .
Very little research focuses on the Spetsnaz, spetsialnogo naznacheniya or Russian special forces, and virtually none focuses on them .
 If these ‘little green men’ were Spetsnaz, their clandestine conduct and their success are extremely intriguing .
 To clarify the scope of this research, Russia employs the Spetsnaz . To clarify how and to what extent Russia uses the Spetnaz are pursued, the author says .
 This thesis tries to find out how the Spetsnaz shaped the battlefield in the early phases of several conflicts and how they performed .
 Russian operations in the annexation of Crimea constitute the main focus of this research . Russian operations are the main focuses of this study .
 Soviet-era “active measures’ are reviewed to detennine if these techniques have been revived by the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is reviewing the techniques.
 This thesis includes comparative case studies dating back to the founding of the Russian Spetsnaz in 1950 . In addition to the annexation of 1 Crimea, this thesis includes Comparative case studies .
 In Russia's case, such special operations forces include Spetsnaz, the ‘little green men’ who allegedly appeared at the decisive point of Crimea in 2014 .
 This thesis explores Colin Gray’s theory of “the strategic utility of special operations’ 2 by focusing specifically on the utility of the Russian Spetsnaz in the context of Russian military strategy .
 The theory of strategic utility and the Russian Spetsnaz are in consideration . The literature about both is in consideration, says the author .
 The actions of the Russian Spetsnaz in Chechnya during the Chechen wars; in Georgia, during the annexation of Crimea; and in Eastern Ukraine constitute the main focus of the examination of the strategic utility of the Russians .
 Little research has been conducted on the strategic utility of the Russian Spetsnaz .
 There is also little written on the strategic utility of special operations forces in general . However, one should note that there is alsolittle written on special ops forces .
 Gray corroborates the inadequacy of this literature after assessing David Thomas’s article, “Importance of Commando Operations in Modem Warfare, 1939-82’
 Gray viewed Thomas's article as the closest in spirit and purpose to his analysis . While he thought McRaven’s Spec Ops was completely deprived of strategic reasoning, Gray thought Thomas’'s article was close in spirit .
 This acknowledgement sheds light on the assessment of the strategic utility of the Russian Spetsnaz . It is not the first time the Russian government has acknowledged this .
 Gray groups the ‘economy of force’ and the “expansion of choice’ as the master claims of the strategic utility of special operations . “morale,” “showcasing of competence,’ “reassurance,�
 Ross Kelly’s treatment of strategic utility in his book Special Operations & National Purpose, 6 was published in 1989, nine years earlier than Gray's Explorations in Strategy, 9 years earlier .
 Kelly does not directly mention the strategic utility of special operations . However, Kelly doesn't directly mention special operations in special operations.
 He analyzes the special operations forces of NATO members and the “special purpose forces’ of Warsaw Pact members . He says the countries’ own national purposes as a policy tool .
 He also examines the Soviet regime’s use of Spetsnaz, which may give insight on how the Russian Spetnaz is employed in today's conflicts .
 Kelly's analyses may fall under Gray's category of ‘expansion of choice’ for respective countries . Kelly’s analyses in his comprehensive work may fallunder Gray’'s category.
In this respect, the mainstream arguments about the use of special operations forces mostly correspond to Kelly’s treatment .
 Whether special operations produce strategic outcomes or not, the main focus mostly stays at a tactical level, says John Sutter .
 McRaven 7 in 1996, Marquis 8 in 1997, and Adams 9 in 1998 contribute to the literature of special operations and special operations forces . Neither mentioned SOF’s strategic utility .
 There are several reports on the organizational structure and defects of Russian special forces . In addition, there are also reports on organizational structure.
 Russia’s Special Forces, 10 is an explanatory book illustrated by Johnny Shumate and Tor Bukkvoll . It is an article that studies the reforms in the Russian special operations forces after 2008 .
 Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine are the most comprehensive work with a focus on operations in Ukraine . Military Aspect of the crisis in Ukraine is the most extensive work with the focus on the Ukraine crisis .
 None of the works on Spetsnaz focuses on strategic utility. However, to reiterate, none of the work on Spetnaz focus on the strategic utility .
 Suvorov credits the military Spetsnaz as the main executor of nearly every remarkable external operation rather than the KGB Spetnaz . The KGB SpetsNaz was the mainexecor of almost every extraordinary external operation .
 The other book, Inside Spetsnaz, reads otherwise . To balance his claims, the other book is Inside Spetnaz .
 The Inside Story of the Soviet Special Forces, 4-9. 5 of Suvorov’s claims, are good sources for a general portrait of the emergence of Spetsnaz as an indispensable element in the Soviet statecraft .
 The myth they have created may focus more attention on the Spetsnaz, per se, than their strategic utility . The latter may require retaliation or reaction .
 Russia’s permanent seat in the U.N. Security Council and “below-the-threshold of the Article 5” political and military actions provided excuses to NATO . NATO was neither ready nor willing to act against Russia's expansion.
 The reluctance of NATO to react may be regarded as the collapse of deterrence . NATO's reluctance to react could be seen as a failure of deterrence, according to experts .
 Russia's "Gerasimov Doctrine" has been reviewed by several pundits . It's been described as Russia's approach to employing special forces to achieve strategic objectives . It has been criticized by some for its approach to special forces .
 A Political Analysis of Egypt and Israel, 1971-73,’s Journal of Strategic Studies 5, no. .
 The third condition requires competent special operations forces and leads to the second hypothesis . The second hypothesis is the third condition requiring competent special forces .
 Hypothesis-2 Spetsnaz produce a strategic outcome when they conduct covert operations in unconventional warfare . Hypotheses-2. SpetsNaz produce the strategic outcome.
 The aim of this thesis is to explore the strategic utility of Russian Spetsnaz . The aim is to find out what is the best way to use the Russian language .
 The Spetsnaz's capabilities and limitations to conduct such operations will be examined . This exploration will also illuminate the unique conditions that lead Russian decision makers to choose covert operations .
 Colin Gray’s theory of “the strategic utility of special operations’ 18 is applied to the following selected cases to examine the significance of the Spetsnaz to Russian strategic purposes .
 7 recommendations are intended to inform decision makers in NATO and Turkey about the potential threat emanating from Russia .
 The research is motivated by the nearly bloodless Russian annexation of Crimea .
 This thesis examines conflicts in which the Spetsnaz have been employed since their formal founding in 1950 . It analyzes selected conflicts in retrospect for a better understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of unconventional warfare .
 Russian special warfare is studied in the context of the respective times . These conflicts are selected to study the adaptation of special warfare and unconventional warfare .
 The selected cases include Operation Danube in Czechoslovakia, the first and the second Chechen wars in Chechnya . The annexation of Crimea is the first Chechen war in Russia .
 Operation Storm-333 and the decade-long follow-up operations in Afghanistan, conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia, and clashes in the Donbas region in Ukraine .
 The selection of these campaigns aims to identify patterns of Soviet and postSoviet era employment of Spetsnaz . The selection is part of a series of campaigns aimed at identifying patterns of Russian and post-Soviet employment .
 The Spetsnaz were also deployed to Hungary, Angola, Ethiopia, Cuba, Tajikistan and many other places . Their respective roles were significantly different from those in the above cases .
 The presence of the Spetsnaz and the strategic targets of the Russian intervention in Syria are still ongoing . In addition, the presence of Spets naz and other strategic targets are still still ongoing.
 The contemporary political context and the military doctrine are examined to discern the strategic objectives of the conflict . The selection of unconventional warfare as a policy tool is considered as a tool .
 The chronology of the conflict is followed to uncover the indicators of an ongoing unconventional war . The chronologists of the war are followed to find out what happened to the conflict .
 The strategic utility of the special operations and the special ops forces’ contribution to the overall campaign are analyzed . The overall campaign is analyzed by the military .
Military doctrine and unique conditions that lead to the selection of unconventional warfare are examined .
 Second, the covert actions the Spetsnaz performed during selected campaigns are derived, and the indicators that occurred simultaneously or before the action are uncovered . The indicators that occur simultaneously and before theaction are uncovered are uncovered.
 The strategic utility of the Spetsnaz to the overall Russian military strategy and Russian national purpose are assessed . Finally, the strategic Utility of the special operations and the utility of. the Spetnaz is assessed .
 The conclusion aims to raise awareness of the strategic utility of the Russian Spetsnaz and its implications for Russia’s opponents .
 NATO and beyond can examine their vulnerabilities and take necessary countenneasures . Hopefully, political and military decision makers of NATO and Beyond can examine the vulnerabilities of their countries .
 This chapter examines the military doctrine, perceived threat, and their implications for Spetsnaz in the Soviet era . The book also examines the post-Soviet era, starting with Yeltsin and ending with the Putin administration .
 The strategic discourse in Russian military literature after World War II was shaped by the Soviet Union's Cold War enemy, the United States .
 The Soviet and Russian military doctrines help the military stay alert for perceived threats . The doctrines are designed to keep the military on the edge of potential threats .
 The strategic use of SOF units gained importance as late as 1956 . Soviet leaders realized the use of nuclear missiles at any proportion would spread throughout the globe .
Military advisors and stay-behind soldiers to support insurgencies gained importance . Thus, military advisors andStay- Behind soldiers gained importance.
 By means of the Spetsnaz, the Soviets both militarily advised pro-Soviet governments’ forces and trained guerrilla forces .
 The Spetsnaz became an indispensable element in Soviet statecraft . As time went by, the SpetsNaz became a vital element in statecraft.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, economic stagnation increased the importance of the small units . The Soviet Union's collapse increased the value of small units.
 The Russian military was used as a skeleton key in some conflicts to make up for the general incompetence of the military .
 Russians learned to integrate the Spetsnaz with conventional forces . Then, as Gerasimov Doctrine shows, Russia learned to integrated the Spetnaz .
 The contribution of military doctrine to Russian statecraft precedes the current Gerasimov Doctrine . As mentioned above, the contribution to Russian military doctrine is similar to that of Russia .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine is a clear articulation of past, current, and likely future Russian strategy . It contributes to the overall work and contributes to a future Russian policy .
 The strategic utility of the special operations from the Russian perspective is examined based on Colin Gray’s theory of the strategic Utility of special operations . Colin Gray's theory is based on the theory of Colin Gray.
 During the Kh rushchev era, nuclear deterrence was the main concern . Spetsnaz did not draw much attention until the Brezhnev era .
 effective use of the Spetsnaz started in the Brezhnev administration and then increased during the Gorbachev administration . Effective use of SpetsNaz began in theBrezhneva administration .
 The Spetsnaz performed several roles in those countries from providing foreign military assistance to direct action . The Spetnaz also performed several role roles in the United States .
 invasions of Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan provide examples of the Spetsnaz’s employment as the ‘tip of the spear’ in pursuit of the national purpose specified in the Brezhnev Doctrine, 37 which was produced to justify the invasion of
 The victory shared by the allied forces after WWII brought about new animosities instead of peace for the Soviet Union, thus shattering its security perception .
 The emergence of a new cross-continental dominant power, the U.S. worried the Soviet Union . The United States was worried by the rise of the United States .
 The expanding ideology of capitalism would limit the Soviet Union’s playground in Eurasia . It would also limit the Russian economy in the region .
 Kh rushchev tried to put more emphasis on weapon systems to challenge the West . He also tried to cut military personnel strength and try to cut defense budget .
 Khrushchev’s plans instigated a discussion between two schools of thought within the military about future wars .
 The first group, the radicals, shared Khrushchev’s viewpoint that future wars would include a decisive use of nuclear weapons in the initial period of war . The radicals, based on the adherents’ scientific prediction, would use nuclear weapons .
 maintaining a massive army in peace time would be uneconomical and unnecessary . Therefore, maintaining a huge army would be unnecessary . The army is an army of around 10,000 troops .
 The second group, the traditionalists, accused the radicals of not being realistic and chose to act cautiously based on a generalized experience of past wars, thus emphasizing the importance of multi-million-man armies .
 The Soviet Union took conventional precautions to preserve the balance of power . The traditionalists predominated despite Khrushchev’s opposing views .
 The Soviets raised million-man armies and consolidated the Soviet military presence all around the world . They raised millions of troops and consolidated Soviet military forces .
This upgraded the Soviet position from regional power to a world superpower . This upgraded the Russian position to a global superpower .
Khrushchev announced a reduction of 1,200,000 from a total of 3,623,000 men in the Soviet armed forces .
 Spetsnaz supported million-man armies, mostly by conducting strategic reconnaissance operations . With regard to preventing a general nuclear war, the main emphasis remained on the conventional units .
 The first Soviet military doctrine was shaped mostly around a weak combination of radical and traditionalist schools of thought . Kh rushchev's doctrine essentially combined conventional and unconventional means .
 The use of SOF, as mentioned above, was mostly limited to the long-range reconnaissance of nuclear sites . It was mostly used to reconnaissance of the nuclear sites.
 Malinovskii, Marshal and Defense Minister of the Soviet Union realized the importance of nuclear weapons as a deterrent . Kh rushchev, as did Khrushchev.
 Malinovskii never gave up the standing mass ground forces . However, unlike Khrushchev, Malinovaskii didn't give up ground forces.
 "combined action of all arms and services," Holloway writes . For him, the victorious end state could only be achieved by, he writes .
 Kh rushchev’s threat alone was not 41 Holloway, “Military Power and Political Purpose in Soviet Policy,” 19. The absolute consequences of a nuclear attack would be unknown .
Brezhnev The West became more powerful at the Soviet Union’s expense through the end of the Kh rushchev era .
 Khrushchev, Report to Supreme Soviet of USSR of the USSR, Pravda, January 15, 1960 . Khrushvic: "I am a proud member of the Soviet Union"
Until Brezhnev’s death, the main focus was to prevent a direct confrontation with the West, while consolidating power on its periphery .
 The Brezhnev administration depended highly upon surprise military interventions . To control the near-abroad while keeping a balanced tension with the West, it depended on surprise military intervention .
 The invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and postwar justification of the invasion ultimately created the Brezhnev Doctrine . The doctrine said the Soviet Union would take precautions in the event a Soviet Bloc country would drift away from communist ideology .
 The Brezhnev Doctrine also justified the invasion of Afghanistan as it moved in a capitalist direction, even if it was not Soviet Bloc country .
After Brezhnev died in 1982, doctrinal changes started to emerge, but the repercussions lingered until late in the Gorbachev era .
 The need for a force that would satisfy the stealth requirement of Brezhnev’s grand strategy during Russian campaigns necessitated the use of SOF-capable units .
 During Brezhnev’s tenure, Spetsnaz units proved their ability to accomplish given objectives in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Afghanistan .
Military expenditures increased dramatically as Soviet military presence expanded . As a result, military expenditures increased significantly .
 The Brezhnev 52 Ouimet, The Rise and Fall of the Brezhnv Doctrine in Soviet Foreign Policy, 2-4. The Rise & Fall of The Breznev doctrine in Soviet foreign policy.
 In the transition from the Brezhnev era to the Gorbachev era, Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko ruled the Soviet Union for short terms, fifteen months and twelve months . In the period of the Soviet Soviet Union, they ruled for 15 months and 12
Unlike Brezhnev, Gorbachev gradually retreated from the assertive use of military power in eastern Europe . Unlike Brezhnv, he gradually retreated.
 More Spetsnaz units were introduced to the battlefield with an enhanced spectrum of missions . To decrease the economic effects of the Afghan War and break the stalemate in the Soviets’ favor, more Spetnaz Units were introduced .
 The 5 percent ratio of the Spetsnaz to ground troops in the beginning of the war increased to 20 percent towards the end . Galeotti claims that the 5 per cent ratio of ground troops to ground soldiers in the early years of the conflict increased to 15 per cent .
 The Soviet Union's efforts to win the Afghan War did not help the Soviet Union heal all its wounds . However, the efforts were not enough to help the Soviets heal their wounds .
 Brown, and Keith Crane, Soviet Foreign Policy and Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe, 1-2 . Brown, Crane, Crane and Crane are both former Soviet foreign policy experts .
 Most of the Soviet communist regimes were deemed to be Soviet stooges . Just a few years later, social democracies had taken the place of the communist regimes .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union entailed a new unipolar world order . The Soviet Union's collapse led to a new world order, according to a report .
 The Russian Federation emerged as the successor of the Soviet legacy, yet was downgraded to a regional power . The Russian federation emerged as a successor to the Russian Federation .
 There have been differences between the Soviet and Russian history . There are many differences between Soviet and Russia's history .
 There are also similarities with the old and new practices and perceptions of the West and in the countermeasures used to maintain security in the post-Soviet era .
 Russian statecraft was further crippled in a period of stagnation during the first president, Boris Yeltsin . The First Chechen War also negatively impacted the success of the Spetsnaz .
 The military strategy to provide security constituted no more than brute reactionary countenneasures to uprisings in order to prevent further instabilities and territory losses . The strategy was not more than a brute reactionary Countenneasures, it was a "brutally reactionary countenasures"
 Russia’s Special Forces, 30. 20 with conflicts when the Russians captured Grozny and lost it two years later to the Chechen rebels .
 In February 1994, nearly ten months before the war, all remaining veterans who had had experience in urban fighting retired .
 Only the Spetsnaz had better training and equipment . Compared to other fighting units, only the Spetnaz has better training .
 Spetsnaz did not let the army make up for general military incompetence . However, the reactionary approach that caught the army unprepared didn't let the military make up.
 The Russians learned from their mistakes in the First Chechen War and launched the second campaign with more emphasis on Spetsnaz . The Russians learn from the first Chechen war and launched their second campaign .
 The Second Chechen War proved more successful than the first based on better employment of Spetsnaz along with other Russian forces . It also sparked controversial debates its overall success .
 A bloody hostage rescue operation shattered world opinion about the Russian antiterrorist campaign .
 The military reform process that started in the nuclear age with Khrushchev was mostly suspended .
 The strategic parity that eroded during Gorbachev’s tenure completely vanished in the Yeltsin era . Putin's strategic parity with the Russian leader completely vanished.
 Yeltsin later seemed to be a placeholder and his era was a transition period . A more powerful ruler who could regenerate the old power of the sublime Soviet Union took office .
 Vladimir Putin's successor, Vladimir Putin, put the country on the track for military reforms . Putin has started to proactively produce countermeasures to domestic threats and threats from the West .
 He kept security responsibility in his own hands when he handed power to Medvedev . He kept his own hand when he gave power to the Russian government .
 Medvedev’s efforts for a more accountable, democratic-like approach to security affairs turned out to be insufficient when Putin took the presidency back .
 Putin took a proactive, if not offensive, approach to security issues . Unlike Yeltsin’s reactionary defensive approach, Putin took an aggressive approach to the security issue .
 The modernization of both the army’s structure and equipment, besides the new, all-inclusive employment of vast means to achieve more unified national objectives, put new tenns such as ‘hybrid warfare’ into the doctrine, and concerns about Russia's status in
 The ambiguous use of military and non-military means below NATO’s Article Five threshold and high emphasis on unconventional warfare in the areas of Russian interest blurred the line between peace and war and paralyzed the West .
 The Russian military started to make formidable territorial gains in the former controlled areas of the Soviet Union . With Putin’s security measures, the Russian military made considerable territorial gains .
 The Second Chechen War, the conflict in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the annexation of Crimea, and the ongoing war in the Donbass region of Ukraine would exemplify Putin’s wars .
 The Russian military underwent military reform. While Putin’s wars were ongoing, the Russian military was undergoing military reform .
 The Russian military refonn was initiated by Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov after the conflict in Georgia in 2008 . It was continued under his successor Sergei Shoigu, and was accelerated later by Gen. Gen. Serdykov .
Gerasimov surfaced with new equipment for special operators during the Crimean conflict . Gerasimov, a former Russian military commander, was involved in the conflict in Crimea .
 The previously acknowledged article by Gerasimov insinuates what Russia’s new approach to security issues would be in the near future and is examined next .
 "Gerasimov Doctrine" perpetuates Soviet tradition by including perceived threats, future war predictions, and political approaches to world affairs . It also includes perceived threats to win future wars .
 The “Gerasimov Doctrine’s’ special operations campaign was conducted in Crimea in 2013 . The portents of the special operation campaign lie between the lines of the Gerasimov doctrine and point out new Russian strategy .
 Two of Gerasimov’s points reflect on special operations and the use of SOF in Crimea . In particular, two of Ger as well as special operations in Crimea.
 First, the covert actions of SOF, combined with active information and counterinformation operations, supplement the use of non-military means to achieve political and strategic goals . First, they combined withactive information andcounterinformation operations .
 The use of SOF and indigenous opposition forces create a pennanently active front through the entire territory of the target state . Second, the use of soF and Indigenous opposition forces creates a pennaently activeFront through the whole territory of a target state.
 The Gerasimov model resuscitates the Soviet practices used in Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan in a modernized fashion with nuances .
 Actions to start a war without declaring it may signal a return to the Soviet era in Russian foreign policy . Actions could jeopardize small neighbors rooted in the Soviet soil .
 The model also discloses the Russian perception of the tactics employed by the West in color revolutions as an excuse to reinvigorate similar tactics to achieve political ends .
Bluntly, blame is on the West for what Russia would do in Crimea and Ukraine, and maybe Moldova, Lithuania, Latvia, or Estonia . Bluntly. Bluntley, blames the West.
 What happened in Crimea puts Gerasimov’s model into practice and tested the quality of modernized SOF units .
 The actions were conducted by the Russian Spetsnaz and Naval Infantry in an obscure fashion, and what actually happened was unveiled after the victory .
 Fait accompli paralyzed any mechanisms that could have reacted. Consequently, the fait accomplist paralyzed any mechanism that could react .
 Mark Galeotti explains the logic behind the “below-the-threshold’ actions of 70 General Valery Gerasimov . He originally published his article “The Value of Science in Prediction’’ in the Military-Industrial Courier .
Post-Stalin regimes faced many serious problems to solve in order to protect the balance of power with their adversaries . The post- Stalin regimes had to solve many serious issues to solve .
 Kh rushchev and the Politburo staff at the time created a basis for grand strategy, policies, and decisions . The military doctrine ended up as the military doctrine .
 The military doctrine suggested constant readiness, military superiority both in quality and quantity . Kh rushchev’s idea of conventional disarmament in favor of strategic nuclear-missile technology .
 The aim of this doctrine was to deter the West and avoid a world war . The aim was to prevent an imminent attack with the first strike, and survive and assure victory .
 In the age of nuclear weapons, preparation for a nuclear war by achieving parity was acceptable . However, Khrushchev failed to sufficiently do so .
Brezhnev made strenuous efforts to achieve strategic parity with the West . He signaled that the aim of the Soviet Union was not superiority .
After Brezhnev died in 1982, doctrinal changes started to emerge . The Soviet Union would take precautions to maintain the Soviet bloc .
 The "fraternal assistance" to nationalist movements, which started in the Kh rushchev era, turned into military intervention to prevent revolutions, and succeeded .
 The mass Soviet military presence backfired and failed to prevent the widespread reactionary movements to replace communist regimes with socialist democracies . The massSoviet military presence in the Soviet Union backfired.
 The new inertia did not help Gorbachev restore power . The gradual contraction in the Soviet presence in Europe ended with the collapse of the communist bloc .
 The post-Soviet Russian Federation created a balance of power with NATO after a stagnation during Yeltsin’s tenure . The Russian Federation was formed after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Russia has perpetuated the Soviet legacy of expanding Russian regional control . Russia has successfully prevented the West from meddling with its business. Russia has also prevented the U.S. from meddling.
 Putin's Russia has tried to reinvigorate the communist bloc . By using all its elements of national power in harmony, Putin’s Russia has used all its national power .
 Russian countermeasures evolved from necessary means to survive in nuclear warfare to all-inclusive combined covert efforts to succeed in hybrid warfare . The transformation of the threat from nuclear weapons to terrorist networks also evolved .
 The emphasis on multimillion-man armies in the Russian military discourse has recently shifted towards special operations . The changing threat perception and resources at hand is behind the shift .
 In theory, the strategic utility of special forces is mostly based on strategy, task distribution, and capability of the units to achieve assigned tasks .
 Colin Gray argues that “he strategic value of special operations forces depends not just on 75 Ouimet, The Rise and Fall of the Brezhnev Doctrine in Soviet Foreign Policy .
 The overall strategy remains most important and the various missions SOF would execute to support that strategy remains crucial .
 The Soviets first sensed the need for special operations to prevent possible escalation of global conflicts while pursuing their goals .
 Khrushchev intended to maintain Soviet military support to “national liberation movements,” but to refrain from an escalation into a war between states .
 Kh rushchev seemed to be saying that local war situations involving formal confrontation of Soviet and United States forces were dangerous and should be avoided . National liberation struggles including guerrilla and proxy forces might be supported without undue risk .
 The strategic path that would lead to political and military victory during the nuclear age entailed unconventional warfare that would avoid engagement in a mutually destructive nuclear confrontation .
 The Soviets regarded anti-Soviet movements in the Soviet bloc as the work of foreign agents . The Soviets were aware of the power of covert actions .
 In that respect, they used the argument of foreign involvement to justify their interference in their neighbors’ sovereignty .
 Reliance on tanks and troops gave way to the use of “special forces’s” and the strategic application of ultimatums . The use of special forces and ‘special forces' is a key part of the strategy .
 All necessary means, legal or illegal, were employed to compromise the authority of the reformist government while strengthening its conservative opponents . The reformists were also employed to strengthen their conservative opponents.
 The Soviets employed special operators as military advisors all around the world . In order to balance the expansion of capitalism by influencing foreign governments, the Soviets employedSpecial operators as special operators .
 Spetsnaz tasked to serve as advisors in many countries to propagate communist ideas as a shield against Western imperialism . The SpetsNaz was tasked with helping to promote communist ideas .
 The use of special operations to achieve strategic outcomes under Putin developed in a similar way with the operations in Czechoslovakia .
 First, Gerasimov and Putin put the blame on foreign agents for setting the stage for so-called “colored revolutions’ and Arab spring, with the aim of changing the regime .
 The annexation of Crimea represents one of the most significant military successes and strategic gains in recent history . Without causing any reaction by the West, the annexation is not expected to cause any reaction .
 The Soviets and then the Russians increasingly employed the Spetsnaz and other SOF-capable units to wage unconventional wars off the Western radar .
 The Spetsnaz left indiscernible footprints by conducting low-profile, covert, covert operations during the Soviet era .
 Strategy and practical implications in both the Soviet Union and the Russian Federation look identical . Strategy and its practical implications look identical in both countries .
 The Russians justify their aggression by projecting a perceived interference by the West in their interest areas . The Russians idiosyncratically justify their aggressive behavior by projecting perceived interference.
 Afterward, they use that perceived threat as a basis to counteract and subvert the unwanted outcomes in Russia’s favor . Russia has a history of using perceived threats to counter and counter the perceived threat .
 To achieve national objectives, the Russians increasingly rely on special operations . Russia increasingly relies on special ops to achieve objectives .
 covert operations give the Russians increased space where they can politically maneuver . Thus, covert operations gave the Russians more space to maneuver .
 The nuclear threat during the Cold War compelled the Soviet Union to have deniability as an important factor to maintain a balance . The Soviet Union had deniability.
 The military doctrine during Khrushchev's tenure required the Soviets to avoid mutual nuclear destruction .
 Kh rushchev tried to implement conventional disarmament in favor of strategic nuclear missiles . In that respect, Khrushchev attempted to implement traditional disarmament . He also tried to use nuclear weapons as a weapon of choice .
 He aimed to achieve strategic superiority over the U.S. by doing so . He said he wanted to achieve a strategic superiority.
Brezhnev managed the crisis skillfully and declared that the aim of the Soviet Union was to accomplish strategic parity rather than superiority . Still, Brezhneva managed the Crisis skillfully, he said .
 Brezhnev did not relinquish Khrushchev’s policy of keeping control over the Soviet bloc .
 The Soviets employed the Spetsnaz to facilitate control within the Soviet bloc and not provoke the West .
 During the Gorbachev era, strategic parity evolved to a "new thinking" in strategic aims, which promoted openness and restructuring . In the 1980s, the strategic parity in the Soviet Union was a key part of the "New thinking"
 They contributed to the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the rise of the Russian Federation . However, they also contribute to the demise of the USSR .
 The immediate perceived threat for the Russian Federation became further territorial losses . The Russian Federation is losing territory in some areas .
 He aimed to restore central control over the separatist regions and gain a reputation by doing so . He said he wanted to restore control over separatist regions .
 Putin was replaced by Putin. To his surprise, he lost the First Chechen War .
 General Gerasimov articulated a new model, mostly known as theGerasimov Doctrine or Model, which adds scientific prediction to power projection . General Ger asimov articulated the new model in a speech .
Gerasimov emphasizes use of special operations in the fluid nature of current and future conflicts . In that model, Gerasimov says, there remains no boundary between peace and war .
 The strategic utility of the Spetsnaz has been consistent in Soviet and Russian Federation statecraft . The Spetnaz is a well-known Russian statecraft.
 In Hungary, GRU Spetsnaz captured the leaders and stopped the anti-Soviet rebellion . In Hungary.
 In Czechoslovakia, they facilitated the entry of the Soviet Army into the country . They captured key government buildings and government officials .
 The Spetsnaz introduced new tactics to infiltrate, to evacuate, and to provide fire support for Soviet operations . In Afghanistan, other than accomplishing similar objectives as in Czechoslovakia, they used helicopters to infiltrate and evacuate . In Czechs, the SpetsNaz used helicopters
 The Spetsnaz acquired more resources as they gained the trust of Soviet leaders . The Spetnaz gained more resources in the past.
 A Spetsnaz unit received its own dedicated air element for the first time in 1987 . Even in 1987, as Galeotti claims, “a SpetsNaz unit’s own air element,’ for thefirst time .
 As the Spetsnaz garnered more resources, the leaders expected more from them . The Spetnaz had more resources.
 Russia emphasizes the use of special operations due to the economic downturn . Another reason why Russia emphasizes special operations is due to economic downturn.
 The spectrum of threats became more intricate, and the resources at hand lessened . Special operations came into focus in Russian military discourse .
 Kh rushchev’s doctrine and the Brezhnev Doctrine did not address directly the use of special operations . The Gerasimov doctrine did .
Gerasimov directly addresses the importance of employing special operations forces and countering the enemy’s. Gerasimov: ‘We need to use special operations to counter the enemy's’
 The focus on special operations forces proves the strategic importance of the special operations in current Russian statecraft .
 The Soviet leaders worried that the reform movement would eventually break the country’s allegiance to Moscow .
 Dubcek did not slow down the momentum of the reforms and sought grounds for a military intervention . They ran out of options as DubceK did not speed down the progress of the reform .
 The Soviets still had influence on the inner circles of the Czechoslovak administration, which gave them the advantage of preempting the Czechs defense .
 The Soviet Union sought an acquiescent attitude from its Cold War opponent, the U.S. before the invasion . On the other hand, the Soviet Union wanted an acquiescence attitude from the United States .
 President Lyndon B Johnson left Washington, DC, in August to return in September . Johnson left in September to return to Washington, D.C.
The Kremlin regarded his distance from the capital on the brink of the aggressions as an implicit approval of the operation . The Kremlin regarded the move as an implicitly approval of it .
 The Soviets decided to invade Czechoslovakia with support from four other Warsaw Pact countries . East Gennany, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Poland were also involved .
 East Gennany also played an important role by sapping Czechoslovakia of resources that could have helped reformers in the country .
 Albania, Yugoslavia, and Warsaw Pact’s Romania diplomatically supported Czechoslovakia . Albania, Croatia, and Poland diplomatically support Czechs .
 On August 20, more than 500,000 Warsaw Pact troops crossed the Czechoslovak borders, led by Anny Gen.
 The main purpose of the operation was to replace the current leader of Czechoslovakia with a pro-Soviet one .
 The Soviet leaders failed in the negotiations to implement their desire to end the Prague Spring . They decided on military intervention to thwart Dubcek's refonn movement .
 Dubcek either to revoke the reforms and conform to Soviet socialism or face a coup . In an ultimatum, they asked DubceK either to revocation the reforms or conform to the Soviet socialism .
 Soviet political leaders may have wanted to keep the Eastern bloc from dissolving . Russian political leaders also may have been keen on keeping the bloc together .
 The risk that the reform movement in Czechoslovakia could extend to the rest of the Eastern bloc countries worried them . The risk is the same as that of other countries in the EU .
 The military intervention in that sense would show Soviet leaders' determination to keep the Warsaw Pact united while “liberating’s Czechoslovakia. It would show the leaders’ determination to stay united, says the author .
 Soviet military leaders focused on invading the capital, Prague, as the main objective for a quick victory .
 To prevent heavy losses, they emphasized paralyzing the enemy’s vital center by massive surprise attacks .
 The leaders ordered the Spetsnaz to secure the Ruzyne airport, to lead the way through Prague, and like Hungary, to capture the opponent's political leaders and bring them to Moscow .
 Warsaw Pact countries would penetrate the country from several directions to create a diversion and prevent a possible counterattack from Prague . Other Warsaw Pact nations would also try to create diversion from other countries .
 Dubcek and the Soviets settled the situation in the Soviet Union's favor in the Kremlin . Spetsnaz operatives escorted him and his cabinet into Moscow to attend meetings .
 The first element of Spetsnaz secured an airhead and then the rest of the Spetnaz, airborne troops, and anned forces contingents arrived at Ruzyne airport .
 At that time, the GRU operated under the KGB, especially in operations abroad where the political situation looked sensitive .
 Before the war, the KGB and the GRU had already established pro-Soviet networks inside Czechoslovakia .
Those networks, the communist hard-liners, and Soviet operatives inside Czechoslovakia facilitated the invasion . Those networks, including Soviet operatives, helped facilitate the invasion.
 The Kremlin used a reverse psychology on Czechoslovak leaders and the Soviet public using the press to cover for its illicit plan . The Kremlin also used the press as a cover for the plan .
 Pravda, a Soviet propaganda disseminator, headlined fabricated evidence that implicated the United States in a coup attempt in Czechoslovakia .
 The Soviet leaders probably aimed to justify the Soviet Army’s prospective invasion of the country .
 Professor Valenta claims the KGB and their agents in Czechoslovakia were most likely involved in placing the United States origin weapons as evidence of a U.S.-based counter-revolutionary coup attempt .
 The operation concept was a surprise attack to invade the country with an army of nearly half-million men . In that sense, the operational concept was an attack on the country .
 The Soviets employed the Spetsnaz to shape the battlefield before the invasion and then to lead the way . The Soviets used the Spetnaz as a weapon of choice .
 By capturing the leaders without harming the city and replacing them with pro-Soviet stooges, the Soviets accomplished an external coup . The Soviets accomplished the external coup by capturing them without harming their city .
 In August 1968, the Soviet Union ‘temporarily’ sent troops to “liberate’ Czechoslovakia .
 The Soviet Union intended to keep the West from intervening, and also to ease fear among Czechoslovaks . By declaring the invasion as “temporarily to liberate,’ the Soviet Union wanted to keep it from intervening .
 The West did not intervene other than a weak condemnation from the United Nations . The Czechoslovak people protested the Soviet troops . The West didn't intervene .
 KGB Spetsnaz operatives landed at Ruzyne airport near Prague in civilian clothes . They contacted pro-Soviet security officers .
 The Aeroflot airplanes carried the GRU Spetsnaz soldiers first .
 What Happened to the United Nations Dream and What the U.S. Can Do about It .
 GRU Spetsnaz, along with the mass army components, moved through the city center to capture key government buildings . The KGB and GRU took control of the airport, including the airport .
 The Spetsnaz and SOF-capable airborne troops captured Dubcek and other reformist cabinet members .
 The day after the invasion began, they escorted officials to the Ruzyne airport and onto Moscow in a military aircraft .
 The KGB and GRU Spetsnaz enabled a mass army to enter Czechoslovakia and capture the reformist leaders alive . The KGB helped the army enter the country and captured the leaders alive.
 The Spetsnaz campaign was based on the campaign's success in the U.S. The campaign was focused on the environment and the importance of public opinion .
 It is difficult to differentiate and compare the relative quality of KGB Spetsnaz and GRU Spetnaz . It's difficult to compare and compare.
 KGB's chief Yuri V Andropov's interaction with the Spetsnaz played a vital role in employing them . Galeotti suggests that the KGB’s chief Yuri Andropova’'s interaction was a vital part in employing the Spetnaz .
 Andropov suggested the use of Spetsnaz to capture cabinet members to quell the Hungarian uprising . He was the Soviet ambassador to Budapest in 1956 .
 Later, as he recognized the utility of such forces, he created the KGB’s own Spetsnaz in 1967 . Later, he was involved in the creation of the KGB.
 Mansur gained fame among the Caucasian people and gathered several ethnic groups together to rise as one against those Muslims he considered corrupt . Mansur was an imam and a Sufi scholar .
 He transfonned his campaign into one to obliterate non-Muslims, specifically Orthodox Christian Russia . Subsequently, he transfoned his campaign to one to eradicate non- Muslims . He then went on to become an Orthodox Christian in Russia .
 Mansur’s efforts to convince Ottomans to aid his jihad rang alarm bells . Russians sent the Astrakhan Regiment to quell the uprising .
 Mansur gathered 12,000 men from across the North Caucasus to fight in successive campaigns . The victory helped spread the word about Mansur’s reputation in defeating the Russians .
 He remained active until his capture in 1791, but without another significant victory . He was still active until he was captured in 1792, but never won a victory .
 Chechens would be a thorn in Russian security. But his struggle proved that Chechen would be an obstacle to security .
 Russia assigned General Alexei Yennolov the task of extending its rule in the North Caucasus .
 Numerous Russian victories over Shamil’s men misled the Russians to believe that the Chechen will to resist was easy to break .
Until the end of Crimean War in 1856, Shamil and his men were able to sustain the fight using guerrilla tactics . The Crimean War ended with Shamil's men being able to survive until 1856 .
 Russia was able to deploy the bulk of its forces to Chechnya when the Crimean War ended . Russia's forces were deployed when the Crimea War ended in Crimea .
In 1859, Shamil was detained, and Chechnya formally became part of Russia again . In 1859. Shamil's detention was the first time he was detained in Russia .
 The collapse of the Russian Empire and the emergence of the Soviet Socialist Republic gave Chechens hope for independence . The bubble burst quickly .
 A Case for Hybrid Warfare’s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2002, was published in 2002 .
 His harsh treatment brought about another rebellion that only lasted for a year . The rebellion only lasted one year .
 Stalin never allowed Chechens free rein, and he managed to quash every secessionist movement . Stalin never let Chechen free rein .
 Stalin ordered the execution of 14,000 Chechen and Ingush in 1937 . In 1937, after seven years of a Red Army crackdown on the region, Stalin orders the execution .
 The Chechen will to resist as they transfonned into a nation. Instead of fading away in exile, the Chechenwill to resist .
 The battle-hardened, tight-knit, and revengeful Chechens returned to what remained of their homes . The Chechens have returned to their homes in the past .
 As deportees arrived, a new debate between the returning old inhabitants and the new owners of the lands and properties brought about tension .
 The Russo149. Russo149 is the author of the Russo149 . He says the incumbents’ failure to address the underlying issues that caused theRus149 .
 A Case for Hybrid Warfare,’ 47; Galeotti, Russia’s Wars in Chechnya, 1994-2009, 20. The author of the book, "A Case for hybrid Warfare," is also known as the author of "The Russian War of
 The hardship the Chechens faced during the exile in the mid 20 th century molded the Chechen youth and steered them towards leading and fighting in the First and Second Chechen Wars .
 The Chechens started to seek freedom in a nationalist campaign led by Dzhokhar Dudayev . After the Collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1980s, the Chechens began to seek free speech .
 Dudayev declared independence after winning the October 1991 presidential election held in Chechnya . With the opportunity that the Soviet Union’s collapse created, he declared independence .
 Boris Yeltsin declared the election null and ordered a battalion of interior troops to arrest Dudayev and quell the uprising . The president of the Russian republic, then the president, declared the vote null .
Russian attempts to keep Chechens under Russian control made the Chechens entrench in their national cause . Yeltsin's intentions were unsuccessful .
 In June 1992, Russia again refused to accept the self-declared Chechen Republic of Ichkeria as an independent state after the split of Ingushetia and Chechnya .
 Russia embarked on an operation in December 1994 under the above-mentioned circumstances in a bid to deny independence to Chechens . The operation was carried out in the late 1990s.
 The First Chechen War lasted two years and ended in the fall of 1996 with a subsequent peace settlement in November . The first Chechen war ended two years later with a peace settlement.
 The Russian defeat in the war caused a dramatic decrease in popular support for Yeltsin .
 Mike Bowker suggests that “was determined to emulate the Estonian revolution and bring independence to Chechnya’s homeland . Bowker: “Conflict in Chechenya” in Russian Politics under Putin .
 His successful reelection in 1996 did not restore his prewar popularity . He was reelected again in 1996 .
 Increasing tensions and his inability to deal with the situation contributed to Vladimir Putin’s rise to power .
 Putin replaced Yeltsin as the Russian President in December . In December, Russian forces marched into Chechnya for the second time . The Russian President replaced the former President of the country .
 These terrorist actions were allegedly conducted by Habib Abdurrahman Khattab’s group . Chechen warlord Shamil Basayev and his followers, and Dagestani Islamist Radicals, are accused .
 The same tripartite alliance resulted in a large-scale incursion into Dagestan to liberate it from Russia and join Chechnya in a single Islamic State .
 Russian forces again moved into Chechnya in October 1999 . In order to end terrorist activities and secessionist movements, Russian forces moved in .
 The Kremlin officially ended the war in April 2009, declaring the counterterrorism operation in Chechnya over .
 North Caucasus continues to contribute to global jihadist terrorism by exporting fighters to conflict zones all around the globe .
Russian proxy, Akhmad Kadyrov, inserted into Chechnya to rule the region in accordance with Russian interests . He later successfully isolated Chechen’s fight from international support .
 Akhmad Kadyrov’s death by suicide bomber in May 2004 . His son, Ramzan, was appointed prime minister and then Chechen president in March 2006 and 2007 .
 Ramzan Kadyrov has ruled Chechnya with allegiance to Putin since then . Since then, Ramzan has ruled the country since then.
 The First Chechen War Yeltsin struggled to prevent the Russian Federation from dissolving despite his pre-election rhetoric to grant constituent states freedom in deciding their destinies .
Yeltsin did not tolerate secessionist movements in Chechnya or anywhere else in that region . Yeltsin has not tolerated secessionist movement in the region .
 Yeltsin was counting on Dudayev’s opponents and Russian ‘volunteers’ and supported them in the unsuccessful October-November 1994 coup . Yeltsins was counting the opponents and Russians “volunteerers” in the failed 1994 coup.
 The poorly planned coup attempt turned into a disaster for the Russians . The poorlyplanned coup attempt was a disaster.
State of emergency in Chechnya to restore order and federal involvement followed. Subsequently, the state of emergency was restored .
 Yeltsin ordered the military to capture Grozny after a coup attempt by Russian-backed Provisional Chechen Council Forces failed . He was misguidedly believing that the fall ofGrozny would mean victory .
 The indigenous forces did not contribute to the campaign, but their workload shifted to the federal forces .
 Minister of Defense General Pavel Grachev personally briefed the objectives to capture Grozny . The Russian military is currently in the region of Russia .
 Forces would prepare and secure locations from which operations would later be conducted . Forward aviation and attack helicopters attained air superiority and other units prepared for electronic warfare .
 Three days, December 7-9, were allocated for Stage II, during which Russian troops would approach Grozny from five directions and effect a double encirclement of the city and of the republic as a whole .
 Forces would move from north and south of the city to capture the Presidential Palace and other key government buildings, television and radio facilities .
 Mobilization of the troops lasted longer than expected, and task forces were not able to move until December ll.
 The inadequate prewar reconnaissance and false assumption that the Chechens would welcome Russians with open arms led the Russian leaders into a limited show of force . The inadequate prewar reconnaissance and false assumption that the Chechen would welcome Russians with open
 The preparations and plans and plans were shortsighted and insufficient to accomplish the purpose of the First Chechen War . The preparations are shortsighted, according to the Russian government .
 Grozny remained Russian for only two years, causing devastating military casualties and civilian losses on both sides . The Russian army remained in Russia for two years .
 Yeltsin could not get what he yearned for and lost a considerable amount of domestic popular support . Yeltsins lost a lot of domestic support in the past year .
 Yeltsin’s erroneous conclusion that the war was won based on decreasing Chechen attacks gave Russians confidence and prematurely caused reductions in military presence in Grozny, Russia .
 Seemingly endless violence eventually brought the two sides to the table . The two sides had been at odds for years .
 Alexander Lebed, Russian security council secretary, and Maskhadov concluded the Khasav-Yurt annistice on August 30, 1996 . Alexander LeBed, Russian Security Council secretary, was the head of security council .
 46 agreed upon which simply stated that Russia would not attack Chechnya, insofar as Chechenya would not declare independence . 46 agreed on which simply said that Russia wouldn't attack Chechensya .
 The Second Chechen War increasing tension across the Caucasus mountains . Maskhadov’s inability to prevent rebel warlords from conducting terrorist actions put Russia and Chechnya on the brink of war again .
 The invasion of Dagestan by these two warlords and Dagestani secessionists ultimately started the war . The invasion was the result of the war between the two factions .
 In the Second Chechen War, Putin intended to end terrorist and secessionist activities to show his determination and power to the Russian public, to reinvigorate central control, and to prove Russia was a great power once again .
 This time the Russians knew that the Chechens would resist and anticipated that they also would be better prepared . This time they knew that they would resist. This time, the Russians known that the Russians would resist . The Russians also anticipated that their own country would resist,
 Chechens entrenched their defenses inside Grozny, digging tunnels and booby-trapping in the buildings they could not hold . The Chechens dug tunnels and traps in their homes to protect themselves .
 The Russians were better organized and improved their armored vehicles and use of technology . The Russians are better organized, improved their vehicles and technology .
 This time they relied on artillery and air power but also had detailed contingency plans . This time, they used air power and artillery but also relied on contingency plans.
 Putin’s detennination to pacify Chechnya brought about disastrous Russian counterterrorist measures as Chechens resorted to terrorism .
 In 2002, operational responsibility in Chechnya passed from the military to interior forces . The concept of operations switched to counterterrorism in 2002 .
 The new commander of the “Special Joint Grouping of Forces ” came from the MVD, even though his predecessors were from the Army .
Consecutive terrorist attacks and counterterrorist operations devastated the region until 2009 . Consecutive terror attacks andcounterterrorist operations were devastated by the region .
 The Kremlin officially declared the war over in April 2009 .
 In both wars, counterinsurgency constituted the overall operational concept . The concept was used in both wars .
 Since the attacks mostly occurred in the cities, the military operations were conducted in urban terrain .
 MVD and pro-Russian Chechen militias took over operations against Chechen rebels . The operational concept switched to counterterrorism .
 In the first war, both operational concepts lacked proper doctrine, dedicated units, and relevant training . In the second war, neither operational concepts had proper doctrine and dedicated units .
 The Spetsnaz, in parallel with the general lack of mastery in the overall campaign, were not employed effectively in the first phases of the war . The Spetnaz were not used effectively in first phases.
 The Spetsnaz proved a brilliant element in the fight against the rebels . Mostly employed in reconnaissance, coordinating artillery and air support, sniper and counter-sniper missions, and also engaging in close quarter battle .
 The Russians used the Spetsnaz more effectively in the second war, starting in the early stages of the war .
 The Spetsnaz also conducted the same missions that they did in the first war . This time more systematically under a unified command, adding more to the already better organized campaign .
After Grozny was captured, the Spetsnaz kept going after escaping rebels in Chechen .
 Since the rebels were dispersed throughout the surrounding villages, their recognition and elimination would require surgical kill or capture operations . The rebels would need surgical kill and capture operations.
 The tasks that the Spetsnaz accomplished in those operations are unknown . However, the tasks that they did are unknown.
 Cleansing the North Caucasus mountains of Chechen rebels turned into a disaster by causing significant civilian casualties .
 MVD’s Alpha counterterrorist team and OMON special police forces stormed the Dubrovka theater in 2002 and the Beslan school in 2004 .
 Moscow announced direct rule over Chechnya in May 2000 and Putin appointed Akhmad Kadyrov in June . Putin appointed the Russian president in June.
 The First Chechen War In the first war, as mentioned above, Yeltsin first supported Dudayev’s opponents in a failed coup attempt .
Federal forces' involvement became inevitable in order to deny Chechnya independence . Then, the federal forces’ involvement was inevitable, the government said .
 Russian air force provided air superiority, and then ground forces moved into Grozny to face their enemy .
 The Russians never managed to seal Grozny, especially in the south . Contrary to the plans, the Russian government never succeeded .
 That gave the rebels an escape route and a chance to regroup and prepare for a counterattack . That gave them an escape routes and gave them the chance to prepare for the counterattack.
 Russians engaged the rebels in numerous bloody urban raids. In between capturing Grozny and losing it, the rebels engaged the Russians in numerous raids .
 Most of the reinforcements came from operational units, including Spetsnaz units from across the country . Russia experienced the impasse in Grozny.
 In the first stages, the Spetsnaz units executed their traditional battlefield reconnaissance missions .
 Russians underestimate their enemy, but lack of intelligence caused them to underestimate their enemies .
 The Spetsnaz failed in their early reconnaissance missions in 1994, or failed in the early days of the war .
 Spetsnaz suffered heavy losses. Despite their superior skills of operating in urban areas, they suffered heavy loss .
 Soviet-era Spetsnaz veterans among the Chechen rebels. These losses partly resulted from the considerable number of Soviet- era SpetsNaz veterans .
 The rebels had all the advantages of being the resident insurgent force . The rebels also had the advantage of being an insurgent force.
 In 1995, the Chechens conducted a treacherous act when Basayev was surrounded in a hospital in Budyonnovsk . The Chechens carried out the treacherous act.
 Oliker suggests that the Spetsnaz took part in the rescue operation in support of MVD’s elite Alpha counterterrorist forces .
 This interim peace agreement would last until the launch of the second war in 1999 . It would be the first peace agreement since the first war began in 1998 .
 The Spetsnaz, along with the rest of the army, were better prepared for the second war . The Second Chechen War The Spetnaz was the second.
 Russians learned from their mistakes in the first war and improved their tactics to defeat their enemy . Russians learned to use their mistakes to defeat the enemy .
 The first war started with a massive air campaign, and then the bulk of the anny and interior troops moved through Grozny . The second one also started with an air campaign .
 This time, instead of making a direct and daring raid into Grozny, the Russians were very cautious and methodical . It was the first time the Russians had made such a daring raid . The Russians are very cautious, methodical.
 The Spetsnaz were successful during urban and rural raids and battlefield reconnaissance . The Spetnaz are known for their reconnaissance of battlefield reconnaissance.
 Their level of training and preparation made them better at spotting for artillery and air support . They were better at seeing for artillery, air support and spotting for air support.
 The company commander erroneously called artillery fire onto his own position rather than on the Chechens . 84 Russian soldiers out of 91 Russian soldiers were killed in the Argun valley .
When the Russian Spetsnaz left Chechnya, local forces known as Kadyrovtsy, Akhmad Kadyov’s loyalists, replaced them .
 Reporting to the GRU, these units sometimes called themselves Spetsnaz . The GRU is known as "Spetnaz"
 The Second Chechen War was over in March 2002 and MVD troops together with indigenous forces took over antiterrorist operations which lasted until 2009 . As mentioned in the concept of the operation section, the second Chechen war was over .
 The Spetsnaz provided an expansion of choice for the Russian leaders . The Spetnaz provides an expand of choice.
 Russian leaders chose to employ them in urban warfare . Since the Spetsnaz had better training and equipment, they chose to use them in warfare .
General military incompetence was not good enough to make up for the general military incompetence . Their level of training and preparation were better in the first war than the rest of the fighting forces .
 The Chechen rebels did not have sufficient information about the rebels . However, they were skillful they were, they didn't have enough information .
 The Spetsnaz contributed significantly to the overall campaign . In the second war, they learned from their mistakes, having learned.
 The improved training and preparation of the rest of the army had a decisive impact in consolidating victory . Also, the improved training of the other army had an impact on consolidating the victory .
 In the second war, the commitment, training, and preparation of all the forces improved . In the first war, training and preparation for all forces improved.
 The Spetsnaz also learned from the first war . The rest of the army, including the rest of their army, also learned.
 This time, their improved capabilities and more skillful employment resulted in greater strategic utility to win the war . This time they improved their skills and capabilities, they won the war, according to the military .
 In fact, the Kadyrovtsy still constitutes Chechnya’s armed forces under the rule of Ramzan Kadyov .
 The Spetsnaz met most of the claims outlined by Colin Gray . In conclusion, after two wars, the SpetsNaz met the claims of Colin Gray.
 Russia in agreement with Ukraine, had political control over Crimea until 20 1 4. The post-Soviet era was ebb and flow in the post- Soviet era .
 The Russian Federation has revitalized its power in the two decades since its emergence . The operation was essential for an operation to take back Crimea, the Russian Federation says .
 Once Russian President Vladimir Putin had offered to “guarantee Crimea’s territory, the only remaining requirement to legitimize an invasion became finding the right window of opportunity .
Russia had the window of opportunity to fulfill its long-term dream. NATO’s ponderous decision-making process and low-probability of reaction to events in Ukraine .
 The Russian Spetsnaz played its role in the anned intervention portion of the annexation . The annexation started on 20 February .
 The Russians aimed to exert direct rule over Crimea in response to the westernization of the government in Kiev . They depended mostly on the employment of SOF-capable units to invade the country .
 Russia annexed Crimea for the second time in history, whether acknowledged by the rest of the world or not . The annexation is the second in history .
 Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine are still unknown . 56 contributions of other Russian intelligence organizations to the outcome remain unknown .
 There were sufficient human resources inside, or insiders, ready to act and facilitate the invasion when Russian units infiltrated . However, there were enough human resources in Russia to act on the invasion .
 The actual extent of the covert operations conducted will remain classified until the Russian archives are opened . Unfortunately, the actual extent will be classified .
 GRU’s Spetsnaz and the newly formed KSO played vital roles in the process .
 The Russians refrained from attracting the attention of the West, thus achieving a sense of surprise and giving Russia space to maneuver . While preparing for the Crimean war by stealth, the Russians fended off the West .
 The employment of nearly all Russian special units in Crimea contributed to that purpose . Also, nearly all of Russia's special units were in Crimea .
 It may also indicate an evolution of the units from the Soviet Spetsnaz to a more modem SOF that is organizationally closer to its Western counterparts .
Nearly all SOF-capable units may be a test of the latest reforms within the Russian military . The Russian military may be testing new reforms in the country's military .
 The Russian military refonn began after the conflict in Georgia in 2008 . It continued under his successor Sergei Shoigu, and later accelerated under Gen. Serdyukov . The Russian Defense Minister Anatoly Serdykov is the Defense Minister .
Gerasimov was revealed with the equipment of the special operators during the Crimean conflict . Gerasimov's equipment was used during the conflict .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine indicated the importance of special operations and SOF to achieve political ends a year prior to the operation . On the other hand, the Gerasov Doctrine indicated a year before the operation.
 The operation in Crimea can be deemed as a display of the Gerasimov Doctrine . The operation is in Crimea, Crimea .
 57 makers before they could react to Moscow from accomplishing its objectives .
 Russia demonstrated both its will and the means to back up that will should the West encroach on the interests of the Russian Federation, the “rightful’s successor of the Soviet Union. Second, Russia demonstrated its will, the means and the will of the
 The Russian Federation got what it wanted before its opponents could acknowledge what was happening . Put simply, the Russian Federation wanted to know what it was doing .
 The reluctance or inadequacy of the West to react potentially gave Putin freedom to act and expanded room for maneuver to pursue Russia’s foreign policy objectives .
 The Russians accomplished a coup de main with the help of local militias, which allegedly comprised a mix of ex-soldiers and Spetsnaz-trained pro-Russian residents .
 The annexation of Crimea was fulfilled mostly by the Spetsnaz and other SOF-capable units .
In the early phases of the occupation, the operation did not include conventional units . In the early stages of the Occupation, Russian units provided logistical support .
 Later deployment of conventional units to Crimea aimed to consolidate Russian dominance, in case Ukrainian soldiers reacted .
 The Russians established networks within the society with the help of the BSF and other units that were already based in Crimea .
 The operations in Crimea mainly centered around surprise and deception . The operations were mainly centered on surprise and deceived .
 The Russian soldiers remained incognito and acted with local self-defense militias until their objectives were achieved . The real identity of the enemy on the Ukrainian side was unclear .
Local reaction may have prevented local reaction since bloodshed would have meant fratricide . That uncertainty may have been prevented by local reaction .
 The stealth and swiftness of the operation paralyzed the Ukrainian forces and enabled a near bloodless takeover of Crimea . The operation followed the annexation of Crimea in Crimea .
 The role the Spetsnaz played in the operations in Crimea and simultaneous protests in Ukraine remains obscure . The role they played is still obscure .
 50 well-equipped men claiming to be the local militia and wearing civilian clothing seized the Crimean parliament building on February 27 .
 The Military Operation for Crimea’ in Howard and Pukhov, Brothers Armed, 160. The military operation was launched in Crimea in March .
 Russia’s Special Forces, 50. 60, hoisted the Russian flag over the building . Russia's Special Forces also hoisted a Russian flag.
 As the day went on, Russian troops continued to flow in by air, land and sea .
 The logistics supply routes of the BSF made their infiltration from the sea easier . The BSF's supply routes made the infiltration from sea easier.
 The Russians' intentions became more vivid, even while their presence was still in question . After the initial shock and awe, the Russians’ intentions become more vivid .
 The lack of unit markings, signs, or license plates caused uncertainty about whether the invaders were themselves Russians or local groups armed by Russians .
 heavily armed groups with armed personnel carriers proceeded to take over the Ukrainian airfields and bases in Crimea one by one .
 Kiev did not issue orders to resist because it lacked trust in its own military . That played a crucial role in the Russian takeover of Ukraine .
 The high number of special operators can be considered an “economy of force’s action from the Russian perspective. Even so, the high number can be seen as an ‘economy. of force'
 With reinforcement from conventional fire support units, the Spetsnaz paralyzed most Ukrainian units in their bases and prevented any resistance .
 A quick political referendum at the end of March to secede from Ukraine followed a quick political vote . The referendum was held in Ukraine in March .
 On March 21, 2014, Crimea became Russian once again . The first wave of unidentified anned men took to the streets .
 The operations in Crimea demonstrated that the Russian Spetsnaz provided Russian decision makers with a capable force to achieve Russia’s strategic goals . The operation in Crimea showed that Russia's strategic goals were achieved .
 Troop numbers increased as the campaign progressed . However, the relative size of the conventional forces remained small .
Operations in Crimea demonstrated how the Russians successfully implemented doctrinal changes into the field . Regarded as the Gerasimov model in practice.
 The inference that such a victory could be achieved outside the Russian near-sphere would need further evaluation . There was no threat to Russian logistic routes in Crimea, especially given that there was no threats to Russia .
 The effectiveness of Russian diplomacy to influence a third party in the pursuit of Russia’s strategic targets remains untested . That said, the effectiveness of Russia's diplomacy remains unested .
 The easy victory showed that extensive efforts took place to soften the battlefield and ensure support prior to pushing armed operators to the front .
Pro-Russian militia groups became a game changer that created popular support to Russia . Their earlier preparations to conscript indigenous peoples of Crimea into infonnal became a popular game changers .
 The nonnal logistics procedures of the BSF covered the transportation of the special operators, who subsequently linked up with local groups to capture key buildings .
 Russian soldiers increased the surprise factor, which played an important role in the Ukrainian soldiers’ indolence .
 The Russians used the cover of securing the Olympic games in Sochi and the relevant large scale drills as ruse de guerre to hide their intentions in Crimea . Also, the Russian government used the relevant drills as a cover for securing the Games in Sochi .
 The operation was allegedly facilitated by the Russians, according to the Russian government . The operation also intensified the fog of war prior to the operation .
 Spetsnaz generated the fame that the Crimean campaign generated for themselves . Another strategic outcome of the campaign is the success of the Crimean Campaign .
Unidentified men surface on the streets of Crimea in Crimea . They stood out as a powerful tool of Russian statecraft .
 A Russian defeat in Crimea will remain unchallenged until a Russian defeat proves it wrong . That worrisome reflection will remain a worrisome reflection .
 The final point is that Russia may be “punching above its weight’ in its latest practices in Ukraine and Syria . Russia's weak economy and inferior conventional military capability compared to the West, as Galeotti states .
 The annexation of Crimea suggests that the modernization of the Russian army paid off very well. Nevertheless, the annexation of the Crimea was not a success .
 Russia has developed a modem, capable, and prospering SOF as a strategic policy tool that Moscow can use domestically and abroad . As a result, Russia has been able to use SOF in both countries .
 The competency of the Spetsnaz poses a threat or at least a warning for NATO to take precautions in case they face a Spetnaz unit in near future . NATO has been warned to be careful with their competency .
 The author researched the Russian Spetsnaz and their history to determine the extent of their involvement and utility in Russian wars . The author also investigated the annexation of Crimea .
 The thesis looks back to the 1950s, when the Spetsnaz were established . To find if a link between Russian and Soviet Spetnaz exists, this thesis is based on the period when the spetsnazi were established.
 The Soviet and then Russian military literature helped grasp how Russians’ employment of conventional and unconventional forces has shifted toward the latter . The Soviet, then Russianmilitary literature helped grasped how Russia’s employment of unconventional forces have shifted .
 The operations that the Spetsnaz conducted in Czechoslovakia, the two wars in Chechnya, and the annexation of Crimea show that Russian Spetnaz became an indispensable instrument in Russian power projection . The operations in Czechs, Chechnyans,
 Colin Gray's theory of strategic utility of special operations constituted the framework for the Spetsnaz’s contribution to Russian grand strategy . Colin Gray’'s theory. of strategic Utility of Special Operations constituted theframework for the spetsnazi’S
 Most of these reasons coincide with Gray’s ideas about his theory of strategic utility .
 Gray’s theory includes ‘economy of force,’ “expansion of choice,” “morale,“showcasing of competence’ and “humiliation of the enemy” as elements of special operations’ strategic utility
 The Russian decision makers considered ‘economy of force’ and “expansion of choice’ in nearly all of the campaigns mentioned in this thesis . The Russian government considered “economy Of force” and ‘expansion’ of choice
 “control of escalation’ likely was an important part of Russian decision making,’s spokesman says . Since the strategic parity and detente obliged the Russians to remain obscure in their aggressions.
 The Russians vividly accomplished “shaping the future’s future in the Second Chechen War by training the Kadyrovtsy militias .
 The Russians’ use of the special operations complies with Gray’s theory, he says . Overall, the Russians' use of special operationscomplies with the theory, Gray says .
 In order to compare theory and practice, this thesis examined three case studies . The thesis examined the study of three cases .
 The annexation of Crimea became the last and most significant case in Crimea . Crimea's annexation became the most important case in the Crimea region .
 Russian Spetsnaz became an indispensable policy instrument in Russian statecraft due to their competency in operating swiftly and stealthily . In sum, the Russian Spetnaz become an indispensablepolicy instrument in Russia .
 The Spetsnaz underwent a series of refonns. As the Russians invested more in them, the Russian government spent more on them .
 With increased resources and capabilities, the more attractive they became, they became . More attractive they become, with increased resources, they said .
 The Spetsnaz are positioned to continue to be a strategic tool in support of Russian policy objectives . It appears that the SpetsNaz is positioned to be an important strategic tool .
 In the three case studies, Czechoslovakia, Chechnya, and Crimea, the first and third conditions are valid . The first and second conditions are also valid .
 The second condition, in which NATO would react in the case Russia chooses conventional warfare, turns out to be no more than an assumption since conventional war never happened .
 Russia is deterred from waging conventional war against NATO . The second condition may be regarded as valid, too .
 The second hypothesis claims that the Spetsnaz yield strategic outcome when they conduct covert operations in unconventional warfare .
 The facilitation of the operations by the pro-Russian networks inside Czechoslovakia and Crimea provides evidence to this claim . Czechs and Crimea are the target countries of the operation .
 The consolidation of power through popular support throughout the operations also suggests that the Spetsnaz kept winning the hearts and minds of the locals .
 The First Chechen War constitutes a caveat to this hypothesis . However, the First Chechechen War is not a conclusive conclusion .
 In this war, the Spetsnaz formed the best fighting units, but their competency could not overcome the flaws in the overall strategy . The Spetnaz were the best units in the war, but they were unable to overcome their weaknesses .
 In this war, the Spetsnaz did not yield strategic results and suffered lots of casualties, mostly due to their incorrect employment as conventional units .
 The Russians learned from their mistakes and recovered from defeat, an improved strategy enabled the Spetsnaz to yield strategic outcomes in the Second Chechen War .
 The Spetsnaz became the Soviet and Russian leaders’ first choice to avoid provoking the West and mostly exceeded expectations . The Russian and Soviet leaders' first choice was not to provoke the West .
 The strategic utility of the Spetsnaz first surfaced in Operation Danube as they spearheaded the operation in Crimea . The operation has been praised for their performance in Crimea.
 The Russians combined all lessons-learned and the perceived interference of the West and then developed similar scenarios to support the uprisings against the government in Kiev .
 Similar scenarios may be manufactured in Moscow to be used against countries of the fonner Soviet Union . Similar scenarios could also be made in Moscow .
 Russian interests pose a threat to the contiguous countries who seek independence and stronger relations with the West .
 Russia may attempt in the future to shatter a NATO member that interferes in its interest areas . Russia may try in the past to shatter NATO member.
 Russian conception, or misconception, of Western practices provides it with a self-righteous justification that it can use to wage war against its neighbors .
 communist party control over the Soviet bloc . It also managed a strategic parity policy in order to not provoke the West .
 The Russians employed a variety of policy tools in accordance with the threat it perceived. In this respect, the Russian government used a range of policies .
 The Cold War required no use of conventional forces to maintain strategic parity . For example, the nuclear armament threat during the Cold War needed no use.
 At that time, Russian thinkers provided solutions such as “strategic missile forces,’ which would eventually win a nuclear war .
 The idea of mutual destruction obliged the Russians to consider other options rather than a nuclear war . However, the Russians considered other options.
 The stealth requirement under those circumstances increased the significance of the Spetsnaz during the Cold War .
 The Spetsnaz stood out as an essential tool for Soviet and 67 Russian leaders . In post-WWII Russian history, changing perceived threats and diminishing resources caused the Spetnaz to stand out .
 The Spetsnaz came into focus in Russian military literature . In parallel to the increasing need for special operations, the SpetsNaz came in focus in Russia .
 The Kh rushchev and Brezhnev Doctrines did not address directly the use of special operations . The Gerasimov Doctrine did .
Gerasimov mentioned the significance of special operations and SOF, which turned them into key players in Russian strategic thinking . Gerasimov said special operations were key to Russia's strategic thinking.
 Operation Danube in Czechoslovakia showed that the Spetsnaz were competent enough to accomplish surgical operations in a politically sensitive situation .
 The Spetsnaz captured Czechoslovak leaders alive and transported them to Moscow for peace talks .
Capturing the leaders alive was an important part of the operation to prevent further escalation . Capturing the leader alive was a key part of an operation to stop further escalation of the conflict .
 Czechoslovak leaders’ inability to protect themselves weakened their hand at the negotiation table . Also, they had to conform to the Soviet tenns .
 This was made possible mostly by the swiftness and stealth of the operations conducted by the Spetsnaz . This was mostly made possible by the quickness and Stealth of the operation .
 Soviet SOF were able to demonstrate “control of escalation,’ and “shaping the future’s future,” master claims by Gray .
 The Chechen Wars illustrate that Spetsnaz do not always yield strategic outcomes, especially if they are not employed in a coherent plan .
 In the First Chechen War, the Spetsnaz contributed little due to the lack of proficiency of the conventional Russian Army . In the first Chechen war, the spetsnazi contributed little to the Russian Army.
 Spetsnaz could not compensate for the general incompetence of the Russians, even though they were the best unit to fight an urban war . The Russian army was the best in the world.
 Russian leaders became the only unit capable of fighting in such a war . They simply became the choice of the Russian leaders because they remained the only group capable of combat .
 The Russians returned to Grozny as a competent force to break the Chechen resistance . In the second war, the lessons learned from the first war paid off .
 In aggregate, after the two wars, the Spetsnaz met most of the claims outlined by Colin Gray .
 The annexation of Crimea showed that the Russian Spetsnaz excelled at covert operations after experiencing several reforms . Lastly, the annexation of the Crimea show that the Russian spetsnazi excelled in covert operations .
 There remains a risk that the Spetsnaz may conduct similar operations in any country contiguous to Russia . The environment in Crimea reflects the case in Crimea .
 Russia has developed a modern, capable, and prospering SOF that can yield strategic outcomes in Russia’s favor and pose a credible threat to its adversaries . In sum, as the annexation of Crimea 68 demonstrated, Russia has developing a modern and capable, capable
 As a counter argument, as the First Chechen War demonstrated, the Spetsnaz are not always the solution by themselves . As acounter argument, the first Chechen war demonstrated, as it demonstrated, they are notalways the solution .
 The Spetsnaz’s competency could not compensate for the general flaws in the battle plans or the general insufficiencies of the conventional anny .
 The Russians learned from their mistakes and recovered to win the Second Chechen War .
 The Spetsnaz did not only help win the war, they also facilitated future stability in Chechnya .
 The Spetsnaz-trained local Kadyrovtsy militias have become the Chechen law-enforcement forces to ensure safety in Chechnya .
 Russian leaders employ the Spetsnaz when operations require stealth and swiftness to hide indicators of their use .
 The Russian Spetsnaz will continue to develop while providing an “expansion of choice’ to the Russian leaders . Russia's war against ISIS and Ukraine’s Donbass region will continue.
 Russia’s power projection expanded beyond its near sphere, as is the case in Syria . The Spetsnaz threat also expanded to countries beyond the near abroad .
 Russian leaders are not allowed to use SOF elements in NATO countries . However, that remains insufficient to prevent Russian leaders from using SOF in NATO nations .
 Russia may exploit any weakness to shatter the foundations of the alliance . It behooves NATO to clearly communicate its commitment to its members to Russia .
 NATO should clearly pledge to take necessary actions to prevent Russian interference in NATO and its members’ interests . Russia endangers any of its members' sovereignty even when using special forces to do so .
 NATO should consider that Russia has fought against NATO since its foundation . An insignificant fracture in a member state may result in a break in NATO’s structure .
 NATO should focus on further research about the Spetsnaz and should share findings with its 69 members . That said, NATO should also focus on other research .
 More research and dissemination of the inferences will help nations to build more competent SOF units that will be aware of and can neutralize the Spetsnaz threat . More research will help countries to build a more competent unit .
 Russian interests in the Middle East may collide with Turkey’s, causing problems between the two countries .
 increasing tension in Syria and Iraq among many proxies may ultimately turn into a Turkish-Russian confrontation . Increasing tension in Iraq and Syria among many proxy groups may also turn into an confrontation .
 In the case of an escalation, Russia may use Spetsnaz units inside Turkey, especially the ones that look more Turkic or Turkish .
 Russia would not be impossible for Russia to recruit Turkish-speaking and Turkish-looking soldiers from old Soviet bloc countries in Asia .
 If this is the case, Russians will use pro-Russian Turks inside Turkey to weaken the constitutional structure and power instruments . If this case, they will fabricate protests or uprisings.
 Turkish government or opposition may ask Russia to help solve the problems arising from the fabricated chaos, pundits warn .
 Russia will not align with Turkey unless Russia wins its more than six-decade long war against NATO in return . Turkey should consider that the Russians will not aligned with Turkey if they do .
 Turkey, a member of NATO since 1952, should cooperate more and work closely with NATO in the current conflict zones to prevent covert Russian aggression . Turkey has been in the conflict zones since 1952 .
 Amundsen, Kirsten, John J Dziak, James F Gebhardt, David C Isby, Owen A Lock, John H Merritt, Jim Shortt, and Robert D Smith are among the stars .
 Rowman & Littlefield: American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1995 .
 Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism, January 1994 .
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Brookings Institution Press, 2002 .
 Ouimet, Matthew J. The Rise and Fall of the Brezhnev Doctrine in Soviet Foreign Policy . Ouimet: "The Rise and fall of theBrezhneV Doctrine" in Soviet foreign policy .