 This waits to log LCP until the page's lifecycle state changes to hidden . This waits for the page to change to hidden.
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine was a massive escalation of a conflict that has been simmering since Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea . Russia’s invasion of Crimea was a major escalation of the conflict .
 Donetsk and Luhansk are two separatist states that have been in open, if muted, conflict with Kyiv since 2014 . At issue are questions about Russia's sphere of influence and Ukraine’s place in Europe .
Ukraine is the second-largest country by area in Europe after Russia . It was briefly independent in the early 20th century, before becoming part of the USSR in 1922 .
 Ukrainians once again declared their independence in 1991 . Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukrainians declared theirindependence .
 Ukraine returned Soviet-era nuclear weapons to Russia and allowed Russia to keep its Black Sea Fleet stationed in Crimea under a lease agreement .
 The ongoing conflict in Ukraine is an escalation of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea . Russian President Vladimir Putin authorized a military operation in eastern Ukraine .
 In 2008, NATO hinted at future membership for Ukraine and its fellow former Soviet republic Georgia .
 The conflict began in 2013 when then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych backed out of an expected economic deal with the European Union . He opted instead to strike a deal with Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin offered support to Russian-speaking separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk . The separatists are part of the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine .
 Putin simultaneously declared Crimea to be part of Russia . Crimea had been made a part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic during the Soviet era .
 Putin’s annexation of the Crimean peninsula was widely denounced by the international community . The Crimean peninsula is located along the northern coast of the Black Sea . The international community still recognizes the territory as part of Ukraine .
 Then-President Viktor Yanukovych backed out of an expected economic deal with the European Union in 2013 . The fighting, which has continued sporadically despite a 2015 cease-fire agreement, has killed an estimated 14,000 people .
 Putin formally recognized the two rebel-held enclaves, Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states this week . He ordered Russian troops to enter the Donbas in a so-called “peacekeeping’s capacity. Fast-forward to 2022, Putin says .
 A car in Mariupol, Ukraine, is seen after shelling . The strongman added: “Madness, the strongman.’
 Russian missiles rain down on at least 16 Ukrainian cities and attack helicopters seen over the capital of Kyiv . The Russian invasion of Ukraine has expanded well beyond the contested rebel-held regions .
 The Daily Discussion is a weekly feature on CNN.com's iReport.com . Please submit your photos and videos of the week's featured news stories . Please share your photos with us at the Daily Discussion .