 December 1, 2014, just might turn out to be the day the tide finally turned against him . But December 1 is still the day of the year that the tide turns against him.
 This week marked something of an inflection point where short-term asymmetrical advantages Moscow enjoyed are now being eclipsed by its long-term structural weaknesses .
 The Russian currency -reeling from the combined effect of sanctions and falling energy prices -experienced its sharpest one-day drop since the August 1998 financial crisis on December 1 .
 The price of this backbone of the Russian economy has fallen 25 percent since the summer . Russia's economy has been hit by a 25 percent drop in the past year .
 Brent Crude, the world benchmark, dipped below $70 a barrel on December 1, a five-year low . OPEC's decision not to cut production led to the drop .
 Putin announced on December 1 that Russia will drop the South Stream natural-gas pipeline . The Kremlin once hoped the project would cement Moscow's dominance over Europe's energy market .
 The move follows Brussels insistence that Gazprom abide by the EU's antimonopoly laws . Gazprom had been flouting the laws for years .
 The Kremlin is facing more setbacks in the coming months. And we should expect to see more setbacks for the Kremlin .
 Russia's strength has long been its ability to reap the benefits of being integrated into the global economy and be treated as a respected member of the international community . While at the same time flouting their rules, Russia flouted their rules .
 Prior to the Ukraine crisis, Putin's Russia had found something of a sweet spot . The Ukraine crisis was the first crisis to hit Putin's country .
 G8 was a respectable G8 member that was able to spread its influence by corrupting Western elites . It was also able to buy up European energy infrastructure through shady shell companies .
 It could even behave like a rogue occasionally, as in the August 2008 invasion of Georgia, and get off with barely a slap on the wrist .
 By manufacturing a pro-Moscow insurgency in Donbas, he effectively invaded Ukraine . And by manufacturing the insurgency, he also effectively invaded the country .
After pro-Moscow separatists downed Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, it was no longer possible for Western leaders to continue to pretend Russia is a respectable member of the international community .
 It became untenable to carry on with the charade that Moscow was a partner with which they could work . Moscow's relationship with Russia has become untenable in recent years .
 Western sanctions and the steady isolation of Russia from the world economy might not have been enough to contain Moscow in the short term .
 Falling energy prices are more than enough to cripple it in the long run . But, with an assist from falling energy prices, they are not enough to make a difference .
 The Russian government acknowledged what has long been obvious, that the economy would slide into recession in 2015 . The government on December 2 acknowledged that it would slide in 2015.
Official projections say it will contract by 0. percent while other estimates say it could shrink as much a 2 percent . Official projections say the economy will contract 0.1 percent . Other estimates say the country could shrink by 2 percent.
 Inflation this year is at 9 percent, and is projected to continue rising . Inflation is expected to continue to rise this year .
 Russian firms owe $700 billion to foreign banks and, due to sanctions, are largely blocked from any additional Western financing . Russia owes $700billion to foreign Banks and is largely blocked by sanctions .
 As 2013 drew to a close, Putin appeared to be running circles around his Western counterparts .
 Syrian President Bashar al-Assad managed to thwart U.S. air strikes against his ally, Syria's President . Al-Assad has been in power for more than a decade .
 Armenia -and temporarily, Ukraine -into abandoning plans for a free-trade pact with the European Union in favor of the Moscow-led Eurasian Union .
 Typical boom/bust cycles and unpredicable volatility with a one-dimensional economy where a dictator by default rules with an iron fist. Typical boom and bust cycles and unredivable volatility with one- dimensional economy .
 Communism/socialism/fascism always lead to the exact opposite of their stated intent . Communism/Socialism/Fascism is the opposite of its stated intent.
Under Putin's bare-chested inspiration, Russian energy supply has become an enabler for Putin's dream . I think we have seen how, under Putin'sbare-chests inspiration, Russia's energy supply have become anEnabler .
 Russians are tired of seeing other countries jockeying around the world stage, he says . The U.S. is not really being held accountable for significant errors in foreign and economic policy .
 Oil will continue to be weaponized until and unless Russia finds a new way to be in the world, together . Russia's oil industry has been in the spotlight for years .
 Several Trillions of pre-1948 Dollars Peking's predatory pack owe Americans and America . But then there are the several Trillions that are owed Americans .
 The war against Serbia in 1999 was specifically for the purpose of changing a 500+ year old border . The war was specifically to change a 500-year old border.
 Yanukovych's ouster, btw, was done while Putin was hosting the Olympics . Putin was hosting the Olympics.
 Henry Kissinger has pointed out that one does not spend two weeks trying to show the world that he's a good leader and then blow the whole thing by invading another country .
 Russian engineers have published an excellent analysis of the MH17 incident that shows quite convincingly that MH17 was shot down by Ukraine fighter jet and not a BUK missile .
 Russia, under Putin, as a far better record on peace than the USG, whose foreign policy is controlled by neo 'conservative' butchers . Russia under Putin as far better than the U.S. under Putin.
 He has nobody to blame but himself for his countries economic ruin and his fall from grace . And he has no responsibility for his country's economic ruin .
 Youtube and Twitter are "proof" that the event took place within minutes of the event .
 This was not a news piece as much as a propaganda piece, bereft of objectivity, it was a news story . This was a piece, not a piece of propaganda, but a piece that was not propaganda .
 PUtin ain't no good guy, but he is no worse than our leadership . He has WAY fewer civilian kills to his credit, says CNN's John Sutter .