 A brief examination of Russian Informational Conflict during the 2014 crisis in Ukraine . Background at the request of the Influence Activities Task Forces .
 This SL is intended to be a limited examination of extant and emergent Russian Informational Conflict capability . The SL is meant to be an examination of the Russian Informations.
 It is concerned with disinformation and propaganda aimed at, or targeting, Western audiences . It is particularly concerned with pro-Kiev government forces and civilian populations in Ukraine .
 This SL does not examine the use of Informational Conflict aimed at, or directed towards, Russian domestic audiences, nor will it provide a detailed or comprehensive examination of Soviet-era Informational conflict .
This SL is limited to Open Source information, as well as English and at-source English translated sources . This SL is only limited to open source information, and can only be used for information .
 The two terms are considered to be interchangeable, representing the same conceptual space within the Non-Linear Warfare construct . The terms are thought to be similar to those used in non- Linear Warfare .
 Informational Conflict will be used as it implies the conduct of hostile action outside of a declared state of war . It best represents the crisis in Ukraine, which best represents it .
 There does not seem to be a Soviet-era equivalent that conceptually encompasses both Active Measures and military deception . Other than ‘political and psychological warfare’ or “special propaganda,’ there is not a Soviet era equivalent .
 Informational Conflict will be used throughout the paper to refer to both Soviet-era and Russian information-related capabilities in support of non-linear warfare .
 A comprehensive and detailed analysis and assessment of Russian Informational Conflict is required . It is recognised that a comprehensive andDetailed analysis is required. It is recognized that a complete analysis and detailed assessment is needed .
 In order to confirm some English-language sources, a limited number of Russian- language sources were utilised in this study . The study was based on a study of Russian language sources .
 Russian / pro-Russian Informational Conflict is largely focused at the strategic-political level . Russian / Russian Informational conflict is mostly focused on military-specific or focused interventions .
 Little attention is being paid by Russian / pro-Russian forces to develop the reality, or system of facts, surrounding or underpinning Informational Conflict .
 The current approach is highly decentralised and extensive use of proxies are made, including private and state-sponsored or controlled media outlets, such as labour unions and criminal gangs .
 The 2014 crisis in Ukraine is seen by a number of military and political analysts as a clear demonstration of the level of advancement of Russia’s Informational Conflict capabilities .
 To identify and briefly discuss key message themes used by Russian / pro-Russian forces, 2.2. To discuss key messages used by the Russian / Russian forces . 2.3.5 .
 To identify and briefly discuss methods and approaches, including new or emergent tactics; and, 3.3. To identify, briefly discuss how to use these tactics . To discuss methods, including the use of new orEmergent tactics .
 To identify implications for future conflict and to make recommendations in order to better prepare the Canadian Armed Forces to identify and counter adversary Informational Conflict . To make recommendations for Canadian armed forces to prepare for future conflicts .
To achieve the objective, the discussion will be divided into three sections . To achieve the objectives, the discussions will be split into three parts .
 The first section is a brief overview of Soviet Informational Conflict capability . The second section is an overview of Russian Informational conflict capability .
 The second section will be a discussion of the main Informational Conflict activities by Russian / pro-Russian forces 5 . In this construct, conventional fighting forces are subordinate to, and support, special forces and Informational conflict capabilities .
 There is a blurring between the states and conditions of peace and war. It should also be noted that there is ablurring between states and war .
 nations are in a perpetual state of simmering conflict, according to the U.S. State Department .
 Centre for Eastern Studies, No 42. 2 employed during the 2014 crisis in Ukraine, specifically the key message themes and tactics .
 The third section will be a list of implications for future conflict as well as recommendations to the CAF to better identify and counter adversary Informational Conflict . The CAF will also be looking at the impact of future conflict in the future .
 The Soviets had a well-formulated and expansive Informational Conflict capability dating back to the Russian Revolution of 1917 . Soviet Active Measures and Maskirovka were developed between the late 1940s and 1970s .
 Vladimir Lenin recognized the importance of propaganda and deception, and captured these ideas in his writings . His writings became “required reading for Marxist revolutionaries,’s foundation for Soviet Informational Conflict development throughout the 20th century .
 In fact, Informational Conflict played a central role in Communist ideology throughout this entire period . It was regarded as a key tactic in the defence of the proletariat in class warfare .
 Active Measures can be understood or loosely interpreted as a cross between psychological and political warfare .
 At least historically, this element of Informational Conflict was coordinated by state security intelligence services . Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti, or KGB, and its predecessors were also involved .
 Disinformation aimed to deceive the target by providing false information and assumed that the target would reach a specified conclusion, as determined by the initiator .
 disinformation could be political, military, economic, intelligence or scientific in nature . In addition, disinformation could also be political and military .
 For disinformation to be successful they were at the very least grounded in reality or exploited generally accepted views . However, for disinformation to have been successful, they were not successful .
 Propaganda was largely designed to exploit a commonly held misperception by providing sensational facts as evidence .
 Soviet intelligence services would send western newspapers forged or anonymous letters or would co-opt or exploit a proxy to deliver the information .
 The difference between propaganda / disinformation operations and influence operations is that the latter does not seek publicity or otherwise exploit existing media structures, largely due to the high level of political risk .
 In essence, influence operations used an agent or sought to exploit or leverage a specific target to shape a particular policy issue .
 influence operations were conducted as “single or long-range’s activities, meaning that they were resourced for a specific outcome and not designed to have immediate impact .
 Active Measures were largely planned and executed in a decentralised fashion . 2.3% of Active Measures are executed in the decentralised style .
 All available political, military, social, social and economic assets were used in the conduct of Active Measures;18 3.3.2 .
 The Soviets did not recognise a distinction between propaganda and action, political and military action, or overt and covert actions . The Soviets didn't recognise a  distinction between propaganda and action .
Disinformation, propaganda and influence operations were not conducted as discrete or isolated activities . Informational Conflict combined elements of all three; and, 5.5, combined elements. Disinformation and propaganda were not conduct as discrete and isolated activities.
 There were no moral or ethical constraints on Active Measures . morality was subordinate to the interests of class war, and anything that could defeat capitalism was considered justified and legitimate .
 Unlike Active Measures, which were coordinated and conducted by state security intelligence services, Soviet military deception was conducted by the Main Intelligence Directorate (Glavnoye Razvedyvatel'Noye Upravleniye)
Military deception can be understood as the deliberate misleading of the enemy regarding one’s intentions or forces . In essence, military deception is a deliberate misleading.
 Soviet military deception can be divided into four sub-forms, that of camouflage and concealment, imitation, demonstration, and disinformation .
 camouflage and concealment were largely concerned with hiding or disguising forces and equipment . Although not necessarily limited to tactical level applications, concealment was largely focused on concealment and camouflage .
 Imitation was largely focused on the development and deployment of decoys . It also included the use of electronic signals to create false impressions .
Demonstration was the classic manoeuvre of forces and the use of feints . Demonstration was a classic manoeuve of forces .
 disinformation, while largely applied in or to the military strategic and political realm, was the release of faulty or misleading information . Lastly, disinformation, largely applied to military, political and political realms, was also released .
 Soviet military doctrine may reference military deception, but it did not provide a definitive account of the concepts, structure and application of the principles .
 Several guidelines were identified, including activeness, plausibility, continuity, timeliness, and diversity .
 Secrecy was paramount for military deception activities to be successful, including planning and procurement and deployment of assets .
 The Soviet approach to Informational Conflict was both robust and comprehensive . But there were no clear lines between political and military applications .
There was an overlap in responsibilities in the broader Informational Conflict concept . Specific directorates were generally responsible for the planning and execution of Informational conflict .
 The Soviet total war approach to class struggle was designed to bring all available assets to bear to defeat the enemy in the Informational Conflict domain .
 The most significant challenge of examining Russian Informational Conflict is the paucity of primary source material, such as military doctrine, doctrinal guides, or position papers .
 There does not appear to be a single source or doctrinal guide for its application . However, there does not seem to be an application for the application .
 Military deception, as a concept, does appear throughout Soviet doctrine, but references appear to be superficial and not provide guidance on how to apply it .
 Use of proxy agents or undeclared forces to foment instability or secure or occupy strategic assets . Use of proxies or undeClared forces is a tactic that can be used to destabilise or secure strategic assets.
Use of Night Wolves (a Russian motorcycle gang linked to Putin) to host anti-Kiev rallies in eastern Ukraine . Use of trade unions as protestors as protestors / counter-protestors and occupy government buildings .
 Use of proxy agents to facilitate Informational Conflict, in particular through social media . Use of proxies to facilitate the conflict via social media, such as Twitter and Facebook .
 The ‘Russian Troll Army’ are employed by a company based in Saint Petersburg, Russia . They have been used to effectively ‘troll’ social media sites and online news media .
 Use of state-sponsored / controlled and private media to promote Putin’s message and the Russian narrative . Use of State-sponsored and controlled media is used to promote Russian narrative.
 Anonymous International released a list of pre-packaged news stories allegedly prepared by the Kremlin for use by Russia’s central TV stations .
 Direction to the news media included the need to justify the Russian annexation of Crimea . It also said the Kiev government was under the influence of criminals and fascists .
 Other news media outlets, such as RT, have acknowledged that they serve as information disseminators for the Kremlin . Other news outlets, like RT, also acknowledge that they help the Kremlin.
 Does United States evidence prove Russian special forces are in eastern Ukraine? Does U.S. evidence prove Russia is in Ukraine?
 United States accuses Russian agents of stirring eastern Ukraine unrest . U.S. accuses Russia of stirring unrest in Ukraine .
Ukrainian forces are used to report significant casualties during the conflict . These stories generally report significant Ukrainian casualties, but low pro-Russian casualties .
 Pro-Russian media often utilise an official voice, such as a local politician or pro-Russian force commander .
 These reports are often amplified by other media outlets or bloggers . 2.3% of these reports are reported by others, including bloggers .
 Russian bloggers and news media reported that U.S. mercenaries deployed to Ukraine to assist the Kiev-government and conduct counter-terrorism operations .
 At least two videos appeared on YouTube showing unidentified special forces in eastern Ukraine .
 Reports of U.S. mercenaries were later ‘confirmed’ by anonymous Russian sources, which led to subsequent media reports .
 Russian media reports were then used as ‘proof’ by high level Russian politicians of U.S. interference .
 An off-shoot of the original story included a report of several U.S. mercenaries and CIA agents being killed when the helicopter they were traveling in was shot-down by Russian forces .
 The Russian government actively countered accusations that it had military forces operating in eastern Ukraine . The government has been accused of having military forces in Ukraine .
 Pro-Russian force leaders admitted to having Russians in their units, but denied they are Russian military . In some cases, the message was modified in some cases .
 Russia wags the dog with Ukraine disinformation campaign, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty .
 Greystone denies its ‘mercenaries’ in Ukraine . U.S. contractors Greystone says it is a contractor in Ukraine.
 In one incident, a soldier geo-tagged him well inside Ukraine, and in the other the soldier posted a status update saying he was involved in the shelling of Ukraine positions from across the border .
 The soldier went on Russian TV and stated that his social media account was hacked . The soldier denied any involvement in attacking Ukraine positions .
 Russian lawmakers introduced legislation that effectively banned soldiers from using social media while on active duty . The legislation was introduced after incidents involving soldiers in Russia .
 The Russian government continues to deny accusations that Russian soldiers have been killed or wounded fighting in Ukraine . Some casualties were the result of military exercises near the Russia-Ukraine border, officials say .
 Russian government officials have been quick to declare stories to be Western propaganda and disinformation . Some reports of Russian casualties have emerged from inside Russia, largely from relatives of the deceased soldiers .
 Journalists have also reported acts of intimidation and have been threatened with violence if they report on the story . 56 5.6% of journalists have reported incidents of intimidation .
 A number of articles about mass desertion of Ukraine soldiers appeared early-on in, and have re-appeared with some regularity throughout the conflict .
 Russian news media reports provide little or no evidence to 48 paratroopers captured by Ukrainian authorities . Russian government dismissed the transgression as a simple navigational mistake .
 Russian soldiers on leave fighting Ukraine troops alongside rebels, pro-Russian separatist leader says .
 Russia burying soldiers in unmarked graves just to conceal their role in Ukraine . Russia is burying soldiers just to hide their role.
Accusations of ethno-linguistic genocide, anti-Semitism and rampant fascism in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . Accusations. Accusation of eth no-lingoistic genocide and anti-Semitic genocide in Crimea .
 Kiev government and pro-Kiev forces perpetrate systemic human rights abuses against ethnic Russians in Ukraine, including the Ukrainian Jewish population . The Kiev government also perpetrate acts of intimidation against other minorities, including Jewish population.
 Russian government officials have promoted a number of counter-narratives, including a mysterious / unknown intercept aircraft and Ukrainian anti-aircraft systems . In an attempt to counter accusations that pro-Russian or Russian forces shot-down MH17, Russian officials say .
 Russian government officials released information that Putin may have been the actual target . The MH17 was accidently shot-down; 63 64 65 8.8, 8.63 .
 The Ukraine and U.S. governments were involved in a human organ harvesting and trafficking conspiracy, according to reports .
 The stories reported several incidents of mass murder and organ harvesting from the deceased . The stories were reported by the media .
 Pro-Russian forces in Slavyansk found “hundreds of bodies’ with the organs removed. One Russian news media site reported that pro- Russian forces found ‘hundreds’ of bodies .
 Polish snipers killed civilians and abducted children, Russian bloggers reported . Ukrainian forces helped cover-up the incident by killing refugees, they said .
Russian Defence Ministry publishes data regarding Malaysian Boeing crash . Russian Defence Ministry releases data regarding Malaysia Boeing crash.
 Stories about a refugee crisis and mass movement of displaced Ukrainians seeking shelter in Russia appeared early on . Stories about the crisis were often repeated by Russian news media and bloggers throughout the conflict .
 In late March 2014, Russian news media reported that a refugee crisis was underway with 140,000 Ukrainian refugees attempting to enter Russia . Many of the stories used fraudulent photos as evidence .
 Russian news media provided a photo of a long line of cars at a border crossing .
 The photo was taken at the Ukraine-Poland border crossing and not of the Russian border, as reported by the Russian news media . However, close inspection of the photo reveals that it was taken on the Ukrainian border .
Pro-Kiev political, military or social leaders have been accused of questionable conduct . The conflict is a recurring theme on social media forums .
Pro-Russian bloggers and social media activists disseminated rumours about Oleksandr Turchynov, the speaker of the Ukraine Parliament .
 The story was also covered by Russian news media sites, which served to amplify and legitimise the rumour . The story is also published by Russian media sites .
 Other attempts at character assassination included linking a Ukraine militia leader and the former president to a human organ harvesting conspiracy .
 Some of the physical activities in the battlespace may be tactically important, such as unidentified soldiers or non-state actors securing a military base, airport or government building . These activities are loaded with and are primarily conducted for, their symbolic value .
 Almost all of the Informational Conflict activities fall into the category of Active Measures, primarily disinformation and propaganda activities . Nearly all of these activities are classified as Active Measures .
 Informational Conflict is proactive and offensive rather than defensive and responsive . It appears to take primacy over kinetic operations .
 In Informational Conflict, disinformation is no longer the simple manipulation of facts . Instead, it is the complete fabrication of truth, says the author .
The current approach to Informational Conflict appears to emphasise quantity over quality . The current approach appears to emphasize quantity overquality .
 The current approach is about creating a multitude of falsehoods and to see what resonates with a target audience . In other words, the current approaches are about creating falsehoods .
 The current approach to Informational Conflict seems to be highly decentralised . All available state and non-state assets are used to facilitate Informational conflict, in particular non- state actors / proxies .
The current approach to Informational Conflict appears to have a two-fold objective . The current approach appears to be more focused on the conflict than the current approach .
First to shape and manage the strategic socio-political discussion space . First to shape, manage and manage social-political discourse space .
 Second to psychologically distract, overwhelm and disrupt the adversary with as much disinformation and propaganda as possible . Second to psychological distract and overwhelm the adversary. Second to mentally distract and disrupt. Third to psychologically distracting and disrupt .
 Russia will continue to conduct Informational Conflict (at least in near-future conflicts) in the same or similar fashion as the 2014 crisis in Ukraine . This author posits that, based upon recent successes in eastern Europe (e.g., Georgia and Ukraine), Russia will continued to conduct
 Russia will continue to employ Informational Conflict in an offensive and pro-active manner, and as a main line of effort . Russia will also continue to use Informational conflict as a key line of efforts .
 Russia will continue to utilise undeclared assets and special forces to conduct Irregular / Non-Linear Warfare . It is likely through or with indigenous or Diaspora-based populations in support .
 Military action taken by the host country in response to an uprising will also be used as a justification for Russian military intervention . 3.5% of Russia's military action will be used in the response to the uprising .
 Russia will continue to utilise all state and non-state assets, including state-controlled and private media, to dominate the information environment . Russia will use all state, non- state assets to dominate information environment, including private media .
 Russia will continue to exploit emergent technology to dominate the information environment, in particular social media, virtual reality, artificial intelligence, and computer-neural networks .
 Russia will opt to utilise an approach of permanent or prolonged state of simmering / low-intensity conflict as opposed to direct, symmetric military action . 6.5% of Russia's military action will be directed by Russia .
 Russia will continue to utilise a decentralised and networked approach to conduct Informational Conflict . 73 Goble. Russia to continue to use decentralised approach to Conduct Informational conflict . Russia to use a decentralising andNetworked approach .
 Russia will seek not just to shape / manage but rather to control both the message and means . Russia will implement policy restricting freedom of the press and independent journalism .
 Russia will continue to aggressively target and message its domestic audience . Russia will be more aggressive in the coming weeks .
 Russia will continue to fabricate reality and dismiss the need for ethical or moral limitations on Informational Conflict . Russia will still continue to Fabricate reality, and dismiss need for moral limitations, says CNN.com .
 Russia will continue to saturate the information environment in order to psychologically overwhelm the target . Russia will still be able to overwhelm the targets with the information .
 The IATF should conduct a deeper and more comprehensive examination of Soviet and Russian Informational Conflict capabilities . It would incorporate both classified and extensive Russian-language information .
 Follow-on study should incorporate other information-related capabilities, such as computer network operations, electronic warfare and signals intelligence capabilities .
 The follow-on examination should attempt to identify possible ways and means to identify and counter or defend against Informational Conflict .
 IATF should incorporate findings from this report, as well as any follow-on activities, into appropriate Influence Activities and Info Ops training and professional development .
 The IATF should incorporate findings from this report, as well as any follow-on activities, into Influence Operations and Info Ops doctrine, doctrinal guides, and related policy .
 The SL is in response to a request made by the IATF to briefly examine the use of Informational Conflict by Russian and pro-Russian forces .
 Russian and pro-Russian forces have a highly robust, comprehensive and holistic Informational Conflict capability, says author .
 There are two key differences between the Soviet-era approach and the Russian approach . The Russian capability clearly reside in the Soviet era .
 The current Informational Conflict approach largely focuses on disinformation and propaganda . The vast majority of these activities are facilitated by social media, says the author .
 New approach of Information Conflict is less concerned about developing ground-truth to support activities in the information environment . The new approach is far less concerned with developing the ground- Truth to support information activities .
 This is a rather simplistic and seemingly superficial approach, but it is far less resource intensive than 12 building a system of truth around the lie . This is more than 12 years old than 12 of the world's best lies .
 truth has become ‘utterly irrelevant’ in Russia’s new approach to Informational Conflict . Russia's new approach has been called “utterly meaningless’ as a result .
 This Scientific Letter is a publication of Defence Research and Development Canada . It is published by Defence Research & Development Canada.
 The reported results, their interpretation, and any opinions expressed therein, remain those of the authors . They do not necessarily represent, or otherwise reflect, any official opinion or position of the Canadian Armed Forces, Department of National Defence .