 Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin is a Russian politician and former intelligence officer serving as President of Russia since 2012 . He previously held the position from 2000 until 2008 .
 In between his presidential terms he was also the Prime Minister of Russia under his close associate Dmitry Medvedev .
 He was not yet a member of the Young Pioneer organization . He was one of a few in the class of approximately 45 pupils who was not a member . He is one of about 45 pupils in his class.
 He wished to emulate the intelligence officers portrayed in Soviet cinema . He wishes to emulate them in the film .
 In June 1996 Sobchak lost his bid for reelection in Saint Petersburg, so Putin moved to Moscow . He was appointed as Deputy Chief of the Presidential Property Management Department .
 Russia made several military incursions into Ukrainian territory in 2014 . In 2014 Russia made numerous military incursion into Ukraine .
 Russian soldiers without insignias took control of strategic positions and infrastructure within the Ukrainian territory of Crimea . After the Euromaidan protests and the fall of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, Russian soldiers took control.
 Russia annexed Crimea after a disputed referendum in which Crimeans voted to join the Russian Federation . Russia then annexed the Crimea after the referendum .
Demonstrations by pro-Russian groups in the Donbass area of Ukraine escalated into an armed conflict between the Ukrainian government and the Russia-backed separatist forces .
 In August Russian military vehicles crossed the border in several locations of Donetsk Oblast . In August Russia's military vehicles cross the border from Donetsk to Donetsk .
 The incursion by the Russian military was seen as responsible for the defeat of Ukrainian forces in early September . The incursions were seen as a result of the Ukrainian forces' defeat .
 Many members of the international community assumed that Putin's annexation of Crimea had initiated a completely new kind of Russian foreign policy .
 The annexation of Crimea to mean that his foreign policy had shifted from state-driven foreign policy to taking an offensive stance to re-create the Soviet Union .
 Putin is trying to defend nations in Russia's sphere of influence from encroaching western power . However, this policy shift can be understood as Putin trying to protect nations in his sphere of power .
 His "new" foreign policy may have more similarities to his older policies . The act to annex the Crimea was bold and drastic .
 Putin has lived in numerous official residences throughout the country . As president and prime-minister, Putin has been in many official residences .
 A massive Italianate-style mansion costing an alleged US$1 billion and dubbed "Putin's Palace" is under construction near the Black Sea village of Praskoveevka .
 The mansion, built on government land and sporting 3 helipads, is said to have been built for Putin's private use . Officials wearing uniforms of the official Kremlin guard service.
 Sergei Kolesnikov, a former business associate of Putin's, told the BBC's Newsnight programme that he had been ordered by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin to oversee the palace .
 It is intended to be a formal alliance between the ruling party and numerous Russian nongovernmental organizations . It is meant to be an alliance between Russia's ruling party.
In the same place, Putin delivered another speech on December 4, 2014 that also picked out Crimea as a central theme .
 Vladimir Putin is the second and fourth President of Russia and 33rd Prime Minister of Russia . He is the third and third President of the country and the fourth President.
 The Munich speech was a speech by Russian leader Vladimir Putin given in Germany on 10 February 2007 at Munich Security Conference .
 Putin used the speech to express significant points of the future direction of politics as it would be directed by himself .
 Opposition to President Vladimir Putin in Russia can be divided between the parliamentary opposition parties in the State Duma and the various non-systemic opposition organizations .
 The former are largely viewed as being more or less loyal to the government and Putin . They are mostly unrepresented in government bodies and are largely seen as being less loyal .
 Their supporters vary in political ideology, ranging from liberals and socialists to nationalists and monarchists . Their supporters range from nationalists to apolitical individuals .
 They are mainly unified by their opposition to President Putin and corruption in the government . They are mostly unified by the opposition to the president and corruption.
 Leading members of the opposition have become targets of violence, including assassinations and harassment . They allege the government of Vladimir Putin is responsible for the violence .
 Opposition figures also claim that a number of laws have been passed by President Putin's government to prevent them from having any electoral success .
 The public image of Vladimir Putin concerns the image of Putin, current President of Russia, among residents of Russia and worldwide .
 The slogan originated in Ukraine in 2014 having grown from a football chant first performed by FC Metalist Kharkiv ultras in March 2014 on the onset of Russian annexation of Crimea and military intervention in Ukraine .
 The phrase has become very widespread throughout Ukraine among supporters of the Ukrainian government and those who do not like Vladimir Putin in both Russian-speaking and Ukrainian-speaking areas of Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin has served three terms and is currently in a fourth as President of Russia . He was Acting President from 1999 to 2000, succeeding Boris Yeltsin in 2000 .
 Putin was also Prime Minister for three months in 1999 and served a full term from 2008 to 2012 . Putin also served as Prime Minister in 2008 and 2012 .
 During Putin's presidency, he has been a member of the Unity party and the United Russia party . He has also been a part of the United Russian party .
 He is also affiliated with the People’s Front, a group of supporters that Putin organized in 2011 . Putin organized the group to improve the public's perception of United Russia .
 Putin has enjoyed very high domestic approval ratings and in 2007 was Time magazine's Person of the Year . In 2007, Putin was Time's Person Of the Year.
 The Russian economy and standard of living grew rapidly during the early period of Putin's regime . Russia's oil industry was fueled largely by a boom in the oil industry .
Lower oil prices and sanctions for Russia's annexation of Crimea led to recession and stagnation in 2015 . However, lower oil prices, sanctions for the Crimea annexation led to stagnation .
 Political freedoms have been sharply curtailed, leading to widespread condemnation from human rights groups . Human rights groups have criticized the curbing of freedoms .
 The second inauguration of Vladimir Putin as the President of Russia took place on Friday, May 7, 2004 .
 The third inauguration of Vladimir Putin as the President of Russia took place on May 7, 2012 . The ceremony was attended by about three thousand people, including ministers, governors, deputies, senators, foreign ambassadors and religious leaders .
 The 2000 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin, Prime Minister of Russia, was announced on 13 January 2000, during his trip to Saint Petersburg . The presidential campaign was announced during his visit to the city .
 The 2004 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin was the first reelection campaign of Russian president Vladimir Putin . The 2004 campaign was Putin's first presidential campaign .
 The 2012 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin, 2nd and 4th President of Russia, was announced on 24 September 2011 . Putin was announced at the United Russia party convention for the legislative election .
 The 2018 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin was announced on 6 December 2017, during Putin's speech at the GAZ automobile plant .
 He is the 4th and incumbent President of Russia . Previously he was the 33rd Prime Minister of Russia, 33rd PM of Russia. He was the 2nd President of Russian and 4th Federal Security Service Director .
 Prior to this, he successfully participated in elections in 2000, 2004 and 2012 . He has also won elections in 2004, 2006 and 2012.
 Vladimir Putin has consistently scored higher than 40% in opinion polls since the last presidential election . Putin has been in the polls for more than three years .
 If Putin was not to be on the ballot 46% wouldn't have known for whom to vote and 19% would have made the ballot paper invalid, Gallup International poll says .
 Putin was re-elected as the President of the Russian Federation on 18 March 2018 . Putin was elected as President of Russia in a landslide victory .
 Vladimir Putin Peak is a mountain of the Tian Shan mountain range in Kyrgyzstan . It is the highest mountain in the country .
 The Russian Federation was named in 2011 after the second president of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin .