 The only relatively simple, legal, and realistic way to end the war in Ukraine quickly is to end it quickly, while maintaining self-determination and dignity for all parties Maidan Square in Kyiv .
 So-called “Peaceful Ukraine,’ was anything but peaceful in that region . The citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the American orchestrated coup of former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 This is unlikely to happen due to censorship in western nations for more pervasive than anything in China . This is the only way to secure peace with self-determination and dignity for all in the region and world .
 Russia decided to invade, smash and destroy much smaller, virtuous, and peaceful Ukraine . Big bad Russia, motivated by an expansionist policy, or just plain evil, decided to invasion, smash, destroy Ukraine .
 A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of violent conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance involving a degree of U.S. duplicitous treachery most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe .
 America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy, and Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War Il .
 The United States moved in as a friend to Ukraine, and then worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia . Thiis time the U.S. moved in to Ukraine as a friends and worked hard to win the election .
 The U.S. role of the United States in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine is not an overstatement at all, but rather about the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible .
 The world's deadliest pathogens can be found across Ukraine's border . The Russian government says it doesn't want large quantities of pathogens across its border .
 The U.S. is concerned Russian forces might seize, says Victoria Nuland .
 The Russian military claims to have identified 30 such facilities, and that does seem like rather a lot one must admit . The military says it has identified 30 facilities .
 The reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of U.S. foreign policy .
 An international moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine is the only way to end the war . President Zelensky has a face-saving excuse to negotiate peace with Russia .
War is so profitable for the U.S. and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and the politicians they can afford to put in office . But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is so lucrative for the United States and western European countries
 U.S. and relevant international prosecutors will start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war . Ukrainians are fighting to end the war by adding fuel to the fire, especially in Ukraine .
 The invasion of Iraq was neither in self-defense against armed attack nor sanctioned by UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force by member states and thus constituted the crime of war of aggression .
 Biden himself had enormous influence as chair and argued strongly in favor of the 2002 resolution granting President Bush the authority to invade Iraq . Biden himself was the chair of the House of Representatives .
 This article is part of a series of articles published on CNN.com's iReporter's weekly Newsquiz . Follow us on Twitter at @CNN.com/Newsquiz.com and @NewsQuiz . Click here for more information .
 Donbass was formed as an industrial region and its cities and factories often flow into one another, even today . Donbass is now a major city in the United States, with many of its factories being built .
 Ukrainian Rebels Claim Huge Victory in Self-Rule Referendum in Ukraine . Separatists in eastern Ukraine say people have voted overwhelmingly to secede from the state . Kiev and its Western supporters decried as illegitimate .
 Solicitation can be a serious criminal offense, in criminal law, in Criminal law, the request, encouragement, or direction of one person by another to commit a serious crime . Solicitations can be serious criminal offenses, such as a criminal offense or a criminal charge .
 Media consolidation, monopolies and American public support for U.S. interference in Ukraine's domestic affairs in Ukraine .
 Ethiopia, Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen remain the countries of highest concern . The Hunger Hotspots Report is from the World Food Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization .
 Ukraine only comes in at 5"" place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but its usually listed first for some odd reason .
 A million or more Ukrainians will happily take a U.S. visa to find what think will be a better life in the US . But that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine .
 President Biden's son's and his top cabinet members' corruption have brought the US and Russia to the brink of WWIII and thermonuclear Armageddon . In sum, it appears President Biden, due to his, his son’s, and his high cabinet members’ corruption,
 Russian President Putin still has verifiable legal justification for ensuring the security of his nation from American/EU ever-increasing threat of force . U.S. laboratories containing deadly pathogens scattered around Ukraine are one of the long list of verifiable threats to his nation .
 No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments, directly or via proxies . No nation has ever attempted to overthrow any government directly or indirectly .
 Ukrainians have been targeted by militias in Lugansk and Donetsk for eight years . Ukrainians are now the target of such barbarity, the same barbarity their weapons and militias were inflicting upon the innocents .
 The threats of missile bases, tanks, and other weapons were exacerbated a million-fold with the presence of potential dual use biological ‘research’ projects and bioweapons that can pass through any nation’s borders with extreme rapidity .
 Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, and could result in death or serious bodily harm . The threat could occur within an immediate time frame .
 U.S. and junior partners against countries that resist their agendas. Sanctions are imposed by the United States and its junior partners .
 The Ukraine War and body count escalates daily, while the UN is in near full support of this United States initiated war . The U.S. continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine .
 A false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, usually civilians, and then blames the opposing side in that conflict .
Evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far . The U.S. and/or Europe should enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine, escalating this conflict into a much later international war .
 The armed conflict in Ukraine is being reported in the U.S. in a manner far different from previous wars, as FAIR online news examines .
 Even the three Ukrainian individuals identified as having a relevant professional expertise. Two doctors and a journalist spoke only of their personal experience of the war .
 Many of the top Cabinet officers he appointed have records of conflicts of interest between their government positions, lobby groups, think tanks, and war industry related corporations . Biden, his family members, and many of his Cabinet officers have records.
 Most nations in the UN General Assembly are held as economic hostages to U.S. threats and/or bribes . Most nations are also held as hostages to American threats .
 President Putin virtually guaranteed a Russian military response in the Donbass region . That was not only ‘undiplomatic’ but more extreme provocation .
 innocent Ukrainian military, and civilians, and innocent Russian soldiers are dying on the battlefields in Ukraine . President Biden family and many of his top appointed government officials are among those dying .
 The United States and international laws and policies allegedly violated by above named United States officials Il.
 Lugansk and Donetsk had voted in a referendum to secede, as they regarded the newly imposed Ukrainian government as illegitimate and had close economic and cultural ties to Russia . The city of Lugansk was surrounded and under siege for several months .
 Case Referral Out-of-control pervasive and illegal American censorship of the news is as much to blame for the Ukraine War as anything else .
 Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States adopted b the UN General Assembly in 1970, 3. The Helsinki Final Act adopted by the Conference on Security andCo-operation in Europe in 1975 . The African Charter of Human and Peoples' Rights of 1981
 President Obama’s possible motivations for launching the Ukrainian war against the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk in 2014 are plentiful, but speculative .
 Raytheon Technologies, the maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% since the invasion began last Wednesday .
 Northrop Grumman, leading manufacturer of attack and surveillance drones, saw its stock rise close to 7% on Monday . The company's stock rose 3% since the Ukrainian conflict began .
The Soviet Union is estimated to have suffered the highest number of WWII casualties . The Soviet Union has suffered the most casualties in the world .
 President Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who believes in family values and honor . He is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of Euro-AmericanKiev imposed genocide .
 A comic book style rational cooked up legions of U.S. disinformation experts posing as journalists . That is a comic book-style rational cook-up .
 Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine in attempt to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries .
 President Biden's blitzkrieg media campaign may have met with initial western public support . But news media is not being honest at all about the origin of this war, the true motivations for this war and the real potential for thermonuclear war .
 Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences . But such totally unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russia's military capabilities and protocol .
 This test applies similarly to limitations of the right to freedom of expression under other legal instruments, including the African Charter . This test also applies to the right of freedom of speech under otherlegal instruments, such as African Charter.
 The United States has installed a labyrinthine network of electronic news censorship organizations . The U.S. has, especially over the period of the decade, installed a system of electronic media censorship .
 The U.S. and EU “defense industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would flatten all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions . That would transition this Russian attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists into a major war .
 U.S. and European war machines never slowed down by a second . The US and Europe's war machines did not slow down by the second .
 President Biden is attempting to trap Europeans into a very deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Federal borrowing competes for funds in the nation's capital markets, thereby raising interest rates and crowding out new investment in business equipment and structures .
 The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago . It was partly due to sanctions imposed on Iran .
 Russia's ban on SWIFT is likely to accelerate decline into a landslide . Now, banning Russia from SWIFT could lead to a landslide.
 President Biden and the EU are allowed to continue pouring gasoline on the fire in Ukraine . If the answer is yes, then continue to permit the EU and President Biden to continue to pour the gasoline .
 If the answer is no, they must back off immediately and start negotiating to back NATO off Russia’s borders entirely . Close their BSL laboratories and get psychological help for those neo-Nazis to deprogram from their ultra-violent and extremist philosophies .
 Given that in any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50 . The best one is 50-50 .
 The fate of advanced life on earth beyond bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble . If the “Western Alliance of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now, it's time for them to stop. And thus, the fate of advance life on Earth beyond bacteria rests on
 The debt-riddled U.S. and EU have isolated themselves from world markets even more since February 24 . Most of the people in Africa, Latin America and Asia have some new measures of hope that the United States will grow up and let a multi-polar world evolve naturally
 It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians and Russians . It appears to be more at risk than just the survival.
Until their power is contained, and campaign finance in the U.S. and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological blitzkrieg occurs .
 Socrates was most certainly right about democracies ending with oligarchy, and now demagoguery . It has been my long belief that the system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in that government .
 The political system in the U.S. has reached such saturation level corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments . Not an honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere.
 Avril Haines is at the axis of the revolving door between defense industries and the government's intelligence community . Haine is at least the appearance of conflict of interest .