Anne Clunan Jessica Piombo Approved for public release . Thesis Co-Advisors: Anne Clun an JessicaPiombo .
 Ukraine remains far from a robust democracy and qualifies as a consolidated hybrid state . ABSTRACT Ukraine is still far from the robust democracy .
 Ukraine continues to experience difficulty shedding the legacy of the Soviet era in order to advance to a truly democratic state . Despite more than 25 years of government development since independence, Ukraine has struggled to shed the Soviet legacy .
 This thesis seeks to understand Ukraine’s regime development and why the country experiences difficulty strengthening democratically . The thesis is based on a study of Ukraine's regime development .
 Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state of government vice a true democracy . Drawing on theories of democratic consolidation and the rise of hybrid regimes, this thesis.
 More than a quarter century of political development in Ukraine failed to bring robust democratic governance to this nation . Analyzing six different criteria of regime development, including choices, institutions, elections, accountability, civil society, and economics .
 Ukraine remain in a hybrid condition with democratic and autocratic elements living in constant tension with each other . As a result, Ukraine remains in a 'hysterical condition'
 The prospects for a strong democracy in Ukraine in the near future remain wishful thinking at best . Ukraine can find a way to radically break with its past, says the writer .
 Ukraine, democracy, governance, hybrid rule, competitive rule, authoritarianism, consolidation, democratization .
 Ukraine remains in a hybrid condition with democratic and autocratic elements living in constant tension with each other .
 Leah, your steadfast love, support, and understanding kept her centered throughout this journey . To Leah, her steadfast love and support kept me centered throughout the journey .
You always provided an honest sounding board and never complained when you had to stay late . You always provided a good sounding board. I never complained about being late .
 I am truly grateful for the sacrifices you made by taking these orders to Monterey and having our first child . I'm truly grateful to the sacrifices I made. I am really grateful for these sacrifices .
 During the difficult and stressful days, you always brought a smile to your face . "You always brought the smile to my face," she says .
 I am truly thankful for receiving these orders, especially for the simple fact that I was able to be around for your birth and first year of life. I am really thankful for getting these orders .
 Second, I am thankful for the wisdom and mentorship from the faculty and staff at the Naval Postgraduate School . The Naval Post Graduate School is located in New York .
 Sandra Leavitt, thank you for sparking her interest in Ukraine and comparative politics during her first quarter . Sandra LeAVitt, thanks for sparking my interest in Ukrainian politics during my first quarter.
 Jessica Piombo, for taking me on-board as an advisee and guiding me throughout this process, has helped me through this process . She has been in charge of the project since the beginning of the year .
 The countless hours and emails you dedicated to this project are immensely appreciated . I cannot describe well-enough how grateful I am for your counsel, and I can't describe well enough .
 This thesis studies Ukraine’s regime development and why the country experiences difficulty strengthening democratically . This thesis also examines Ukraine's regime development .
 This thesis analyzes Ukraine’s political development from 1991 to the present . Drawing on theories of democratic consolidation and the rise of hybrid regimes, this thesis examines Ukraine's political development .
 During that time period, the nation observed two political revolutions, civil discord, foreign intervention, and a loss of territory . During the time period the nation saw two political revolution and civil discord .
 After the Orange Revolution in 2004, Ukraine was trumpeted in the West as a nation on a better path to democratic development . The Orange Revolution was the country's first democratic revolution .
 Events in the last twelve years demonstrate that problems are still prohibiting progress . However, events in the past twelve years show that problems still prohibit progress .
 Understanding the root causes of Ukraine’s development will shed light on what type of regime the nation is becoming .
 Those questions have implications for policy makers and scholars of democratic consolidation theory .
 For policy makers, much time and money is invested by the United States and international organizations for the development of democracies around the world .
 The amount of foreign aid the United States has contributed to Ukraine over the years is a noteworthy example of U.S. priorities . The amount is a notable example of United States priorities .
 The video contains Nuland’s entire address to the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation in 2013 . The video provides sufficient context to know that her comments on United States spending in Ukraine are not efforts to “subvert the Ukrainian government as the title indicates .
 The United States has contributed a range of US$90 million-US$140 mi llion in aid since 2013 . More recently, according to foreignassistance.gov, the U.S. has contributed to US $90 million in aid .
 A strong, independent, and democratic Ukraine can act as a counterweight against Russian influence in the region . Ukraine can be an example for other nations to follow .
 Ukraine has higher prospects of joining Western organizations such as the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Separately, a strong democratic Ukraine could promote greater stability and security for the region .
 Present-day Ukraine also provides an important case study for democratic theory . The debate over democratization and consolidation continues among scholars .
 The world observed another conflict and regime overthrow. Fast forward to 2014.
 The last decade and a half of development provides yet another opportunity to analyze and evaluate theories of democratic development . The last 10 years of development provide yet another chance, as it did from 1991-2004, to analyze theories of democracy .
 After two revolutions, the country has failed to change the government fundamentals that allow both democratic institutions and authoritarian practices to live in constant tension with each other .
 Ukraine continues to be affected by key decisions made over a quarter of a century ago . Stemming from a failure to cleanly break with its Communist past, Ukraine is still struggling .
 Broken into five chapters, this thesis will apply democratic consolidation theory to the case study of Ukraine . The thesis will be broken into four chapters .
 Chapter I covers the literature behind democratic consolidation, as well as a brief history of Ukraine . Chapter I also covers the history of the Ukraine .
 Consolidation theory seeks to understand what makes a strong democracy, what happens when democracy fails to consolidate, as well as the rise of authoritarian systems of government .
 Ultimately, scholars attest to the development and analysis of six different criteria for determining a government's development toward better democracy .
 These same criteria nest hand-in-hand with determinants for failed democracies and the rise of authoritarian / hybrid states . The same criteria are also used to determine the rise in authoritarian states .
 The remainder of Chapter I provides a brief history of Ukraine, covering key events, timelines, and characters that are present throughout the remainder of the thesis .
 Ukraine's history will determine if Ukraine has consolidated closer to a democracy after 25 years . As such, applying the six developmental criteria across Ukraine’s history will decide what have they consolidated into and why .
 Chapter II explores the development and evolution of Ukraine’s political institutions . Chapter II examines the development of Ukraine's political institutions and political institutions.
 Key decisions following independence caused lasting implications for the nation’s stagnation towards democracy .
The persistence of communist influence after independence shattered chances at a meaningful transition to democracy . The persistence of Communist influence afterindependence shattered chances of a meaningful change to democracy.
 The communist presence tainted the new government, and allowed corruption to take hold . Rather, the communist presence tarnished reform, according to the author .
 From the beginning, Ukrainian institutions failed to adhere to democratic norms, and these flawed norms became entrenched. From the start, Ukrainian Institutions failed to comply with democratic norms .
 At the same time, the flaws created incentives to cheat and commit fraud as a means to retain power . The flaws create incentives to commit fraud and cheat, according to the author .
 Even elections, a fundamental pillar of democracy, remain defective in Ukraine’s political system . Even elections remain defective, creating uneven barriers for opposition victory .
 Ukraine's institutions and practices remain deeply flawed and fail to serve the public or advancement of the state, which is far from democratic in nature . Ukraine’s institutions are deeply flawed, says the author .
 Corruption remains rampant in Ukraine, affecting nearly every politician and 3 ordinary citizens . Corruption remains rife in Ukraine.
 Failing to pay taxes, bribery, and coercion are a means to get rich among elites, says the author . "Failing to paid taxes and bribery is a way to survive for everyday Ukrainians," he says .
 All levels of society are plagued by this deep entrenchment of corruption and failure to uphold the rule of law in the country, says author .
 While corruption and accountability problems are widespread, civil society development remains weak and unable to consistently shape the government .
Early civil society engagement following independence was passive and designed to assist elites rather than citizens . Failing to establish a foothold in Ukrainian politics, early civil social engagement was passive .
 Ukrainian civil society is making progress, but due to the entrenchment of perceptions and practices of the past, is proving extremely difficult to change . Today, Ukraine's civil society has made progress.
 The two factors do not bode well for Ukraine’s progress at democratic consolidation. Ultimately, these two factors don't bodewell for Ukraine's progress at democracy .
 Chapter IV analyzes the economic development of Ukraine over the last quarter of a century . Chapter III analyzes Ukraine's economic development over the past 25 years .
 Economic distortions resulting from a failure to reform immediately following independence allowed old Soviet practices to continue and perpetuated a close relationship between the government and economy .
 The intermingling of money and politics continues even after reforms accelerated in the 2000s, giving rise to the wealthy class of Ukrainian oligarchs .
 The economy of Ukraine consistently benefits elites and continually fails to serve everyday Ukrainians. Ultimately, the economy of the Ukraine consistentlybenefits elites .
 Ukrainians struggle to make ends meet with low wages and high prices for basic commodities . Ukraine's history has seen many Ukrainians struggle with poverty .
 Ukraine’s economy is far from a free market model found in most well-developed democracies . Ukraine's economy is not free market models found in many democracies .
 As a result of this economic situation, many Ukrainians are left disenchanted at their government’s ability to improve their lives and lack the resources necessary to remain consistently involved in the political system .
 The conclusion of the chapter synthesizes the discussions of previous chapters through a lens of hybrid rule . The chapter concludes with the conclusion of this chapter .
 Chapter V explains that Ukraine is far from a consolidated democracy . Ukraine fits into a consolidated competitive authoritarian state .
 Ukrainian government consistently fails to practice democratically, and sufficient distortions exist to keep the 4 system in advantage of elites . While democratic on paper, the Ukrainian government fails to Practice democratically, it fails topractice democratically .
 Ukraine's long history has demonstrated an inability to fundamentally break with the past . Ukraine’s long history shows that it has not been able to break with past .
 The communist influence continues to linger in the government today . Choosing to allow the continued communist influence, immediately following independence, continues to remain in the Government .
 Ukraine will likely remain in a hybrid state for the foreseeable future . Two revolutions failed to break with the past, and until Ukraine does, the nation will likely be a hybrid .
 Debates over democracy date back to Aristotle in the fourth century BC and continue today . The debate over democracy dates back to the 4th century BC .
 This literature review will focus on two strands of this broad literature . The review will also focus on the history of the English language .
 The first strand seeks to explain what creates strong democracies, as well as why democracies fail . The first is to explain how democracies form, and why they fail .
 The second strand follows from the explanation of why democracies fail, and an examination of the rise of “hybrid regimes’s” regimes .
 The reviewed theories will serve as the foundation for the remainder of the research in this thesis . The review theories will be used to build up the thesis .
 One particular field of study, known as democratic consolidation, analyzes democracies based on how well they have habituated good democratic norms and procedures .
 A survey of the main competing and 4 Frank Cunningham, Theories of Democracy, 6-7. A survey. of themain competing and theories of democracy .
 In Search of Consolidation,” in Consolidating the Third Wave Democracies: Themes and Perspectives, eds. In Search Of Consolidation. In search of Consolidated,’s.
 scholars and their arguments may share or disagree with certain components, they all agree . The habituation of certain aspects of these factors is key to ensuring democratic consolidation .
 The majority of scholars agree that the habituation of good electoral practices is essential to democratic development .
 Some argue elections are the only condition needing habituation for a democracy to succeed . Others say elections are only condition for habituation of a democracy .
 Most scholars agree that analyzing the consolidation of a democracy based solely on elections is insufficient .
 Election fraud and other efforts to subvert the process can undermine the true intent of a democracy, counter popular preferences, and render the practice as merely a fagade for authoritarian rule .
 Even countries with an optimistic “initial opening crowned by free and fair elections’ can end up falling into hybrid rule . As a result of the numerous processes involved in a transition to democracy, Andreas Schedler explains .
 A hybrid regime is a type of governance that possesses both democratic and authoritarian institutions, norms, and practices . The regime has both authoritarian and democratic institutions and norms .
 Electoral authoritarian regimes lack accountability measures or a robust civil-society to significantly challenge the government, says the author .
 Vladimir Putin's reliance on subversive electoral practices including ‘shameless fraud,’ says Vladimir Gel’man . Putin’s reliance on “shameless Fraud,” limiting media access, and mobilizing workers in order to maintain the current regime .
 Some argue political institutions are an additional key factor in consolidating democracy . Scholars acknowledge the importance of habituating the people’s vote as the bedrock for democratic consolidation .
 The habituation and strength of institutions act as a counter to human actions and impulses that lead to abuses of power and corruption, says John Sutter . Sutter says the habituation of institutions acts as counter to humans' impulses .
 "Democratization 16, no. . 407, 407, is a Democratization 16 and 407, according to CNN.com .
 The impact of institutional choices may be intertwined with other conditions, but they still play a role . The impact on institutional choices can be seen as a factor in the decision to make decisions .
 The habituation of political parties also promotes or degrades democratic consolidation . The habit of political party membership is also a cause for political consolidation .
 A weakened or failing democracy is a party system with too many parties that fail to compromise among a broad range of constituents, and coalitions that dissolve frequently .
 Pre-existing institutions can be helpful, though their application may vary . Postcommunist states can't be construed as a one-size-fits-all observation .
 Valerie Bunce shares her perspective on the post-communist situation in Latin America . She argues post-Communist situation is different .
 9 authoritarian regimes stem from an incomplete transition to democracy that leaves the nation with weak institutions and areas of contestation . Mark Kesselman and Joel Krieger, 61, are among the top two men in the world's history of authoritarian regimes .
 The authors argue that four areas of contestation allow the opposition an opportunity to challenge or defeat an autocratic ruler through the electoral process . However, weak does not mean impossible, they say .
 oppositional elements and authoritarian elements live in tension with each other . The oppositional element and authoritarian element live in tensions with each others .
 democracy’s survival depends on the habituation of the rule of law . The role of institutions is to keep officials accountable for their positions and actions .
 Larry Diamond claims for a democracy to not only be considered a democracy, but also to survive, it must be a constitutional democracy centered on a written contract that establishes, limits, and upholds the rules of the political game .
 Accountability ensures leadership maintains the highest standards of rule, and remains true to the preferences of the governed .
 Habituating accountability and adherence to the rule of law can prevent or mitigate corruption, human rights abuses, and promote a stronger democracy . Habituated accountability can prevent, mitigate corruption and promote stronger democracy.
 A government that is weak in the rule of law leaves citizens in fear of carrying out their rights . The government may face unfair and inconsistent prosecutions that delegitimize and undermine perceptions of a democracy .
 Even corruption, left unchecked, undermines the perception of government legitimacy . Even corruption is left unchecked.
 The rules are so ambiguous or loaded with ideology, they become difficult to change even with a majority vote, and undermine consolidation efforts . Separately, when the rules are too ambiguous, they are hard to change with majority vote .
 Civil-Society Scholars argue that the role of civil society has a separate impact on health and survivability of a democracy .
 A rich civil society amplifies the preferences of individuals on issues that citizens may not address on their own . Taking the preferences or grievances of individuals, a rich society amplifying the preferences to a level representative of mass population .
 opposition candidate failed to win the Russian elections . Civil society moves lacked the strength needed to continue and challenge President Vladimir Putin’s tightening grip on LGBT rights .
 A narrative of far-right, neo-fascist groups seeking to undermine Ukraine’s democracy and promote the murder and persecution of Russian-speaking civilians, according to Samuel Ramani . Ramani gained traction with critics of a nationalist movement .
 Ramani concludes that this narrative failed to address the reality on the ground, and the nationalist movement, while loud, lacked sufficient political capital to push an agenda . Ramani: "This narrative fails to address a reality"
 Civil society must work hand-in-hand with other institutions in a symbiotic relationship in order to strengthen a democracy and improve its survivability .
Economic development is critical, if not the only factor for democracies’ survival, as an affluent nation lacks conflict over basic goods, services, and norms . Other scholars argue that economic development is crucial, as a nation lacks basic goods.
 Wealthier citizens are also more able to pay attention and be engaged in politics, which is required for citizens to participate, to hold their leaders accountable .
 Thinking back to Diamond's argument, a society that worries less about basic survival will likely be more open-minded, flexible, and tolerant of different interests that develop within the democratic process .
 The authors may be ambitious to peg a dollar amount to survivability . But increased personal wealth improves democratic durability, they say .
Some scholars add that consolidated democracy cannot possess either a command or pure market economy . Some government regulation is required, they say .
 Regulation can safeguard citizens and ensure delivery of goods . Some regulation allows the government flexibility to step in and attempt to fix the economy in times of crisis .
 The economic level and structure can promote democratic endurance as they provide policymakers with tools to mitigate crisis, and ensure delivery of goods and wealth, which in turn enhances the flexibility and tolerance needed to weather crises .
 Ruling leaders’ choices have profound effects on promoting or undermining democratic consolidation . Leaders’ Choices have profound effect on promoting, undermining or undermining democracy .
 Valerie Bunce analyses Boris Yeltsin's decisions during the Russian transition to democracy in the 1990s . Bunce outlines the role choice plays in democracy’s development .
 Russia was not poised for a clean break with its communist past similar to other post-Soviet states . As Bunce explains, Russia's communist past was similar to those of other states .
 Communist party members, elites, and the public lacked a consensus on how the new regime and state should develop . It came to the swiftness of economic reform, especially when it came to swiftness.
 Yeltsin was unable to implement economic reform quickly with the Duma . The Duma led to a partial economic reform that allowed rent seekers to benefit .
 Flaws in the democracy, based on elite choices, allowed for the later exploitation and undermining of Russia’s democratic consolidation .
 Getting it right can establish a strong foundation and entrench the correct norms and practices of democratic rule within emerging democracies, particularly within post-communist countries . Getting it wrong can establish the correct standards and practices.
 The transition period from authoritarian to democratic rule is critical for establishing a strong democratic foundation . It is critical to promote future survival of a regime and prevent the return of authoritarian government .
 States lacking strong institutional foundations to provide checks-andbalances on power will remain weak, and rulers will exploit that weakness to retain power .
Without the strong habituation of institutional norms and procedures, “widespread corruption, human rights violations, illegality, and abuses of authority by the holders of state power at all levels,’s Schedler says .
 Russia's early years as a democracy illustrate how weak institutional foundations negatively affect democratic consolidation . Russia’s early years show how weak institutions negatively affect democracy .
 The Duma granted Boris Yeltsin sweeping powers for a year to overcome legislative deadlock . The powers allow for the implementation of economic legislation .
 The power included consolidating the President and Prime Minister positions under a single authority . The power also included canceling regional elections, and allowing the unchecked issuance of presidential decrees .
 The powers bestowed on the president had the best of intentions, but the unchecked powers laid the foundation for a battle between Yeltsin and the Duma over who truly held power in Russia .
 Following the bloody confrontation, a constitutional referendum and parliamentary elections were held that solidified Yeltsin’s power .
 Yeltsin granted unchecked ability to dissolve the Duma on a whim if he desired .
 The standoff with Parliament and the subsequent referendums highlight how obtaining the correct foundation for democratic rule during the transition phase is critical for 50 O'Donnell, “Illusions About Consolidation,’ 35, 37,” 35,37.
Establishing quality institutions right away allows for the habituation of norms and practices suitable to a healthy democracy from the beginning . Establishingquality institutions in a democracy allows for a healthy society to be a democracy .
 democracies in the post-Soviet sphere may fail to consolidate if democratic reforms are implemented too slowly . The transition period was a period of institutional and accountability problems .
 Some contend that successful democratization in postcommunist countries hinges on a quick and clean break with the communist past . Latin American countries used a bridging strategy that slowly integrated people and democracy over a greater time .
 Analyzing Poland’s transition from communism, Bunce describes that high popular support and a “sweeping economic... reform agenda,” contributed to a quicker than planned transition .
 An abrupt severing of former Soviet ties facilitated a greater habituation of democratic procedures and norms, according to the former Soviet regime .
 The democratic consolidation school often discusses transitional dynamics as either leading to consolidated or unconsolidated democracies, in a binary format .
 Other scholars, as indicated earlier, analyze how the process of democratic consolidation may actually lead to the consolidation of a nondemocratic regime that has the trappings of democracy . They label hybrid regimes.
 Democracies that fail to follow through on a successful transition or instill flawed norms and practices open the door to regressing back to authoritarian rule or developing a hybrid governance .
 Hybrid regimes have their roots in the transition period to democratic rule . These regimes use democratic institutions to mask authoritarian rule .
 Matthijs Bogaards echoes the same idea that these types of governance are “inherited from an undemocratic 56 Bunce, “Rethinking Recent Democratization’s” 174. Bogaard: “Recent Democratization,’
 Authoritarian leaders manipulate the electoral process by barring opposition candidates or parties . But elections in competitive authoritarian regimes lack the widespread fraud one sees in electoral authoritarian regimes .
 The media can be a platform to challenge rulers, but at the same time be under authoritarian leadership control . The media is a platform for challenges, but it can also be under an authoritarian leadership.
 The key with competitive authoritarian regimes is that autocratic elements lack sufficient power to completely remove or degrade democratic elements, so there is a constant tension between the two . The key to competitive regimes is to have enough power to remove and degrade democracy .
 Levitsky and Way indicate that rulers in competitive authoritarian regimes may choose more subtle means to exercise authoritarian tendencies . They say they may opt for “bribery co-option’s over overt or pervasive violations of democratic norms and practices .
 Ukraine presents a turbulent political history. BRIEF POLITICAL HISTORY and CAST OF CHARACTERS Ukraine present a turbulent history .
The following will present a basic chronological evolution of Ukraine’s political history . The following will show the evolution of the Ukrainian political history.
 This section seeks to present key events and players that will be recurring throughout the thesis . This section is not all encompassing, but it seeks to highlight key events .
 Leaving the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine experienced numerous political shortcomings and upheavals that hindered the nation's ability to consolidate toward a strong democracy .
Current difficulties are compounded by a recent war in the country’s east with Russian-backed separatists . Separately, current difficulties are also compounded by the recent war with Russia.
Unfolding between 1990 and 1991, the events surrounding independence were fast-paced . Unfolding from 1990 to 1991 was fast- paced .
 Negotiations between democratic, nationalist, and communist forces seeking 59 Bogaards, “How to Classify Hybrid Regimes?,’ 406. 406 .
 All sides wanted independence in order to chart their own path free from higher Soviet overreach . All sides bargained for what future Ukraine should look like, but all wanted independence .
 Leonid Kravchuk, the former Head of Communist Ideology in Soviet Ukraine, is the nation's first head of state . He beat out the democratic opposition candidate, Vyacheslav Chornovil, 61. to 23. percent, respectively .
 Kravchuk set out on an ambitious policy of establishing a national and cultural foundation for Ukraine . He set out to establish a national, cultural foundation in Ukraine .
 The government maintained a priority on symbols of statehood, including a national anthem and flag .
 heated debates over national identity, including language and official history, pitted pro-European forces from Western Ukraine against the heavily Soviet-influenced East . Also, heated debates on national identity.
 Privatization was extremely slow and faced stiff resistance from the carryover communists . Privatisation was extremely fast and faced tough resistance from communists .
 printing money, as Andrew Wilson describes, “hand over fist’ to back production and pay state wages . Inflation sent inflation through the roof and facilitated capital flight from the economy .
Kravchuk’s entire presidency was a disaster that left many Ukrainians disenchanted by their new government . Kravchuk's entire presidency.
 Once the pride of Soviet production and economy, coal miners in the East demanded the government fix their economic situation .
 Attempting to pay wage arrears by printing money, the economic situation only worsened . The economic situation in the country has worsened .
Early elections forced Kravchuk out of office prior to the formal end of his term . The strike ended with early elections that forced him to step down .
 In 1994, Ukrainians elected Leonid Kuchma over Kravchuk as their second president . In June 1994, he was elected with 52 percent of the vote and a clear regional division of pro-Russian support .
 Kuchma’s presidency saw economic turnaround and expanding centralized control over the government . The president was elected in 2008 .
 Kuchma's program gave rise to an elite oligarch class as the privatization of large state companies benefited the few that were loyal to the president . Increasing privatization and introducing an official national currency reduced inflation .
 The oligarchs came to dominate the political scene, making millions as the overall economy continued to stagnate and decline .
 Viktor Yushchenko was Prime Minister of Ukraine in the 2000s . He was appointed a savvy economist who accelerated economic progress . Kuchma is now the leader of Ukraine .
 Yushchenko’s reforms, along with his Deputy Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, turned the economy around . The economy began experiencing real growth again in the 2000s .
 Yushchenko's successful program has threatened Kuchma's power base . Such a targeted and successful program made YUSHchenko more popular than Kuchmma .
 Kuchma expanded his control over the government . In addition to the economic turnaround, he expanded his power .
 Kuchma expanded his authority in 1996, 70 Wilson, The Ukrainians Unexpected Nation, 257 .
 Kuchma shored up his power of the media through both state-run stations and loyal oligarch elites . In addition, Kuchm's power was also the power of his own state- run stations .
 Kuchma notoriously issued out censorship guidelines to the media, known as Temniki, as a means to control the popular narrative . The media is known for its censorship guidelines .
 Kuchma leveraged the tax and traditional police as a mechanism to control vocal opposition . Also leveraged tax, traditional police and tax and tax as a means of controlling vocal opposition.
 Shutting down dissenting or opposition newspapers was common through the use of tax police, or denial of permit renewals .
National appointment of loyal police chiefs and judges ensured an extension of the executive pervaded the courts and law enforcement .
 Kuchma built his own version of authoritarianism that was extensively developed by 2004 . His chosen successor faced the possibility of losing to the opposition party .
Kuchma engineered a political campaign that attempted to guarantee his chosen successor, Viktor Yanukovych, victory . Exercising all levers of control built since 1994, Kuchma built a campaign that tried to guarantee Yanukovych's victory .
Tax police and shutting down opposition newspapers and television stations during the campaign season is one such example .
 More importantly, engineering a widespread campaign of egregious voter fraud through ballot tampering . More than 1,000 ballots were tampered with, according to election officials .
 Kuchma went too far in threatening polling stations, poisoning his main contender, Kuchman .
 Kuchma’s actions sparked massive street protests demanding his resignation and a repeat round of voting . The Orange Revolution is a movement known as the Orange Revolution .
 The Orange Revolution was deemed a success. Pressuring the courts to overturn the fraudulent round and force a repeat round of voting, the Orange Revolution.
 Viktor Yushchenko emerged victorious as Ukraine's third president . The poisoned opposition candidate and former Kuchma prime minister, Viktor YUSHchenko, emerged victorious .
 Alongside Yulia Tymoshenko, the two were set to run Ukraine's next government . Alongside his trusted campaign aide, YuliaTymoshenko was set to be the next president .
 Yushchenko appointed Tymoshenko as his prime minister, but shortly after taking command of the government the two clashed over economic and political reforms .
 Viktor Yanukovych became Prime Minister after clashes with his grand coalition . The clashes created inroads for Viktor Yanukovych to gain additional power in Parliament .
 Yushchenko's term ended with a back and forth for political power . The Prime Minister position changed from Tymoshenko, to Yanukovych, then back to Tymchenko .
 Viktor Yanukovych, the disgraced 2004 candidate, was elected as the nation's fourth president . Yanukovych was the country's fourth President .
 Yanukovych, almost immediately after taking office, embarked on a campaign to shore up political power .
 Yanukovych allowed businessmen and politicians to continue corrupt practices and gain immense wealth without government opposition, so long as they pledged complete political loyalty to Yanukovych .
 This network benefited Yanukovych until 2013, when his house of cards came crashing down . Yanukovych's network benefited him until 2013 .
 Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2015) are the latest in a long line of Russian Imperialisms .
 Signing the EU agreement would mark a significant commitment to joining Europe, improving Ukraine’s institutions for economic trade, and more importantly represent a significant rebuke to Russia .
 For decades Russia sought to expand its influence in Ukraine, establishing deep roots with economic and political integration through the ashes of the Soviet Union .
 Signing the EU deal would have sent a stark message that Ukraine no longer required Russia’s support or influence .
 Yanukovych’s decision resulted in small scale street demonstrations in Kyiv demanding a change to the status quo .
 Yanukovych ordered a harsh police response to break up the protestors . As a result of the demonstrations, Yanukovych orders a harsh response .
 The beating of demonstrators only fanned the anger amongst the populace, sending more people to the streets to demand Yanukovych's resignation .
 The Euromaidan, or the Revolution of Dignity, took place in 2013 to 2014 . The events surrounding 2013-2014 came to be called the Eurom Maidan or the "Revolution of Dignities"
 Yanukovych's order to use live ammunition against demonstrators turned the nation against the leader . The demonstrations started out small and were violently suppressed .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 as a result of the political upheaval . Parliament voted to hold new elections, and the people successfully dictated the terms of their political future .
 Separately, while the Euromaidan was unfolding, Russia invaded Ukraine . Russia invaded the Ukraine on Sunday .
 The Russian government seized part of Ukraine’s southern territory, known as the Crimean peninsula .
 Russia's actions added another layer of complexity and challenges to Ukraine’s domestic and international political situation. Violating numerous international agreements, Russia”s actions added an additional layer of complex challenges .
 Ukraine held presidential and parliamentary elections in May 2014 . Eventually, Ukraine held elections in April 2014 .
 Fighting and Russian involvement hampered voting in the war tom regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as Crimea . Fighting and Russia involvement hampered vote in the Donetsk region, and Crimea .
 In the end, Ukrainians voted Petro Poroshenko in as the country’s fifth, and current, president . In the final vote, the Ukrainian president was voted in as president .
 Ukrainian president wins 54. percent of the vote in the first round . It is the first time in Ukrainian history that a president has a majority of votes to avoid a runoff .
 Ukraine’s progress toward democracy has been inconsistent with marked instances toward greater authoritarianism . Ukraine's progress towards democracy has not been consistent with marked cases of authoritarianism.
 Ukraine presents an interesting case study to apply the principles of democratic consolidation and hybrid government theory to determine what type of government they are, why and where things went wrong for democracy .
 The remainder of this thesis applies the principles of theory to Ukraine, reaching the conclusion that Ukraine is far from a consolidated democracy . The rest of the thesis applies to Ukraine's political system .
 Ukraine is something different, strongly akin to a hybrid regime coined competitive authoritarian regime . Rather, Ukraine is more like an authoritarian regime, rather than a hybrid .
 Ukraine’s political institutions remain an area of contestation beyond the norms and behavior of a developed democracy and are indicative of a competitive authoritarian state .
 post-communist countries are most successful at transitioning to democracy when they experience a clean break with the Soviet past . Ukraine did the exact opposite, according to scholars .
 A clean break implies that old elites must go, and institutions overhaul and cleanse themselves of centralized Soviet influences in order to have the best chance at transitioning to successful democracy .
 Ukraine opted to build a new type of government out of the old Soviet framework . Ukraine opted for a bridging strategy that attempted to build an new kind of government .
 The transition from Soviet to democratic rule allowed hybrid consolidation to take hold . Failing to break with that past at the critical transition allowed hybrid consolidations to take place .
 Democratic institutions were built out of a Soviet framework, with Soviet practices and actors, establishing democratic and autocratic elements that became entrenched and live in tension .
 Choosing to carry over political institutions from the Soviet era, and molding them from within, hindered democratic consolidation in Ukraine . Choosing not to carry out political institutions, and Molding them out of the Soviet period, hindered democracy .
 This chapter will cover key choices just prior to and following independence . It will cover the early system of governance that shaped Ukraine’s early system. It includes maintaining the Soviet constitution.
 These choices set the stage and early rules of the political game that influenced the transition and consolidation process . The political game was a key part of the transition process .
 Analyzing the impact of these choices on key governmental aspects, including the Parliament, the president and prime minster .
 Ukraine's political institutions failed to consolidate toward a strong democracy, and remain stuck in hybrid rule . Ukraine’s political institutions fail to consolidate towards a strong political democracy, according to reports .
 Both democratic and communist forces had interest in an independent Ukraine . Both parties were interested in independent Ukraine.
 As national and democratic opposition movements gained seats in Ukraine’s Soviet parliament in 1990, these movements began to push for independence .
 Communists were also interested in achieving national independence . Even with growing opposition to single party rule, they were interested in independence .
 An independent Ukraine allowed to determine its future, avoiding Mikhail Gorbachev’s forced policies of glasnost and perestroika . In theory, in theory, could remain highly centralized .
 The Rada amended the 1978 Soviet constitution, added president and prime minister positions, declared independence from the Soviet Union . In 1991, the Rada held their first nationwide elections .
 Ukraine decided to keep its 1978 Soviet constitution as continued negotiations for a new one failed to come to fruition until 1996 . The constitution was kept in place until 1996, creating lasting implications for Ukraine today .
 The Communists failed to act as true checks and balances to each other . The institutions were dominated by single party rule .
 These institutions were designed to promote and support the party in power . Rather, these institutions were meant to promote the party.
 The delineation of powers were often deliberately vague in documents so as to allow flexibility and informal practices .
 The influence of this relic carried over into independent Ukraine, with all of its amendments . The influence was also carried over to independent Ukraine .
 Three main decisions established the continuation of communist influence in the new government . The new government was formed in the early 1990s .
First, bargaining for independence allowed communist elites to remain in place, along with their influence and old ways of business, in the new government . First, bargaining with the government allowed them to stay in place .
 The outdated Soviet constitution remained the law of the land, and was amended to add two new positions without clearly defined roles . Second, the outdated Soviet Constitution remained the Law of the Land .
 Leonid Kravchuk, a former communist, is the nation’s first president . He did little to remove old influence from the new system .
 The choices directly hindered democratic development and perpetuated Soviet influence in the new independent government . These choices directly hinder democratic development, according to the Russian government .
 Deciding to keep communist elites in positions of authority directly hindered democratic consolidation in Ukraine’s early transition .
 Leonid Kravchuk was the head of the Rada, then-head of the country's political party . He knew he needed both opposition and communist support to make it happen .
 He had to bargain with both sides to determine the rules of the game going forward . This limited the country’s ability to break with its past .
 The result of bargaining included keeping the communist elite on board in the new government . The new government is the first government to take over from the previous government .
 As part of the deal for independence, old elites remained as long as they supported an independent Ukraine . The deal was part of a deal for independent Ukraine.
 The presence of the old elite made chances of substantial reform next to impossible . Former communists often blocked opportunities at modernization reforms that often ran contradictory to their personal interests .
 Former communists in their reincarnated parties continued to block reform, democratic or otherwise, threatening their interests . Former communists still block reform or otherwise .
 The original Soviet constitution after independence contributed to lasting institutional weakness . Also, deciding to keep the original Russian constitution contributed tolasting institutional weakness.
 Remaining the law of the land from 1978 to 1996, the document called for three branches of government . The document was released in 1996 .
 The Verkhovna Rada represented the legislative branch, crafting and voting on laws . The Rada was a member of the House of Representatives in Russia .
 The constitution called for having both a president and prime minister .
 In theory, the president remained responsible for foreign policy and key cabinet appointments . While the prime minister maintained other appointments, remained accountable to the Rada and the president .
 Political Reform, Economic Transformation and Security Policy in Independent Ukraine . 3.3.2.5.
 The judiciary branch was to be an independent apparatus . However, the persistent communist legacy undermined that mandate . The judiciary was an independent branch .
 Overall, given its lack of definition and extended Soviet influence, the constitution promoted dysfunction, confrontation, and power grabbing in the three branches of government, rather than conducting any meaningful reform for a better democracy .
 The contest over power played out in 1996 when a new constitution was finally adopted . The contest was over power when the constitution was first adopted .
 Ukraine’s second president, Leonid Kuchma, rammed a new constitution through the Rada under an illegal threat of dissolving the Ukrainian Parliament .
 The Rada capitulated to Kuchma’s threats and overwhelmingly approved the new constitution . The new constitution grants the president greater powers and further weakening Parliament .
 The 1996 constitution granted the president the approval to dissolve Parliament, appoint and dismiss the prime minister . It also removed deputies from the protection of immunity laws .
 The Soviet constitution was more undemocratic than the last . It centralized greater powers to the executive .
 The document's adoption came about by illegitimate and illegal tactics on part of the executive . The document’s adoption was adopted by an executive .
 This illustrates the willingness of elites to operate beyond the rules and is representative of building a greater authoritarian regime . This illustrates a willingness to operate outside the rules, says the author .
 Ukraine's first independent president did not guarantee an authoritarian future . In conjunction with the other factors of Soviet influence, it compounded the odds against a successful transition .
 These key decisions had disastrous effects on the transition beyond the first presidency . The Soviet legacy persisted in early government development .
 Literature on post-communist states indicates criticality for such nations to break away from their Soviet past as well as develop robust institutions right away .
 Ukraine’s political system continues to be plagued by these decisions made in haste from 1990-1991 . Soviet influence affecting the development of all three branches of government .
 Ukraine's president and prime minister have an uneasy relationship between them . Ukraine's Parliament has been influenced by the executive influenced judiciary branch to understand this conclusion .
 The structural aspects and evolution of Ukraine’s Parliament promote fragmentation, corruption, and legislative stagnation .
 This section will analyze how Ukrainian political parties are created around individual interests, vice a public platform . This section includes a brief overview of Ukraine's Parliament and what theory tells us about quality parliamentary systems .
 Parliamentary laws and procedures promote politicians’ self-interest, and predatory behavior .
 These same laws also shield parliamentary members from punishment, changing the incentives in favor of corrupt practices .
 This critical institution fails to serve the public interest and achieve the consistent cooperation found in strong democracies . Overall, this critical institution failed to serve a public interest, says the author .
 The Verkhovna Rada's practices fall in line with hybrid governance as elites violate the rules of the institution so often and fail to uphold democratic norms, says the author .
 The Rada is a mixed system. While the structure has changed over the years, it is still mixed . Currently, the Rada has a mixed structure .
Under PR, runner up candidates can gain seats if they cross a certain threshold of victory . Under PR, runners up candidates (second, third, fourth place) can gain a certain level of victory.
 Ukraine's political system is polluting Ukraine’s political system as it promotes fraud, and fails to create incentives for coalition building, which leads to gridlock and fragmentation .
 The problems run deeper and reflect how political parties work in Ukraine, and how Rada laws and procedures are practiced every day . There are concerns regarding how the Rada elects its members .
 Democratic consolidation theory tells us that parliamentary makeup is critical to the success or failure of a developing democracy .
Political parties can play the vehicle of popular preference in government . Political parties can also play a key role in the government .
Too many parties with vastly different visions fail to achieve cooperation and compromise . Too many parties have vastly different vision, too many fail to reach agreement .
 Too many political parties and popular preferences may not be adequately represented . Too few political parties or popular preferences are adequately represented.
 The rules of the game are critical for the success or failure of parliamentary systems . Separately, the rules are also critical for success and failure of Parliamentary systems .
 Rules such as an imperative mandate force politicians to maintain party platform or risk losing their seat to someone else in party .
 Immunity laws foster honest debate and freedom of speech within Parliament’s chambers . They are conducive to crafting quality legislation .
 blanket immunity laws can be used as a shield for corrupt practices and petty behavior, beyond the scope of legislative duties . In contrast, blanket immunity law can be utilized as a Shield for corrupt behavior, according to the law .
 The make-up, including parties, structure, and laws, are critical to shaping or degrading democratic consolidation . Thus, the make- up, including party structure, is critical to shape or degrade democracy .
 For Ukraine, Parliament fails to serve the public interests and ideals of democratic governance, and remains in a perpetual state of fragmentation . For Ukrainian Parliament, Parliament failed to serve public interests, ideals ofdemocratic governance .
 Too many political parties in a mixed system makes coalition building difficult. Too many parties in the mixed system make coalitionbuilding difficult .
Political parties in Ukraine are not exactly created to promote public interest . Separately, political parties in the country are not actually created to promoting public interest.
 Rather than promote oligarch and individual interests, they are often created to promote oligarchs .
 By the time Kuchma entered office in 1994, there were nearly 40 registered political parties in Ukraine . There were almost 40 registered parties.
 Two or three parties hold a large share of the seats with the remainder sprinkled with numerous other smaller parties . Most of them fail to reach the threshold to gain seats .
 Fewer seats for even a simple majority, even with coalitions, few hold enough seats .
Too many political parties degrade the coalition building necessary to pass legislation, too many parties. More is discussed later, but more is discussed .
Political parties remain fluid in Ukraine, shifting from new names and new leaders over the years . But predominantly revolving around the super wealthy .
 Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 175. 32 influence in politics remains today .
 A diverse stage of political parties promotes competition in a manner conducive to democratic behavior, says the author .
Ukrainian political parties are created to serve an elite few and their elite interests . The majority of political parties fail to uphold democratic values or work for the people, according to Ukraine .
 As Ukraine's wealthiest oligarch, Akhmetov became a parliamentarian in 2006 . He never attended another session following his oath of office .
 Perks such as blanket parliamentary immunity offer an attraction to individuals that are difficult to resist . Perks like blanket immunity offer a attraction to people that are hard to resist.
 Akhmetov likely sought political office as a means to enrich and protect himself . He likely sought a political office to enrich, protect himself, according to reports .
 Each election cycle typically produces at least three parties that are most influential in the Rada . Party parties often serve as a vehicle for elite power, protection, and enrichment .
 Ukraine was a three-party system after the Orange Revolution . For example, shortly after the revolution, three political parties maintained the most influence .
 All parties failed to achieve enough seats for a simple majority. While other smaller parties held seats, all failed to win enough seats .
 Perpetuum Mobile or the Endplay of Post-Soviet Elites?,” in Beyond the Euromaidan .
 Keeping coalition cohesion proves difficult, and even simple majorities are hard to come by . Even simple majorities can be difficult, even if they are majority majorities .
 gridlock can be used as a pretext to justify greater executive powers in the president as a means to overcome legislative stagnation . However, it also reduces the checks against the executive arm, allowing for the growth of authoritarian overreach .
 To make matters worse, the laws surrounding how parliamentarians operate promote corruption and selfish practices, as well as shield members of Parliament from prosecution .
An "imperative mandate" requires elected officials to maintain loyalty to the party platform or risk surrendering their seat to someone else in the party .
 Lacking an imperative mandate in the first decade allowed the habituation of poor practices by MPs that became entrenched, and persisted after the law came into effect.
 Members could switch party platforms when it suited them, and simply vote as they pleased with little to no repercussions for their actions . Members could change party platforms if they wanted to change their party, or simply vote with no repercussions .
 The practice contributed to parties that lacked a cohesive platform or identity . The practice led to a lack of cohesive platform and identity .
 stronger political parties that not only have a clearly defined platform and ideology, but also follow it, could be beneficial for Ukrainian politics . There may be more avenues for cooperation, as there could be more avenue for cooperation .
 Lacking strong parties, along with having the ability to vote for personal incentives, political parties and coalitions fragment easily within Parliament . LackingStrong parties, as well as being able to vote on personal incentives and personal incentives .
 The ability to continue promoting selfinterests, through illegal means, if necessary, without repercussion, undermines good governance, and perpetuates an unfair playing field . The ability for self-interests to continue to be promoted by illegal means is illegal .
 Members that fail to follow the imperative mandate escape punishment due to the immunity given to parliamentarians . Members that follow the requirement escape punishment.
 Immunity laws protect politicians from prosecution and reinforce self-interested corrupt behavior found in autocracies .
 Neopatrimonialism, Rent-seeking, and Regime Change,” in Beyond the Euromaidan,’s. Beyond the Euro-Mediterranean journal .
 Officials use this law to shield themselves from prosecution as they continue corrupt practices to gain power and amass large amounts of wealth . Subsequently, officials use thisLaw to shield them from prosecution .
 The immunity law perpetuates the intermixing of money and politics that gave rise to Ukraine’s oligarch elite .
 Efforts to reform the law are unlikely, as reform directly threatens elites with punishment or imprisonment . Efforts are unlikely to be successful, as reforms directly threaten elites with imprisonment .
 Draft laws to amend or strip immunity have made little progress through the Rada . Draft laws have been passed by the government but have not yet been amended .
 The issue becomes that of self-preservation for politicians with little to no incentives remaining to change the system . Thus, the issue becomes the issue of selfpreservation .
 The long term distortions related to these laws perpetuates the intermixing of money and politics . The long-term distortions are the result of the long- term distortions .
Today, the largest political party in the current Rada, Solidarity, was built and revolves around Ukraine's current president . Today, the pattern remains much the same as the current political party.
 Petro Poroshenko is himself an oligarch . Also known as the “chocolate billionaire’s” according to Wilson, he is also known as a ‘chocolate billionaires’
Public opinion continues to hold little in regard of the Ukrainian political system . As a result of the Rada’s shortcomings, public opinion has little regard to the country's political system.
 Parliament that is disconnected from constituents is more likely to continue seeking self-interest over public interests . Also, a Parliament that's disconnected from its constituents is likely to seek self- interest .
 decisions early to bridge between communist Ukraine and independent Ukraine promoted fragmentation and anti-democratic norms . The structure and laws surrounding Parliament compound the problem .
 The Verkhovna Rada fails to uphold democratic values, norms, and practices, says the government .
 Elites have become deeply entrenched in the system, as a result of the failure to establish a robust structure following independence . Elites are deeply entrenched. Elite have become deep entrenched.
 Laws shield elites from prosecution and create incentives in favor of cheating and corruption . Laws also create incentives for corruption and bribery .
 The failure of the Rada to do its job as a legislative body for the public good provides a pretext to authorize greater executive control as a means to accomplish reform, says the author .
 A weak legislative body allows a strong executive to implement reforms advantageous to themselves, as observed with Kuchma’s 1996 constitution showdown . A strong executive can implement reforms to themselves. A weak parliamentary body allows an executive to impose reforms advantageous.
Oligarchs dominate the political scene and the maneuvering for power between president, prime minister, and Parliament continues . These same institutional deficiencies remain today, as oligarchs dominate political scene .
 The president and prime minister relationship is creating a recipe for confrontation and ineffectiveness that persists today .
 Scholars argue that strong presidents only work in post-communist nations that have the overall political will to radically change their government toward democracy .
 Parliamentary systems more successful for others given the nature of the relationship and accountability between a prime minister and Parliament . Parliamentary systems are more successful.
 Maintaining a mixed system was supposed to bring the best of both worlds to Ukraine . But this section shows that this relationship results in perpetual confrontation and power shifts unfavorable to democracy .
 No prime minister in Ukraine’s history has lasted an entire parliamentary term . Most MPs lasting only a year or two before being dismissed or resigned .
 Mykola Azarov lasted the longest, staying on as prime minister from 2010-2014 . Viktor Yanukovych was ousted along with Viktor Yanukovych during the Euromaidan .
 A prime minister that lasts only a year or two represents a tangible element to the institutional shortcomings and inadequate division of power . A prime Minister that lasts a year and two represents an element to institutional shortcomings .
 The relationship presents opportunities for expanding presidential power and periods of greater authoritarianism, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes . This relationship presents opportunity for expanded presidential power.
 Ukraine also experienced an ebb and flow of political power between the president and prime minister over the years . Through frequent turnover, Ukraine has experienced a lack of consistency and stability .
The confrontational relationship often justifies greater executive control to the presidency . The confrontational relationships often justify greater control of the presidency.
Under Kuchma and Yanukovych, Ukraine observed a greater centralization of presidential power, resulting in greater authoritarianism . Under Kuchmma, Ukraine saw a greaterCentralization of the presidential power .
 The division of power stemming from the constitution remains unclear and a source of repeated tension in Ukrainian politics .
 During Kuchma's tenure as president, he went through seven different prime ministers over 10 years .
 Pavlo Lazarenko was fired for the slow pace of economic reform and improvement, and for becoming a political liability over allegations of corruption . Notable prime ministers include Pavlo Lazarusko, who was fired in 2010 .
 Kuchma fired Viktor Yushchenko after successful economic reforms and rising popularity threatened the president’s power and chances of reelection .
 Under the 1996 constitution, Kuchma maintained the authority to appoint and dismiss the prime minister and cabinet members at will . Under the1996 constitution, the power to appoint, dismiss and dismiss cabinet members .
 Ukraine observed significantly high prime minister turnover, indicative of the lack of incentives to cooperate, and the encouragement to reject and replace . Ukraine observed significant high PM turnover .
 Orange Revolution in 2004 attempted to split powers between the two positions . Changes to the constitution after the Orange Revolution were made in 2004 .
 The 2004 constitution granted the prime minister greater appointment powers, taking them from the president . The prime minister retains presidential authority in areas of defense, foreign affairs, and internal security .
 The changes also granted the prime minister greater powers to counter-sign laws from the president .
 The constitutional changes attempted to overcome the past super-presidentialism that brought about Kuchma’s authoritarian regime . They nonetheless remain flawed and fail to promote cohesion, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The ability of the prime minister to counter-sign the president with greater ease perpetuates confrontation between the two positions, rather than promoting conflict resolution . The ability to counter sign the president is more likely to lead to conflict.
 2004 changes played out in the failures of the president and prime minister following the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was the first Orange Revolution in France .
 Orange Coalition or Orange Government members banded together in an effort to end the corrupt and paralyzed practices of previous governments . The Orange Coalition is known as the Orange Government .
 division of power between president and prime minister ended the Orange Government . However, the division of powers between the president and PM ended the government .
 In 2008, President Viktor Yushchenko gave Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko the mandate to fight corruption and fix the economy . At the same time, she was opposed to her at every o turn .
 Yushchenko opposed her at every turn by signing a number of decrees that prohibited all discussed privatization deals . Ultimately, she signed the decrees to prevent privatization deals.
 The president also appointed positions that specifically countered Tymoshenko’s influence . The positions were chosen to counter her influence .
 President Poroshenko solicited Yatsenyuk's resignation over a loss of confidence in his coalition’s ability to implement reforms . Other reporting indicates that Poroshenko had solicited the resignation .
 Disagreements over policy, and sometimes personal feuds, drive premier turnover . Disagreement over policy and personal disputes drive turnover, say experts .
 This does little to improve Ukraine’s norms and behavior as a democracy, particularly when so frequent . This does not improve Ukraine's behavior, especially when it is so frequent, says the author .
 compromise is often cast aside in favor of resignation and replacement . When elites disagree, compromise is sometimes cast aside .
 Hardly a democratic process, high turnover keeps Ukrainian politics in a reoccurring state of crisis and stagnation . High turnover keeps Ukraine in a state of Crisis and stagnation, says Ukrainian journalist .
 Yatsenyuk’s resignation exemplifies the problematic dynamic between the two positions. Nonetheless, Yatsenuk's resignation exemplified the problem between the positions .
 President Petro Poroshenko fought with the prime minister and Parliament over divisions of power and reform . Prior to Yatsenyuk’s resignation, President Poroshenko had fought with Prime Minister and Parliament .
 Poroshenko and Parliament disagreed over critical appointments, the authority to declare a state of emergency, the decentralization of the state, and various political and economic reforms .
Both the president and prime minister positions in the constitution failed to achieve the best of both worlds . It added yet another layer of complexity to the governance equation .
 Inadequately defining the roles and responsibilities in the constitution perpetuates infighting for power plays between the two positions .
 The West has had 154 different prime ministers in the last 25 years .
 The weakness of this relationship undermines public credibility, runs counter to democratic governance . It creates vulnerabilities for expanded executive authority to achieve progress, says the author .
 The constitutional design contributes to infighting and expanding executive authority, thus creating autocratic tendencies found in hybrid and authoritarian governments . The Constitution is designed to prevent infighting.
 Ukraine’s judiciary has a long history of reliance on the executive branch that carries over from the Soviet era . The judiciary has been in the midst of the battle for power between the president and prime minister .
 The inability to reform judicial institutions into an independent law enforcing body influenced accountability and the makeup of Ukrainian politics for decades .
 Theory explains that an independent judiciary provides a crucial check and balance against the other branches of government .
 Judges that uphold written laws and are free from influence of other government branches reinforce confidence in the system . Judges that upholding written laws are free to influence other branches .
 A judicial system that subverts laws and rules is vulnerable to corruption, human rights abuses . In contrast, the judicial system is susceptible to corruption and abuses, says the author .
 A judiciary that exists only to support the party in power undermines democratic development and remains vulnerable to authoritarian overreach . The judiciary is vulnerable to overreach, according to the judge .
 Failing to overhaul the judiciary during the transition from authoritarian to democratic rule leaves vulnerabilities for perpetuating old authoritarian ways of business . Failed to overhaul judiciary during critical transition leaves vulnerabilities.
 Hybrid judicial systems are independent on paper, may possess independent judges, but often allow overreach and influence from other branches of government .
 The executive and legislative arms may dictate rulings through coercive and co-optive mechanisms for favorable rulings to the party in power . The executive, legislative arms could dictate rulings.
Independent judges are willing to go against the grain of authoritarian influence . At the same time, the possibility remains for opposition contestation through truly independent judges .
 The hybrid judiciary stems from the failure to purge the old system during the critical transition towards democracy, this is the case observed in Ukraine .
 The problem, as with most of Ukraine’s shortcomings following independence, began when the government failed to implement judicial reform right away . The problem is with the government's failure to implement justice reform.
 Rolling over the communist system into an independent nation-state kept the system weak and vulnerable to exploitation .
 Soviet-era government controls persisted in the new system, with the executive branch able to directly influence judicial proceedings .
 The Ukrainian judiciary existed to support the parties in power, rather than to promote and defend the rule of law . The judiciary existed in Ukraine to support and defend and support the party in power .
 The executive maintained numerous levers of control, including limiting judicial pay and threatening job loss for unfavorable rulings . As a consequence of a centralized judiciary, the executive maintained many levers of Control .
 A 2003 Bertelsmann Transformation Index report noted that judicial wages remained low . The report said judicial wages remain low .
 Failing to appropriately pay judges opens the door to executive manipulation for rulings favorable to the party in power . Failed to properly pay judges can open the door for executive manipulation.
 A constitutional court judge discovered accepting a US$12 million bribe for a ruling, was fired by Yushchenko . He was later reinstated by then PM Viktor Yanukovych .
 pressure and coercion is used against judges to instill fear of job loss if they fall out of line . Pressure and coercion are also used by judges to induce fear of losing jobs .
For the courts in Ukraine, politics is king and to not follow the party line carries high consequences . For the courts, politics are king and for the courts is king .
 As a result of subjugating the judiciary to the executive, it has become a tool for selective political punishment . Journalists, protestors, or political opponents are often granted on flimsy grounds .
 Yulia Tymoshenko's jailing by Yanukovych regime in 2011 demonstrated how political the judiciary is . The jailing of main opposition candidate YuliaTymoshenko by the Yanukovych regime was a demonstration of political power .
 Rada opened an investigation against Tymoshenko over the abuse of power during 2009 gas contract negotiations with Russia .
 The timing and method of the trial inquiry reflects that it was politically motivated . The timing of the inquiry reflects the political motivation behind the trial .
 The regime appointed a judge that was too young and unqualified to carry the case . Separately, the regime appointed an unqualified judge that is too young .
 The level of pressure, along with a historical training pipeline, made Judge Kireev easily susceptible to executive influence . The training pipeline that mentored judges on the informal means of the law made him susceptible to Executive influence .
 Tymoshenko's trial and subsequent sentencing represent the weakness in Ukraine's judiciary system, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the judiciary system is a tool for political oppression, similar to those found in autocratic states .
 The judicial system is also used as a tool to protect those loyal to the party in power . It is also a tool for political persecutions .
 Current reforms for the system look promising on paper but have yet to achieve results . Current reforms look promising but have not yet achieved results .
 Constitutional changes to the judiciary passed in June 2016 call for the creation of a new Supreme Court .
 The legislation was recently approved, but it has yet to move to the implementation phase . It was recently passed by the House of Representatives .
 Ukraine's new court system would represent a step forward for Ukraine, says Ukrainian journalist . The new court would be stacked full of judges who have experience in the old system or are educated in the new way of business .
Ukrainian courts have been and remain highly politicized vehicles for executive and elite interests . Nonetheless, Ukrainian courts are highly politicised vehicles for Executive and Elite interests .
 The courts maintain a long history of failing to adequately uphold the rule of law or benefit the people of Ukraine . The courts have been accused of not upholding the law or benefiting the people .
 Government influence over the judiciary makes it far from an independent branch . Government influence is far from independent branch, according to reports .
 The failure to prosecute corrupt officials while jailing opposition voices is a trademark relic of the Soviet era and authoritarianism .
 Hardly democratic in nature, subverting the rule of law allows authoritarian overreach and illiberal practices to become entrenched as business as usual .
With such a weak judiciary, the enforcement of election laws and punishing fraudulent activity proved elusive . With such aweak judiciary, it proved elusive, says the judge .
 flaws in the electoral system undermine democracy, and create a skewed arena advantageous to few that is found in hybrid regimes .
 Ukraine’s electoral system, while improved, continues to create an asymmetric playing field advantageous to oligarchs and elites that are well connected and financed .
 This section will first analyze the impact of campaign finance laws on the institution . Follows a brief description of Ukrainian elections and what consolidation theory tells us .
 Election fraud continues to impact Ukrainian elections, according to a new report . Changing incentives for election fraud reveals how widespread the practice is, and how election fraud continues .
 Ukrainian elections are more inclusive and intuitive than the past, according to the Ukrainian government . The system retains sufficient barriers to entry and practices to de-level the playing field in favor of elites .
Ukrainian elections remain flawed and advantageous to elite interests . While not completely designed to legitimize the party in power, the party remains in power . The party is a fundamental pillar of Ukrainian democracy .
 A strong democracy hinges on elections that are free, inclusive, and promotes a level playing field for all participants . A strongdemocracy hinges on a strong democracy that is free and inclusive .
 Elections provide the mechanism of vertical accountability from the public that is safeguarded by the secrecy of their ballot. Elections provide a mechanism of accountability for the public .
 Laws are 45 crafted in a manner that promotes inclusiveness, transparency, ease of voting and deters fraudulent activity .
 Elections fail to meet democratic standards when they incentivize fraud, create barriers to entry or participation, and exist only to defend the party in power . Elections should not be held on the basis that they are not democratic, they should be held accountable .
 Under hybrid rule, electoral institutions are created in a manner that remains competitive to a degree . The environment is deliberately skewed towards elites and the party in power .
 Stemming from the failure to design rules and procedures during the transition period that promote free and fair voting can persist .
 hybrid regimes also allow the chance for opposition victories and reform that can change the rules and practices toward democracy . However, hybrid regimes can also allow for opposition wins and reform .
 This creates a tension between autocratic and democratic elements, says David Cameron . Cameron: Failure to clearly define an electoral institution and process that promotes free and fair elections from the beginning .
Currently, Ukraine holds elections for parliamentary and presidential positions . Currently, Ukraine is holding elections for presidential and parliamentary positions .
 Public officials are elected to five year terms via a popular vote across Ukraine’s 27 regions .
 Ukraine does not elect regional government positions, such as governors, who are appointed by the president .
 Suffrage is universal, with citizens over the age of 18 remaining eligible to vote . Women and minorities are also eligible for the vote .
 Problems relating to campaign finance and electoral fraud continue to undermine the fairness of the Ukrainian government .
 The most problematic area for Ukrainian elections is that of campaign finance . The mixing of money and politics that deliberately manipulates the playing field in favor of elites is a problem .
 Ukrainian finance laws evolved from virtually no limits on contributions 1611 OSCE, ODIHR says .
 The limitations imposed in law are generally so small that they incentivize off the record contributions . The limits imposed in the law are so small they incentivized off the records .
 In the 1990s, donation limits were as low as US$200 for private citizens . In the '90s, donations were at least $200 for citizens .
 Individual donation limits increased to -US$40,000 by 2010, but again with unlimited contributions from political parties . Since then, individual donation limits have risen to -U.S. $40k by 2010 .
 Unlimited political party donations steer elections in favor of elite interests . Unlimited political donations steer election in favor.
 Opposition victories are possible, but only to those well-connected . Opposition victories remain possible .
 The amount of money spent in Ukrainian elections is massive, and undermines the prospects for nonpartisan candidate participation . The amount is huge, and it undermines the prospect of nonpartisan candidates participation .
 Viktor Yanukovych’s 2004 presidential bid is one such example of the colossal amount of wealth spent on him . Viktor Yanukovych is one of the richest men in the world .
 Even Ukraine’s current president, Petro Poroshenko, had financial backing for his presidential bid in 2014 through oligarch Dmytro Firtash .
Ukrainian elections have a long history of associated election fraud . In addition, Ukrainian elections have also been associated with associated elections fraud .
 Efforts to combat the most egregious and overt fraud from the Kuchma era drives modem fraud activity to covert tactics that are more difficult to detect .
 With a weak judicial and law enforcement body, elites could manipulate away and face little risk of political blowback or punishment . With weak judicial body, and immunity laws for members of Parliament, elites can manipulate away .
 As international attention against fraud in Ukraine grew, the risks for fraud exceeded the gains and drove fraud toward less detectable tactics . The risks for committing such overt fraud exceeded gains, according to the authors .
 The Orange Revolution demonstrated the consequences and risks associated with traditional fraudulent activity . The 2004 Orange Revolution showed the consequences of traditional fraudulent activities .
 As a result, the regime and majority of political parties opted for less overt tactics, utilizing fake parties and candidates to distract voters .
The use of clone candidates and covert tactics is equally damaging as that of overt means . The use of cloning candidates and overt tactics is also damaging, say experts .
This covert fraud distracts voters from real candidates, and pulls voters away from main opposition challengers . This covert fraud has been used in the past for years, but it is now being used to help voters.
 At least 63 seats in the Rada were directly affected by this type of fraud. Ultimately, the practice worked as well .
 The pervasiveness and persistence of fraud in Ukraine is what sets it apart from other nations . Ukraine's elections have some level of fraudulent activity .
 Incentives to cheat remain high in Ukraine, but have shifted as the penalties between overt and covert fraud are different . Incentive to cheat remains high in the Ukraine .
 The international community has insufficient means to detect and prevent fake candidates and parties from participation, says the international community . The International Community has insufficient Means to detect.
 The risk of being caught and facing the public is lower than overt fraud, according to the authors . The incentives to continue this type of fraud remain lower than Overt fraud, they say .
 The potential for widespread fraudulent manipulation by an overzealous leader remains possible in Ukraine .
 The persistence of fraudulent activity undermines the credibility of the electoral process, says the Electoral Commission . The persistent fraud undermines a level playing field for all members, it says .
 The continuation of fraud necessitates that other candidates commit fraud in order to remain viable in the race . The continued fraud requires other candidates to commit fraud to stay viable .
 There are some notable improvements in the campaign finance system . There are still some problems associated with election fraud .
 Registration for political candidates has become more streamlined and inclusive . Registration for candidates is more streamlined than ever .
 In the past, candidates had to jump through numerous hoops and obtain a large amount of signatures to be eligible for public office .
 The old process was cumbersome and not all candidates had a equal chance at meeting the requirements . It created unnecessarily high barriers to entry, which created unnecessary high barriers .
Current candidates must provide biographical information, tax and income documents, as well as a small fee . Ukraine no longer requires a set of signatures from across the country .
 In addition to the registration process, switching to a positive voting method has improved the voting process and reduced the number of invalid ballots . The voting process has also been improved by changing the voting method .
 Throughout most of the 1990s, Ukrainians followed the cumbersome and confusing negative voting method . Ukrainians followed a cumbersome, confusing and confusing method .
 By 1998 Ukraine switched the process to a positive voting method . By 1998, by 1998, the process was switched to apositive voting method.
 Switching to a positive voting method reduced the number of invalid ballots, improved voter confidence, and benefited the electoral system overall . Switching from a negative voting method to positive voting reduces invalid ballots .
 These procedural improvements fail to counter the influence wealthy elites play at dictating who is most likely to succeed in an election .
 Unlimited political party contributions and limited personal contributions have created incentives for off the books payments, and colossal amounts of money to be spent in Ukrainian elections .
This amount of money creates barriers to victory for those who are less connected or out of favor with wealthy oligarchs . This amount of cash creates barriers for those less connected and out of favour with oligarchs.
 The likelihood of success without oligarch support is an immensely difficult challenge . Opposition victories are possible in Ukraine .
 The system remains asymmetrically skewed in favor of elite preferences, according to experts . The system is more likely to favor elite preferences.
 The field of candidates is narrowed by those with ties to oligarchs and elites . While the population elects a winner, the field is narrowed.
 The persistence of election fraud over the years, from overt to covert tactics, perpetuates a corrupt electoral system . In addition, election fraud has also been used in covert tactics and covert tactics .
 It is not so much that Ukraine has fraud in its elections, but rather that fraud has become commonplace in some form or another .
 Candidates that commit fraud reinforce the need for other candidates to do the same in order to maintain a viable shot at victory .
 The system is designed to skew the playing field in favor of elite interests with additional hurdles for opposition victory .
 Ukraine's political institutions continue to benefit elites, promote infighting and fragmentation, and undermine democracy . Ukraine’s political institutions still benefit elites and benefit elites.
 Ukraine observed drastic shifts in political institutions and electoral practices that prevented consistency and undermined good governance . Over 25 years, Ukraine observed dramatic shifts in politics, electoral practices .
 Choices prior to independence allowed Soviet influence to pervade Ukrainian institutions during the critical years of transition .
 A parliamentary structure was created that promotes fragmentation and deadlock . It was created to promote fragmentation and deathlock .
 Political parties fail to serve public interest and are often a mechanism for self-enrichment . Political parties failed to serve the public interest, according to experts .
 Lacking an imperative mandate for many years allowed decision making based on self-interest to become entrenched and has proven difficult to change . Lacking a mandate for years allowed decisions to be made based onself-interest .
 Other laws protect elites from prosecution, allowing corrupt practices to flourish . Other laws surrounding the Ukrainian Parliament continue to protect elites .
 Scholars recommend switching to a full proportional representation government . They also recommend eliminating the shield of immunity laws .
 Currently, these changes do not exist and Parliament is failing to act as a strong democratic institution . Currently, the changes are not being made, and Parliament has not acted as strong democratic institutions .
 The relationship and vague definition of powers between president and prime minister create a recipe for continued confrontation .
 Continuous infighting over the division of powers has plagued every administration .
 Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 357. 51 problem . 51 problem and resulted in continued legislative stagnation .
 The combative relationship established incentives that promotes resignation and dismissal of prime ministers over cooperation, which is an impediment to democratic development, says the author .
 The relationship opens the door for stronger executive power, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes . The relationship also leads to greater authoritarianism, as seen with the Yanukovych regimes.
 Ukraine's judiciary system remains a relic from the Soviet era . Also, the judiciary system in Ukraine remains a relics from the USSR .
 The Ukrainian judicial system for most of its existence has been an extension of the party in power . The judicial system has been intact from the days of communism .
 Judges taught the informal relationship between judiciary and executive early in their careers . Judges are taught to understand the relationship between the judiciary and Executive early in careers .
 The judicial system is used to prosecute opposition elements, such as the jailing of Yulia Tymoshenko . It is also used to protect those loyal to the party in power .
 Recent efforts to reform the judiciary appear promising on paper, but as with past efforts, continue to lack the necessary enforcement mechanisms to carry out their duties as a truly independent branch of government .
 The hybrid system leaves a constant tension between judges and law enforcement officials . It's a result of the hybrid system, and those that decide to act independently within democratic norms .
 Ukraine's electoral process has improved over the years, with some aspects becoming more inclusive and intuitive . Ukraine’s electoral process is more inclusive than ever before .
 Registration requirements have become more streamlined and less burdensome, reducing barriers to entry for candidates . Registration requirements are now more streamlined, reducing burdens on candidates .
At the same time, changes to voting practices improve voter confidence, and reduce the number of rejected ballots . At the same times, changes in voting practices help voters to vote .
 Campaign finance laws and election fraud hinder additional progress within this institution . While these are notable successes, continued shortcomings with campaign finance laws hinder further progress within the institution .
 Massive campaign donations from the well-connected oligarchs, as well as the persistence of electoral fraud, pollute Ukrainian elections in favor of elite preferences .
 Ukraine's electoral institution continues creating an un-level playing field advantageous to elites with extensive resources found in hybrid regimes .
 Ultimately, shortcomings in leadership choice prior to and immediately following independence established flawed structures and procedures. Ultimately, flaws in leadership choices before and after independence established flaws in the leadership system .
 The flaws that promote selfinterest over public interest have become deeply entrenched . The flaws in self-interest are deeply entrenched, say experts .
 Ukrainian institutions and 52 practices fail to serve everyday Ukrainians . Ukrainian institutions, 52 practices failed to serve daily Ukrainians .
 President and prime minister conflict with each other, and parliamentary structure promotes weakness and fragmentation that prevents successful reform and meaningful legislation . President and PM conflict. President and Prime Minister conflict.
 The parliamentary makeup creates incentives for fraud and cheating, according to a report .
 The electoral system, though improved, remains vulnerable to future manipulation . It has a history of exploitation and is vulnerable to further manipulation .
 Given the historical precedent and current events, the future does not look good for Ukraine’s ability to consolidate into a strong democracy .
 The long shadow of a Soviet conscience and shortcomings of the recent past continue to influence current Ukrainian politics toward hybrid governance .
 The next chapter illustrates the pervasiveness of corruption in Ukraine, how it effects every level of society, and how it proves extremely difficult to eradicate .
Civil society failed to build robust bridges between citizens and politicians, says David Cameron . In addition, it illustrates how civil society, for a quarter of a century, failed to built robust bridges .
 This weakness allowed for the expansion of executive powers under the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes . This weakness allows for the expanded of executive power under the two regimes .
Civil society in Ukraine remains able to mobilize during times of crisis to prevent full authoritarian consolidation . However, as observed with multiple political revolutions, civil society in the country remains able.
 corruption remains pervasive and erodes democracy in favor of hybrid rule . Civil society at the same time prevents full-blown authoritarian consolidation .
 These distortions are likely to continue working in tension with each other, placing boundaries on both democratic and authoritarian consolidation . These distortions will continue to work in tension.
 Corruption remains a deeply entrenched problem in Ukraine that limits democracy, degrades accountability, promotes authoritarianism, and hurts the civilian population . Corruption is a deep entrenched problem, says the author .
 At the same time, Ukrainian civil society remains too weak to challenge the shortcomings that make such corruption possible .
The following chapter is broken into two sections, analyzing the evolution of Ukrainian corruption and civil society . The following chapter includes the development of Ukraine's civil society.
 These sections are combined due to the interrelationship of accountability and civil society’s role as a check and balance to government . These sections include the inter relationship between accountability and the civil society .
First, examining various stories of politicians and civilians will reveal how systemic corruption is to everyday life . First, examine how corrupt practices are used for self-enrichment, protection, and survival .
 analyzing factors other than money and bribery will reveal a system with a long history of violence as a legitimate tactic to retain power and wealth . Second, analysis will reveal that bribery and money are used as a tactic to keep power, wealth .
 This level of accountability concerns are problematic and support expanding authoritarianism as it promotes inequality before the law . This level is problematic and supports expansion of authoritarianism, says author .
 This behavior runs counter to democratic norms, says CNN's John Sutter . Also, promoting narrow, elite interests vice popular interest and preferences, this behavior is counter to democracy .
 corruption is a cornerstone for Ukraine’s vast governmental problems, but civil society remains too weak to challenge it . Ukraine's civil society is still struggling to find solutions to its problems .
 Analysis of Ukraine’s civil society development reveals a long history of weak organizations that are great at educating and moving people into the streets .
 At the same time, these organizations continually lack the long-term connections between the public and government that can bring about meaningful change .
 First, following independence, Ukraine observed an explosion of civic groups that failed to create bridges between public and government . First, followed independence, followed an explosion in civic groups.
Following the Orange Revolution in 2004, organizations failed to capitalize on the climate of change, and standing by as Yanukovych built his version of authoritarianism in 2010 .
 Ukrainian civic organizations continue to be viewed as the enemy and blocked by elites . Third, attempting to finally build a proper bridge between public and government following the Euromaidan reveals that civic organizations are viewed as an enemy .
Civil society in Ukraine remains an incapable political force for continual, day-to-day negotiation and change . Ultimately, civil society in the Ukraine, though 55 making recent inroads, remains incapable of change .
 A weak civil society opens the door for greater authoritarianism as it is unable to adequately challenge the government . As a result, a weaker civil society is opening the door to authoritarianism .
 The institutional and structural aspects that make such corruption possible were discussed in previous chapters . This section provides examples to illustrate just how entrenched and commonplace corruption remains in Ukraine .
 This section reveals the extent of the politicization of both the police and the court system, turning it into an extension of the executive branch. Separately, this section also shows the extent.
Recent reform efforts that look good on paper maintain flaws that reflect a continued lack of elite . The system will fundamentally alter the system in favor of democratic rules and norms, says the author .
 Such deeply entrenched practices continually challenge or refute the prospect of democracy in Ukraine . Such practices erode public trust and confidence in the system, and actively serve selfinterest vice public interest found in autocratic regimes .
 Accountability is an important facet of any government, but it is especially crucial for democracies . Accountability is a key part of democracy .
"In Beyond the Euromaidan: Comparative Perspectives on Advancing Reform in Ukraine, eds. Reform after Revolution,"" in "Beyond the Euromsaidan"
 In contrast, subverting or failing to adhere to written laws undermines the government in the eyes of the people, says the government .
 The inability to hold leaders accountable to written laws can lead to increasing corruption and human rights abuses . The inability of leaders to hold them accountable towritten laws can also lead to increased corruption .
 Upholding written laws ensures citizens feel protected, are able to voice their concerns, and avoid living in fear of unnecessary or extrajudicial attention .
 At the same time, upholding laws ensures criminals are punished, regardless of stature (politician or citizen) As everyone is equal before the law, everyone isequal before the laws .
 Failure to follow the law, or bending and subverting it to serve a political purpose, undermines government and leads to inconsistent persecutions . Failure to following the law leads to inconsistency, according to the law .
 Adherence to the law, and maintaining a principle of accountability, is critical to democratic consolidation, says the author . "Adherence to a law is critical for democratic consolidation," says author .
Nearly all governments have some level of corruption, even if small in number and severity . Nearly all governments in the world have some levels of corruption .
 Kudelia describes difference between petty and grand corruption, in reference to Ukraine’s deeply entrenched corruption problem .
 A problem emerges when corrupt practices become a norm, widespread, and continue unabated by the other institutions within the government, such as the courts .
 Ukraine has a grand corruption problem due to weak institutions and rule of law . There is a difference between petty and grand corruption, according to Ukraine's president . Ukraine's corruption problem is due to strong institutions and law, says the president .
This level of corruption plays out through the abuse of positions for wealth and political power . This level of Corruption plays out in the abuse for wealth, political power, says the author .
 Numerous politicians use their positions to aggrandize wealth and power . Many politicians use positions to gain power and gain wealth and influence .
 Analysis of various cases reveals the extent of corruption in Ukraine . Nearly every modem president uses their position for self-enrichment vice public good .
 Corruption and circumventing the rule of law are staples of Ukrainian politics . Well-connected oligarchs and politicians down to the average citizen .
 Grand corruption has proven a systemic problem for Ukrainian politicians. Grand corruption is a problem for the Ukrainian politicians .
 Rinat Akhmetov, discussed in the previous chapter, is one such example of using their position to acquire wealth, power, and protection . Pavlo Lazarenko is another example of such an example .
 Lazarenko received roughly US$72 million in kickbacks from regulators he managed within the company . He managed around US$70 million of the company's profits .
 Akhmetov and Lazarenko are not alone, with nearly every modern Ukrainian president tied to corrupt practices, wealth and the oligarchs .
 The disposed President Viktor Yanukovych was the most egregious, amassing a monumental US$100 billion from and for his loyal political network through a patron-client scheme . Yanukovych was a former President of Ukraine .
Politicians care more about advancing their own interests than those of the state, writes John Sutter . Sutter: Activity such as this is problematic as it demonstrates that politicians care more than the state .
 Politicians use their positions to protect the corrupt system, oust reformers, and maintain power . Politicians also use their position to protect their own interests .
 In 2000, Prime Minister Yushchenko implemented economic reforms that directly threatened oligarchs’ power and wealth to improve the overall economy . In 2010, he fired the prime minister to protect the system .
 Kuchma and Parliament’s actions went beyond public good, but rather they were more about selfinterest and preservation . The actions were more than public good.
 The ability to shore-up and protect power contradicts the ideals of accountability, as laws, institutions and documents, including the Constitution, are meant to constrain elected official behavior .
 Ridding Yushchenko because he was successful at turning the economy around, challenging the oligarchs, and more popular than the president . The level of behavior found in un-democratic regimes as a means to preserve elements or all of the system, he says .
 Poroshenko amassed a net worth of US$350 mi llion by the early 2000s through his businesses, including the Channel 5 television station, a shipyard, and his confectionary business, Roshen .
 Poroshenko continually protects the interests of the pro-Russian gas lobby and loyal elites .
 Poroshenko's ties with the gas lobby and oligarchs run deep as they helped finance his 2014 presidential campaign . Poroshenko’s ties with gas lobby, oligarchs and gas lobby run deep.
 Aslund explains how many feared in the early 2000s that Poroshenko would use his government position to slowly “claw back’s’ fortunes after a large chunk was lost during the Kuchma era .
 Currently, he does not appear to be charging forward on all of the crucial and tough reforms necessary for the country .
As previously mentioned, subverting the laws on the books to protect those loyal runs counter to democracy . As previously mentioned.
 If individuals break the law, they are criminals, they should be held accountable . If people break the laws, they're criminals and should be accountable .
 Failing to uphold these values of governance perpetuates the failure of the system and undermines its legitimacy to the governed, says the author . The author says the failure to uphold the values of Governance perpetuates a failure.
 This type of behavior is pervasively problematic in Ukrainian politics. Again, this type of behaviour is pervaively problematic .
 Nepotism and cronyism occur in many governments, yet the broad extent that it occurs in Ukraine makes it a problem . Ukraine is in line with hybrid rule .
 Hybrid and authoritarian regimes subvert and twist the laws in their favor when the opportunity presents itself . Strong democracies more often than not uphold the law.
 Ukraine's corruption is a way of life in Ukraine, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine's political leaders are accused of corruption in the past .
 One may have to pay as many as 18(1 Wilson, The Ukrainians Unexpected Nation, 316, 327, according to Sharon Wolchik .
 The Origins of Ukraine’s Democratic Breakthrough (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2006), 112.
 Corruption as widespread as in Ukraine is problematic for democratic progress in Ukraine . Corruption is widespread in Ukraine, but it is a problem for democracy in Ukraine.
As accountability problems extend through all ranks of society and become acceptable, this practice and process become normalized . As accountability problems reach all ranks, this process and process becomes normalized .
 As corruption becomes normalized, breaking the trend becomes increasingly difficult . The number of those willing to push against the norm shrinks .
 As a result, the corrupt system perpetuates and becomes more entrenched . The corrupt system is more entrenched than ever before .
 Ukraine has a long history of elites who rake in millions to billions of dollars . They shield themselves with immunity laws and seek out new methods to consolidate power .
 Ukraine’s leaders are far from democratic, with numerous politicians seeking to aggrandize wealth and power when the opportunity presents itself .
 Ukrainian lawmakers are not destined for authoritarianism or enrichment, but history does indicate that the temptation is extremely difficult to resist . The temptation is very hard to resist.
Ukrainian elites have a long history of selectively enforcing and subverting the law . Extensive Politicization of the Law is part of a long-term political and monetary benefits .
From Kuchma to Poroshenko, leaders have operated beyond the constitution, politicized the police, failed to investigate criminals, and frequently utilized violence to achieve their goals . From Kuchmma to poroshenko, leader has operated Beyond the constitution .
 These practices erode confidence in the government, and are indicative of practices found in authoritarian regimes .
 The selective enforcement of laws undermines perceptions of the government, and creates a greater disconnect between citizens and politicians . Also, the selectiveenforcement of laws undermine perceptions of government, according to CNN .
Failing to adhere to the laws then trickles down through all elements of society . Failing to comply with the law then trickled down through the society .
Expecting citizens to follow the law while elites can skate by furthers disenchantment and erodes the system from within .
Elites have long politicized the police and judicial system for personal gain and protection . Elites have been politicized by the police for their personal gain, protection .
 The Ukrainian police force quadrupled in the first decade following independence . In addition, the size of the police force after Communism provided an increasingly larger reach for the executive arm .
 A centralized police force that was also ballooning created an extension of the executive arm that was later used to harass opposition groups, journalists, and businesses . The force was also used to target opposition groups and journalists .
 The police and justice system existed as a political tool to further the executive agenda, says the author . In other words, rather than using the police force as a tool for enforcing the law, the police system was a political weapon .
 The police were not an independent arm of enforcement, but promoted authoritarianism as they existed to protect the party in power over the public .
 The problem of politicized police was not left to the first decade, as it persisted through the Euromaidan . The problem is not left in the first 10 years, but it has continued through the past .
The Berkut internal police force was associated with some of the worst violence during the revolution . The BerkutInternal police force has been linked to the violence of the revolution.
 The West, 75. 61, end the demonstrations, rather than allow peaceful protests to continue .
 Providing monetary compensation from the regime for harsher crackdowns further undermined the independence of the force .
 Incentivizing harsh responses toward opposition protests, the police were exercising their authority to defend the regime vice protect civil liberties such as freedom of assembly .
 Following the Euromaidan in November 2015, the government disbanded and purged the Berkut force . It established an entirely new National Police Force .
National police force is headed by national-level appointments . While welcomed, this is still a national police force that is headed for national level appointments .
 There still remains vulnerability to appoint cronies to the position, much like past police forces . Due to the centralized nature of leadership, there still remains vulnerable to appointing cronies .
 centralized framework exists for future exploitation by the government that could undermine the independence of this new force . As such, the government could undermine its independence.
 Parliament approved expanded anti-demonstration laws that contributed to the brutal crackdown in an effort to restrict the freedom of assembly for demonstrators . The Euromaidan parliament also approved expanded police authorization during the crackdown .
 The passing of anti-demonstration laws on January 16, 2014 enhanced police capabilities and authority against lawful anti-government demonstrations by banning certain superficial criteria .
 This voting method allowed the authorities to cook the results in their favor . The voting method was used by the authorities .
 The film Winter on Fire depicts how absurd the laws were, ranging from granting the authorities the right to shut off Internet access to arresting individuals simply for wearing a helmet or mask in a crowd .
 The laws were eventually overturned after Yanukovych fled the country . They represent a willingness of officials to directly suppress civil liberties such as the freedom of assembly and speech .
 At the same time, keeping the courts weak and in the government's corner allowed the Rada and president to ram these laws through the system with no review process or input from civic groups .
 There was no check or balance to the process, and no review by an independent court or human rights organization prior to processing the law .
 This indicates another authoritarian practice existing in tension with other democratic elements of Ukrainian government . This indicates an authoritarian practice. This indicates a tension between the government and other government elements .
 Law enforcement is organized to support the party in power vice protect and serve the public . In addition, police have a long history of centralizing and expanding police capability .
 The subversion of the law in Ukraine advances elite interests, it also provides a shield to protect others loyal to the system . The law is also a shield for those loyal to Ukraine's elite .
 Centralized courts and police forces are authoritarian in nature as they extend the executive arm, vice serve as an independent institution found in democracies .
 The courts and police are used to silence opposition, they fail to actually hold criminals accountable .
Failing to prosecute high level criminals is hardly anything new to Ukrainian politics . Failing to prosecution high level criminal criminals is not new to Ukraine's politics .
 President Yushchenko bargained with the old regime after the Orange Revolution in 2004 . He gave up his moral high ground, granting Kuchma and his cronies' immunity, and dropping key investigations .
 Yushchenko missed a prime opportunity to change business as usual and establish a precedent for charging corrupt and ruthless officials .
 The problem continues as four corruption cases in 2013 were for relatively low level officials . Two attorneys representing the state in bankruptcy cases, and two other village council members were also involved .
 The Euromaidan also failed to bring change, as Poroshenko’s current government fails to convict officials associated with the violent crackdown in the Euromsaidan .
 Failing to hold individuals who created mass casualties of fellow citizens accountable allows popular anger to fester and reinforces failure of the government to adhere to popular preferences .
In cases where investigations begin, the government often suspends them before a conviction is reached . In cases where investigation begins, investigations are often suspended .
 The cases against law enforcement officials and leadership responsible for the Euromaidan violence are “marred by bureaucratic hurdles,” Amnesty International says . The Prosecutor General is trying to reduce his staff and the powers of the departments responsible for Eurom Maidan investigation .
 The Prosecutor General’s office and actions run counter to upholding the rule of law in the country . Personal attempts to sabotage the investigation progress, the Prosecutor General's office says .
Former Berkut riot police investigations. One example of this protection effort includes the handling of ex-Berkut riot investigations .
 After disbanding the force in 2014, other efforts to hold them accountable have proven futile . The force was disbanded in 2014 .
 Roughly 20 Berkut officers were tipped off about future arrests, causing them to flee . 18 reached Russia and Crimea, and 18 reached Crimea .
 The courts remain highly politicized in Ukraine, a quality of authoritarian regimes . The courts are highly politicised in Ukraine .
 Cooperate and the system will find a way to protect or limit the damage . Cooperate will be able to protect and limit damage from the damage.
 Ukraine’s justice system is flooded with examples of failing to uphold the law equally to all . Hardly democratic in nature.
 A system that is unequal before the law, allowing loyal political criminals to skate by and have protection, while citizens and opposition groups receive harsh sentences . The system is far from independent and democratic, says the author .
Degrading freedom for some, while protecting those loyal to the system, is a staple of authoritarian regimes . Degrading freedom is a key part of the regime's authoritarian regime .
 A Centerpiece for Handling Vocal Opposition Maintaining the judiciary and police in the government's corner makes using violence to suppress opponents more likely .
 A regime that must coerce its population toward its policies and narratives, is not democratic, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says a regime that uses violence to coerce the population is not democracy .
 The murder of prominent investigative journalist and founder of new site Ukrainska Pravda Georgy Gongadze in 2000 represents the height of a brutal campaign to suppress negative government portrayal in the news .
 Gongadze was investigating and publishing stories on government corruption . He disappeared on September 16, 2000 only to be found a couple months later, decapitated and buried .
 In Orange Revolution, Myroslava Gongadze’s wife explains how Georgy was investigating the regime and asking questions about corruption on live television .
 Myroslava adds that the regime threatened Georgy, reminding him that he was ‘playing a deadly game’ in relation to his reporting . The regime threatened him, he says .
 The scandal rocked the public, and contributed to the downfall of the Kuchma regime . No one was charged and the investigation stalled out .
After the Orange Revolution, part of the deal between the new and old regimes put a stop to the investigation into Gongadze’s murder .
 The regime deliberately tried to silence free speech and an unfavorable narrative . The important point of the Gongadze affair is that the regime deliberately tries to silenceFree speech .
 Violence extends beyond journalists as well, impacting a host of professions and activities that challenge or question government .
 A government that believes it can unfairly harass and assault the public is far from democratic . The government believes it could unfairly harass the public, it says .
 Hybrid and authoritarian regimes extend their police forces as mechanisms to maintain and enforce their agenda, vice what is written in law . Police forces are used as mechanisms for maintaining and enforcing their agenda .
 The decision to use live ammunition was critical to the downfall of Yanukovych’s regime . It stoking public anger and reinforcing opposition resolve to oust him .
 Parliament and the administration voted to turn up the violence . While Parliament stopped the violence, it remains that Parliament along with the administration also voted to stop the violence.
 It was only when the violence got out of hand that Parliament opted to stop it .
This observation reinforces perceptions that violence has been deemed legitimate by the government as a mechanism to control the populace . This observation reinforces perception that violence is not legitimate by government .
 The institutional shortcomings discussed in the previous chapter allow this type of behavior, and these same structural problems remain in the system today . The institutional problems discussed in this chapter remain today .
 Condoning violence remains undemocratic as politicians become eager to use the tactic over compromise and negotiations . Condoned violence is still undemocrat as politicians use the tactics of violence over compromise .
Compromising and negotiating with the opposition threatens the current power structure . Compromising and negotiations with the Opposition threaten the currentPower structure .
To preserve the power structure, rulers in authoritarian regimes are more likely to use violence as a tactic of choice in order to control the population .
 Yuriy Grabovsky, a lawyer, went missing and was found murdered in 2016 . Grabovsky was found dead in 2016.
 In July 2016, a car bomb exploded in Kyiv killing outspoken Ukrainian journalist Pavel Sheremet . The car bomb killed the journalist in July 2016 .
 Poroshenko called for an immediate investigation into the bombing . Poroshenko has yet to identify any perpetrators .
 Numerous journalists that remain critical of the government or publish reports positively on the separatists in the east face increasing threats of violence and harassment .
Violence remains an acceptable tool for the government, according to the government . Suppressing vocal opposition via violent methods remains anacceptable tool.
 The use of violence, particularly against journalists and lawyers, undermines the protection of civil liberties including free speech and the rule of law .
 These types of harsh responses undermine public confidence in the government, democratic or not. More importantly, these types of tough responses undermine confidence in government .
 Ukrainian civil society remains too weak to act as a consistent force for government development beyond complete regime overthrow . As the next section will illustrate, Ukraine's civil society is still too weak.
 The room for expanding authoritarianism exists, but at the same time, civil society places a limit on full authoritarian consolidation . As a result, there is a room for expanded authoritarianism, but the room for it exists .
 With two revolutions that relied on mass public mobilization under the country's belt, one may think civil society has become robust and entrenched in Ukrainian politics .
 Several scholars reflected on Ukrainian civil society’s inability to establish long term government relationships .
 A civil society that remains unable to build bridges with the government will continue to fail at changing policy, or addressing public grievances before reaching a crisis level .
Ukrainian civil society appears to be supporting and degrading democratization at the same time . Ukrainian civil society seems to be both supporting and supporting democratization .
 Negative aspects of civil society, such as armed thug groups and militias, directly challenge the stability of democratic consolidation .
 Two revolutions prove Ukrainians are willing to place certain limits on the system . At the same time, two revolutions prove Ukraine is willing to put limits on system .
Ukrainian civil society continually struggles to influence day-to-day governance in Ukrainian politics . Ultimately, Ukrainian civil society continues to struggle with autocratic elements .
 For a democracy, a robust and vibrant civil society can act as a critical counterweight to government overreach . For a robust civil society, a strong civil society is a criticalcounterweight to overreach, says David Cameron .
Civil organizations provide an infrastructure to take popular grievances and coordinate solutions within the government . Civil organizations provide a framework for the government to address grievances .
 These organizations allow citizens who may otherwise remain silent to speak up. Promoting participation with the government, these organizations allow people to speak out .
Civil organizations provide a bridge, an official channel, between citizens and politicians to channel their concerns . Civil organizations provide an official channels to channel citizens' concerns .
 They also provide an alternative avenue of approach for negotiations when politicians fail to listen or adhere to their constituents .
 In contrast, civil society in authoritarian regimes is viewed as the enemy that intends to alter the current power structure .
 Efforts to silence, restrict, and co-opt civic groups are more common in authoritarian regimes .
When successful, civil society can prevent reversals toward authoritarianism, and push for democratic progress . When successful, Civil Society can prevent reversal of authoritarianism .
Civil society development is critical for democratic consolidation and the prevention of authoritarianism . Civil society development has been a key part of the development of civil society .
 Analyzing the history of Ukrainian civil society will reveal numerous missed opportunities to develop closer ties between the public and politicians .
 The Comparative Politics of Reform and Lessons for Ukraine,” in Beyond the Euromaidan,’s book, is published in Ukraine .
 69 carried over from the Soviet era became part of the corruption apparatus rather than a force for worker rights . 69 carried on from theSoviet era. 69 carried out from the Soviets and became part the corruption system .
 Most political organizations opted to educate voters and monitor elections, but failed to maintain a lasting relationship beyond election season . Most political groups opted to focus on educating voters and monitoring elections .
 The Internet and personal ties have proven a more powerful motivator to get people into the streets for protest, vice civic organizations .
 Examining the Euromaidan movement will illustrate a rise in negative organizations that ran in direct contrast to democratic behavior, says the author .
 Current civic organizations continue to face uphill battles to build bridges between people and politics .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of glasnost brought about 251,000 non-communist party organizations . Flaws in the Soviet Foundation began to emerge through the policy.
 Following independence, hundreds of organizations including women’s leagues, youth organizations, and education organizations emerged . Few were political in nature .
 Most of the organizations and activities associated with early Ukrainian civil society worked directly to counter the dominant government media campaigns and information operations . Most of those associated with the early Ukrainian Civil Society worked directly with the government .
 While these organizations expanded to educate individuals in a narrative outside government channels, they did little to build bridges or try to influence policymakers directly . "These organizations expanded" to educate people in a story outside of government channels .
 The Search for a National Identity, 33. 70 organization, in 1993, climbed to 86 percent . In 1993, that number climbed to 82 percent .
 The failure to continually engage in policy and government development allowed elites to shape the system in their favor . This was problematic for the prospect of democracy in early Ukrainian political development, says the author .
 Elites were able to set the rules of the game as well as the precedent to ignore the popular preferences of the governed . Elites are able to play the game without the need to play a game .
 Trade unions failed to operate in developed democracies, according to a report from the Soviet era .
 Often times, union leaders merely worked to support the politician vice the worker .
 Union leaders failed to understand how a market economy worked, or their role within it, and often sided with the employer because it was easier .
 This means union leadership failed to understand their role in voicing member grievances, says union leader . This means the union leadership fails to understand the role of voicing members' grievances, he says .
 75 percent of businesses participated with union organizations, but 75 percent participated with unions . Union membership tanked over the years, likely as a result of lost faith .
 The failure of trade unions early on degraded a pillar upon which to build civil society . The failure to build a civil society has been described as "a pillar of the society"
 Trade unions could have provided a platform for negotiation with representatives of industry and government .
 This early failure left citizens without an important mechanism of influence that could prevent growing authoritarian trends . Instead, this early failure leaves citizens without a important mechanism to influence .
 Ukrainian civil society failed to build bridges early on, but there was notable progress in educating the electorate . Voter Education and Election Monitoring was successful .
 CVU was critical in conducting Parallel Vote Tabulation to monitor potential election fraud during the Orange Revolution in 2004 . Also, the CVU conducted Parallel VoteTabulation in 2004.
 Pora went door to door, polling station to polling station during the 2004 election . Consisting of about 30,000 activists, and receiving technical assistance from the West .
 While educating voters had a tremendous impact during election season, these organizations did little in the wake of affecting routine, day-to-day government policy .
 More robust organizations are needed to interact with government on a daily basis, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Make negotiations, make negotiations, and hold leaders continually accountable"
 The media began playing a greater role in educating the public during election season . In addition, the media also began playing more role in education during the season .
 Ukrainska Pravda, a local news outlet, informed the public during the Orange Revolution .
Ukrainska Pravda published various exit polls and alleged fraud information online . The Internet lacked robustness during the Orange Revolution when compared to the Euromaidan .
Independent sources allow voters to draw independent conclusions on election progress contrary to the state-run storyline, and promote quality democratic engagement, debate, and participation .
 Internal and External Factors in Ukraine’s 2004 Democratic Breakthrough,’ in Democracy and Authoritarianism in the Postcommunist World, eds. ‘’
 Popular mobilization for mass government overthrow has proven successful on a number of occasions . Only One Peaceful Transition of Power is the only one Peaceful transition.
Civil society is at least strong enough to place limits on authoritarian consolidation, while remaining too weak and unable to push Ukraine toward full democratic consolidation .
 Ukrainians have ousted their leaders through popular protest on three occasions . Ukraine has only one peaceful transition of power from Yushchenko to Yanukovych in 2010 .
 mine directors and workers from the Donbas region banded together to force a region wide strike . The first ousting was in 1993, when a miners’ strike led to early elections and the ouster of Ukraine’s first president .
 The miners demanded new elections as a means to throw out the government . Protesting work conditions, harsh economic lives, and the political chaos that plagued their nation following independence .
 The second notable protest movement was the Orange Revolution in 2004 . The Orange Revolution was the second popular protest movement in 2004.
 Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets after the Central Election Commission ruled that Viktor Yanukovych won the second round run-off through widespread voter fraud on part of the regime .
 Over 500,000 people poured into the streets of Kyiv by the third day of demonstrations, November 23, 2004 .
Mass citizen mobilization forced the courts to uphold the law, hold a repeat vote, and reject a continuation of an autocratic regime . Ultimately, mass citizen mobilization forced the court to uphold law and reject the law .
 The last mass protest transition was that of the Euromaidan in 2014 . The last, and most recent mass protest Transition was that in 2014.
 President Viktor Yanukovych's unilateral decision to back away from an EU Association Agreement in November 2013. Thousands of angry Ukrainians took to the streets following the decision .
 Ukraine's most overt pivot away from Russian influence would solidify the country's commitment to Europe . Implementing the agreement would represent Ukraine’s most overt pivoting away from Russia .
 Demonstrations in Independence Square (the Maidan) started at about 100,000 on the first Sunday after Yanukovych’s announcement . But quickly swelled to an estimated 800,000 .
 Yanukovych fled the country and the government stripped him of his power and held new elections . Eventually, after numerous violent clashes and deaths between protestors and government forces, Yanukovych fled .
 People can mobilize effectively if their collective grievances reach a tipping point, which can help push the nation toward democratic consolidation . People can mobilize effectively if they have grievances that reach tipping point .
What remains problematic and undemocratic is the continued absence of organizations on which to mediate and work through problems before they reach a breaking point . However, what remains problematic is the lack of organizations to medicate and work.
Public opinion supports that Ukrainians are not exactly enthralled by civic engagement . Also, public opinion support that Ukrainians aren't exactly enthalled by Civic engagement .
 Aasland and Lyska found that civic activity remains low, particularly at the local government level . Many viewing their local authorities in a negative light, according to the authors .
Low involvement exacerbates the disconnect between the success of the central governance trumpeted by politicians, and the reality on the ground experienced by citizens .
Low involvement allows for local governments to continue corrupt or abusive practices with little to no fear of punishment or no need to confront constituents face-to-face . Second, low involvement lets for local government to continue abusive practices .
 Ukrainian society is successful at ousting regimes that become too extreme . Overall, Ukrainian society, with some assistance from civic organizations, is successful in overthrowing regimes .
 Providing a check to authoritarian consolidation is noteworthy and represents a glimmer of democratic nature in Ukrainian civil society .
 civil society in Ukraine lacks the day to day engagement with government that can allow it to become a truly robust democratic force .
 failing to act appropriately prior to grievances reaching a level that requires mass mobilization is not a sign of a robust civic pillar. Also, failing to acting properly prior to grievance reaches a level of mass mobilization is not an indication of a strong civic pillar .
There are other flaws in Ukrainian civil society that undermine democratic progress, says the author . The success of civil society at checking autocratic consolidation is welcomed .
Other flaws in civil society development hinder consolidation and habituation of this vital pillar to democracy . Other flaws in the Civil Society also hinder consolidation.
 Passivity of organizations allows grievances to fester and reach a breaking point that requires regime overthrow . Passivity is a key part of the process of dealing with grievances .
 Negative civic groups undermine credibility of honest groups and provide a pretext for excessive government crackdown . Also, negative civic groups undermined credibility ofHonest groups and provides a pretext of excessive government enforcement .
 These flaws consistently undermine the habituation of quality civil society practices found in robust democracies . The flaws are often found in democracies, says David Cameron .
 A flaw in Ukraine’s civil society is that people remain largely passive to a point, allowing grievances to reach an extreme level . It then requires mass mobilization to the streets and complete regime overthrow .
 Failing, time and time again, to invest in civic institutions that address popular grievances before they reach a breaking point is a shortcoming . Failing to invest into civic institutions is a long-term problem .
 Ukrainians need to create more organizations with direct involvement with the government . The entire system is built to protect elite interests and basic political representatives .
 Yanukovych regime was largely silent under the Yanukovych regime . He reinstated a controversial Black Sea fleet treaty with Russia .
 The treaty extended basing rights to the Russian Navy in the autonomous region of Crimea . It was extended to the region in 2014, prior to Russian annexation in 2014 .
 The treaty was highly controversial, and yet society did not mobili z e against this . The treaty is highly controversial .
Civil society lacked the organizations to mediate between the public and elites . Civil society lacked organizations to Mediate between public and elite .
 To make matters worse, the rise of vigilante groups and organized crime under the Yanukovych government undermined legitimate organizations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: To make matter worse, to make it worse, is to make matters Worse .
Way notes that negative civil society organizations, or hijacked civil society, directly undermine democracy and good governance . Way notes thatnegative civil society groups, or hijacking civil society.
 Rising groups such as the Titushki detract and erode what little gains other, more honest organizations have achieved .
 Negative groups provide a bull horn for elite justification of harsh crackdowns that degrade civil liberties . In addition, negative groups provide an elite justification.
 Ultimately, these organizations are built around the idea of causing trouble. Ultimately, they are built on the idea that causing trouble .
 Notoriously, the Titushki were a group of armed thugs, hired by the Yanukovych regime . They were used to augment internal security forces during the Euromaidan uprising .
 Yanukovych paid these thugs anywhere from US$17 to US$100 a day to beat up demonstrators . Yanukovych paid them anywhere from $17 to $100 per day .
 The Titushki were responsible for some of the most heinous deaths, beatings, and kidnappings during the Euromaidan .
 Organizations like the Titushki run counter to any democratic ideals and norms . They are often a tool for authoritarian overreach, and are often used by authoritarian organizations .
 They prey on the disenfranchised and poor to fill their ranks . They do little in the face of public good or the promotion of civil liberties, says the author .
Vigilante groups promote authoritarianism by suppressing and coercing honest civic groups . Vigilante groups are also known as 'vigilante' groups .
 Building Bridges is one of the largest impediments to democratic progress and promoters of authoritarianism . Civil society's inability to effectively influence government on a daily basis remains civil society’s inability to influence government .
 Today, civil society groups are finally making inroads and building longer term relationships between citizens and the government .
 The new generation of British football stars are often met with stiff resistance from the old elite . However, this fresh success is often met by stiff resistance, reminiscent of past problems .
 The Center assisted and lobbied for the creation of the National Anti-Corruption Bureau . The Center started out as an organization to craft and push anti-corruption legislation .
 Patients of Ukraine lobbied to break up the “de facto national pharmaceutical mafia,’s ‘de facto pharmaceutical mafia’ George Weigel explains another organization that lobbied to make medicine more affordable for citizens .
 An increasing number of success stories for civil society illustrates this pillar of democracy may finally be making inroads and bridging the divide .
 caution is recommended as the system has proven resistant to change . While these successes are welcomed, caution is advised to be cautious .
 civil society appears to be improving since the Euromaidan, activist and organization efforts have continually met resistance from elites . Though civil society has been improving, activists and activists are still facing resistance .
 The West wants to stop the implementation of anti-corruption reforms . The U.S. government says it is working to stop corruption in the West .
 The battle remains an uphill one for civil society, but a handful of success stories are welcomed . The battle is still an uphill battle for the civil society .
 Through all of civil society’s successes and failures in Ukraine, civil society as a whole continually fails to attack the source of the problems .
 Two revolutions have failed to change the system in a manner that rids the deep intermixing of money and politics that is the source of so much of Ukraine's woes .
Civil society has taken almost three years to build and faced resistance along the way . There have been recent successes for civil society since the Euromaidan .
 This illustrates the current difficulties facing Ukrainian civil society today . This illustrates current difficulties faced by Ukraine's civil society .
 civil society appears to be growing in a manner that has evaded the country for a quarter of a century . There remains much work to be done and it remains far from a “robust’s or consolidated pillar of democracy.
 Corruption and accountability problems extend beyond petty infractions to colossal levels, and remain incredibly entrenched in Ukraine . In conclusion, corruption and accountability issues extend beyond Petty infractions .
 Politicians use their positions to acquire greater wealth and power, as citizens skirt the law as a means to get by or conduct business . Politicians are using their positions as a way to acquire more power and wealth .
 Hardly democratic in nature, these practices erode confidence in democracy and perpetuate authoritarian qualities . Hardly democracy in nature. Hardlydemocratic in nature .
 centralized police force after independence extended the reach of government that allowed them to abuse and harass citizens .
 Recent efforts to reform appear to have the same centralized structure that allowed such overreach of the past . Recent efforts have been welcomed, while welcomed, appear to be similar to the past.
 Many of these reforms look great on paper, but they continually lack enforcement mechanisms for implementation . The reforms have been criticized for not being implemented, leading to criticism that elites do not intend to alter the status quo .
 corruption pervades all levels of society, and elites seek their own interests over public interests . Civil society remains too weak to influence the routine shaping of government, says John Sutter .
 Organizations exploded into existence following independence following independence but failed to truly build a bridge between citizens and politicians .
 Incompetent trade unions carried over from the Soviet days advanced commercial interests vice worker rights . In Competent Trade unions carry over from Soviet days to Soviet days .
Political organizations were active during election seasons but faded into the background after the polls closed . At the same time, political organizations wereActive during election season .
Ukrainian civil society has little engagement to influence government policy on a daily basis . Ukrainian civil society is not engaged in the government's policies .
 Ukrainian civil society has proven extremely effective at mass mobilization for regime overthrow . Three different regimes since independence have been overthrown by popular protest .
 This frequency of mass mobilization for overthrow does not bode well for democracy in Ukraine, but does appear to place limits on authoritarian consolidation . This frequency is not well for the country's democracy .
 civil society in Ukraine is preventing and promoting both authoritarian and democratic consolidation in the country .
Civil society is unable to push consolidation fully toward democracy as a result of its relationship with the government . Civil society is not able to push consolidating fully towards democracy as result of relationship with government .
 mass popular mobilization during times of crisis appears to also limit full authoritarian consolidation . At the same time, mass popular mobilization during crisis also appears to limit authoritarian consolidation.
Economic success is one of many requirements for a democracy to remain strong and prevent authoritarian regression .
 Establishing a market economy structure at the beginning of a democracy ensures the greatest likelihood of democratic success . It allows democratic norms and practices to become established early .
 Nations that fail to transition to a market economy quickly allow the growth of corruption . Nations that don't transition to the market economy rapidly allow corruption .
 Some argue that specific measurements of citizen wealth demonstrate the success and strength of government . Separately, some argue that such measurements show the success of the government .
 Economies showing approximately US$2,236 GDP per capita income are deemed on the threshold of stable . A GDP per per capita of US$13,418 indicates a democracy is well established .
 The economic structure and performance within a country can support or degrade consolidation . The economy and performance of the country can be seen as a factor in a country's growth .
 When the populace has to worry about survival, it opens the door for populism and authoritarianism as a means to address economic woes .
 The first few years of independence left many citizens broke and angry at leaving the Soviet Union . Follows a brief overview of the Ukrainian economy .
Delaying the crucial transition from a planned to market economy in the Kravchuk years wreaked havoc on the system . Delaying the key transition from the market economy to the market system in the years wreaks havoc on system .
 The election of Kuchma and his eventual appointment of Viktor Yushchenko as his prime minister turned an ailing economy around within one year . The election brought much needed relief to the system .
 The economy has faced ups and downs with various crises, per capita GDP has remained low . Overall, the economy is still low .
 Reforms following the Euromaidan look promising, but they are currently hurting the everyday citizen .
 The constant divide between the super wealthy and average citizen reinforces disenchantment with the government . The system leaves the system vulnerable to exploitation by populism and authoritarianism .
 Ukraine inherited a centralized economy from the Soviet Union in 1991 . The country's economy was centralized in the 1990s .
 Ukrainian economy has changed vastly since independence . The economy has been revolving around agriculture and heavy industry .
 Ukraine once supplied roughly one-fourth of the food for the Soviet Union . Today, Ukraine's farming sector only accounts for roughly 14 percent of the nation’s economy . The country once supplied about one- fourth of its food.
 Ukraine’s economy was dominated by heavy industries such as metallurgy, coal and chemicals under communism .
 Heavy industry still accounts for a quarter of Ukraine’s economy, and is predominately located in eastern Ukraine . Heavy industry remains a major part of Ukraine's economy .
 Ukraine's economy now accounts for over 50 percent of economic activity in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's transition from a command economy to a free market economy has been a difficult process for Ukraine . The transition has been difficult for Ukraine.
 Lingering communist influence and presence of old Soviet elites hindered the implementation of radical reforms to a market economy in the early transition years . Lingering Communist influence and the presence of former Soviet elites hinder the introduction of reforms to the market economy .
 In 1994, 85 percent of the economy remained state-owned . Failing to radically break with a centralized past, after three years of independence, in 1994, the economy continued to remain state- owned .
 Both President Kravchuk and then-Prime Minister Kuchma faced strong resistance at instituting economic change . Both faced resistance at the time .
 The Search for a National Identity, 199. 82 the presidency by taking the rug of economic power out from the very people that got him elected .
 Efforts at privatization would likely face stiff resistance from sitting communists, or their reincarnated leftist parties, and jeopardize Kravchuk’s power base .
 Kuchma understood how the corrupt game worked in Ukraine, even during his tenure as prime minister .
 Kravchuk was unable to jump start economy, even if he wanted to . Ukraine lacked the basic economic infrastructure to do so, as Ukraine lacked a basic infrastructure .
After independence, Ukraine lacked a national bank, a budget, and adequate means to collect taxes . After independence, the country was unable to find an adequate way to collect tax money .
 Kravchuk needed to build these institutions and mechanisms in order to establish a sense of order and rules for a new market economy . He says he needed to building these institutions to establish new market rules .
 The lack of these basic pieces contributed to the establishment of an oligarchy, and corruption at a time when Ukraine desperately needed reform, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Failing to reform the system quickly and implement vital infrastructure led to stagnated development, increased hardship, and the rise of a rent-seeking, predatory state . The rise of the predatory state has led to a rise of rent-seekers, a predatory state.
 The Ukrainian oligarchs came to power shortly after independence . State-owned enterprises continued to operate in close coordination with the government .
 Pavlo Fazarenko, who operated the company along with Yulia Tymoshenko, siphoned off mi llions in profits in the late 1990s .
 Viktor Yushchenko became prime minister in 1999 and began implementing reforms that directly challenged oligarch interests . The elites simply maneuvered and diverted their energy to capture the sales of state enterprises and increased footholds in the political system .
The lack of robust tax laws and enforcement mechanisms meant elite profits failed to reach the state . The lack of a robust tax law and enforcement mechanism meant elite profit failed to reached the state.
 The evolution of elites allowed for the continuation of policies advantageous to them, harming overall economic development, and everyday Ukrainians, says the author . "The evolution of elite policies allowed for a continuation of the policies advantageous"
 A large problem associated with the rise and persistence of the super wealthy in Ukraine remains tax evasion and the loss of income to the state . The problem is tax evasion.
 Ukrainians have long avoided taxes, especially the super wealthy . Public projects may not be completed or achieved if taxes are not received by the state .
After raking in millions from UES, Lazarenko paid only US$11,000 in taxes . He is one such example .
 The inability to receive adequate taxes then shifts the burden on the lower affluent or connected population, as they lack the means to hide their money .
 In 2011, approximately 8 mi llion of the eligible 22 million of the workforce did not pay taxes . In 2012, about 22 million people in the workforce didn't pay taxes.
 Elite profiting robbed the economy of vital income to provide for government wages, pensions, and social benefits .
 As these programs became insolvent and shifted the tax burden on the middle to lower income populations, many people had to resort to barter and corrupt practices just to get by .
 In turn, this set up forced increasing amounts of the economy underground . This set up a set up set up by the government .
 Kravchuk and Kuchma allowed elites to pillage their way to enrichment, and entrench corrupt practices that wreaked havoc on the economy . The lack of reform is a consequence of the lack of reforms, Kravuk says .
 Prizel explains how the slow implementation of reform was possibly deliberate by then-Prime Minister Kuchma . He says he would avoid shock therapy in reforming the economy .
 GDP per capita declined from an average of US$5,499 per person in 1991 to a meager US$750 in 1998 . In 1991, the average GDP per person was $5,500 per person. In 1998, the economy was $750 per person .
 The deterioration of the economy, aside from the corrupt elite stealing millions, hindered democratic consolidation by shifting popular focus on survival vice everyday engagement with the government .
 The system that became entrenched in Ukraine promoted self-preservation and evasion vice public good. Thus, the system became entrenched.
 The effects of this economic catastrophe directly impacted everyday citizens . The effects were directly impacted by the economic catastrophe .
 As wages decreased and prices increased, Ukrainian families had a difficult time making ends meet .
 Between 1990 and 1996, the average household spent between 56 to 66 percent of their income solely on food . The average household spends 56-66 percent of its income on food.
 According to BTI, in 2003 approximately 25 percent of Ukrainians still lived in poverty . 80 percent believed they were poor .
 It became increasingly difficult to understand how the government was taking care of everyday Ukrainians . elites continued getting rich while the population worried about feeding their families .
 Viktor Yushchenko’s appointment as prime minister in 1999 managed to turn the economy around . After muddling through eight years of economic decline, the economy turned around .
 Ukraine,” 7. 86 improved transparency, altered tax break incentives for the wealthy, and increased privatization . Ukraine’s 7.86 improved transparency.
 Yushchenko’s reforms targeted the corrupt oligarch practices that became so deeply entrenched during the first eight years of independence .
 Yushchenko’s reforms swung the Ukrainian economy ‘dramatically’ in the other direction, Wilson says . The reforms have sustained gains for another seven years, he says .
 Yushchenko was fired only a year and half after taking the job, which allowed Kuchma to return to previous corrupt practices .
 Reforms may have improved Ukrainian wages, but corruption eroded those gains quickly . Reforms might have improved Ukraine's economy, but Corruption eroded gains quickly.
 For all the economic success and turnaround, little made it to the populace as profits were squandered by officials .
 The Search for a National Identity, 118. 87, as corruption remains rampant . Many citizens remained in poverty, or at least believed they were poor .
 Democracy became associated with economic hardship early on . As such allowed for the establishment of populism, nepotism, bribery, and corruption, it allowed for populism .
 The corrupt practices and siphoning of money by elites by elites may not have become as entrenched if there had been a clean break with the centralized past .
 Inheriting a weak and centralized economy and failing to reform it right away degraded democratic success . Inherited a weak, centralized economy, and failed to reform the economy right away .
 Civil society was unable to flourish as citizens worried more about basic survival and feeding their families vice investing in Ukrainian politics .
 The distortions and holes in the independent economy allowed for the creation of economic institutions that promoted the enrichment of an elite few . The distortion of the economy allows for the development of the elite few, says the author .
 The Ukrainian economy in the first decade established corrupt, semi-authoritarian practices that worked against democratic consolidation . Ukraine's economy was founded in the 1990s .
 As a result, elite pillaging and drastic income inequality continue today, says the author .
 The 2008 global financial crisis was the next shock to the system . The YANUKOVYCH ERA was the first major financial crisis to hit the world .
 A Democratic Post-Soviet State?,’s in Institutional Dimensions of Authoritarian Persistence: In Institutional dimensions of Authoritar Persistence .
 In 2011 roughly 36 percent of working Ukrainians did not pay taxes, according to Kuzio . Most Ukrainians received their salaries in cash envelopes, the company says .
 Whatever small scale gains occurred after the Yushchenko turnaround were being erased . Whatever smallscale gains occurred.
 Ukraine’s economy is improving, but economic distortions and the pain of modern reform leaves many everyday citizens hurting .
 inflation has declined since the Euromaidan revolution where it peaked at 43 percent in 2015, fell to 12 percent in 2016 . Inflation is currently projected to reach 8 percent in 20 1 7.
 The failures of transferring larger macroeconomic prosperity down to the micro level continues to impact everyday Ukrainians . The failures to transfer larger macro economic prosperity to micro level continue to impact daily Ukrainians .
 Wages remain low, prices for goods are high, and many Ukrainians have yet to benefit from the changing economy . Many Ukrainians are still struggling to find a way to get out of poverty .
 Roman Olearchyk explains that Ukraine’s GDP per capita is “just 20 percent of the EU 29 1 Menon and Rumer, Conflict in Ukraine, 50. He says that Ukraine's GDP is just 20 percent.
 The average Ukrainian monthly income is only US$194, and those living below the subsistence level nearly doubled from 2015-2016 .
 This situation leaves the country vulnerable to authoritarian overreach and the degradation of democratic progress as a means to fix economic hardship, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the situation is a "vulnerable" situation .
 Cost for goods and services is increasing as a result of recent reforms, only adding more pain for average citizens . Wage concerns are only part of the problem, as the cost for goods is increasing .
 Even as wages remain low, the price of goods continues to increase, particularly energy costs .
 An IMF-mandated end to energy subsidies caused prices to triple in 20 1 6.1 6.6 . The IMF's end to the subsidies caused the price of energy subsidies to triple .
Living standards of many Ukrainians continue to decline as prices for heat and water go up . Amnesty International echoes the current problem .
 As power and heating costs dominate the majority of Ukrainian income, so too does putting food on the table .
 40 percent of Ukrainians spent nearly two-thirds of their budget on food and sustenance . In 2014, 40 percent spent more than half of their budgets on food.
 Plateauing or regressing wages in combination with rising prices is forcing a growing number of Ukrainians to live below the poverty level .
 The number of those living in poverty nearly doubled to 58 percent in 20 1 5. 90 percent in the United States .
 Ukrainians predominantly spend their income on energy and food . Some landlords pay for some heating costs for apartment buildings .
 The persistence of poverty and low wages, in addition to the high cost of goods, perpetuates the corrupt practices discussed in previous chapters . In addition to poverty, the persistence of low wages and high costs of goods.
 Contributing to bribery, barter, and favors as a means to get by, this set up remains undemocratic and vulnerable to authoritarian overreach .
 Current reforms that are designed to help Ukraine’s economy are hurting Ukrainian citizens . Current reforms are hurting Ukraine's citizens, according to Ukrainian media .
 Corruption continues to fleece money from society and leave Ukrainians disenchanted with their government . While GDP has improved since the Euromaidan, corruption continues to leave Ukrainians continually disenchant with their governments .
 The everyday Ukrainian sees little improvement as heating costs continue to rise with their incomes receding .
 Theory may say the country appears in the stable range, but in practice this seems far from true .
 Continued economic problems will only destabilize the government, leaving it vulnerable to another popular change in the next election cycle . Continued economic shortcomings will only threaten the government .
 The largest part of Ukraine’s economic woes stems from the persistence of the oligarchs . The oligarchs are responsible for Ukraine's economic woes .
 Oligarchs controlled 38 percent of the country’s GDP in 2014, higher than other developed democracies and some authoritarian states .
 Ukrainian economy and taxpayers of a better life, and they are continually successful at it . The New Russian Imperialism is 319. 91 .
 The oligarchs have managed to evolve over the years from playing a direct role in o politics to shifting behind the scenes as a means to survive .
 The oligarchs, as the few very wealthy were popularly called, have changed qualitatively . As a consequence, the oligarchs are now more likely to be more powerful than ever .
 Until 1999, all the richest people in Ukraine made their money on gas trade, but from 2000 on, they became steel producers .
The country had traversed the crucial hurdle from arbitrage to export production . The country had crossed a crucial hurdle to export produce .
 The oligarchs were no longer courtiers who made their money on intrigues in the corridors of power . They were owners of large factories with well-defined and lasting interests .
 The specialization allowed new big businessmen to evolve in other industries, such as machine-building, banking, retail trade, real estate, and agriculture .
History has shown oligarchs remain cunning and able to evolve with the system . Greater decentralization, improving watchdog organizations, and implementing anti-corruption measures may challenge the relationship between politics and wealth .
 Ukraine has a long history of economic distortions that enrich few and harm many, says the author . The author says Ukraine has been guilty of many economic distortions .
 Failure to reform an inherited centralized economy quickly allowed distortions and loopholes for corruption to flourish . The failure to reform a centralized economy allowed distortions to flourish, says the Economist .
 Efforts at reform and eroding the oligarchs’ power base have been met with stiff resistance . The oligarchs' power base has been met by stiff resistance.
 The implementation of recent reforms failed to alter the fundamentals of the system . oligarchs have been able to shift with the system, according to reports .
 Average Ukrainians continue to live below or close to the poverty line . They spend most of their wages on food and energy .
 Candidates are elected on promises of fixing the economic hardships and ending corruption . But nearly every one of them has failed to deliver, they say .
 Oligarch dominance and the continued economic hardship serve as platforms for authoritarian exploitation in order to achieve and preserve political power . Oligarchy dominance and continued economic hardships serve as platform for authoritarian abuse .
Failing to quickly break with the communist past resulted in over a quarter century for Ukrainian consolidation to a competitive authoritarian state . Failing to quick break with communist past led to the state's consolidation.
 Many of the same reasons Ukraine failed to develop as a democracy support the nation’s consolidation into hybrid rule .
Review of Steven Levitsky and Lucan Way’s criteria of competitive authoritarian governance will demonstrate how and why Ukraine qualifies as a competitive authoritarian state .
 This chapter reveals the source of democracy’s woes in the country, stemming from the critical years immediately following independence . Separately, this chapter also reveals the failure to break with the communist past .
 Whether one views Ukraine as lost in transition, or firmly consolidated into hybrid governance, the nation qualifies as a competitive authoritarian state .
 The author argues that 25 years of this type of governance constitutes a firmly consolidated hybrid government, vice being stuck in a transitional phase .
 Competitive authoritarianism is a form of governance in which “formal democratic institutions are widely viewed as the principal means of obtaining and exercising political authority’s power .
 Skewed and weak institutions allow for abuses by executives that can give rise to greater autocratic governments .
 The government has an advantage, but the institutions also limit full blown authoritarianism . The government also limits full-blown authoritarianism.
 This paper does not analyze the media component, but there is plenty of evidence to support an analysis of the remaining three .
 Levitsky and Way explain that “authoritarian governments may coexist indefinitely with meaningful democratic institutions.’s ‘authoritarian government may co-exist indefinitely’
Opportunities exist for opposition victories and democratic achievement, but rules of the game are deliberately skewed in favor of the party in power .
 autocratic elements exist in inherent tension with the democratic ones that developed as a result of the continued communist influence following independence . Ultimately, as is the case for Ukraine, autocracy elements exist.
 The continued communist influence allowed elites to shape an asymmetric playing field in favor of elite interests, including within the electoral, legislative, and judicial arenas .
Three key choices allowed communist influence to pervade throughout the newly independent government . Three key choices were made by the new government .
 Soviet constitution allowed a free-for-all of corrupt practices to continue . Second, failing to craft a new constitution with clearly defined roles and rules for the new government allowed the Soviet constitution to remain the law of the land .
 Leonid Kravchuk was elected as the country's first president . He was a far cry from breaking with the Soviet past .
 The Soviet influence of highly centralized governance perpetuated and tainted Ukraine’s prospects of breaking through as a strong democracy . As a result, the Soviet influence has tainted Ukraine's prospects of being strong democracy.
 The communist presence helped reinforce institutions that were flawed and gave rise to an elite oligarch class of society . The Communist presence helped reinforcing institutions that had been flawed .
Constitutional reform continually fail to definitively separate powers between the president and prime minister .
 Ukraine maintains a revolving door of prime ministers that is too easily dismissed . Ukraine lacks incentives to cooperate, and lacks incentives for cooperation .
 Parliament is seen as a vehicle for elite enrichment and protection, vice a chamber for advancing public good . In addition, Parliament is also seen as the chamber for advancement public good.
 The intertwining of political parties, leaders, and oligarchs has entrenched the mixing of money and politics that has proven extremely stubborn to uproot .
 Parliamentary laws allowed self-interest decisionmaking to become the norm . Parliamentary laws, or the lack thereof, allow self- interest decisionmaking .
 immunity laws provide a shield from prosecution that creates incentives for elites to cheat and commit egregious corruption . In addition to immunity laws, immunity laws give immunity from prosecution .
 Parliamentary weaknesses resulted in multiple failed attempts at vital reform for the nation and legislative stagnation, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes .
 The manner in which politicians have and continue to use Parliament fails to adhere to democratic norms, and ultimately fails to deliver basic government services to the people .
 judiciary system intact from communism extended the influence of the executive branch over the courts and law enforcement in Ukraine .
 Competitive authoritarian states often maintain a subordinated judiciary through coercion, bribery, and co-optation . But they fail to completely control them.
 The lack of complete control provides opportunities for “maverick judges’ to challenge the executive, says the executive .
 Rulers may seek to punish judges who rule or operate in opposition to the executive . Ruler may try to punish Judges who rule, operate in opposed to executive .
 Judges have a history of inadequate pay, providing a mechanism for bribery . Judges have been accused of bribery by bribery .
 Judges are trained early on in the formal and informal rules of the judiciary, including executive levers of influence . Judges are also trained in the informal and informal Rules of the Judiciary .
 The judicial system has been used for political persecutions, as observed through the jailing of opposition candidate Yulia Tymoshenko during the Yanukovych administration .
 The same system is used as a shield for those loyal to the party in power . Also, the same system was used to protect the party's supporters .
 The judiciary remains weak, and current efforts to reform the system appear promising, but they continue to lack adequate implementation mechanisms . The judiciary continues to be weak.
 The harassment of lawyers and judges by the current Poroshenko administration continues . The harassment continues .
 Executive influence has not evaporated from the Ukrainian judicial system, says the Ukrainian court .
 At the same time, the executive lacks complete control of the judicial system . The executive has been in charge of the justice system for years .
 These dynamics continue playing off of each other, living in constant tension, and indicative of hybrid rule .
 Ukraine's independent judiciary has yet to come to fruition in Ukraine. Ultimately, this vital institution of democratic governance, a strong and truly independent judiciary, has not yet been completed in Ukraine .
 An additional consequence of weak institutions is the persistence of election fraud and an electoral system that continues to benefit elite interests. An electoral system continues to benefits elite interests, says the author .
 Ukraine’s electoral system creates an asymmetric playing field that makes opposition victories difficult, but not impossible .
 In competitive authoritarian states, the government abuses state resources, maintains biased media coverage, decreases transparency, and suppresses opposition all .
 Ukraine's electoral process has improved since independence, but remains vulnerable to widespread manipulation and advantages in favor of elites .
 Changing certain processes such as candidate registration and voting methods have improved voter confidence, increased participation, and bettered the system . Changing voting methods such as voting methods and voter registration have improved voters' confidence, according to experts .
 At the same time, the shift in fraudulent activity undermines confidence and the freeness of the vote . The shift in persistent fraudulent activity undermined confidence, the government says .
 As a result, the risks to commit such overt fraud and face punishment or international condemnation became too great, and drove fraudulent activity to ulterior, covert tactics . The risk to commit overt fraud was too great.
 As overt fraud has become too costly, the rise of covert methods continues to distract voters and steal votes . The rise of proxy candidates and parties is difficult to detect, such as proxy candidates .
 fraudulent activity continues to distort the playing field of Ukrainian elections . It creates an unfree and unfair competitive electoral process found in hybrid rule .
 Ukraine’s electoral system remains distorted to the advantage of elites, though opposition victories are possible . Ukraine's electoral system continues to be distorted.
 The intermixing of money and politics, along with the unlimited contributions of political parties, has given rise to a colossal amount of spending during Ukrainian elections .
 The high stakes electoral game reinforces that oligarchs and elites get to choose who the top contenders are in each race .
 The playing field is deliberately skewed in favor of those who receive oligarch financing and resources . Though elections are competitive, and small-time opposition victories remain possible .
 In the end, the perpetual communist influence following independence hampered the transition to democracy and solidified the weak institutions found in Ukraine today .
 Communist resistance to early reform created incentives for politicians to cheat and subvert the laws, vice use their positions for public good .
 Confrontation, fragmentation, and self-interest fail to deliver for the people and have become a norm to the Ukrainian government . Confrontations, fragmentation andSelf-interest, which are anti-democratic aspects, fail to delivered for people .
 Communist resistance to widespread reform perpetuated a centralized judiciary and law enforcement system that existed to serve the government, and not the people .
 These flawed incentives carry over into the electoral arena as fraud persists, and opposition victories are asymmetrically challenging . Also, these flawed incentives also carry over to the election arena .
 Ukraine’s institutions fail to uphold democratic standards, but at the same time resist full authoritarian consolidation . Ukraine's institutions failed to uphold the democratic standards of the country, according to a report .
Ukrainian society has a massive corruption problem that pervades all levels of society, says the author . "These flawed institutions and incentives give rise to a monumental corruption problem," he says .
 Corruption is systemic to the Ukrainian way of life, and efforts to eliminate it prove extremely difficult .
 Ukrainian society fails to adhere to the law with the political elite using their positions to acquire wealth and power . Citizens skirting the law as a means to do business or survive, according to Ukrainian media .
 The courts and police force remain too weak to challenge corruption, and are often complicit in its conduct . Also, the courts, police force and courts remain too strong to challenge Corruption .
 As a result, accountability remains a persistent problem in Ukraine, according to the U.S. State Department . It reflects a continuation of undemocratic behavior found in hybrid and authoritarian regimes .
 Problems associated with the protection of power and wealth prevent democratic progress and promote greater authoritarianism, says the author .
 Colossal levels of corruption that are incredibly widespread undermine the current system of government . Colossal amounts of corruption undermine the government's current system.
 Nearly every president and numerous other politicians have used their positions within the government for self-enrichment and power grabbing .
 The most egregious representation of corruption is that of Viktor Yanukovych’s US$100 billion fleecing of the government . The most damning representation of the corruption is of the Yanukovych's US $100 billion.
Kuchma fired his premier, Viktor Yushchenko, after his successful reforms threatened Kuchma’s power base . Others used their position to protect their prospects of future power .
Two extreme examples represent a greater 98 problem that is far from democratic and does little to serve the public interest or advancement of the state. These two extreme examples are far fromdemocratic and do little to serving the public interests or advancement.
 The lack of horizontal accountability mechanisms to act as checks and balances to this type of behavior is consistent with hybrid and authoritarian regimes . The absence of accountability mechanisms for authoritarian regimes is inconsistent with hybrid or authoritarian regimes.
 The problem extends well beyond the political leadership as corruption and skirting the rule of law trickles down to civilians . The problem is also well beyond political leadership .
 Everyday citizens face paying numerous bribes to simply do business or avoid jail time .
 The environment promotes perpetual corruption at all levels, according to the book . The book also discusses economic hardship and economic hardship .
 Corruption in Ukraine is truly grandiose, and its pervasiveness makes eradicating it all the more challenging .
 The politicization of the courts and law enforcement adds levers of control that undermines democratic governance . The corruption remains pervasive, but it is still pervasive .
Communist law enforcement system from communism failed to reform it, and quadrupling its size extended the reach of the government over its population .
 This heavy police presence, run by presidential political appointees, ensured that distortions in favor of the party in power continued . The police presence is run by the presidential political appointedees .
 Police became a force to support the party in power, vice to protect citizens . Some of the most egregious acts of violence against their own population during the Euromaidan .
 The politicization of the courts and law enforcement extended the reach of the executive over the population . It is a tool for coercive control that directly contradicts democratic government and mirrors authoritarianism .
 With the police and courts in the government’s corner, violence became an acceptable means to handle vocal opposition elements . The police and the courts are in the corner of the government's corner .
 Numerous instances over the last 25 years support this, including the aggressive crackdowns on protesters and killing of an independent journalist during Kuchma's presidency .
 The use of live ammunition against protestors during the Yanukovych era is not a one-off instance in Ukrainian history . Also, the use ofLive ammunition against protesters during theovych era, and the harassment and attacks on journalists and lawyers during the Poroshenko presidency are not one-
 Violence remains a deeply entrenched norm that is proving stubborn to reverse. Rather, violence remains a deep entrenched norm .
 A government that continues to accept violence 99 as a legitimate means to control its population is far from democratic and qualifies for authoritarian rule . The government that accepts violence 99 is not a legitimate way to control the population .
 For all of these accountability and institutional shortcomings, civil society remains too weak to influence the government on a consistent basis, says CIVIL SOCIETY. CIVil SOCIety .
 The analysis of three criteria in the remainder of this section support this argument . The analysis is based on three criteria. The analysis in the rest of the section supports the argument .
 Ukrainians failed to capitalize on an explosion of early civic organizations to establish a critical foothold between citizen and politician immediately following independence .
 Ukrainians have proven quite capable of mass mobilization in support of regime overthrow . Second, while civil society was slow to start, Ukrainians themselves have proven very capable of mobilizing .
 Third since Euromaidan, Ukrainian civil society is finally making inroads and building links between citizens and politicians . But their success is still met with stiff resistance and skepticism .
Recent success is not yet indicative of a larger trend for a robustly developed civil society . The civil society is capable of day-to-day government influence .
 An explosion of organizations prior to and immediately following independence failed to seek a routine relationship with government .
 The few political organizations that did emerge focused on educating voters during election season . But they stopped short of continuing engagement after the votes were tallied .
 trade unions carried over from the Soviet era exploited their position to advance business interests vice worker interests . Also, trade unions were used to advance the interests of business interests and workers .
 Ukrainians missed an opportunity to leverage these types of organizations early to develop critical foundations on which to grow civil society . Ukrainians missed a chance to leverage this type of organization early to build critical foundations. Ukrainians missed the opportunity.
 The failure to capitalize on this transition period permitted the degradation, or isolation, of civil society by elites .
 Ukrainians have proven on three different occasions that they are capable of mobilizing to the streets to remove inept leaders . Ukrainian civil society development got off to a slow start in the country .
 Kravchuk was removed from power early over his poor economic policies . Many Ukrainians angry at the government’s lack of ability to ensure basic goods and services .
 Yanukovych's ousting provoked millions from all over the country to seek his removal . Most recently, the ousting of Yanukovych after backing away from an EU agreement seven years in the making .
 This ability of civil society to mobilize for regime overthrow at least places limits on authoritarian consolidation . This ability to mobilize is limited to the power of the civil society .
Having to consistently overturn the government via mass protests does little to support the institutions and practices of a democracy . However, having to consistently overturned the government through mass protests is not enough .
 Ukrainian civil society is concerned about the relative passivity as authoritarian leaders rise . Other concerns include the rise of negative organizations and the increase of authoritarian leaders .
 By and large, civil society remains silent on issues of concern until they reach a critical tipping point .
 Yanukovych's cozying with the Russians in 2010 and signing of a controversial Black Sea treaty went largely unanswered, but indicated intentions to warm relations with Russia and keep Europe at some distance .
 The rise of negative movement organizations deliberately designed to cause trouble undermines honest civil society organizations in the country, says author . "It provides a pretext to justify a harsh government response," he says .
 Organizations such as the Titushki augmented security forces during the Euromaidan and were incentivized to cause trouble . organizations such as Titushk were incentivised to cause problems .
 The negative organizations threaten civil society’s credibility as they directly contradict the idea of building bridges between the government and society . Also, the negative organizations threatening civil society's credibility, according to the authors .
 Recently, civil society organizations are making inroads with day-to-day government influence . The government is directly addressing popular grievances .
 The creation of anticorruption legislation and anti-pharmaceutical organizations are a couple examples of the creation of anti-drug legislation .
 These organizations are often met with stiff resistance from old elites who still benefit from a distorted system . However, these organizations are not indicative of a larger trend .
 The problems of accountability and corruption live in tension with civil society’s demands, says the author .
 At the same time, it remains too weak to consistently challenge the government and advance public interest . The government is too weak.
 Recent success stories look promising, but skepticism remains as elites continually resist and block reform efforts .
 Tension within these two areas of government promote and degrade democracy in Ukraine . Tension between Ukraine's government and the Ukrainian government is growing .
 Both Ukraine and Ukraine remain too weak to push consolidation in one direction or the other, leaving Ukraine in a state of hybrid rule .
 A chronically deficient economy that benefits elites is leaving many citizens worried about surviving vice daily political engagement .
 Inheriting a centralized economy from communism and failing to quickly reform to a market economy is a problem . It's a problem that creates vulnerabilities for populist and authoritarian victories, says the author .
 Maintaining a highly centralized economy after independence perpetuated Soviet-style business in newly independent Ukraine, and hindered reform .
 A predatory class of elites was allowed to pillage their way to wealth, siphoning off profits for themselves and inadequately paying workers . Due to the economic distortions, a predatory class is allowed topillage their ways to wealth .
 The close connection between business and politics gave rise to Ukraine’s oligarch class .
 The efforts to accelerate reform in the 2000s under Yushchenko attacked the elite and oligarch power base, causing elites to oust the reformer .
Deliberately rejecting those that seek to reform the system for the better indicates a semi-authoritarian structure that is built to safeguard elite interests over the public good . Deliberately rejects those that want to reform system for better .
 The inability to reform the economy quickly to the free market, and increased predatory behavior of the new elite class perpetuated the need to circumvent economic laws, such as paying taxes, as a means to get by .
 Many Ukrainians find ways to avoid paying taxes that then shifts the burden on to lower income citizens . Many Ukrainians, particularly more affluent ones, find ways of avoiding paying taxes .
The economy lacks sufficient tax revenue to run and fund government programs that will provide goods and services to the people . The economy lacks enough tax revenue.
 The government bill drives many Ukrainians underground to a large shadow economy . Also, leaving lower income and less connected Ukrainians to foot the government bill .
 Estimates place the shadow economy at roughly half of Ukraine’s total economy .
 underground economy leaves less revenue for the government to fund critical welfare and infrastructure projects that provide for the public good . Such a large underground economy also leaves less money for the Government to pay for critical welfare projects .
 The entire Ukrainian economy is a vicious cycle of corruption and tax evasion that further perpetuates the shadow economy . The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 macroeconomic policies that are meant to improve the Ukrainian economy continually fail to reach the micro level . Overall, macro economic policies that have been intended to improve Ukraine's economy continue to fail .
 Ukrainian wages consistently remain along the threshold of government stability, but barely . On average, Ukrainian wages continue to rise .
 Periods of hyperinflation have eroded savings and increased the cost of goods and services, forcing the majority of citizen budgets to go to food and energy .
Currently, energy costs are astronomically high, as EU mandated reforms and an effort to eliminate the reliance on Russian gas are raising energy prices . Currently, energy prices are high .
 Ukrainians spend three-quarters of their budget on heating their homes and keeping the lights on . On average, Ukrainians spend 3% of their budgets on heating and keeping lights on.
 Many are leaving little money to pay for civil society groups, donations, education, or savings . Many are simply trying to make ends meet .
 Ukrainians are more concerned about providing for their fa mi lies vice continual engagement with the government . As such, Ukrainians are also more concerned with providing for the fa mi .
 Ukrainians are further disenchanted with their government’s ability to solve their problems . As a result of these economic distortions and shortcomings, Ukrainians are even more disenchant with the government . Ukraine's economy is being distorted by the government, according to experts .
 The strength of democracy in Ukraine, let alone any regime type, remains threatened by economic hardship facing average citizens .
Far from robust, Ukraine remains vulnerable to exploitation by populist and authoritarian overreach . Ukraine is vulnerable to populist overreach that claim to have simple solutions for complex economic problems .
 The system of government has a long history of distortions that support elites and the party in power . The system has a history of distortion that supports elites, the party.
 Institutional shortcomings perpetuate internal battles and power politics that serve elite interests and present opportunities for greater authoritarianism through expanded executive powers .
 Ukraine has a chronic problem of failing to uphold the law, and continues to bend it in elite favor . Corruption and abuses are allowed to flourish, allowing corruption and abuses to flourish .
 Civil society shows some success and promise, but overall remains too weak to challenge day-to-day government consistently .
 The economy continually fails to serve the majority of Ukrainians, and consistently benefits an elite few . The economy continues to fail to serve most Ukrainians .
 This situation prevents government funding for critical projects that benefit all citizens, including welfare programs . The situation prevents the government from funding critical projects such as welfare .
 The economic distortions continue to promote the existence of a large shadow economy . The economic distortion continues to promote a shadow economy.
 While democratic on paper, the government continually fails to uphold the standards and values of a true democracy . The government has been accused of failing to uphold its standards .
 At the same time, full-blown authoritarianism has managed to escape Ukraine . Ukraine has a history of authoritarianism .
 Ultimately, Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state .
 The democratic elements are in constant tension with authoritarian ones. The democratic element is in tension with the authoritarian ones, says one observer .
 Political institutions such as the Rada and the presidency are the legitimate mechanisms for exercising political authority . The Rada is the legitimate mechanism for exercising the power of the presidency .
 Ukraine's institutions have continually failed to follow the law, pass meaningful legislation, and serve for the advancement of the country overall . In true Levitsky and Way fashion, Ukraine’s institutions have repeatedly failed to following the law .
 Weak institutions permit the rise of more authoritarian leaders such as Kuchma and Yanukovych .
 civil society remains in tension with expanding authoritarianism and serves as a mechanism to counter it .
 In the electoral arena, the playing field is deliberately skewed in the elites favor. Separately, in the electoral field, the field is also deliberately skewed .
 Elections do not exist to solely legitimize the party in power, and opposition victories are still possible . But elections do not mean that the party is only in power .
 Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state that negates the prospects of true democracy until a hard break with the status quo occurs . Fitting numerous wickets and practices of hybrid rule, Ukraine has consolidated into an authoritarian state .
 Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2009. o Aslund, Anders, and Michael McFaul .
 The U.S. High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy is a member of the United States.
 In Democracy and Authoritarianism in the Postcommunist World, edited by Valerie Bunce, Michael McFaul, and Kathryn Stoner-Weiss . The book is based on the book "In Democracy andAuthoritarianism In the PostCommunist World"
 Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, Jose Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi are among those who have been named .
 Lessons from Post-Soviet States. Lessons from post-Soviet U.S.