 Ukraine's sovereign state and the constitutionality of the NATO membership course are the domestic affairs of the country .
 The intelligence told about Russia's overthrow of military and powerful weapons to the border with Ukraine .
 EU court rejects Gazprom and Russian state banks in abolishing sanctions . EU court rejected Gazprom, Russia's state banks .
 The EU continued individual sanctions against Russia for another six months . The EU continues individual sanctions on Russia for more than a year .
 United States fighter aircraft intercepted two Russian bombers near Alaska . U.S. military aircraft intercepted the Russian bombers .
 In the United States, it was known that Syria did not lose all the chemical weapons . In the U.S. it wasknown that Syria had not lost all the weapons .
 The Alliance confirms recognition of Ukraine's aspirations to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The alliance confirms that Ukraine wants to join NATO .
 The consolidation in the Constitution of the foreign policy course on joining the Alliance is an internal affair of Ukraine, says the ambassador .
 NATO Deputy Secretary General: "I do not dare to intervene in your discussions" "You are a sovereign state, and for this reason, I do not risk to intervene"
 The Under-Secretary-General of the Alliance said Ukraine should focus on achieving genuine progress in the reform process .
 Russia increases the number of forces of the RF Army near the borders with Ukraine . The RF Army is near the Ukraine border .
 This is reported by the Main Directorate of Intelligence of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine . The report was published by the Department of Intelligence .
 Individual military units were transferred to regular equipment, including Artillery units, which are armed with the RSA Hurricane . In particular, under the guise of participation in the maneuvers of the "East-2018"
Special units are formed to provide covert rotation and strengthen the advanced positions of the Armed Forces . At the same time, expanded military field camps were formed .
Part of the so-called "Recruits" is completed exclusively by representatives of Dagestan and Chechnya . Part of the units of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine.
 At the same time there are formed so-called "Cossack detachments" Some of the detachments have already come under the jurisdiction of 1 AK occupation .
 The command of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation carries out transportation to the border with Ukraine of new batches of weapons, engineering equipment and other assets for the covert transfer .
 The Court of General Jurisdiction of the European Union refused to meet the requirements of Russian state-owned banks, as well as subsidiaries of Gazprom .
 Russian "Sberbank" and "Rosneft" filed a lawsuit in an EU court requesting to recognize the sanctions imposed against them unjustified and cancel them . As it is noted, Russian ""Sber bank" and VTB" are noted, as it
 The declared goal of the disputed acts is to raise the price for Russia's actions, a court decision says . The court says the goal is to support the peaceful settlement of the crisis .
 The Kyiv Court of Appeal froze the actions of Ukrainian subsidiary banks VTB, Prominvestbank and Sberbank to comply with the Hague Arbitration ruling on damages from Crimea .
 Ukraine offers sanctions against 19 Russian companies for the construction of the Kerch Bridge .
 In July, the European Union for six months extended economic sanctions against Russia . The European Union has extended sanctions against the Russian government .
 On June 29, the European Parliament passed a decision to extend sanctions against Russia for the annexation of the Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The European Union imposed sanctions against five individuals through the organization of "elections" in the annexed Crimea . Also, on May 14, 2018, the EU imposed sanctions on five individuals .
 The European Union on Thursday extended sanctions against Russia for six months until March 15, 2019 . The EU has extended the sanctions against the Russian government until March 2015 .
 The information on this decision will now be published in the Official Journal of the EU on September 14, 2018 . The decision will be released in the official Journal of EU on Sept. 14.
 Two F-22 Fighter aircraft of the U.S. Air Force intercepted and accompanied by two Russian strategic Tu-95 bombers .
 This is reported by the Joint Command of the Air Defense of North America . The Joint Command is based in Washington, D.C.
 On May 11, American F-22 fighters intercepted two Russian Tu-95 bombers off the coast of Alaska . The Russian bombers were intercepted by U.S. forces on May 11 .
 Poland does not approve the use of fines against Hungary and will vote against any European Union sanctions against that country . Poland will vote on any EU sanctions against Hungary .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland issued statement on Wednesday, September 12 .
 Poland calls for the abolition of the resolution and the search for a solution to the problem in other ways .
 It is unacceptable and grossly contrary to Russia's obligations regarding Minsk agreements. It's unacceptable, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert says Correspondent is the Correspondent . Censor.NET reports.
 The United States' support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine remains firm, a State Department spokesman says . The U.S. support for Ukraine "remains firm," he says .
 Ukrainian Foreign Ministry says the occupation administration of the Russian Federation to hold so-called "extraordinary elections" in the temporarily occupied territories of the Donbas roughly violate Russia's obligations as a party to the Minsk accords .
 The self-proclaimed "Luhansk People's Republic" declared their readiness to hand over 50 Ukrainian prisoners sentenced to 2014 under the control of the territory . The fighters have declared they will hand over over 50 prisoners to Ukrainian prisoners .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission Tony Frisch visited the occupied territories of the Donbas . This was announced by the coordinator of the OSCE special monitoring mission .
 ORLO will be bigger after an important step by the ORLO is made . But it seems to be that they will be larger after a major step by ORLO .
 "I have confirmed to ORLO that they are ready to move these people, said Frisch . And I have confirmed that they have been hired by the Ukrainian government .
Earlier in the self-called "LNR" they said they were ready to convey 44 convicts to Ukraine . Earlier in theSelf-called ""LNR"" they said.
 Ukrainian ombudsman Lyudmila Denisova said she does not know exactly which convicts are talking about .
 Russia's representatives in the humanitarian subgroup of the Tripartite Contact Group in Minsk refused to discuss the exchange of Russian citizens, prisoners in Ukraine, on Ukrainian political prisoners .
 22 citizens of Russia have appealed to Putin to exchange them for Ukrainians . As you know, already 22 citizens are appealing to Putin for exchange .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko is ready to pardon the Russians convicted in Ukraine for the release of Ukrainian political prisoners . Recall Ukrainian President Poroshenko.
 Russian serviceman Victor Agiev was sentenced to 10 years in prison in Ukraine . He appealed to the Russian president to exchange him for one of the Ukrainian political prisoners .
Gerashchenko named 23 Russians, whom Ukraine is ready to exchange for political prisoners of the Kremlin . Earlier Gerashchenko name 23 Russians .
 Ukraine is ready to transfer Russia with 13 more convicted persons with dual citizenship . Earlier, Ukraine agreed to release 23 political prisoners in order to release political prisoners .
 Kiev is ready to give Russia 36 people in exchange for 23 Ukrainians . The deal is expected to be completed in the coming days .
 Oleg Sentsov, the director, is in the list whom Ukraine expects to exchange . Ukraine expects the exchange.
 The Kremlin commented on the possibility of exchanging Sentsov and other Ukrainians on Russians convicted in Ukraine .
 In April 2018 Gerashchenko claimed that Moscow was delaying the process of liberating Ukrainians from Russian prisons . In April 2014 Gerashenko claimed that Russia was delaying freeing Ukrainians from prisons .
 In Russia and in annexed Crimea, there are 64 Ukrainian political prisoners, 27 of whom are in Russia . It should be noted that in Russia and the annexed Crimea.
 Some graves do not even have a name or a surname only the number . A video shows the place of mass burial of Russians .
 Voice over the air reports that in the Rostov region suddenly appeared about a thousand graves . The Rostov area is in the Russian capital of Russia .
 Kolpino a city in Russia, an inner-city municipality within the Kolpinsky district of the city of St. Petersburg . The city is a city of federal significance.
Social networks published photos of the tomb of Russian militant Dmitry Vorotin . Vorotin died in the spring of 2017 in battles on the line of collision in the Donbas .
 The Barack Obama administration knew that the Syrian government did not get rid of all the chemical weapons stockpiles . The Obama administration did not know that the Syria government had no chemical weapons .
 John Kerry declared former U.S. secretary of state John Kerry on Fox News' air . John Kerry was the former Secretary of State of State .
 Kerry agreed with the policies of the incumbent president, Donald Trump, that the use of force against Syria was acceptable . But he complained about the lack of diplomatic efforts .
Without Iran, Russia and other countries, settlement in Syria is impossible. According to him, without the involvement of Iran and Russia, settlement is impossible .
 The United States and allies intend to respond quickly in the case of chemical weapons, the White House says . The U.S. and allies say they will respond quickly if Syria uses chemical weapons .
 The ambassador of Russia to the U.S. warned the State Department that militants are preparing provocations in Idlib . The State Department is preparing to blame Syrian authorities for using chemical weapons .