Putin’s rationale for Ukraine invasion gets the history wrong. Retropolis.
 The 1,031st anniversary of Christianization of Rus-Ukraine was held in Kyiv in 2019 .
 Putin was connecting a 10th-century ruler of a country called Rus, whom Russians call Vladimir the Great, with present-day Russia’s leader, Vladimir Putin .
 Shevkunov, who is close to Putin, was legitimating Putin’s rule with a gesture at eternity .
 Putin’s return to the presidency in 2012, he endorsed this understanding of his role as president . Putin's return to Russia in 2012 was his first time in the presidency .
In a 2012 address to the Russian Parliament, Putin suggested that he was fulfilling an eternal cycle initiated by Vladimir .
 Russians have no need to think of any other leader. Within such a logic, Russian leaders can't think of other leaders .
 Putin has repeatedly invoked his namesake, who ruled from Kyiv, to claim some essential unity between Russia and Ukraine . A central problem of Russian politics is pushed to the side .
 Putin claimed in July 2013 that God wanted the two countries to be together . He said that their union was based upon “the authority of the Lord,” unalterable by an earthly force .
Putin's attack on Ukraine echoes Hitler’s takeover of Czechoslovakia . He made the same claim in secular terms in September . He said Ukraine was part of the Russian body .
 Ukraine was supposed to sign an association agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . Ukraine was expected to sign a deal with the EU two months later .
 Putin tried to halt that process by applying pressure to the Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych’s change of mind led to broad protests, and the attempt to suppress the ‘Euromaidan’ only made it stronger . But Yanukovych”s change.
 Yanukovych fled to Russia two days after a mass shooting on Feb. 2014 . By then, Russian troops were already on the move .
 Putin said Crimea had to be part of Russia because Vladimir was baptized there . Putin said that Crimea had been part of the Russian republic .
 There are countless lines between the past and present, not just one . The actual history is different and much more interesting .
 Vladimir is a much later Russian transliteration of Valdemar, a Scandinavian name . Vladimir is also known as Vladimir, a Russian name .
 Valdemar descended from a group of Viking slave traders called the Rus . The Rus had established a trade route that ran through Kyiv down the Dnieper River . Valdemars descended from the Rus, who had established the trade route .
 Valdemar's life suggests a more elemental truth about politics. But his doing so did not create modern nations .
 There will be no democratic election during his lifetime to settle the issue. What Russians do know is that there will not be a democratic election .
Ukraine is different. And so Putin strives for eternal glory through a war grounded in myth .
 There, presidents lose elections and depart — something that has never happened in Russia . There, President Vladimir Putin has never been such a thing in Russia.
 Ukraine’s current president, Volodymyr Zelensky, defeated a sitting president in 2019 . Ukraine's current president was elected in 2013 .
 Putin's justification of power, eternal rule sanctified by God, makes Ukrainian democracy doubly intolerable, both as Ukraine and as democracy . Putin's justifying of power makes Ukraine, Ukraine and the Ukraine, as Ukraine, a democracy, more intolerable .
If we consider what we know of Valdemar’s actual history, we see the problems that arise in the absence of a succession principle . Thus the grand cyclical mission of one Vladimir to save a Russia created by another.
Valdemar made for Scandinavia to seek military assistance against his brothers . Valdemar's brothers also staked a claim against his brother .
 Valdemar had imprisoned his son Sviatopulk and was marching against his son Yaroslav . He died in 1015, aged 1015 .
After Valdemar’s death, Sviatopulk killed three of his brothers, only to be defeated by his brother Yaroslav .
 Sviatopulk then brought in the Polish king and a Polish army to defeat his brother . Sviatoopulk was brought in by the king and the Polish army .
 Yaroslav recruited an army of Pechenegs, who had killed his grandfather and drunk from his skull . For his part, Yaroslav enlisted an army.
 The succession from Valdemar to Yaroslav took 17 years and was only complete when 10 of Valdemars' other sons were dead . With their aid, he defeated Sviatopulk, who fell in battle .
For the next two centuries, with some brief intervals, it was more of the same . For the next 2 centuries, the same happened for some brief periods .
 Mongols are blamed for the collapse of Rus but the realm was divided long before the Mongols dealt the final blow in 1241 .
 Russia’s attack on Ukraine is unfolding on the ground . Russia's history is one that might trouble Russians today .
 Volodymyr Zelensky's Ukraine passes this test; Vladimir Putin's Russia does not . Shevkunov spoke of the two Vladimirs and of "God's will" just after he and Putin had visited the grave of 20th-century philosopher Ivan Ilyin .
 A few years earlier, Putin had overseen the reinterment of Ilyin’s remains . The reinterments were overseen by Putin .
 He wished for a savior from beyond history, who would unite the nation with violence . He wished to unite the country with violence.
 In Russia he imagined, elections would have no meaning, and leadership would depend on charisma . In Russia, he said, elections had no meaning and would depend upon charisma .
 Shevkunov, who is close to Putin, was legitimating Putin’s rule with a gesture at eternity . He spoke those words in 2009 in the interregnum between his presidencies .
In a 2012 address to the Russian Parliament, Putin suggested that he was fulfilling an eternal cycle initiated by Vladimir Putin .
Since then, Putin has repeatedly invoked his namesake, who ruled from Kyiv, to claim some essential unity between Russia and Ukraine . Since then, he has repeatedly invoke his namesake.
Ukraine was supposed to sign an association agreement with the European Union two months later . Ukraine was due to sign the agreement in November 2013 .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia two days after a mass shooting on Feb., 2014 . Russian troops were already on the move .
 Putin said Crimea had to be part of Russia because Vladimir was baptized there . Putin said he was baptized in Crimea .
 This baptism more than a thousand years ago “predetermined the overall basis of the culture, civilization, and human values that unite the peoples of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.”’s baptism ‘predicted the overall base of the society, culture,
 "There are countless lines between the past and present, not just one" "The actual history is different and much more interesting"
 Valdemar's life suggests a more elemental truth about politics, says the author . He says he did not create modern nations but let alone any sort of union among them .
 "Ukraine is different. And so Putin strives for eternal glory through a war grounded in myth," says Putin .
 Ukraine’s current president defeated a sitting president in 2019 . Ukraine's current president,\u003c/u003e \u003b/b-b-a-u003makes, defeated a Sitting president in 2018 .
When he died in 1015, Valdemar had imprisoned his son Sviatopulk and was marching against his son Yaroslav . To win Kyiv, he made for Scandinavia to seek military assistance against his brothers .
 The succession from Valdemar to Yaroslav took 17 years, and was only complete when 10 of the other sons were dead . With their aid, he defeated Sviatopulk, who fell in battle .
 Volodymyr Zelensky's Ukraine passes this test; Vladimir Putin’s Russia does not .
 Putin’s self-appointed role as political messiah refers to his namesake of a millennium ago . But its real sources appear to lie much nearer, according to Snyder . Snyder is author of a half-dozen books on Russia and Ukraine .