 Close to 140,000 people from eastern Ukraine have been displaced, another 16,000 from Crimea . The Ukraine Crisis Need for international assistance is not required Low Moderate Moderate Significant Urgent assistance .
 Human rights abuses continue to be observed, including abductions, torture/ill-treatment, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies . Treatment of wounded and treatment of wounded are also observed .
 Security issues hamper health services and access to health care in the  Insecurity and fighting limit access. Humanitarian constraints hamper the health care of the world .
 The drinking water supply situation heightens the risk of water-borne diseases . There is a risk of increased numbers of Tuberculosis incidences, says the BBC .
40 people were killed in clashes between pro and anti-government activists in Odessa, Ukraine .
Anti-government protests followed in which people expressed their dissatisfaction with corruption, poverty and social Voter turnout in the country .
 In mid-February 2014, more than 80 people were killed in Kiev within several days . More than 80 were killed within a few days, according to reports .
 The Ukrainian Parliament voted to remove Yanukovych and to hold new elections in May 2014 . The Ukrainian parliament voted to oust Yanukovych and hold a new election .
 Crimea joined the Russian Federation and Crimea effectively becoming absorbed into the Russian territory . A referendum in Crimea was held on 16 March 2014 on whether the region should officially join Russia .
 The referendum was declared illegal by Ukraine, the European Union and the U.S. The EU and the United States declared it illegal .
 Russia seized all military bases in Crimea and Ukrainian forces were ordered to leave Crimea by the acting Ukrainian president . By late March, Russia seized the Crimea military bases .
Ukrainian army launched an ""anti-terrorist operation" to oust separatists who occupied Donetsk airport .
 At least 40 separatists were killed during fighting in Ukraine . An agreement to ease the situation in Ukraine was reached in Geneva on 17 killed in fighting .
 Tensions between Ukraine and Russian Federation continued to increase when and the United States. April 2014 between representatives from Ukraine, Russia, and the U.S.
 Gazprom cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine in Ukraine in April 2014 during the Easter mid-June . Ukraine missed a Russian-imposed deadline to pay a 2 billion truce .
 In April, seven OSCE military observers were detained by proUSD instalment for past gas deliveries . In late April, 7 were detained.
 On 27 June, the EU signed an association agreement with Ukraine, along with that went missing in May . Another team was released a month later .
 Tensions escalated further with protests rising in Slovyansk and Mariupol and both economically and politically . Ukrainian forces strengthening their so-called anti-terrorism operations with Ukrainian forces .
 Fighting in the following weeks concentrated on the densely populated urban centres of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 At the end of July, the European Union and the United States announced further sanctions against Russia . The sanctions are targeting its energy, banking and defence sectors, including energy and banking .
 Continued fighting and lack of public transport limit the possibility for civilians from contested cities to seek refuge in other areas .
 Shortages of medical supplies and limited health services have been observed . Medical supplies have been found to be out of service .
 Fresh food supply is limited in some of the contested cities in eastern Ukraine . Fresh food supplies are limited in many of the cities in Ukraine .
 The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine deteriorated as a consequence of the continued unstable and violent situation, and insecurity prevails . The situation has been described as "unstable and violent" and "insecure"
 By 13 August, a total number of 155,800 had been displaced in Ukraine .
 Close to 140,000 IDPs from eastern Ukraine registered for some form of assistance with government or local NGOs in Ukraine .
 Almost 65,000 of them are located in Kharkiv and Donetsk oblasts, and more than 18,000 in Kiev . More than 17,000 are in Kiev, more than 50,000 more in Donetsk .
 In eastern Ukraine, freedom of expression is under particular attack through the corridor . Some 3,000 people left Luhansk through such a corridor during fighting in August .
 Some 5,000 people have left Slovyansk using humanitarian corridors that were detentions . In some cases torture and murder of journalists have been established .
 All schools and orphanages under the control of armed groups in Slavyansk city had been closed by the authorities .
UNICEF Field Monitors reported that in Slovyansk the schools were experiencing low attendance of pupils because parents have use of landmines that have allegedly led to three deaths and left several people security concerns .
 Children kept away from school in some city due to fears of mines planted in fields centres . The crop harvest began in late June.
 In April, Ukraine’s Parliament adopted a law that defines Crimea as temporarily facilities and 7 kindergartens have been reported damaged . The law regulates entry and exit of Crimean citizens from UNICEF .
 Ukrainian citizens can move freely between Crimea and mainland . Protection only required to hold an identity document was adopted in May .
 As of 13 August, at least 2,119 people had been killed in eastern Ukraine . Residents from Crimea will not be penalised for engaging in everyday activities .
 Ukraine has accused Russian forces of laying antipersonnel mines in Crimea, but has not been able to identify the types or provide photographic or other evidence . Armed groups have increasingly committed human rights abuses, including tangible evidence .
 Russia has denied use of antipersonnel mines, indicating abductions, torture/ill-treatment, unlawful detentions and killings . Only trip-flares have been used . seizure and occupation of public buildings .
 Abductions have taken place across Crimea, in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . In Crimea, harassment and discrimination has reportedly intensified against eastern Ukraine .
 An average estimate of 260,000 Roma live in Ukraine . There are indications that Tuberculosis may increase due to the risk of treatment .
 Hate crimes against interruption, lack of access to health services or inadequate treatment have raised concern . Roma have been reported frequently over the last years .
 Children experience anxiety, stress, stress and loss of concentration, anger and aggression families have been subject to armed robberies by gunmen in the eastern city of Roma . In April 2014, houses of Roma  children experience anxiety and stress .
 Incidents of violence against Roma have been children in Donetsk oblast . About half of all children aged 7-18 have reported from other cities .
 More than 5,000 people have been confirmed wounded through 2014/07/03, IWPR, 2014/08/11 . The conflict is the highest level of people that remain Health in the areas affected by unrest .
 The number of people injured in the conflict is likely to be higher . Price increases of agricultural products may affect the ability of households to buy food at affordable prices .
 Domestic prices of emergency and primary health care capacities in Donbas have deteriorated due wheat products in June . In June, wheat products were at record levels, after sharp to the fighting .
 wholesale prices of maize have surged electricity and water supply, lack of pharmaceuticals, consumables and human since the beginning of the year and reached all time highs in June .
 Slovyansk, Semyonovka and Krasny Liman that killed at least two medical staff in Donetsk city . In Donetsk city, the continuing conflict is causing difficulties in supply for some . supermarkets .
 The number of tourists visiting Crimea between January 1 and June 30 has decreased by almost one-third compared to the same period last year .
 In mid-August, a total of 35,070 IDPs were accommodated in 1,648 collective lost almost 40% of its value by August . The Ukrainian currency hryvnia has experienced further depreciation .
 schools that will have to be vacated for the start of the year . New school year begins on 1 September .
 The unrest in Ukraine has not had a significant impact on spring sowing and total hotels . Other IDPs are staying in privately owned spaces, such as sanatoriums or Sanatoriums .
 In mid-June, hundreds of displaced people from Slovyansk were reported in the spring-crop area .
 In mid-July, FAO GIEWS reported that harvesting of winter to have found shelter in old recreational compounds and a monastery in the cereals .
Crop to be between 55 and 59 million tonnes, down from an all-time-high harvest in 2013 . 95% of IDPs in the Lviv region reportedly stay with relatives or in private .
 Kirovska substation in Kamennobrodskyi region was damaged by the conflict . In spite of the conflict, export  was fulfilled .
 In the new 2014/15 marketing year, Luhansk city was without electricity and hydraulic power stations stopped total cereal exports . The city was also without water supplies .
Luhansk has reportedly been without power since for 80% of Crimea's freshwater supply . Luhansk is reportedly without power for more than a quarter of its freshwater supply.
 No rice was cultivated, corn planted for the beginning of August . feed was sharply curtailed and crops like wheat and barley were stunted . No rice or corn was cultivated .
 Water supply in eastern Ukraine is hampered by destruction of or damage to Information Gaps water facilities .
Slavyansk in the beginning of June and halted the water supply through the 130many school-going children have been displaced . There is an information gap on how Slavyansk has been affected .
 The ensuing shut-off of mains supplies left several parts of their end of year exams . The ensuingshut-off left several part of their exams.
 Water infrastructure has been damaged during fighting and the lack of Dokuchaevsk and Selidovo, and parts of Konstantinovka .
 Water constraints have caused pumping stations in some areas to stop working . Some areas have been affected by water constraints .
 Access to and supply of potable drinking water is limited in Donetsk city due to services, medical supplies and vaccination campaigns require monitoring .
 Food supply, food shortages and the effect of the crisis on livelihoods are the beginning of August to be monitored .
 The need for shelter repair of returnees and for NFIs needs to be established . Distribution of native languages in Ukraine should be established, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Further information on actual IDP numbers and shelter and NFI needs is necessary .
 Monitoring of human rights violations in eastern Ukraine and Crimea and treatment of minority groups is also necessary . Monitoring of Human Rights violations is also needed in Ukraine and Ukraine .
 A number of incidents continued to occur between April and July in the region, especially in Slovyyansk, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Heavy fighting took place in Donetsk, Slovyansk and Kramatorsk after an agreed ceasefire .
 Slovyansk was retaken by government forces on 6 July, easing the burden on the population that had remained in the city .
 The majority of people living in Crimea are of Russian origin . Since the Ukrainian independence, the Ukrainians and the Crimean Tatars have identified most closely with the Ukrainian population of about 280,000 ( FT, Crimea)
 In his inaugural speech, Poroshenko declared that the country would not give land use rights. up Crimea .
 The Ukrainian government also announced the out of their homes for fear they would be attacked by pro-Russian groups .
Safety and access to rights of Crimean Tatars have remained . Safety and access of rights of Crimea Tatars remain .
 President Putin declared after the referendum that the interests of all of Crimea's Relevant Stakeholders in Ukraine ethnic groups would be respected . Russia’s 8 ACAPS Briefing Note.
 The party professes to defend and uphold the rights of ethnic Russians and Human rights concerns . The party is concerned about the total lack of public debate in Ukraine .
 After Yanukovych’s escape, the exclusion of Crimean Tatars from the drafting process was raised . The exclusion was raised after Yanukovych's escape .
 Mykhailo Dobkin came sixth with 3% of Russian citizenship . The party’s also remain regarding citizenship issues .
 The party is currently led by Borys Kolesnikov (ECFR, 2014/04/07, Aljazeera, property and land rights, access to healthcare and enjoyment of other civil and other civil rights . Political rights guaranteed.
 The party runs a pro-European and the referendum in Crimea is pointed out by the U.N. High anticorruption platform . The party has been criticised by the United Nations .
 Klitschko was vocal during the protests in Kiev and Commissioner for Human Rights in May . He was vocal at the protests.
 In mid-May, the house of the Crimean helped arrange a deal with parliament to hold presidential elections in May 2014 .
 Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev, barred by Russia from entering Russia, was searched by police . Klitschko withdrew his bid for president in Ukraine and instead Federation and his native Crimea .
 Klitschko had declared his support for the independent candidate, Petro July, Refat Chubarov . The current leader of the Crimean Tatar Meijlis was Poroshenko, a billionaire who leads the Solidarity party .
 The Russian military party advocates for European values . Crimea was one of the parties most active in had its Black Sea Fleet base in Crimea with the fleet headquarters .
 Yulia Tymoshenko infantry brigade headquarters located in Sevastopol . In the presidential elections in May 2014, YuliaTymoshenko won the presidential election .
 Russian won 12,8% of the votes and came second after Petro Poroshenko . There were also Russian won 10% of votes .
 The party's coastal missile regiments and active bases in Crimea, including air bases . The party is based in Crimea and Crimea .
 At the end of July, he the annexation of Crimea, he had been leased by Russia . The port at Sevastopol had been in Crimea since July .
 Russian military seized all Ukrainian military bases in Crimea in March . Ukraine ordered its troops to withdraw from the peninsula .
 The party is allied with euro-sceptic far-right parties within the party . Access to Crimea from Ukraine from Ukraine for supplies is constrained .
 Svoboda is frequently from mainland Ukraine experiences many border checks established by the accused of anti-Semitism, which it denies . It denies the allegations .
 Svoboda's support base is in western Crimean authorities and long delays at the ferry crossing in Kerch . The ferry crossing is in west Crimea .
 In the east and south of onwards, international shipping is prohibited from entering the ports of Ukraine . The party is widely seen as extremist and is seen as extreme .
 The Right Sector is a radical nationalist opposition group . It announced cuts to its budget for social issues, healthcare, and agriculture in behind the violent protests in Kiev .
 According to a Right Sector leader, the order to support the armed forces is to support armed forces .
 In July, a 1.5% war tax was announced by organisation was set up in late November 2013 and includes several small ultrathe government in order to fund the military actions .
 The Right Sector has been accused by Russia of being involved in anticrises in recent years . Mr Scenarios Yarosh has announced that the Sector's paramilitary unit will not be disbanded .
 Russia's recent actions in Crimea follow a pattern similar to that of its interventions in other parts of the former Soviet space .
 The 11 March referendum on organisation of ethnic Russian or pro-Russia social and political groups was held by the self-proclaimed ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ movements . The referendum was held on 11 March .
 The Transdniestria region in Moldova unilaterally declared independence in 1990 . Moldova declared independence from recognised presence of citizens of the Russian Federation .
 The region with a population of half a million held a referendum Chechnya and other republics of the North Caucasus . 98% of voters opted for joining Russia in 2006 .
 The region is to a large extent effectively under Russian control . Full annexation has not . happened .
 The Chechen separatist group allegedly bears the same name as a likely when transferred to the Ukraine situation . It is not expected to have a strong Chechen unit sponsored by the Russian military intelligence service, GRU .
 In the Georgian region of South Ossetia, tensions between Tbilisi and Moscow 845,000 troops are high . Tensions between the two nations are high in the region of Georgia .
 At the end of July an estimated 35,000 were in the area of the war in 2008 . The war ended in a five-day war in July .
 Ukraine’s armed forces continue to operate mainly Soviet-era and another separatist territory, Abkhazia, as independent countries and equipment are needed .
 Russian services have been inadequately protectorates. They function as Russian been around 1% of GDP in recent years . They have been inadequate to protect the country's economy .
 This historical event was considered relevant for consideration in financed and defence reforms . Defence reforms have been significantly under-funded . The event is considered relevant to consideration in financing and defence reform .
 Ukrainian forces are considered better-trained than Russians, have been engaged over the last decade in international peacekeeping missions . Russia’s President Putin asserted close contacts with western counterparts .
 In May 2014, Ukraine's claim to New Russia, an area of Ukraine that used to be part of the Russian 10 ACAPS Briefing Note empire, is shown in the map below . The area was part of Russia’s claim to the New Russia.
 The New Russia Low High claim referring specifically to Ukrainian territory has been considered as relevant in Affected Population Probability level X the scenario formulation . The claim refers specifically to Ukraine, which is considered relevant in affected population levels .
 Population movements into neighbouring countries continue. Social tensions between host communities and displaced people arise . Lack of access to medical facilities and food, electricity and clean water for civilians .
 Insecurity, targeted attacks and increased violence limit access, according to reports .
 Ethnic repressions in Crimea associated with forced displacement and two and activist groups . Check points complicate access to the region .
 Protection, Cash, Food, Livelihoods, Shelter and NFI, Education, Priority needs Health . Priority needs health.
 Insecurity, bureaucratic obstacles imposed by Russians, targeted attacks and increased violence limit access . Access dependent on ceasefire agreements monitored by international observers . Check points, restriction of access to aid.