 The conflict in Ukraine has resulted in the deaths of roughly 10,000 people, including 3,000 civilians, and displaced roughly 1. million people . The conflict has also displaced about 1.m.
 The Pentagon on Friday announced it's giving $200 million to Ukraine to bolster its defenses . Ukraine's conflict with pro-Russian separatists rages on .
 President Donald Trump continues to face backlash over a recent meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 President Donald Trump continues to defend his relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin . The two world leaders met in Helsinki earlier this week .
 The U.S. has given more than $1 billion to Ukraine since conflict broke out there following the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 .
 The Trump administration also said discussions are "underway" to host Putin in Washington this fall . The visit could occur close to the 2018 midterms .
 The United States intelligence community concluded Russia interfered in the 2016 U.S. presidential election under Putin's guidance . The Kremlin is also planning attacks on future United States elections including the midterms .
 Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats appeared to be shocked on Thursday when he learned Putin was being invited by the Trump administration to the nation's capital . Coats spent much of the week reiterating warnings about Russia's dubious intentions regarding the United States electoral process .
 Trump has long signified a desire to have a strong relationship with Putin . His administration has maintained support for Ukraine in its fight against Russian-leaning separatists in the Donbass region .
 The U.S. government in recent months delivered Javelin anti-tank missiles to the Ukraine . The move met with resounding approval by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko .
 Defense Secretary James Mattis has maintained a hawkish stance on Russia . He urged Congress to waive sanctions on allies who purchase Russian arms over an apparent concern it could push these countries into the Kremlin's arms .