 In simple terms, self-determination denotes the legal right of a people to decide their own destiny in the international order .
 What this actually means in practice continues to be a contentious issue amongst international lawyers. What this really means is in practice in practice.
Lack of a consistent interpretation of the right to self-determination by states has led to confusion about its application within the realm of international law . This article will explore how lack of a consistency interpretation of right toSelf-determination is leading to confusion .
Referenda held in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk in March and May 2014 are the latest instances where self-determination has been controversially invoked . Referenda has been held in the Crimea and Donetsk since March 2014 .
 This article will discuss the notion of selfdetermination, its history, and how it has been applied and interpreted over the years by states and international community .
 It will examine the events in Eastern Ukraine and assess what impact they have had on the law of self-determination . It will then examine what impact the events have had.
 To whom the right applies and in what context it can be invoked, are issues which remain highly debated and still unresolved . To whom right applies, in whatcontext it can't be invoked is the right .
 Such indeterminacy has raised serious questions in a number of situations . The right to self-determination has been proclaimed in many cases .
 As a concept, it is of a potentially radical and subversive nature . It is capable of undermining the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a state .
International law has approached the concept in a cautious and restrained manner . It is for this reason that international law is not willing to commit itself to a particular stance .
 It will examine the events of 2014 in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk . It will then assess what impact they have had on the law of self-determination .
 The current law of self-determination needs a clearer and more consistent approach to avoid posing a serious threat to the stability of the existing state system . It will then conclude by stating that the current law is needed to be clearer and consistent .
 Historical background and development of the right to self-determination International law was slow to recognise the juridical signiﬁcance ofSelf-determination. International law .
 Woodrow Wilson was one of the ﬁrst proponents of the theory of self-determination . Wilson was also a proponent of the idea of selfdetermination .
 He described self-determination as ‘an imperative principle of action’ and was adamant it should play an integral role in the League of Nations .
 Wilson’s proposed articulation of a League of Nations Covenant provision on self-determination was considered and redrafted a number of times at the Paris Peace Conference . Wilson's proposal was redrafted at the Peace Conference in Paris .
 The term was ultimately excluded altogether due to inconsistencies as to its interpretation . It was excluded altogether because of inconsistencies .
 The issue of self-determination reappeared during World War II when the United States and the United Kingdom declared it one of the goals to be achieved and to be put into practice .
 Roosevelt and Churchill contained provisions which stated that self-determination governed territorial changes as well as the principle concerning free choice of rulers in every sovereign state .
 Churchill adopted a narrow interpretation of the principle by emphasising that it only applied to European states affected by the Nazi invasion .
 Inclusion of the principle of self-determination in Article 1 of the UN Charter initiated its climb in prestige in international law .
 The Purposes of the United Nations are: To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples .
 Some considered it dangerous to place self-determination as a basis for friendly relations between nations as it would allow for inadmissible interventions . Others considered it would be dangerous to put self- determination on a basis.
 Others feared it would bring about civil strife and encourage secessionist movements . Others feared that it would encourage civil strife .
 The committee responsible for the drafting of the provision ultimately interpreted self-determination as a principle of universal application which allowed for free and genuine expression of the will of the people .
 The Charter did little to clarify what self-determination actually meant . In spite of its newly elevated status, the Charter did not clarify what it meant .
 The Charter mentions self-determination of peoples in only one other place – Article 55 – ‘as a condition for peaceful and friendly relations’
 The anti-colonialist movement at the Bandung Conference in 1955. Its emphasis shifted from peaceful relations among sovereign states to independence from colonial rule .
 Socialist countries were soon joined by Third World countries who were the most active proponents of anti-colonial self-determination .
 The emphasis was now placed on the right to external self-determination . It insisted on people having right to choose their international status .
 Various UN General Assembly Resolutions, including the 1970 Declaration on Friendly Relations, served as a legitimising force for the emergent predominance of the external dimension of self-determination .
 Western states were initially opposed to this new formulation of the concept . Western states initially opposed the new concept of the idea .
 The principle of self-determination ought to be interpreted as the right of peoples of every state to freely choose a government which meets their needs and aspirations . It was only when countries started making progress in their battle against colonialism that Western states took up the challenge .
 Inclusion of the principle of self-determination in the UN Covenants for Civil and Political Rights and Economic, Social, Social and Cultural Rights 1966 provoked further debate .
 Those opposed to its inclusion put forward various reasons for their argument, such as the insistence that self-determination was a political principle and not a legal right .
 The principle was argued to be too ill-deﬁned and vague to be included in an international treaty . It was asserted that because self-determination is a collective principle, it could not be included into a treaty that dealt with individual rights .
 The principle of self-determination can be found in Article 1 of both covenants . The principle is found in both Covenants .
By virtue of that right they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development . By virtue of the right they can freely determine political status .
 Exactly who the intended beneﬁciaries of this right are, is not explicitly stated .
 The notion of a 'people' has depended mainly on the context in which the right to self-determination has been invoked . It has included former colonised peoples, citizens from a given state and self-identifying groups .
 The territorial approach looks at all persons within a deﬁned territory and identi ﬁes them as a people .
 It was used during the decolonisation era and was based on the principle of uti possidetis . It meant colonies would become independent on the basis of established colonial boundaries .
 Self-determination was granted to people on the basis of the territorial unit they belonged to . People were granted the right to self-determination .
 The term 'people' with 'nation' fails to take into account the reality that several peoples can exist within the boundaries of a given territory . This approach has been criticised for being too restrictive .
 The characteristics approach on the other hand identiﬁes a people by the common characteristics of its members . The characteristics of a person are similar to the characteristics of their members .
 The group as a whole must have the will to be identiﬁed as a people or the consciousness of being a people . The group may have institutions or other means of expressing its common characteristics .
 The characteristics approach is frequently used by academics as a template for the deﬁnition of a people for the purposes of self-determination .
 It too has been criticised on the basis that deﬁning a ‘people’ based on ethnicity could be destabilising to multi-ethnic states .
 peoples who have qualiﬁed as a group under these terms have been granted the right to internal self-determination rather than a right to secession . For the most part, for the most parts, they have been given the right.
 What people achieve through self-determination is unclear and remains contested in international law . Precisely what people achieve is unclear.
 The right to secession has been strongly disfavoured under international law . It is to protect the territorial integrity and political unity of existing states .
 Exceptions to this rule have traditionally applied to people under colonial domination or some kind of oppression . Exceptions have traditionally been applied to those under colonial control or under oppression .
 More recently the right to secede from a state has also been granted in situations where a people have been denied civil and political rights and subject to serious human rights abuses .
 Various attempts at widening the limited list of the no-secession rule have been made by minorities and territorial sub-units . However they have been largely unsuccessful .
 Critics say recognising a general right to secession undermines state sovereignty . Critics say it could potentially lead to global chaos caused by micro-states and a continuous redrawing of boundaries .
 International political and legal bodies have generally remained neutral on the issue of self-determination . The issue has been debated for decades .
 The Human Rights Committee acknowledges the realisation of self-determination is an essential condition for the effective guarantee and observance of individual human rights . The committee states that it is up to individual member states to decide how the principle is to be implemented .
 The committee observes that very little information is provided by member states on self-determination . Many just choose to ignore the concept altogether in their reports .
 The Human Rights Committee has also had the opportunity to provide further clariﬁcation on the right to self-determination through a number of communications submitted to it by people alleging a breach of said right .
 In its submission, the Human Rights Committee took a restrictive textual approach of interpretation .
 An individual cannot claim a violation of his/her right to self-determination and therefore cannot bring the matter before the committee . Since Article 1 deals with a right conferred on ‘peoples’, an individual cannot sue .
 The Human Rights Committee has submitted similar communications to it . An analogous approach has been taken by the Human rights Committee .
 The International Court of Justice has dealt with a number of cases concerning self-determination through the years . It has recognised the concept as an essential principle of contemporary international law .
 The Human Rights Committee has avoided making any ofﬁcial pronouncement as to the content’s scope or content .
 In 2004 and 2010 the General Assembly asked the ICJ to address this issue in two separate circumstances . The ﬁrst was in relation to the legal consequences of the construction of a wall in occupied Palestinian territory31 and the second was in the accordance of international law of the unilateral
 The ICJ's opinion regarding the Israeli Wall reafﬁrmed the existence of ‘a Palestinian people’ and declared the wall’s construction a breach of the Palestinian people's right to self-determination .
 It provided no clariﬁcation as to the meaning of selfdetermination . Unfortunately, it provided noClari ﬁcation as to its status as an essential principle of international law .
 The Kosovo case was distinct from other cases addressed by the court as it concerned the people of a special status territory declaring independence from the parent state . Kosovo is a special territory that has been declared independence by the Kosovo court .
 The issue before the court was whether secession as part of the law of self-determination could apply to non-colonial situations . The court heard the case in a hearing on Tuesday .
 The international law of self-determination confers upon part of the population of an existing State a right to separate from that State . The court noted that there were sharp disagreements as to whether outside the context of non-self-governing territories and peoples subject to alien subjugation, domination
 The court declined to ﬁnd a solution to the issue, stating that it was unnecessary to do so in order to resolve the question posed to it by the General Assembly . Kosovo's declaration of independence was in accordance with international law .
 Kosovo’s declaration of independence did not violate international law, the court found . The court ultimately found that Kosovo's declaration ofindependence did not breach international law .
 ICJ's decision was viewed by many as a missed opportunity to elaborate further on the principle of self-determination .
 ICJ implicitly indicated that the right to self-determination does not extend to secession, due to the lack of any extensive and uniform juris supporting such a right .
 The ICJ ultimately avoided dealing with the matter of secession by narrowly interpreting the question posed by the General Assembly .
 The ‘dilemma’ of self-determination has been addressed and interpreted by other national and international legal bodies over the years .
 The commission emphasised that peoples are given the right to internal self-determination within a state, but not theright to secede from it . It emphasised the principle of territorial integrity .
 The commission perceived this to be a breakdown of federal power sharing rather that an issue of selfdetermination . In relation to the dissolution of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the commission saw this as an issue.
 The Canadian Supreme Court in the Secession of Quebec case emphasised that the right of a people to self-determination was expected to be exercised within the framework of existing states in order to prevent threats to a state's territorial integrity .
 Both bodies say the possibility of unilateral secession can only be entertained in extreme circumstances where serious human rights violations have been committed by the state against the people in question .
 Contemporary international law is still very much in line with the above interpretation of self-determination, with a strong emphasis on the importance of territorial sovereignty .
 The right to self-determination leading to independence has been greatly restricted . Excluding instances of decolonisation or where a people is threatened with persecution by the parent state .
Self-determination has generally been conceived of in terms of the right of peoples to political participation or the right to self-government within the existing boundaries of a country .
 A number of academics have linked this aspect of self-determination to the theory of democratic entitlement in international law .
44 Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008 has been singled out as a case sui generis . Franck perceived the common Article 1 of the two international covenants as entitling ‘peoples in all states to free, fair and open participation in the
 Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk declared themselves independent from Ukraine in 2014 . In 2014, the regions of Crimea and Donetsk declared themselvesindependent from Ukraine .
 referenda sought to legitimise the regions’ intention to secede from the mainland territory . This development came about following the outcome of referenda .
 Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk had exercised their right to self-determination, a right conferred on them by international law . In each instance, there was a declaration to the effect that the peoples of Crimea and Donetsk had exercised the right toSelf-determination .
 Both referendums and their outcomes were declared illegal and in breach of international norms and principles by the international community . The international community declared both referendum and outcomes illegal .
 Russia did ask for the outcome of the Crimean referendum to be respected . Russia said the case of Kosovo had set a precedent which allowed Crimea to secede from Ukraine . Russia also asked for the result of the referenda to berespected .
 The next section of this article will provide a context for an examination of the 2014 referenda and their outcomes to consider whether they were valid instances of self-determination by way of secession .
 Crimea has been fought over by various outside forces through the centuries . Due to its strategically important location on the Black Sea.
 In 1954, the then Soviet Leader, Nikita Khrushchev ‘gifted’ Crimea to Ukraine . The then Soviet leader, then Soviet President, was in charge of Ukraine .
 The transfer was supposedly made as a reward for loyalty during the process of de-Stalinisation47 and to mark the 300th anniversary of Ukraine’s merger with the Russian empire .
 Khrushchev had obviously not envisaged the collapse of the Soviet Union less than 40 years later .
 Out of two million inhabitants, just under 60% identify themselves as ethnic Russians . 24% ethnic Ukrainians and the remainder of the population are Tatars .
 Many Tatars returned to the peninsula in the 1980s and 1990s stirring tensions with Russians over claims to land . Many returned to Russia in the 1990s and 1980s stirring tension with Russians .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 many expected President Boris Yeltsin to take Crimea for Russia . But this did not happen .
 In 1992, Crimea was granted the status of an autonomous republic within Ukraine . Crimea is now an autonomous Republic within Ukraine.
 The period between 1992 and 1994 was extremely unsettled between Ukraine and Russia . The period was very unsettled. The period from 1992 to 1994 was incredibly unsettled .
 In July 1993, the Russian parliament passed a resolution declaring the Crimean port city of Sevastopol a ‘Federal Russian city’ This move was condemned by the Ukrainian parliament and most Western governments .
 The UN Security Council declared the resolution in violation of the UN Charter .
Russia signed a treaty granting Russia a long lease of Crimean naval facilities and establishing two independent national ﬂeets based in Sevastopol . Alongside this treaty, separate agreements were also signed.
 Twenty years ago, a referendum was held in Crimea to establish whether the region should secede from Ukraine and join Russia . Twenty years later, on 16 March 2014, the region was held to decide whether to join Russia and Ukraine .
 The referendum took place amidst an ongoing political crisis between Russia and Ukraine . The referendum was held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 Ukraine President Yanukovych was unanimously removed from power by parliament in late February 2014 .
 Olexander Turchynov was appointed interim President of Ukraine and Arsenly Yatsenyuk, Prime Minister of the new proposed government .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin was quick to denounce Yanukovych's impeachment as illegal . Putin declared events in Kiev tantamount to a coup d’état .
Pro-Russian forces entered Crimea and seized key buildings in its capital, Simferopol . On 26 February, pro-Russian troops entered Crimea.
 The Ukraine government accused Russia of aggression of its sovereign territory . A number of countries, including the US, warned Russia against military intervention .
 Russia responded stating that military movements in Crimea were in line with previous agreements to protect its ﬂeet in the Black Sea . Russia responded saying that military moves in Crimea are in line.
 Russian parliament approved Putin's request to use force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests and the Russian-speaking population of Eastern Ukraine and Crimea . On 1 March, the Russian Parliament approved Putin’s request for force in the Ukraine .
 referendum was to follow within days to establish whether Crimean people were in accordance with the Supreme Council’s decision . A referendum would be held within days.
 Ukraine government condemned by Ukraine government as unconstitutional and illegal . The move was immediately condemned by the Ukraine government .
 The UN Secretary General, Ban Ki-Moon, expressed serious reservations about the referendum . This sentiment was echoed and supported by the US53 and the EU .
 referendum took place on 16 March as scheduled . Despite the controversy, the referendum was held as scheduled.
 Those eligible to vote were asked whether they wanted to re-join Russia as a federal subject . Crimea's status as a part of Ukraine was also asked if they want to restore the 1992 Crimean constitution .
 Voter turnout was reportedly at a record high according to election observers of the Eurasian Observatory For Democracy & Elections . President Putin invited by President Putin .
 96.8% of voters were in favour of joining Russia, according to the head of the referendum commission .
 The United States and EU immediately rejected the results of Crimea’s referendum . The U.S. and EU announced sanctions against a number of of Ukraine and Russia .
 Crimean parliament ofﬁcially declared its independence from Ukraine on 17 March . It requested to become part of Russian Federation .
 The following day, President Putin delivered a speech justifying Russia's actions in Ukraine and Crimea’s annexation to the Russian Federation .
 He claimed Russia was responding to Crimea's request for help because its Russian-speaking population feared repression following events that had unfolded in Ukraine . He outlined Russia's strong historical ties with the Crimean region .
 Putin went on to refute claims that Russia was acting in contravention of international law . Putin said Russia was not acting in violation of law .
 Putin says Crimean people exercising right to self-determination granted to them by UN Charter . He claims it was a precedent set by Ukraine when it seceded from USSR and by Kosovo .
 Putin subsequently signed a treaty that ofﬁcially recognised Crimea as part of the Russian Federation . The treaty was signed by Putin after Crimea was recognised by Russia as a Russian Federation.
 The treaty has been declared invalid by Ukraine, 58 the US59 and the EU Council . The treaty was signed by the EU and Ukraine .
 International law prohibits the acquisition of part or all of another state’s territory through coercion or force .
 To do so violates the principles upon which the international system is built, it violates the rules of the world's international system .
We condemn the illegal referendum held in Crimea in violation of Ukraine’s constitution . We condemn theillegal referendum held. We condemn it.
 Russia's illegal attempt to annex Crimea in contravention of international law and speciﬁc international obligations . We also strongly condemn Russia’s illegal attempt.
 Ukraine submitted a draft resolution to the UN General Assembly that declared Crimea’s referendum invalid . It echoed the wording of a similar document that was submitted to the Security Council in early March but was vetoed by Russia .
 The UN General Assembly passed this resolution, entitled Territorial Integrity of Ukraine, on 27 March 2014 . It sent a strong political message to Russia that the wider international community condemned its actions in Crimea and Ukraine .
 Donetsk and Luhansk have a different relationship with Russia . Unlike Crimea, Donetsk andLuhansk do not have a similar relationship with Moscow .
 Crimea was part of Russia until 1954 and more than half of its population is ethnically Russian . Crimea was one of Russia's most populous regions until 1954 .
 Donetsk and Luhansk on the other hand have historically belonged to Ukraine and contain a majority ethnic Ukrainian population . Donetsk has a majority of the Ukrainian population.
 southern-east Ukraine was conquered and made part of the Russian empire . During the imperialist Czarist era of the nineteenth century, Ukraine was conquered .
 President Putin used this term in April 2014, almost a month after Russia annexed Crimea . He impliedly suggested that the annexation was justiﬁed because Crimea was in Novorossiya .
 Putin's use of the term ‘Novorossiya’ caused alarm and brought about speculation that Russia’s ultimate goal was to regain territories that were once regions of New Russia .
 In April 2014 pro-Russian rebels began occupying government buildings in the eastern region of Ukraine . In fact, following Crimea’s secession, in April 2014, they began occupying buildings as a protest .
 rebels called for referenda on independence to be carried out in both cities . They publicly demanded that Russia send ‘peacekeepers’ to protect them .
 Ukraine troops began anti-terrorist military operations against the rebels . The rebels had begun occupying increasing portions of Donetsk and Luhansk . Ukraine troops have been fighting the rebels for more than two years .
 Russian President Putin's call on rebels to postpone them. Hastily organised referenda were carried out on 11 May 2014 .
 The Peoples' Republic of Luhansk and The Peoples’ Republic of Donetsk were declared quasi-independent entities by rebel separatists . The People’s Republic of Lhansk was later declared quasi independent entities .
Violent clashes between Ukraine militia and separatist rebels escalated between the two referenda .
Civil unrest in the eastern region of the Ukraine has seen the loss of thousands of lives . This led to the outbreak of a civil unrest that has seen numerous people to ﬂee from their homes .
 On 5 September 2014, Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels signed a peace deal to end months of ﬁghting .
 Ukraine granted self-status rule to Donetsk and Luhansk and offered an amnesty to rebels involved in the eastern Ukraine conflict . The rebels were not guilty of serious crimes .
 rebel-held parts of Ukraine's eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions were to be granted a 'special status' Under the legislation, they will be granted broader autonomy for a temporary three-year period .
 Donetsk and Luhansk Republics welcomed the laws as the start to peaceful dialogue with Ukraine . However they were vehemently against Donetsk andLuhansk remaining part of the country . The September 2014 ceaseﬁre came to an abrupt end in October of the same year .
 Second ceaseﬁre was announced on 12 February 2015 with the promise of decentralisation and permanent special status for separatist held regimes . Since then a second cease-Cease was announced.
 The situation in this region is still extremely precarious and countless lives have been lost as a result of the conﬂict. The situation is still very precarious and many people have been killed in the region .
 Russia’s approach to the eastern Ukraine crisis in Donetsk and Luhansk has been far less direct than with the situation in Crimea . Russia's approach to Ukraine crisis has been less direct.
 Russia has repeatedly sustained that it has nothing to do with the pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine . Any of its citizens and soldiers are doing so as volunteers, Russia says .
 Ukraine and Western governments have accused Russia of making a deliberate effort to support separatists in another sovereign country . The Ukraine and the Western governments on the other hand, have accused the Russia of supporting separatists .
 The Crimea, Luhansk and Donetsk are regions which belong to Ukraine’s sovereign territory . Ukraine's Crimea,Luhansk, Donetsk and Crimea are regions that belong to the country .
 The constitution of Ukraine does not provide for a right to secession . Article 73 speciﬁcally states that any changes to Ukrainian territory can only be approved via a referendum . All citizens of Ukraine are allowed to vote .
 The referenda which took place in March and May 2014 were held without the authority of the Ukraine government . They were only for citizens of the regions concerned .
 Ukraine has not yet agreed to vote on a referendum in Ukraine . It would have been necessary in order to make appropriate arrangements to hold the vote .
 Scotland and Catalonia's referenda were examples used by President Putin to justify the legitimacy of Crimea’s referendum on 16 March .
 The 2014 Scottish referendum and Catalonian referendum75 came about in an internally constitutional manner and following years of democratic debate and discussion . Such comparisons are however ﬂawed since preparations for the 2014 Scottish vote were made for the referendum .
Self-determination by way of secession in international law has traditionally only been granted as a remedy to people in former colonial territories or under oppression . Self-determination is traditionally only granted to people under oppression or under colonialism .
 More recently, the concept of remedial secession has been used in non-colonial situations where a people has been persecuted and subjected to serious human rights violations by the parent state .
 The argument was partly used for the declaration of independence of Kosovo from Serbia . It was maintained that the relationship between the two parties was far too volatile to be resolved through domestic political structures .
 Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk are not in any danger, say Crimean politicians . Despite unsubstantiated claims by Crimean politicians that the unconstitutional change of government in Kiev posed a threat to its people, there is no plausible evidence .
 The Ukraine government has shown itself willing to respect the internal self-determination of the people of these regions . On the contrary, the Ukraine government is willing to grant them a wider autonomy .
 Crimea is an autonomous territory with its own constitution and its own particularised local laws . In the early 1990s, it negotiated Crimea’s status as an autonomous region with its constitution .
 Russian forces entered Ukraine territory in February 2014 in order to ‘assist’ Crimea’s transition to independence and protect the Russian-speaking population of Crimea .
 Russia violated the jus cogens principle of non-use of force under Article 2 of the UN Charter . Russia violated this principle by so doing, according to the UN.
 It also violated the ‘Declaration on Principles of International Law’ The UN General Assembly declared illegal any territorial acquisition resulting from a threat or use of force .
 Ukraine was clearly the victim of an outside aggression when Russia sent armed forces onto its sovereign territory to ‘facilitate’ Crimea’s independence and subsequent annexation to the Russian Federation .
 Russia called upon the international community to recognise them as legitimate instances of self-determination . Russia called on the world to recognise the outcome of all three referenda .
Self-determination of peoples by way of secession should only be recognised in extreme circumstances . Emphasised that self-determination should only have been recognised inextreme circumstances .
 Utilised the territorial approach for its deﬁnition of a people sustaining that the term represented the population of a State taken as a whole as opposed to sub-national groups .
 Russia did not recognise the citizens of Kosovo as a ‘people’ for the purposes of self-determination because they were a sub-national group .
 Russia's take on the situation in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine was decisively different . Russia’s take on Crimea and Ukraine is decisively different.
 Russia disregarded Ukraine's territorial sovereignty by sending armed forces to Crimea . Russia recognised Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk's declarations of independence as valid instances of self-determination despite the fact they were in clear violation of the Ukraine constitution .
 Putin referred to a statement by the USA regarding Kosovo regarding Kosovo which stated that ‘declarations of independence may, and often do, violate domestic legislation.’
 He sustained that the actions of the Crimean people fell well within this category . He could not understand why the international community was willing to accept this argument for the people of Kosovo but not for Crimea .
 Putin also mentioned that the Crimea was of historical and civilizational importance to Russia . Putin also said that its reuniﬁcation to the Russian Federation was vindication for the historical injustice of its handover sixty years earlier .
 Russia has taken advantage of the right to self-determination’s indeterminate nature . Russia has strategically moulded the concept to suit its own purpose and pursue its goal of maintaining control over former Soviet territories .
 The right to self-determination has led to arbitrary applications of the concept in international law . It has been described as a 'self-determination' in the past .
 State practice has traditionally limited its scope in order to safeguard the stability of the international state system . State practice is limited due to the wide-ranging nature of self-determination .
Self-determination by way of secession has been granted only in exceptional circumstances . Self-determination is only granted in exceptional cases .
 The events which took place in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk have potentially set a dangerous precedent . Self-determination by way of secession can be applied in the region .
 Ukraine has been forced into a corner as a result of the conﬂict which is devastating its eastern territory . The majority of the international community widely condemned what took place in these regions .
 Crimea seceded from Ukraine, and Russia annexed the territory as part of its federation . With regard to Crimea, it factually secedes from Ukraine .
 Seven countries to this date have made statements about their recognition of the Republic of Crimea as a federal subject of the Russian Federation .
 The rest of the international community has either remained neutral or refused to recognise Crimea’s new status . Crimea has been declared Crimea's new status.
 With regard to Donetsk and Luhansk, the situation at the time of writing is still very unstable . The situation is very unstable, says the author .
 Both regions have declared themselves independent from Ukraine . However their status has not been recognised by the international community . Both regions are now independent from the Ukraine .
 Ukraine has agreed to grant greater autonomy and confer special status to both regions . However an agreement has not yet been reached on this matter .
 In none of these regions were the people in circumstances which could be considered to be extreme for the purposes of secession in international law .
 Such arbitrary secessionist instances undermine the principle of territorial integrity, they also open the door to potential conﬂoodgates .
Self-determination is attractive to ‘all peoples’ from a human rights and democratic governance perspective . It is essential that international law develops a more consistent approach with regard to how the concept is to operate in practice .
 Examples include Bangladesh’s secession from Pakistan, Eritrea's secession from Ethiopia and Kosovo’S secession from Serbia . Examples include Pakistan’'s secession.
 External self-determination by way of negotiation has been recognised as a viable option in the advisory opinion issued at the request of the Canadian government . Quebec possessed a unilateral right to secede under either domestic or international law .
 The Court recognised that although unilateral secession is not permitted by the Canadian constitution, clear majority vote in Quebec would confer democratic legitimacy on the secession initiative . All of the other participants in the Confederation would have to recognise .
 The democratic vote of the people of Quebec to secede would require Canada to engage in serious negotiations regarding the possibility of separation .
 Opportunities for a people’s right to external self-determination have been limited to three examples .
International law is reluctant to widen the scope for secession, keen to preserve the primacy of the territorial integrity of states . International law is fearful of chaos it could potentially bring to the international order .
 The ﬁnal way in which self-determination has been interpreted in international law is from an ‘internal’ perspective . It is not the same way that self- determination is interpreted in law .
 Internal self-determination means the right to self-government within the conﬁnes of the parent state . InternalSelf-determination is a form of self- determination in the state .
 Through this right people are able to participate and meaningfully contribute to the decision-making processes that impact their lives . The right people can make decisions that affect their lives and their lives.
 It allows them the possibility ‘to freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development’ without compromising the territorial integrity of the parent state . It also allows them to freely determine the political status of their state .
 Internal self-determination gives people the opportunity to deal with conﬂicts over minority and majority issues before they escalate to the stages of civil unrest or demands for secession .
 In some circumstances, internal self-determination can also include economic and culturalSelf-determination . In some cases, it can also be used as a tool to determine the outcome of a person's life .
 In other words, the right of a people to be taught in their own language about their culture, history and tradition, as well as the right to economic independence .
 Examples of the practice of internal self-determination include the statutory granting of powers from the UK Parliament to the Scottish Parliament and the National Assembly for Wales .
Internal self-determination in international law is the most feasible way forward, according to the author of the book .
 Societal structures which permit group interaction and representation are better-suited in accommodating pluralistic societies . Societies based on compromise rather than confrontation are better suited to accommodating pluralism societies .
 By widening opportunities for internal self-determination, states create a fairer and more inclusive environment that safeguards the interests of all peoples . States are reﬂective of democratic values and human rights.
 To maintain the status quo is no longer defensible, if it ever was, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Ukraine crisis is a demonstration of the real danger that the unresolved dilemma of self-determination presents to the international order . Thousands of lives have been lost.
 The Belgian representative did not take into account self-determination as an anti-colonial principle . Cassese, 39, was criticized by the Belgian representative for his criticism .
 P Thornberry, ‘The Democratic or Internal Aspect of Self Determination with Some Remarks on Federalism’
 A/4684 ; 1970 Declaration on Principles on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations, GA Res.25 (24 October 1979)
 The 1970 Friendly Relations Declaration is perhaps the most-cited source for evidence of an emergent rule of customary international law granting a right of remedial secession . Also, the 1970 Friendly relations Declaration is a source of evidence of a right to remedy secession .
Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory Advisory Opinion, ICJ Reports 2004 136. Legal Consequences of the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian Territory .
 Accordance with International Law of the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in Respect of Kosovo Advisory Opinion, International Court of Justice, 22 July 2010 .
 Accordance with International Law of the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in Respect of Kosovo Advisory Opinion, International Court of Justice .
 It was held by the GA that the right applied to Palestinians GA Res.87 of 6 December 1971 . It was applied to the break-up of the former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia where the European Community’s Declaration on the Recognition of New States in Eastern Europe and Soviet
 Resolution of the Armed Forces of 09.07. 1993 N 5359-1, on the status of Sevastopol .
 Security Council, Note by the President of the Security council, UN Doc.
 Catalonia's referendum was meant to take place in November 2014, however it was subsequently suspended by Spain’s Constitutional Court . The referendum was originally meant to be held in November, but was suspended by the court .
 An informal vote took place instead which showed that 80% of inhabitants were in favour of independence . The vote was an informal vote.
 The Russian Federation, Kosovo Advisory Opinion, is based in Kosovo . It is the country's second largest country in the world .
 The Russian Federation is of the view that may be construed as authorizing secession under certain conditions, says the author .
 The parent State is threatening the very existence of the people in question . The State should be limited to truly extreme circumstances, such as an outright attack .
 An Alternative to the Secessionist Movements in India’s North East’, The Student Advocate 10 .