 Turkish fighter jets downed a Russian warplane over Syria in 2015 . Russia and Turkey have repaired relations since the incident .
 Ankara and Moscow still compete for influence, and their interests still collide, in the Black Sea and the South Caucasus . Ankara and Russia still compete.
 Turkey has sought a greater role for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in the Black Sea . Anxious at Russia's increased naval capability and power projection south from Crimea .
 Russia and Turkey back opposing sides of the Armenia-Azerbaijan confrontation over the disputed territory Nagorno-Karabakh . The conflict could add an extra layer of risk to that conflict .
 Armenia-Azerbaijan dialogue could use its broader rapprochement to minimise risks around regional hotspots . By taking steps to prevent accidental clashes in the Black Sea, improve the plight of Crimean Tatars .
 Russia and Turkey have repaired relations that nearly collapsed after Turkish fighter jets shot down a Russian Su-24 warplane near Syria-Turkey border in late 2015 .
 Russia has lifted most of the sanctions it had imposed on Turkey . Russia has since lifted the most sanctions it has imposed on the country .
 The two countries coordinate in Syria, have relaunched energy projects . Turkey and Turkey have agreed to Turkey's purchase of Russian S-400 missiles .
 Russia-Turkey rivalry is still all too evident in regions sandwiched between the two countries – the Black Sea and South Caucasus . But Russia- Turkey rivalry remains all too apparent in regions between the countries .
 Moscow's military build-up in Crimea and power projection across the Black Sea has increased Ankara’s reliance on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Turkey's relations with Western powers tank.
 Russia-Turkey competition in the Caucasus adds an extra layer of risk to hostility between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 Moscow and Ankara would work to resolve regional conflicts thus appears unlikely . That Moscow and Turkey would work on regional conflicts seems unlikely .
 The recent rapprochement could serve to calm flashpoints, or at least mitigate the risk of flare-ups .
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's public apology for the Su-24 downing in June 2016 . He and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, have met more than ten times .
 Warmer relations also owe to Erdoğan's apparent gratitude for Putin’s support during the July 2016 coup attempt in Turkey .
 The Turkish leadership's frayed relations with the West reflect its anger at the U.S. for supporting the YPG in Syria and refusing to extradite Fethullah Gülen, Ankara blames .
 Russia-Turkey rapprochement has reached such peaks as to prompt Western concern about Turkey's commitment to NATO . Some officials perceive Ankara's pivot east as Ankara’s pivot east .
 Warmer relations also owe to Erdoğan's apparent gratitude for Putin’s support during the July 2016 coup attempt in Turkey .
 Moscow and Ankara in the Black Sea and the South Caucasus are struggling for influence . But they overlook the continued struggle for influence between the two countries .
 Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea has enabled it to expand its naval capability, project power south and shift the strategic balance in its favour .
 The annexation has also raised Ankara’s concerns about the plight of the Crimean Tatars . Turkey has historically close ties to the Tatars, who enjoy historical ties to Turkey .
 NATO has reversed a decades-old policy of keeping the alliance out of the Black Sea . It has encouraged NATO to deploy into the Black sea, reversing the policy .
 Ankara's strained links with Western capitals notwithstanding, in the Black Sea at least, NATO is critical to Turkey’s strategic calculations .
 Moscow has a defence pact with Yerevan . Ankara has a strategic partnership and mutual support agreement with Baku . Moscow has an agreement with the country .
 The conflict's flare-up coincided with the fallout from the Su-24 crisis and provoked a harsh exchange of words between Moscow and Ankara . Both chose not to escalate and Moscow eventually brokered a ceasefire .
 Turkey has been cautious to test Russia only so far in the region where Moscow seeks to be the preeminent power . Turkey has not tested Russia so far.
 Any escalation over Nagorno-Karabakh will always carry some risk of sucking in the two regional heavyweights .
 Moscow's expanded military footprint in Syria, Armenia, Georgia’s breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . The Crimean peninsula fuels Turkish fears of encirclement .
 Ankara might use its ties to both NATO and Russia to mitigate the risk of incidents in the Black Sea . Both Russia and NATO expand their presence and conduct military exercises, with Russian jets “buzzing” or intercepting NATO planes .
 Dialogue at all levels is essential, and Turkey might facilitate additional channels of communication . Turkey may facilitate more communication with Turkey .
 Moscow and Ankara could work to prevent another outburst in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict . Both sides could offer mutual concessions in a bid to avoid another outburst .
 Ankara should engage the Russian leadership on the status and rights of the Crimean Tatars . Ankara should use its improved relations with Moscow to engage the Russians on the rights and status of the Crimea .
 Russia-Turkey rapprochement is good news for the Turkish economy and for citizens of both nations who suffered the consequences of Moscow’s sanctions after the Su-24 crisis .
 It benefits the countries of the Black Sea and the South Caucasus regions that otherwise risked getting caught in the crossfire . Overall, too, it benefits the nations that otherwise risk being caught in crossfire.
Despite improved ties, the two countries’ aims and interests still conflict across those regions’ main trigger points . The two countries have improved ties.
 Moscow and Ankara could harness their imperfect partnership to reduce the danger of flare-ups . improved Russia-Turkey ties in themselves will not resolve often protracted conflicts .
 Crisis Group’s Europe & Central Asia Program Director Magdalena Grono talks about the relations between Russia and Turkey . Grono also discusses the Black Sea and the South Caucasus .
 A proxy conflict in Syria became a frontal clash in November 2015 when a Turkish fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 ground attack aircraft . The Turkish jet was shot down by a Russian fighter jet .
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan apologised and called for the two countries to patch up . Then, in June 2016, Erdoğan called for both countries to fix things up .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin’s support for Erdoğan in the aftermath of the July 2016 coup attempt paved the way for rapprochement .
 Ankara's relations with Western allies, on the other hand, have deteriorated . Ankara’s relations with the Western allies have deteriorated.
 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, Moscow and Ankara avoided a broader escalation over the disputed enclave . In 2016, when the downing of the Su-24 and Russia-Turkey relations hit rock bottom coincided with a flare-up
 cooperation perhaps could contribute to greater stability in other areas, too . In other areas.
 Syria dominates international coverage, focusing on the Black Sea and the Caucasus . Moscow's and Ankara's interests have traditionally clashed with Ankara's .
 It draws on discussions with experts and officials from Russia, Turkey, NATO, the European Union and its member states, Ukraine and South Caucasus .
 The Russia-Turkey rapprochement largely reflects the two states’ evolving strategic calculations away from the Black Sea and South Caucasus . The two states are now closer to each other .
 Ankara's determination to contain the Kurdish People’s Protection Units requires it to cooperate with Moscow . The group has close operational ties to Kurdish insurgents in Turkey .
 Turkish frustration at Western powers is fed by U.S. backing for the YPG, and support for Erdoğan, from his loyalists’ perspective . The lacklustre United States support for the Turkish leader during the 2016 coup attempt also nudges Ankara toward Moscow .
 Russian sanctions on Turkey in 2015-2016 provide further impetus for closer Moscow-Ankara ties .
 The evolving engagement of Moscow and Ankara in Syria’s war has played an important part in reframing their relationship . Russia and Ankara have been engaged in the conflict for years .
 Putin, having long offered political support to Assad, in September 2015 deployed Russian forces into Syria to prop him up militarily .
 Russian air power helped regime forces reverse course of the war and reconquer much of the country from rebels aligned with Ankara .
 Turkey's downing of the Russian plane in November that year marked a low point in Turkey-Russia relations . Turkey’s downing in November 2013 marked a high point in relations with Russia .
 The YPG formed the backbone of the Syrian Democratic Forces, which spearheaded U.S.-backed counter-ISIS operations in Syria . It benefited in particular from United States support, motivated by the fight against the self-styled Islamic State .
 Turkey has used Turkey as a bridge to the anti-Assad opposition in its quest to consolidate Assad’s military gains . Russian bombing raids in February 2016 allowed the YPG to capture the town of Tel Rifaat in the Aleppo governorate from Ahrar al-Sham, a militia
Turkey's concern about the YPG’s gains has led to growing cooperation between Moscow and Ankara .
 Ankara appears to have sought Moscow’s endorsement ahead of Operation Euphrates Shield . The operation was launched in August 2016, shortly after Erdoğan's apology for the Russian jet incident .
 Euphrates Shield allowed Turkey to secure an enclave in northern Syria and divide Kurdish-controlled territory under the pretext of expelling ISIS from the area .
 Russia's green light for the operation may have influenced Turkey’s decision not to intervene on behalf of rebels in December 2016 when regime forces, aided by Russian air power, recaptured Aleppo .
 Erdoğan's principal goals in Syria now are to secure a stake in the country’s future . He wants to weaken the YPG to the extent possible and to prevent the establishment of a YPG/PYD-run Kurdish corridor to the Mediterranean along the Turkish border .
 Russia has used Turkey as a bridge to the anti-Assad opposition in its quest to consolidate Assad’s military gains . Russia, for its part, has used it to offer some concessions to its armed opponents .
 The two countries, alongside Iran, have co-sponsored de-escalation talks in the Kazakh capital of Astana . The talks have already gone through six rounds .
 Ankara appears to have arrived at some form of understanding with Moscow ahead of Olive Branch, its ongoing offensive that has ousted the YPG from much of the north-western enclave of Afrin .
 It is still a big question mark whether the U.S. did not know, and if it did not, why not . It's still not clear whether the United States knew what happened .
 Putin has always been against regime change – and Erdoğan appreciated this . Putin has also been against the regime change .
 United States sources strongly deny the allegations . Turkish officials regularly voice the conviction that the United States was aware of the coup attempt before it occurred .
 Fethullah Gülen, a Turkish cleric self-exiled in the U.S. since 1999, is accused of directing the plot and executing it through his agents . He had infiltrated the Turkish military .
 Gülen has been stripped of Turkish citizenship and stripped of citizenship . U.S. refusal to extradite him is cited as proof of collusion .
 Russian officials have not criticised Ankara for its wide-ranging purges in the wake of the failed coup . Russian officials, unlike their U.S. and European counterparts, have not been criticised .
 Ankara's anger at the U.S. refusal to hand over Gülen, its perception that the White House did not support Erdoğan during the coup, and its annoyance at broader Western criticism at Turkey’s human rights and democracy records . Russia has offered Russia an opening to
 Turkey’s Undersecretariat for Defence Industries announced it had signed a contract with the Russian state-owned arms conglomerate Rostec for the supply of two batteries of S-400 SAMs .
 The S-400 transfer, scheduled for 2020, has raised eyebrows in Washington and European capitals . The transfer has fuelled fears that Ankara is “pivoting’s” toward Moscow .
 Top U.S. officials express open concern. General Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, expresses open concern .
 The Russian-made missiles cannot be integrated into NATO’s defence infrastructure .
 The deal might fall under the remit of U.S. sanctions targeting parts of Russia’s economy . Turkey could also face trade penalties as well .
 The United States Congress has taken steps that might eventually result in Ankara being denied deliveries of advanced F-35 jets . The U.S. Congress is taking steps that may result in Turkey being denied the jets .
 Turkey argues next-door Greece already has S-300s, an earlier generation of the Russian air defence system . Turkey argues that next- door Greece already had S- 300s .
 Originally acquired by Cyprus, those missiles ended up on the Greek island of Crete . Turkey threatened military action against Cyprus in 1998 .
 Greece took the S-300s as a concession to Turkey, whose planes would have been in range of projectiles had they been deployed in southern Cyprus .
 Rostec chief Sergei Chemezov said in February that deliveries are scheduled to start in 2019 . There are reports of a second deal in the works, according to Rostec .
 For a time, Ankara was pushing hard for technology transfer as part of the bargain but later backtracked on those demands .
 Russian officials also view warily the prospect of handing over advanced know-how that might allow the purchasing state to “localise’s’ production .
 Turkey offers alternative to Ukraine once the latter’s transit contract with Russian state-controlled gas company Gazprom expires in 2019 . Turkey offers an alternative to the country's transit contract.
 TurkStream, a pipeline running under the Black Sea en route to Turkey and the EU, was restarted during Putin’s visit to Istanbul in September 2016 .
 Turkey's first nuclear power station, at Akkuyu, will position Russia's state corporation Rosatom as a pivotal player in the electricity market starting in the mid-2020s .
 The S-400 missile deal could turn the Turkish armed forces into a major customer of the Russian arms industry .
 The impact on Turkey of Russian sanctions imposed in 2015 after the Su-24 downing illustrate how dependent Turkey is on exports to Russia . Turkey is dependent on Russia for its exports.
 Turkish trade with Russia plummeted by nearly a third from $23 billion in 2015 to $16. billion in 2016 . Turkey's trade with the Russian nation fell by almost a third in the past year .
 Russian gas exports, accounting for the bulk of overall commerce, continued without restrictions . The slump was even more dramatic in sectors such as tourism and construction .
 The two countries did not shield them from the crisis provoked by the downing of the Russian jet . Clearly, the mutually beneficial economic ties between the two countries didn't protect them from it .
 Russia and Turkey's ties provide strong incentives to reverse downturn in their relations with the West . But the evolving situation in Syria and Turkey’s worsening relationship with West provides strong incentives .
 Some limits on Turkish agricultural exports to Russia are still in place . Some limits to Turkish agricultural export to Russia remain in place.
 Turkey restricts the import of Russian wheat, leveraging its position as the second most significant market for the latter . For its part, Turkey restricts import of Russia wheat, which is second most important market for Russia .
 In 2017, gas deliveries to Turkey from Russia from Russia hit an all-time high, reaching 29 billion cubic metres . In 2016, Turkey's gas deliveries from Russia to Turkey hit a record high of 29billion cubic metres.
 The Ukraine crisis has also tested Russia-Turkey relations, though not as severely as the early years of the Syrian war . The Ukrainian crisis has tested the relations between Russia- Turkey .
 The crisis has had strategic implications for both countries, given Russia's increased military presence in Crimea and Turkey's support of Crimea’s Tatar minority, which opposed Russia's annexation of the peninsula .
 In early 2014, massive anti-government demonstrations, known as the Maidan revolution, prompted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to flee the country .
 Moscow labelled Yanukovych’s ouster a coup, and shortly afterward annexed Crimea . A referendum on whether to join Russia was held on 16 March 2014 .
 Boycotted by many pro-Kyiv voters, the referendum passed with overwhelming support . The referendum was held in Ukraine's capital, Kiev .
 Only a handful of governments – Turkey was not among them – recognise that vote . Only a few of them were among them .
 Moscow also backed separatist forces in Donbas, in eastern Ukraine, its support proving critical to their military gains . Moscow also backs separatist forces.
 Normandy Four reached two peace deals known as the Minsk agreements, which Western powers and conflict parties still view as the only way out of the conflict . After those gains, the so-called Normandy Four reach two peace agreements known as Minsk .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its interference in eastern Ukraine have deepened the standoff developing since the early 2000s . The EU and U.S. on the other hand, on the one hand, and the EU on the another, have been in the
 In 2014, the United States and the EU imposed sanctions and other restrictive measures on Russia in response to the Crimea annexation and its meddling in eastern Ukraine . Moscow retaliated with a set of countermeasures .
 Turkey vocally opposed Russia's annexation of Crimea, lending support to the territory’s Tatar minority . Most of whom prefer to remain part of Ukraine .
 Erdoğan has been cautious, not to allow either Crimea or the Donbas conflict . Some Turkish officials portray as the responsibility of both Russia and the West .
 Ankara has not supported Western sanctions against Moscow . In particular, Ankara has no support for Western sanctions .
 Turkish diplomacy has been a staple of Turkish diplomacy since March 2014 . Such declarations include words of support for the 300,000-strong Tatar community in Crimea .
 Erdoğan and Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu are in close contact with Tatar leaders . Mustafa Dzhemilev and Refat Chubarov, chairman of Crimean Tatars’ exiled representative body, or Mejlis .
 Tatar activists, too, consider Turkey a kindred state and count on its support . In the 1990s, Turkish money helped Tatars return to the ancestral land from which they were banished in 1944 .
 Turkey has showcased its commitment to the Tatars’ cause on multiple occasions . The Tatars' cause has been highlighted on several occasions .
 Erdoğan spoke to Putin to obtain assurances that the Tatars, 70 per cent of whom boycotted the vote, would be treated well . Immediately before the March 2014 referendum, Erdoğan told Putin to get assurances from Putin .
 Erdoğan claimed to stand up forcefully for Tatar rights during his conversations with Putin . At a party rally in the town of Eskişehir, home to a substantial community of Crimean Tatar descent, he said .
 Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu held a joint press conference with Dzhemilev . He pledged to pursue ‘determined diplomacy’ while rejecting the outcome of the vote .
 TIKA, Turkey’s foreign development agency, funded the opening of a Tatar Centre in Kyiv .
Support increased during the 2015-2016 crisis over the jet downed over Syria . Such support increased during 2015- 2016 crisis over Syrian crisis .
 Turkey donated camouflage uniforms to a Tatar volunteer battalion in Ukraine’s Kherson oblast . Ukraine had been involved in the blockade Kyiv imposed on the annexed region since November 2015 .
 Ankara's reluctance to lend its support to Western measures against Moscow aggravates its squabbles with the West . Ankara’s reluctance to lending support to the West adds to its squabbling with Moscow .
 In April 2014, it banned from its ports any vessel declaring ‘Russian Crimea’ as its domicile . In April 2013, it also banned from ports any vessels declaring “Russian Crimea,’s domiciles’
 In October 2016, Turkish authorities restored ferry services connecting Zonguldak to Sevastopol, a major port and the largest city in Crimea, and to Kerch on the peninsula.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Vladimir Groysman praised the decision . In March 2017, Turkey again closed its ports to traffic from Crimea .
 Turkish-owned ships registered in other jurisdictions continue to break the ban . It seems that Turkish- owned ships are still breaking the ban.
 A Turkish cargo vessel under Moldovan flag called in the port of Feodosia, ostensibly for repairs after an accident at sea .
 Ankara has been reluctant to let the Crimea annexation overshadow its relations with Russia . Despite Turkey's rejection of Moscow’s annexation of Crimea, its support for the Tatars and its limits on shipping has been limited .
 Turkey knows this is something between Russia and the West, said Gülnur Aybet, an international relations professor who has become a senior adviser to Erdoğan . Turkey knows it will keep quiet and let them work it out, said Aybet .
 Hundreds of thousands of Turkish citizens with origins in Crimea have limited bearing on Ankara’s foreign policy .
 For its part, the Kremlin has largely ignored Turkish concerns regarding Crimea .
 In 2014, it banned Tatar leaders Dzhemilev and Chubarov from entering the peninsula . They were banned despite their relationship with Erdoğan .
 An unofficial monitoring mission dispatched by the Turkish government in April 2015 . Russians registered violations of Tatar rights to free speech, property and access to native-language education .
 The mission's 21-page report was subsequently dismissed by the Russian foreign ministry . Erdoğan handed the report to Putin during a June 2015 meeting.
 Crimea’s Supreme Court outlawed the body as an ‘extremist organisation’ The Mejlis had links to Turkish ultra-nationalist groups such as the Grey Wolves and Hizb ut-Tahrir .
 Reports cite repression, including imprisonment and confinement in mental institutions, of Tatar activists opposed to the region's incorporation into Russia .
 In October 2014, it formed the so-called Interregional Social Movement of the Crimean Tatar People, or Qirim . It was led by Remzi Ilyasov, who led the group .
 He has frequently called on Turkey to recognise the peninsula’s merger with Russia .
 Turkish lobbying, combined with the Russian-Turkish rapprochement, has had some impact in Crimea . That said, Turkish lobbying has also had some effect in Crimea, according to reports .
 Ukrainian authorities credited Erdoğan for the release of Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov, both deputy Mejlis chairmen, after three years in jail . Moscow’s permitting the departure of both men for Turkey .
 Turkey's quiet diplomacy and persistence can pay off – at least on some issues . Their release suggests Turkey’s quiet diplomacy could pay off .
 Ankara should build on improving relations to lobby Russia for further concessions . Ankara should improve relations with Russia to lobby for more concessions .
 Turkey has largely steered clear of serious involvement in the four-year-old conflict between Russia and Ukraine over the breakaway region in Donbas .
Many Turkish officials regard Russia and the West as equally culpable in the conflict . Ankara supports the Minsk agreements, and Ertuğrul Apakan has served since April 2014 as head of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine .
 During the early stages of the crisis, some Turkish commentators alleged that Western powers had helped stoke the Maidan protests .
Turkish leaders have occasionally used the Ukraine conflict to score rhetorical points against Russia . At the same time, Turkish leaders have sometimes used the conflict as a rhetorical point .
 Erdoğan slammed Putin for commemorating Armenian genocide in late April 2015 . He pointed to Russia’s invasion of Crimea and interference in Donbas .
 Turkey also declared plans by Russian-backed Donbas separatists in July 2017 to rebrand the so-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic as “Malorossia’s Republic.’ It is a violation of Ukrainian territorial integrity.
 Ankara prefers a stronger Ukraine which could act as an ally in the region . While Moscow uses the Donbas conflict as leverage to keep Kyiv in check.
 Moscow has not publicly suggested that Moscow take steps to de-escalate that conflict . However, it has not said that Moscow will take action .
 The seizure of Crimea tilted the balance of power between Russia and Turkey in the Black Sea toward Moscow . The seizure is the latest in a series of events that have rocked the region .
 Russia's de facto coastline grew from 475km to 1,200km after March 2014 . About 25 per cent of the sea’s total shorefront grew from 4,000km to 475km in 2014 .
 That nearly equals the length of Turkey’s shore, which is 1,785km or about 35 per cent of the total coastline . That almost equals the size of Turkey's shore, with about 35% of the coastline .
 The Crimean port of Sevastopol has long provided Russia with a natural deep-water port centrally located in the Black Sea basin . Moscow previously leased the port from Ukraine .
 Major littoral cities, including Istanbul, Samsun, Trabzon, Constanta and Varna, are within easy reach, less than 1,000km from Istanbul .
 Sevastopol has been a springboard for Russian forays through the Bosphorus into the Mediterranean . The so-called Syria Express supplies Russian forces in Syria .
Vladimir Putin claimed to have ‘turned Crimea into a fortress’ in a documentary aired by the Russia-1 TV channel on the first anniversary of the annexation in March 2015 .
 S-300 and S-400 SAMs are deployed on the peninsula . The SAMs have advantages in the air, too, thanks to their air-based SAMs .
 Russia's projection over the Black Sea adds to NATO's worry over its actions in Crimea and Donbas . NATO's littoral members include Romania and Bulgaria as well as Turkey .
 U.S. and other allies’ naval ships from outside the region have visited Romania . This presence rests on, first, frequent exercises and visits by United States and others .
 NATO focused its Black Sea strategy on non-traditional security threats, such as terrorism and illegal trafficking . Prior to the Ukraine crisis, NATO focused on the Black Sea .
 After Crimea annexation, Russia's prime concern is Russia's expansionism .
 In 2017, the U.S. led 18 exercises in the area, including the Sea Breeze multinational exercise co-led with the Ukrainian navy and Saber . Georgia and Ukraine also took part in the exercises .
 NATO members are making a sustained push to anchor the alliance institutionally in the Black Sea . Turkey supports a policy Turkey supports, says Turkey .
 Romanian Defence Minister Mihnea Ioan Motoc proposed the establishment of a permanent naval task force by Romania, Turkey and Bulgaria, with German, Italian and United States logistical and direct military support .
 Bulgaria vetoed the plan before the July 2016 Warsaw summit . Turkey was in favour, illustrating its shifting posture .
 In any case, the alliance has taken incremental steps toward reinforced cooperation .
 NATO defence ministers endorsed an enhanced presence ‘on land, at sea and in the air’ and authorised the Standing Naval Forces to deepen links with allies .
 Russia's actions and NATO's response raise the risk of some form of confrontation, even if accidental . Russia’s actions raise the risks of some forms of confrontation .
 Russian jets “buzzing’s U.S. warships and intercepting NATO planes in the Black Sea have been common since 2014 .
 A Russian intelligence vessel en route to Syria sank off Turkey’s Black Sea coast, not far from Istanbul .
 Allied exercises in the Black Sea sometimes take place alongside even larger-scale Russian drills . Allied exercises are sometimes held alongside larger-sized Russian drills.
 Violations of NATO members’ airspace, or instances of Russian jets flying on the very edge of that airspace, are frequent .
 Until the annexation of Crimea, Ankara believed its interests in the Black Sea best served by keeping the U.S. at arm's length .
 From 2001 onward, Ankara and Moscow promoted Black Sea Harmony and the Black Sea Naval Cooperation Task Group . The group sought to reduce risks of confrontation by excluding NATO from Black Sea .
Black Sea Harmony emerged as an alternative to NATO’s Active Endeavour mission . Black Sea Harmony is an operation targeting transnational terrorism and smuggling .
 Bulgaria lobbied for the extension of Active Endeavour into the Black Sea . Newer NATO members Romania and, less overtly, Bulgaria lobbied to extend the programme .
 Turkey largely sought to accommodate Russia’s security concerns . Older NATO member Turkey, by contrast, mostly sought to accommodate Russia's concerns .
 Turkey barred two U.S. hospital vessels, the USNS Comfort and Mercy, from crossing through the Bosphorus .
 NATO’s current objective is to find a credible yet unthreatening strategy to deter Russia in its eastern and southern flanks .
 Russia and NATO are on the brink of a potential conflict. It is clear that further militarisation of the Black Sea will create an unstable environment that can bring Russia andNAT to the brink .
 The U.S. and U.N. have been engaged in an ongoing dispute over the South Korean peninsula . It is not clear if the two sides will be able to reach an agreement on the South Korea-South Korea crisis .
 Russia's expansion makes the NATO alliance more and more significant for Turkey in the Black Sea . Despite increased friction between Ankara and its Western allies and improving Ankara-Moscow ties.
 France cancels sale to Russia of two Mistral-class vessels in 2015 . Turkey retains edge only in amphibious warfare ships, due to France’s decision to cancel the sale .
 NATO is now a logical choice, irrespective of Turkey’s rift with the United States and Europe . But leaning on NATO – and thus allowing in more ships – is now the logical choice .
 Turkey is modernising its armed forces and seeking to boost its indigenous defence industry . In parallel, Turkey is trying to boost the indigenous industry .
 The MILGEM project, which had stalled for years, is again a clear priority . The MIL GEM project is again an important priority .
 Turkey inaugurated the Kınalıada, a corvette equipped to fight submarines . MILGEM’s next phase involves the construction of a new class of frigates .
 Turkey and Ukraine have enjoyed close security cooperation, which has continued despite improved Russia-Turkey ties . Turkey and the Ukraine have been close to each other for years .
 The relationship was again highlighted in October 2017 by Erdoğan’s visit to Kyiv . The High-Level Strategic Council has brought the two presidents and cabinets together since 2011 .
 Turkey leans more clearly toward Ukraine, notwithstanding the cautious balance it has traditionally struck with Moscow . Turkey's frustration grew over Russia's 2015 Syria intervention .
 Officials from both sides agreed to cooperate in designing and manufacturing aircraft engines, radar units, military communication and navigation systems . In February 2016, then Prime Minister Davutoğlu visited Kyiv .
 Advanced technology projects, such as phased space rockets, ballistic missile systems and cruise missiles, are also under discussion .
 The Ukrainian navy has been training with its Turkish counterpart, most recently in an air defence exercise at Odessa in April 2017 . The Ukraine navy was greatly diminished after the Russian seizure of Crimea .
 In March 2017, Vladimir Groysman, Ukraine’s prime minister, signed a preliminary memorandum of understanding over the supply of engines for Turkey's Altay battle tank .
 Ties to Ukraine also provide Turkey with backup technology transfer and know-how . Turkey also provides Turkey with back-up technology transfer, know- how .
Ukrainian industries could help Turkey develop its naval force . Turkey's naval force could help the country develop its navy force .
 Turkey provides a lucrative market for Ukrainian contractors who have suffered losses after cutting ties to their traditional partners from Russia’s military-industrial complex .
 The South Caucasus is another region in which Russian and Turkish interests clash . The region is also in which Russia and Turkey have interests in each other .
 Ankara has pursued a three-way partnership with Azerbaijan and Georgia focused on security and defence . Since the early 1990s, Ankara has played up its credentials as a NATO member .
 A recently inaugurated railroad runs from Kars, in eastern Turkey, through Georgia to Baku . It is touted as part of the new Silk Road connecting Europe and China while bypassing Russia .
 Russia remains a key power in the region and exerts enormous influence over Armenia, Georgia's breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Turkey acknowledges Russia’s advantage, and avoids direct confrontation with Azerbaijan and Georgia . For now, Turkey acknowledges Russian advantage, but deepens cooperation with Azerbaijan .
 Russia-Turkey rapprochement unlikely to signal major shifts in the region . It might offer opportunities to reduce risks of another flare-up between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the contested enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh .
 The protracted conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh poses a particular challenge to Russia-Turkey relations . Russia- Turkey relations are strained by the conflict .
 Russia has close ties to Armenia, through a bilateral defence cooperation treaty and through the Russia-sponsored Collective Security Treaty Organization . Armenia is a member.
 In early April 2016, Nagorno-Karabakh saw its most dangerous upsurge of violence since 1994 . Armenia and Azerbaijan signed a ceasefire in May 1994 .
 An Azerbaijani offensive won minor territorial gains, inflicted heavy losses on both sides and briefly galvanised diplomatic efforts to end the conflict . The escalation, facilitated by Baku’s beefed-up military capabilities, unleashed a war of words between Russia and Turkey
 Erdoğan chastised the Kremlin for siding with the Armenians rather than acting as an honest broker . He was one of the three co-chairs of the OSCE-led Minsk Group .
Top Russian officials accuse Turkey of fanning the flames by channelling military aid to Azerbaijan . They say it is similar to Turkey's “meddling” in Syria .
 The testy exchange between Ankara and Moscow was misinterpreted internationally as full Turkish backing for Baku’s military adventurism . In all likelihood, Turkey was reluctant to take the risk of getting too involved .
 Ankara, which was overstretched domestically and in the Middle East, opted to keep a low profile . In any case, Ankara had no intention of taking on Russia in the region .
 The risk that the two regional powers get inadvertently sucked in remains. The conflict continues to escalate again .
 The last flare-up between Azerbaijan and Armenia was contained fairly quickly . Turkish and Russian relations with the two countries add an extra layer of risk to the region .
 Baku has scaled up its forces in Nakhchivan, an exclave separated from the rest of Azerbaijan . Baku is deploying artillery, multiple-rocket launchers and special forces there .
 The Azerbaijani and Turkish militaries also held joint exercises in the province . The province shares a short stretch of border with Turkey .
 Russia upgraded its military presence in Armenia in January 2016 . Russia stationed Mi-24P attack and Mi-8MT transport helicopters at the Erebuni military airfield .
 In September 2016, the Armenian army showcased a new 9K720 Iskander short-range ballistic missile system . The system was acquired from Russia .
 Russia and Armenia agreed to set up a joint group of armed forces with a mandate that includes repelling attacks against Armenian territory . Two months later, Russia and Armenians agreed to join forces to protect Armenia .
 Yerevan’s motivation for arms build-up is to deter another Azerbaijani offensive . The joint group of forces does not envisage deploying inside Nagorno-Karabakh or along the line of contact .
 The build-up and the joint group also appear to be a signal from Russia to Turkey . Ankara should stay away in the event of renewed violence in or around the enclave .
 Turkey has deepened links with regional allies to hedge against Russia in the Caucasus . Turkey has also pursued close bilateral military cooperation with Azerbaijan .
 A meeting among the defence ministers in May 2017 was followed by a three-nation military drill near Tbilisi . A month later, a military drill was held near the city .
 In April 2018, the three defence ministers signed a memorandum that envisions closer trilateral defence partnership . The memorandum was signed in April 2018 .
 This comes on top of Turkey’s already well-established bilateral military cooperation with Azerbaijan . This comes as Turkey is also well-known to Azerbaijan .
 Turkey has long provided training to the Azerbaijani​ army and the two armies have held joint exercises of land forces . Turkey has also provided training for the Azerbaijan army .
 Since 2014 joint exercises have been expanded to include air forces and special forces, and annual joint trainings are held in Nakhchivan .
 Whether Turkey and Russia can use their rapprochement to reduce risks of another flare-up over Nagorno-Karabakh remains to be seen .
 The conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, each with powerful regional allies, overlaps with tense Turkey-Armenia relations and with grievances dating back to Ottoman times .
This multilayered dynamic makes any progress on Nagorno-Karabakh particularly difficult . This multilaysered dynamic is particularly difficult for the region .
 Ankara and Moscow working together to ease regional tensions . Yet there is precedent, albeit limited, for Ankara and Russia working together .
 In 2007-2009, Russia supported Turkey's and Armenia’s ‘football diplomacy’ In 2009, Russia helped unblock the border that Ankara closed in 1993 in connection to the war over Nagorno-Karabakh .
 Yerevan and Ankara signed two Zurich protocols in 2009 . The protocols envisaged the normalisation of diplomatic relations between the two countries . The opening of the Turkey-Armenia border .
 Ankara maintained that progress on border opening should be linked to Armenia’s return of Azerbaijani territories adjacent to Nagorno-Karabakh to Baku's control .
 A decade later, Moscow offered to facilitate the normalisation of relations between Armenia and Turkey . A decade after, Russia offered to help normalise relations between the two countries .
 The Russian Federation would most certainly welcome the opening of the Armenian-Turkish segment of the EEU’s external border for free movement of people, goods and services . The move would establish a territorial link between the Moscow-led EEU and the EU-Turkey Customs Union .
 Turkey launched an EU-funded demining operation along the border with Armenia in April 2017 . The same month, the Armenian aviation authority granted Pegasus Airlines a licence to fly three times a week between Yerevan and Istanbul .
 Armenians and Azerbaijanis subsequently rejected the scheme . A few months later, Foreign Minister Çavuşoğlu backed the so-called “Lavrov plan’s” for the settlement .
 Russia-Turkey relations might at least open opportunities to head off new outbreaks of violence in Nagorno-Karabakh .
 More fundamental progress toward the settlement of the conflict appears unlikely, but more fundamental progress is unlikely .
 Armenia is reluctant to link Russia-Turkey relations to either its own relations with Baku or the Nagorno-Karabakh settlement process . Armenia is also reluctant to linked Russia- Turkey relations to its own relationship with the country .
 President Serzh Sargsyan said he would revoke the Zurich protocols before leaving office in April 2018 . If Ankara did not return the Turkey-Armenia normalisation process to the bilateral track, neither Russia nor Armenian demands for Armenian concessions on Nagorno-Karabakh .
 Nikol Pashinyan was propelled to power by April 2018 mass protests that forced Sargsyan to stand down . The new PM has not wavered from this position .
 Ankara’s main precondition for continuing its process of normalising relations with Yerevan and a non-negotiable requirement for any rapprochement with Baku . He is seen as espousing a tough stance on Nagorno-Karabakh .
 He also mentioned his determination to press for “international recognition of Armenian genocide’ – massacres that took place on the territory of present Turkey a century ago . Ankara denies the events amounted to genocide .
 Erdoğan appealed to the Armenian government to show ‘common sense’ and work for the region’s stability .
 Overall, Erdoğan has little incentive at home to improve relations with Armenia . Overall, he has little incentives at home.
 He is more likely to expend political capital with nationalists over the more pressing Kurdish issue than Armenia . Besides, he is likely to spend political capital on a second front over Armenia .
 Armenians are wary of the give-and-take between Ankara and Moscow . Azerbaijan has strived to stay on good terms with both countries .
 President Ilham Aliyev shared the stage with Erdoğan and Putin at the October 2016 World Energy Congress in Istanbul . TurkStream pipeline and the Akkuyu nuclear power plant were restarted .
 Baku – like Yerevan – would not necessarily welcome a Russian-Turkish peace initiative in Nagorno-Karabakh . That said, like Baku, would not certainly welcome the initiative .
 Moscow is calling the shots and Ankara playing along. This would be especially true if it perceives Moscow is playing along with Ankara .
 Russia and Turkey could nonetheless use their combined political weight to forestall a new flare-up . The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict remains a tall order .
 The sides from the use of force and even pushing behind the scenes for substantive and honest discussions of a possible peace deal might be feasible .
 Neither Moscow nor Ankara would be served by a fresh outbreak of violence . Moscow and Ankara would not have been served by the violence .
 Another area where Russian and Turkish interests could collide is Georgia’s breakaway region of Abkhazia .
 Located on the Black Sea, the region sought to secede from Georgia in a 1992-1993 war . Georgia declared independence in 1999, and was internationally recognised by Russia and other countries in 2008 .
 Russian missile systems, including the Iskander-M and S-300, were deployed there in 2014 . Since then it has hosted Russian troops, the Russian military has been deployed there .
 Ankara has a special relationship with Sukhumi, Abkhazia’s de facto capital, due largely to the well-organised Ab Khazia and Circassian diasporas in Turkey .
 Georgia has been careful not to let ties with Georgia interfere with its relations with Georgia . Georgia has never signalled it might recognise the breakaway region .
 Georgian-Abkhaz war has maintained commercial and sea transport links to breakaway entity . Abkhazia’s representation office has been allowed to operate in Istanbul .
 Ankara has not prevented private Turkish investment in the region . Ankara also has not stopped private Turkish investments in the area .
 Turkey has been Abkhazia’s second biggest trading partner after Russia, with investment in coal, tourism and agriculture . In fact, Turkey is Turkey's second largest trading partner.
 Abkhazia officials have called for diversifying the region’s foreign partnerships rather than relying on Russia .
 Tbilisi has traditionally been wary of Turkey’s links to Abkhazia . Ankara has managed to navigate both relationships fairly smoothly .
 Georgian politicians have expressed a cautious interest in encouraging trade links with Russia . Some Georgian politicians say they are concerned about potential counterweight to Russia .
 The 2015 Su-24 crisis prompted Moscow to push Abkhaz leaders for the first time to openly side with Russia against Turkey . Russia's leaders have been criticized for not openly supporting Turkey in the past .
 Sukhumi imposed an embargo on some Turkish produce – although the Abkhaz claim to have taken care to target only insignificant items .
 Members of Turkey’s Abkhaz diaspora had problems entering the region via Russia on Turkish passports .
 Some Turkish investors had to take down the Turkish flags in front of their factories and offices .
 Ankara-Moscow relations were quickly reversed as Ankara- Moscow relations improved . The region’s profound sensitivity to shifting geopolitical winds. But these developments quickly reversed .
 In early 2017, the EU started exploring options for extending the benefits of its free trade area with Georgia to Abkhazia .
 It is still unclear whether the Georgians or Abkhaz will make any move that could have implications for the breakaway region’s political status .
 Nor is it clear whether Russia would tolerate that level of EU engagement. It is not clear whether it would tolerate such engagement .
 Turkey has implicitly supported EU efforts by suggesting it would be in Ankara’s interests if a greater variety of outside actors engaged with the conflict region . Turkey, on the other hand, has implicitly support EU efforts.
 The population in Abkhazia has benefited without crossing either side of the red lines . Overall, the carefully calibrated engagement of Ankara and Turkish investors has benefited the population .
 It has not, in other words, introduced additional friction with Moscow, it has not . It has been said to be a problem with Moscow .
 Ankara has strong historical links to the region given that Turkey has long been home to its diaspora communities . Ankara has a strong historical link to the area .
 More recent exiles, many of which are Salafi Muslims known as muhajirs, now live in Turkey after being driven out of their homes .
 These include people from various parts of the North Caucasus, as well as from the Volga/Urals region and elsewhere in Russia .
 Turkey is home to Turkey, mostly in Istanbul’s conservative districts . There are growing intolerance and state persecution in Russia that intensified in the run-up to the Sochi Winter Olympics .
 Turkey has denied supporting Chechen separatists since 1999 . Since 1999, successive Turkish governments have denied supporting separatists .
 Turkish companies have done business in Chechnya despite being subjected to pressure and extortion by the republican leadership .
 Russia abstained from supporting the PKK in late 1998 . In late 1998, it refused PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan asylum, shortly before his capture .
 Russia's intervention in Syria and occasional cooperation with the YPG upended this understanding . Russia’s intervention in the Syrian conflict has been criticized by the YPG .
 Turkey and Russia found themselves on opposing sides in Syria . Ankara had less incentive to address Russian concerns over 10,000-15,000 mostly Muslim émigrés in Istanbul carrying Russian Federation passports .
 Cooperation at the level of security and law enforcement has been rudimentary, both before and after the 2016 reconciliation .
 Turkish police arrested suspects based on information from Russia . 99 Russian attempting to join ISIS.
 Police rounded up at least 50 Russian Muslims suspected of ISIS involvement in the Atatürk bombing .
 Turkish authorities rarely extradite muhajirs that Moscow claims have links to militant groups in Russia . Most Russian nationals are sent to third countries, rather than third countries .
 Moscow views the émigré community as a hotbed of Islamist radicalism . It cites its alleged links to jihadists in Syria, Iraq and elsewhere .
 It points to individuals recruited in Turkey into jihadist movements, including Akhmed Chatayev, a Chechen thought to have masterminded the Istanbul airport attack .
 Petersburg metro bombing was an ethnic Uzbek from Kyrgyzstan who had spent time in Turkey .
 Turkish authorities tend to look favourably on the muhajirs and have granted some political asylum . Turkish authorities, on the other hand, have given some political Asylum .
 Russia-born Salafis typically are staunch supporters of Erdoğan and his party, in contrast to the North Caucasus diaspora that arrived during the 19th century .
 Turkish authorities suspect the involvement of Russian security services in the assassinations in Turkey of prominent Chechens .
 Deputy Prime Minister Bülent Arınç explicitly blamed Russia after the most recent incident in January 2015 .
 Community activists claim Russia has often blacklisted and pressed criminal charges against Russian nationals residing in Turkey without conclusive evidence . Community activists say Russia is often accused of having a criminal record in Turkey .
 Russian law enforcement agencies pressure Turkish authorities to hand over people on its list . Turkish authorities have agreed to cooperate with Russian authorities on criminal matters .
 Continued Russian efforts to pressure Turkey into cracking down on the muhajirs will likely remain a thorn in the side of bilateral ties .
 Ankara can make sporadic arrests and deportations but stop short of fully meeting Russian demands . Ankara can be expected to make sporadic arrest and deportation .
 Russia reclassifies Salafi militias in Syria it previously labelled terrorists as ‘moderate opposition’ The question illustrates the limits of security cooperation between the two governments .
 Improved Turkey-Russia ties are good news for the Turkish economy and for citizens of both nations who suffered the consequences of Moscow’s sanctions after the Su-24 crisis .
 Russia and Turkey are no longer locked in confrontation . It is better, too, for the countries of the Black Sea and the South Caucasus regions that Russia andTurkey are no more locked in conflict .
 The two countries diverge in their aims with regard to those regions’ main pressure points . Yet notwithstanding the recent rapprochement, the two countries differ in their goals .
 Crimea and the Crimean Tatars disagree in Ukraine, particularly over the status of Crimea . They disagree over Crimea's status and Crimean Tatar status .
 Russia's force projection across the Black Sea has upset Ankara enough to prompt it to enable NATO's entry into those waters . It has reversed a decades-old policy of keeping the alliance out .
 Moscow and Ankara were careful not to fuel the latest flare-up over Nagorno-Karabakh . Their interests in the South Caucasus nonetheless conflict and their weapons supply and deployment intensify a build-up in the region .
 The Russian Muslim diaspora in Turkey has not found common ground on the question of Russian Muslims in Turkey .
 improvements in overall relations would lay the groundwork for Russian-Turkish cooperation . Russia and Turkey could bring greater stability to the Black Sea region .
 The two sides could establish military-to-military contacts to avoid accidents involving the two naval forces in the Black Sea .
 Turkey could provide further aid to the Crimean Tatars . Russia could allow it to do so . Turkey could also provide more aid to Crimea .
 The two countries could coordinate efforts to persuade Armenians and Azerbaijanis to avoid any military escalation . They could take confidence-building steps or even even compromise .
 Russia and Turkey should at least prevent regional conflicts from derailing bilateral cooperation . There are important obstacles to having Russia, Turkey seize the opportunity to create such a virtuous cycle, they say .