 A majority of Ukrainians want NATO's and America's protection . It's easy to understand why a majority want NATO’s and U.S. protection, according to the Ukrainians .
 No third party,e., Russia, has any say on who joins the alliance. Western officials insist that no third party has any says on who will join the alliance .
 NATO should add nations only if they increase the security of the whole. NATO should only add nations to the group of nations .
 The U.S. would do most of the heavy lifting in any conflict with nuclear-armed Russia . The critical question is whether adding a new member would increase Americans’ security .
 The current president came to power after a street revolution against the previously elected, though notoriously corrupt, president .
 Wealthy oligarchs still hold disproportionate power, while extreme nationalists exercise worrisome influence . The power of extreme nationalists is still worrisome .
 The country would be a huge security black hole for NATO and especially America . The U.S. would be the biggest security blackhole for NATO .
 Historically Washington had little concern about a territory which spent most of the last two centuries as part of either the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union .
 Ukraine’s independence, though a moral good, didn’t matter much militarily . Ukraine's independence was not a moralGood, but it was a political issue .
 The United States would vastly outrange whatever Russia emerged, irrespective of Kiev’s status . The U.S. would outrangewhatever Russia emerged .
 Today America possesses a substantially stronger military, vastly larger economy, and far greater array of allies than Russia . Today's military is stronger, more powerful and more powerful than Russia's .
 Adding Kiev to NATO would also bring in Ukraine's conflict with Russia . But adding Kiev to the NATO would bring in the conflict with Ukraine .
 Washington should avoid conflict, but it doesn't change the fact that it’s a conflict Washington shouldn’t avoid .
 America simply has no interest at stake at stake worth confronting a nuclear-armed power . America simply wants to avoid nuclear power .
 Russia’s security interests are immediate, serious, and obvious . Especially when Russia's security interests in Russia are immediate and serious .
 Moscow is as a pre-1914 great power, concerned about international respect and secure borders . The best way to understand Moscow today is to be concerned about security, respect and security .
 The U.S. and NATO ignored both when expanding the transatlantic alliance up to Russia’s borders . Serbia, promising Georgia and Ukraine NATO membership, and backing the 2014 street putsch against the elected Viktor Yanukovych .
 NATO's official welcome to Kiev’s membership efforts. Applicants are supposed to resolve any territorial disputes before they are eligible for inclusion .
 That seemingly rules out Ukraine, but only so long as conflict rages in the Donbas . That seems to be the case .
 Kiev’s ongoing pursuit of NATO actually gives Russia an incentive to keep the geopolitical pot boiling .
 The U.S. and Russian governments should go deep to forge a lasting peace . The United States and Russia should consult with the other NATO members, the U.N. says .
 Ukrainians would be free to trade either east or west and Kiev would be able to join the European Union . As part of such an agreement Ukrainians would also be free of joining the EU .
 Ukraine would allow greater regional decentralization, especially in the Donbas . Ukraine would also allow greater decentralization.
 No Russian government is likely to yield Crimea under any circumstance, short of losing a general war . No Russia government will be willing to give Crimea back to Russia .
 The U.S. and Europe should indicate they do not plan to extend security guarantees to Ukraine under any circumstances . However, the United States and Europe are not likely to extend guarantees .
 That would allow all parties to move on in search of a practical resolution to the conflict in Ukraine . That would be the first time all parties have been able to find a solution to the crisis .
 Doug Bandow is the Senior Fellow and former Special Assistant to President Ronald Reagan . Bandow was the former Special assistant to President Reagan .
 NATO should expel Turkey, which seems hell-bent to go the other way. If Ukraine has a long way to go to become a democracy, I'm wondering if it should be expelled .
 Turkey is moving in the direction of Shari'a and away from democratic norms . Turkey should get off the NATO bus.