 Ukraine's former top security official has gone from tracking down Russian spies to fighting what he perceives to be the country’s greatest threat .
 Valentyn Nalyvaichenko told The Daily Signal from his offices in Kiev, Ukraine’s capital .
 Nalyvaichenko, 50, is the former head of the Security Service of Ukraine, or SBU . SBU is Ukraine's successor agency to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic’s branch of the KGB .
 Nalyvaichenko wore a well-appointed suit and tie during his interview with The Daily Signal .
 He spoke fluent English, evidence of his university degree in linguistics . He is a graduate of the University of Cambridge .
Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia in the closing days of the revolution . He took over the security agency for a second time on Feb., 2014, two days after deposed former President Yanukovych .
 Nalyvaichenko has also served as a member of parliament and as Ukraine’s deputy minister of foreign affairs .
 Nalyvaichenko recently traveled to Washington to present evidence to Congress about Russia’s involvement in the war in eastern Ukraine .
 Nalyvaichenko has called for the FBI to investigate the financial crimes of Ukraine’s current and former political leaders .
 He also wants U.S. and EU prosecutors to oversee the adjudication of corruption investigations . He wants Ukraine's newly minted National Anti-Corruption Bureau independent from the executive and judicial branches .
 Ukraine has “several months, two or three months’ to show real progress in anti-corruption measures, Nalyvaichenko says . Western partners begin to break ranks on measures such as maintaining punitive sanctions against Russia .
 Nalyvaichenko’s strategy is to reach out to civil society leaders working at the grassroots level . Within Ukraine, he says, he is trying to help Ukraine's civil society.
 He wants to convince Ukrainians to believe in the democratic process, despite a quarter-century of oligarchic thug rule after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Nalyvaichenko’s two anti-corruption organizations have provided pro bono legal assistance to more than 3,000 Ukrainian citizens involved in court cases against allegedly corrupt officials .
 Nalyvaichenko’s groups have also given free medical care to more than 9,000 civilians in the war zone . More than 8,000 people have been given medical care.
 The hryvnia, Ukraine’s national currency, is currently less than one-third its value against the dollar than it was before the revolution .
 Wages have not concurrently risen to match the falling currency, dramatically reducing Ukrainians' spending power .
 30 percent of Ukrainians surveyed who had visited a doctor in the previous 12 months said they paid a bribe for service . The poll was conducted by the International Republican Institute .
 Among those who interacted with the police, 25 percent said they paid a bribe .
 Ukraine’s Economic Development and Trade Ministry said the shadow economy was 40 percent of the country's gross domestic product in 2015 .
 It also leaves many returning combat veterans, many of whom were drafted, no legal recourse to recover their jobs at the conclusion of their military service . Many returning combat vets, many who were drafted.
 Many veterans previously worked off the books and were paid in cash so their employers could skirt payroll taxes . Many veterans had previously worked in cash to avoid paying taxes .
 72 percent of Ukrainians surveyed said the country was moving in the wrong direction . 11 percent said the nation was on the right track, according to the 2016 International Republican Institute study .
 69 percent of Ukrainians surveyed said the country was moving in the wrong direction . A year prior to the revolution in May 2013, 69 percent said they were moving the country in the right direction . 15 percent said the nation was moving the right way .
 73 percent of Ukrainians disapprove of Poroshenko's performance as president . 87 percent have an unfavorable opinion of their parliament, according to the same poll .
 Nalyvaichenko is among a new breed of Ukrainian reformers who have emerged after the 2014 revolution . The Ukrainian revolution was the first to take place in Ukraine since the revolution .
 Former Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili resigned as governor of Ukraine's Odessa Oblast in November . Nalyvaichenko’s allies are former Georgian President and former Ukrainian governor of Odessa.
 The move was a protest against what Saakashvili claimed was stonewalling by Poroshenko and the majority of Ukraine's political class in implementing anti-corruption reforms .
 Saakashvili has since launched his own anti-corruption party called Wave .
Across the country, political activists and humanitarian workers have enabled the spread of democratic norms . Many millennials are pushing for government accountability at the grassroots level .
Young kids in Zaporizhia and other regions dreamed about another life . How we young, young kids in the region dreamed about a new life .
 The UK has a free market, with the rule of law, for children to create a new country with more opportunities . The UK is one of the world's most successful countries .
 Nalyvaichenko endeavored to purge the security agency of its Soviet KGB past . As head of the SBU, he tried to purge the agency's past .
 Nalyvaichenko spearheaded an effort to open up the SBU’s KGB archives . He launched fresh investigations into Soviet crimes in Ukraine, including Joseph Stalin's organized mass famine in the 1930s .
 Nalyvaichenko tapped young political activists and reformers who had no living memory of life in the Soviet Union . To fill out the SBU’s thinned ranks, he tapped political activists, reformers and activists .
 The solution to beating corruption in Ukraine is to elevate a new generation of political and business leaders, says Nalyvaichenko .
 Nalyvaichenko’s second term as head of the SBU came at a tumultuous time for Ukraine . Nalyvichenko's second term was his second term in office .
 In the months following the February 2014 revolution, Russia launched a hybrid invasion of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula, ultimately annexing the territory .
Pro-Russian separatists and Russian regulars were on the march in eastern Ukraine in 2014 . There were worries then that Ukraine could be cleaved in two, or that Russian forces massed on Ukraine’s borders might stage a large-scale invasion .
 In Kiev, the post-revolution government was at the time trying to establish its legitimacy and follow through on the pro-democratic promise of the revolution .
 Ukraine's armed forces had been gutted by decades of corruption and neglect . Officials were piecing together a military campaign out of the remnants of Ukraine’s armed forces .
 Nalyvaichenko pushed to prosecute corrupt government officials . He also pushed to prosecution corrupt officials .
 In Ukraine, opinions diverge about the hierarchy of threats facing the country .
 A nearly three-year-old war between Ukrainian troops and pro-Russian separatists continues to simmer in the Donbas, Ukraine’s eastern territory on the border with Russia .
 About 10,000 Ukrainians have so far died in the conflict, which has also displaced about 1 million people . About 1. million people have also been displaced by the conflict .
 The war cost Ukraine an equivalent 20 percent of its gross national product in 2015, according to a report by the Institute for Economics and Peace .
 Military and civilian casualties still occur almost every day from landmines, artillery fire, rocket attacks, and small arms gun battles .
 Ukraine’s military has rebuilt itself since 2014, but many front-line soldiers complain that they still aren’t getting basic supplies .
 Nalyvaichenko said the greatest threat facing Ukraine today is not on the battlefields of the Donbas, but within Kiev's government halls .
 Ukraine's military brass says war effort should take priority over any anti-corruption crusades . There is a countervailing, quieter faction, particularly among Ukraine’s military brass .
 Ukrainian military officials who spoke to The Daily Signal on background cautioned against ambitious anti-corruption agendas while the country is still at war . The country is at war with Ukraine .
 Most Ukrainians consider the war to be the biggest threat to the country . The October 2016 International Republican Institute poll says most Ukrainians consider it to be biggest threat .
 Of the Ukrainians surveyed in the poll, 53 percent said the war in the Donbas was the country’s most important issue . 38 percent said corruption was the top issue, compared with 38 percent who singled out corruption .
 Nalyvaichenko spearheaded an investigation into a June 8, 2015, fire at an oil depot near Vasylkiv, Ukraine .
 The investigation allegedly implicated government officials in financial crimes, according to Nalyvaichenko's account of events .
 The investigation also revealed the undisclosed involvement of a Russian company in a Russian oil depot .
 Nalyvaichenko said he personally presented Poroshenko with the evidence . He pushed for the issuance of arrest warrants for Poroshenko .
 Ukraine's parliament votes to approve Nalyvaichenko's ouster . Three days later, Ukraine’s parliament voted to approve his ouster.
The Poroshenko administration declined a request for comment for this article . The Poroshenko government declined to comment .
 The SBU defended its track record of investigating and prosecuting corrupt officials . But, in an emailed statement to The Daily Signal, the SBU says it has a track record.
 Nalyvaichenko acknowledged that Ukraine has made some progress in fighting corruption . He said the past few years of investigations have largely targeted midand low-level government officials .