 C O R P O R AT I O N Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements . Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available for this publication .
 The escalation in tensions between Russia and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization since 2014 has led to numerous proposals to enhance U.S. and NATO posture on the Alliance’s eastern flank .
 NATO faces imbalance in conventional capabilities in regions bordering Russia, such as Baltics . Despite its overall military advantages, NATO faces a clear imbalance in the Baltics.
Analysts and policymakers have designed proposals to increase the apparent costs and reduce the probability of success of any attack on a NATO member that Russia might contemplate .
 The U.S. and NATO want to produce a change in Russian behavior . The goal is to improve posture in Russia .
 The nature of Russian responses will determine the utility and advisability of whatever actions NATO decides to take .
 Potential Russian reactions could run the gamut, from tacit acceptance of U.S. and NATO actions and a reduction in any willingness to consider an attack on NATO .
 Russia could also respond to U.S. and NATO military moves by attempting to exploit nonmilitary vulnerabilities in the United States or other NATO countries . Russia could respond to United States and NATO moves by trying to exploit vulnerabilities .
 Assessing the likelihood of potential Russian reactions is a vital component of any analysis regarding which posture enhancements the U.S. and NATO should pursue .
 This report develops a framework that analysts can use for this purpose . This report will help analysts develop a framework for analysts to use this purpose.
 The research was commissioned by Brig Gen Mark D Camerer, United States Air Forces in Europe . It was conducted within the Strategy and Doctrine Program of RAND Project AIR FORCE .
 The research was prepared under contract FA7014-16-D-1000 . The research reported here was prepared by FA7013-16.
 Key Factors Likely to Affect Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements. Key Factors likely to affect Russian Reaction to United States .
 NATO faces imbalance in conventional capabilities in regions bordering Russia, such as Baltics . Despite its overall military advantages, NATO faces an imbalance in the Baltics.
 Analysts have made additional proposals that would represent more dramatic changes in U.S. and NATO posture . Some enhancements are in the process of being implemented following the 2016 NATO Warsaw Summit .
 Determining the likelihood of potential Russian reactions is therefore a vital component of any analysis regarding which capability and posture enhancements the U.S. and NATO should pursue .
 Analysts have failed to predict Russian actions in the past, most notably the 2014 invasion and annexation of Crimea .
 The failure of Russian behavior underlines the importance of morerigorous study and analysis, despite difficulties involved .
 Building a Framework for Assessing Russian Reactions . Report develops an analytical framework to better understand how Russia is likely to react to potential U.S. and NATO posture enhancements .
 This framework draws on an analysis of three main sources of information . This framework includes a look at three main source of information.
 The Russians have written about U.S. and NATO intentions, United States and NATO capabilities, Russian strategic objectives, and related issues .
 Russia has a robust culture of writing and discussion regarding strategic issues, says author . Russia's culture is a strong culture of talking and discussion about strategic issues . Russia is a great place to discuss strategic issues.
 Russian history has prompted strong Russian reactions in the past . Second, we examined the historical record to see what issues have prompted strongRussian reactions .
 Russia and NATO members have had more ix x Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements than two decades of post-Soviet strategic interactions . Russian military and economic capabilities have had substantial variation in relative Russian economic and military capabilities .
 Russia has reacted to events in the past but its future reactions will not be similar . We can analyze these events to better understand Russia's interests and the relative importance Russia appears to place on different issues .
Third, we reviewed the extensive academic and policy literature on issues that pertain to Russian strategic thinking . Third, we looked at the extensive Academic and Policy literature .
 We considered unique aspects of Russia’s history and domestic politics, as well as how states generally respond to political and security challenges like those Russia faces today .
 Concepts from international relations literature, such as diversionary warfare and security dilemma, may have substantial relevance for understanding Russian motivations and behaviors going forward .
Analysts should consider possible Russian reactions to U.S. and NATO posture enhancements . The United States and NATO have been criticized by Russia for their posture changes .
 We also conducted case studies of key moments in Russian-NATO interactions over the past 20 years . The 1999 Kosovo War, the 2002 decision to offer NATO membership to the Baltic States, the 2008 Georgia War, and the 2014 crisis in Ukraine are examples .
 The report examines the potential for changes in Russian intentions or motivations . We do not separate these intentions as a distinct key factor, treating them instead as an intermediate variable .
 The 2016 Warsaw Summit and the United States’ ongoing European Reassurance Initiative are already in progress . The U.S. is currently working on a new European reassurance initiative .
 The enhancements are likely to be implemented over the near term when the strategic and Russian contexts in which they will take place are most similar to the present . These enhancements will likely be implemented in the future .
 Overall, our analysis suggests that NATO’s deterrent against a conventional attack by Russia on a NATO member is currently strong .
 Implementation of already announced U.S. and NATO posture enhancements is most likely to further decrease this already low risk of an attack . Implementation of the new posture enhancements will likely increase the risk of a terrorist attack .
 NATO and the United States would respond militarily to any aggression against the Baltic States or other NATO allies where posture enhancements are being implemented . The current strength of NATO’s deterrent stems from its large edge in overall conventional capabilities and the strong signals .
 Russia perceives that any aggressive actions sufficient to trigger Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty would result in direct military conflict with at least several key NATO members . It is highly likely that Russia perceiving that anyaggressive actions would lead to direct conflict .
 Russia retains substantial defensive capabilities of its own, particularly its nuclear deterrent . NATO posture enhancements currently in progress would be used for direct aggression against Russian territory over the near term .
 There is currently little evidence that Russia is interested in a direct military conflict with the U.S.
 Russia does not appear to count any current NATO territory, including the Baltic States . It is willing to use force to preserve its influence in the region .
 Russia has used military force in post-Soviet states over the past two decades . Russia has conducted numerous lower-level provocations involving NATO allies . It has taken no actions that approach to invoking Article 5 .
 Russia's behavior appears to have been highly sensitive to military costs . Russia has undertaken operations in Ukraine, such as in Ukraine .
 A direct attack on a NATO member in response to posture enhancements currently in progress would represent a level of cost and risk acceptance that has no precedence in prior Russian behavior .
Under current strategic and Russian domestic conditions, such benefits are likely to be marginal . Further enhancements could send a stronger signal of U.S. and NATO willingness to defend Alliance members .
 The risks of an aggressive Russian reaction may be growing, experts say . The risk of a military conflict between Russia and NATO is growing .
 Russian elites increasingly appear to have concluded that the long-term goals of the U.S. and NATO are not compatible with the current regime in Moscow .
 Russian leaders have noted with concern the steady conventional posture enhancements in Eastern Europe . Russia views as clearly within its sphere of influence .
Until it changes, this perception is likely to continue to increase the risk of conflict in Europe . Until it is changed, this risk of Conflict in Europe will continue to rise .
 Moscow has a strong hold on power, but there are long-term domestic threats to the Kremlin . The lack of certainty regarding how a transition to a post-Putin leadership would be handled, and potential for more-virulent nationalists to become a more powerful political force .
 NATO has consistently expressed a clear commitment to the defense of all of its members . That commitment could weaken, or appear to weaken, under different political leadership in the U.S. or other NATO countries .
 If this were to occur, the risk of miscalculation and misperception between Russia and NATO over redlines could substantially increase . In turn, it could raise the potential for inadvertent escalation and direct conflict .
 A Russian attack on NATO in the near term is highly unlikely, we assess . It also seems probable that Russia will explore other avenues to signal its displeasure with U.S. and NATO posture enhancements .
 Russia has already announced that it intends to adjust its domestic force posture on its western borders to compensate for a larger NATO presence . Russia has said it will adjust its national force posture.
 Russia has used a variety of mechanisms to respond to U.S. and NATO actions that it perceives as threatening . These include withdrawing from multilateral security treaties, sending forces for provocative out-of-area deployments in the Americas .
 Other options to protest U.S. and NATO enhancements could include targeting cross-domain areas of asymmetric concern . Other options could include cyber attacks on politically or economically sensitive Western targets .
 The U.S. and NATO posture enhancements on the Alliance’s eastern flank could evolve over the next decade . We conducted a scenario analysis of how Russia and NATO could evolve .
 The U.S. and NATO posture enhancements in the Baltic region have the potential to be destabilizing, says the author . Such enhancements would tend to enhance deterrence and limit the risk of conflict, he says .
 The main aim of this report was to build this analytical framework . Several key points emerged from the illustrative application of the framework to ongoing or proposed U.S. and NATO posture enhancements .
 Russia currently assesses that direct aggression against a NATO member would likely result in a very damaging, and potentially disastrous, military conflict . Combine that with NATO’s clear overall edge in conventional capabilities, and it is likely that Russia would likely be concerned .
 Russian elites appear to have increasingly concluded that the United States and NATO represent long-term political and potentially military threats to the current regime in Moscow .
 Many Russian policymakers appear to believe that the prospects for a stable, long-term accommodation with the U.S. and NATO are limited .
 This perception, if not reversed, represents an unstable feature of the European security order that increases the risk of conflict, inadvertent or otherwise . This perception is an unstable factor of the EU security order, says the author .
 Review of Russian documents and recent Russian strategic literature found very little discussion of Baltic States as an important strategic area .
 Russia is continuing to take limited aggressive actions toward the Baltic States through political, media, intelligence, and cyber efforts . To be sure, Russia has taken and is taking limited actions .
 The Baltics are in sharp contrast to some other former Soviet states, such as Ukraine and Georgia, which represent a much greater focus . This lack of discussion of the Baltics was in sharp Contrast with some other ex-Soviet states .
 Any Russian decision to confront NATO militarily over the Baltics would not appear to come from any existing vein of Russian strategic thinking .
 Russian actions since 2014, and arguably since 2008, have shown an increasing willingness to take calculated risks to achieve strategic goals . These actions have all had very limited military costs, says Russian military expert .
 Russian campaigns in Ukraine and Syria exceeded what most analysts would have considered likely . But they have remained militarily limited affairs and have targeted adversaries with capabilities clearly inferior to Russia .
 Russian assistance to rebels in eastern Ukraine appears to have been gradually calibrated to give enough assistance to stave off defeat . But little more than that appears to be the case .
 Russia has been willing to accept large costs is in the economic realm . Western sanctions have limited Moscow’s ability to cope with and respond to the decline in the price of hydrocarbons .
 Russia has yet to risk substantial resources in any of its aggressive actions . Militarily, however, Russia has not risked substantial resources to risk any aggressive action .
There are important long-term trends that may eventually threaten the regime’s hold on power . The evidence suggests that the regime in Moscow is currently stable, but there are important trends that could eventually threaten it .
 The country's poor economic performance, the lack of clarity regarding a post-Putin leadership, and the potential for morevirulent nationalists to become a more powerful political force. These include, most notably, the country’s poor economy performance, and a lack of clearer
 The main theme of this report is that Russian reactions to U.S. and NATO posture enhancements may vary considerably depending on the context in which they take place . The main issue is that Russia's reactions to the United States.
 Policymakers should consider whether the advisability of certain enhancements is dependent on specific conditions that may be subject to change or could help achieve United States goals in a wider range of possible futures .
 Enhancements whose benefits are highly context-dependent should be pursued with greater caution . Enhancements that are very context- dependent should be followed with greater cautious caution .
 The key strategic and Russian domestic political factors identified in this report provide a list of potential signposts that analysts can monitor to aid posture enhancement decisions . The key factors identified are the key strategic, Russian political factors.
 Many posture enhancements require years of lead time to execute properly, so the precise context in which they come to fruition may differ substantially from the context they began .
 There is a danger that projects are completed on ‘autopilot’ which can inadvertently signal aggressive intent under changed circumstances .
 NATO announced in May 2016 that the missile defense site in Romania had been completed and that ground would soon be broken on a similar site in Poland . In May 2016, NATO announced that the site would be completed in Romania .
 At the same time, NATO was floating a separate set of posture enhancement proposals connected with the upcoming Warsaw Summit .
 The timing helped to undercut U.S. assurances that Russia was not the target of the missile defense systems .
 Policymakers should consider delaying final completion or announcements of posture enhancements that may take place during times of heightened tension . Policy makers should routinely reassess posture decisions in the process of being implemented .
 Russia has long maintained that such systems as ballistic missile defense have the potential to affect strategic stability . Such systems are highly threatening, Russia has maintained .
 Russia's concerns appear to be sincerely held. Western analysts often point out that these systems lack the technical capabilities to affect a nuclear arsenal as large as Russia's .
 Russia’s second-strike nuclear deterrent or security of its command and control systems. This may be due to fears about the long-term development and scalability of these systems .
 Russia may be willing to run substantial risks to forestall further development of systems that may affect strategic stability . Russia's nuclear deterrent is central to its security .
 The disconnect between the two sides over the implications of NATO development of these systems thus has the potential to lead to conflict . The two sides have not been able to reach agreement over the issue .
 Posture and capability enhancements are important tools that the U.S. and NATO can use to minimize the risk of Russian aggression against NATO members .
 policymakers will need to pay careful attention to the manner in which the enhancements are executed and the context in which they are undertaken to maximize their effectiveness .
 The authors wish to thank Brig Gen Mark D Camerer at United States Air Forces in Europe for sponsoring this research. Acknowledgment is acknowledgment .
 The staff at USAFE Headquarters A5/8/9 also provided helpful feedback on an early draft of this research . The staff also provided useful feedback on the early draft.
 The project’s principal investigator, David Ochmanek, gave tireless encouragement and clear guidance throughout the project .
 Olga Oliker and Catherine Dale provided tremendously helpful reviews that substantially improved this document . OlgaOliker andatherine Dale provided tremendous helpful reviews .
R RAND colleagues Paula Thornhill, Melissa McDonough, Andrew Radin, Scott Boston, Clint Reach, and Dara Massicot. We also wish to thank our colleagues for supporting our work and providing valuable comments .
 Several analysts have assessed the military utility of proposed enhancements and their likely effect on the outcome of a conventional conflict between Russia and NATO in the region .
 Potential Russian reactions could run the gamut, from tacit acceptance of U.S. and NATO actions and a reduction in any willingness to consider an attack on NATO .
 Analysts have failed to predict Russian actions in the past, most notably the 2014 invasion and annexation of Crimea .
 Many existing analyses of the strategic situation in Eastern Europe tend to make strong assumptions regarding Russian motivations and decisionmaking .
In much of the existing policy discussion on Russia and the Baltics, contending camps have often spoken past one another . As a result, in many cases, they have spoken past each other .
 Wargaming the Defense of the Baltics, Santa Monica, California, 2016 .
 NATO would carry a very high potential for escalation across the nuclear threshold . Such a contingency might be politically challenging for NATO, would almost certainly be devastating for Baltics .
 These hawks generally advocate greater NATO forward posture to deter Russian military incursions into the Baltics . Seeking to avoid these risks, these hawks seek to avoid the risks .
 Russian leaders would be willing to run tremendous risks for the opportunity to hand NATO a political, and possibly military, defeat, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia would be prepared to run huge risks for a political and possiblyMilitary defeat .
 Russia may have the capabilities to launch such attacks, analysts say . But it has little incentive to do so, they say .
 Russia would be left with a choice between devastating conventional defeat or an even more devastating escalation to nuclear confrontation . Once NATO concentrates its forces, its military capabilities are much greater than Russia's .
 Russia would leave itself in a potentially catastrophic fiscal situation if the West responded with aggressive economic sanctions . Even if NATO were not to react militarily, without a major rebound in prices for oil and gas, Russia would be in a potential catastrophic financial situation .
 Russia has not demonstrated such recklessness at any point in recent history, says Peter Bergen . Taking such risks for a prize as peripheral to Russian vital interests would require Russian decisionmakers to accept risk to the point of recklessness .
 The U.S. and NATO capabilities and Western political institutions are not perceived as existential threats to the Russian regime . The arguments generally rest on the assumptions that the incentives of Russian leaders are largely aligned with Russian national interests .
 Both sides in these debates explore important aspects of the issue . The Framework for Assessing Russian Reactions is designed to assess Russian perceptions .
 Before outlining what this report does, it is important to make clear what it does not do, it's important to do .
 Russian reactions are not the sole goal of U.S. or NATO policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's response to the U.N. has been criticized by the United States and NATO .
 Russia would likely, at least temporarily, reduce the risk of a Russian attack on bordering states . For example, acquiescing to Russian demands to let Russia define its own sphere of influence and maintain ultimate control .
Doing so would also run counter to long-standing NATO policy and security commitments, with potentially serious strategic consequences . Doing so could also runcounter to NATO policy.
 It could embolden Russia to expand its goals in the region in ways that further threaten U.S. and NATO strategic interests . It could also embolden Russian to expand goals in region that threaten the United States and NATO .
 The likelihood of a Russian attack on a NATO member needs to be carefully assessed, says the report . Russian influence over NATO posture decisions should not be determinative, the report says .
 This report is also not designed to make definitive pronouncements about Russian reactions . This report was also not intended to make a definitive pronouncement about Russia .
 The report is based entirely on publicly available information . It discusses some decisions that may not be made for several years, when important conditions may have changed .
 The report develops a framework that analysts can use now and in the future to assess likely Russian reactions to the U.S. and NATO posture enhancements .
 The report illustrates how this framework can be applied to specific posture enhancements being considered for Eastern Europe today . The primary value of the report is the framework itself, rather than our own application of it .
 The Organization of This Report undertakes several analytical tasks . It will assess Russian reactions to NATO posture enhancements .
 In Chapter Two, we briefly summarize existing United States and NATO posture in Europe . We detail several ongoing or proposed efforts to enhance this posture . We also describe the posture of Russian forces .
 In Chapter Four, we demonstrate how these key factors can be used to assess likely Russian reactions to U.S. and NATO posture enhancements . The next one to three years and further into the future could be the future, they say .
 Chapter Five discusses the policy implications that stem from our analysis . Chapter Five also discusses the impact of our analysis on the economy .
 Appendix A consists of case studies of notable episodes in the NATO-Russia relationship over the past 20 years . It illustrates those factors that appear to have played key roles in Russian decisionmaking in past .
 Appendix B includes overview summary of key NATO and Russian interactions and points of tension since 1995 . Appendix B also includes overview of NATO and Russia interactions since 1995.
 This chapter summarizes several of the most prominent of these proposals . This chapter includes some of the best proposals for the future .
 It also places these proposals in context by briefly surveying current Russian posture and capabilities and historical and current NATO posture in Europe . The proposal is also placed in context.
Assessing the size, location, and capabilities of posture enhancements may play a role in determining Russian reactions . Other factors that will be discussed in Chapter Three will also be discussed .
 A detailed analysis of the proposed posture enhancements’ effects on the balance of forces in specific conflict scenarios is beyond the scope of this study . The study will look at the impact of the posture enhancements on thebalance of forces.
 The size and scope of these enhancements relative to current Russian, NATO, and U.S. forces can help provide important context for our analysis .
 NATO Posture in Europe and Overall Capabilities Historic Posture NATO posture has evolved significantly since the Alliance’s formation in 1949 . NATO Postures in Europe have evolved significantly.
 During the Cold War, the size and placement of NATO forces were largely driven by estimates of the balance of conventional military forces between NATO and Warsaw Pact in Europe .
 Those estimates shifted throughout the Cold War and were often the subject of vigorous debate . The Cold War was often subject of fierce debate .
 The Soviet Union enjoyed a quantitative edge over the West in personnel and conventional arms . Overall, the Soviet Union and its allies enjoyed a qualitative edge over West in military personnel and arms .
 The concept of massive retaliation, adopted by NATO in the 1950s, was largely a response to this development . The concept was largely the response to the development of NATO's "massive retaliation" in the 1960s .
 This strategy sought to offset the conventional disparity by responding to a Soviet assault with overwhelming force in the form of a U.S.-led nuclear attack . This strategy was aimed at offset the traditional disparity in the Soviet assault .
 doubts grew about NATO's willingness to respond to a conventional attack with nuclear weapons . However, as the Cold War progressed, the Soviet Union developed a formidable nuclear arsenal .
 NATO would maintain a wider suite of deterrence options along a continuum of force, from conventional formations to nuclear weapons . The strategy took precedence.
 NATO’s conventional deterrent now had the larger role of preventing a Warsaw Pact assault into the members of the Alliance . NATO's conventional deterrent has now had a larger role.
 Most of NATO's forces in the Central Region were positioned close to the interGerman border in a forward defense posture . To achieve this goal, most of NATO’s forces were positioned near the inter German border .
 NATO forces grew substantially from the adoption of flexible response until the end of the Cold War . Befitting the increased importance placed on the conventional deterrent, NATO forces grow substantially from a flexible response .
 In the mid-1980s, Warsaw Pact militaries could field 6 million troops compared with NATO’s 4. million . In the 1980s, the Warsaw Pact could field more than 4 million troops and maintain larger quantities of military equipment .
 NATO forces during the later Cold War period were postured with the goal of denying the Soviet Union the ability to achieve a rapid conquest of vital allies . But not all NATO territory could plausibly be defended in this manner .
 NATO relied on threats to escalate any conflict there to a wider war with unacceptable costs . West Berlin was never militarily defensible in its own right, and to deter Soviet aggression against the city .
 Large conventional NATO forces persisted in Western Europe until the end of the Cold War . They were deemed unnecessary when they were deemed necessary .
 With the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, NATO began to rely less on forward-deployed main defense forces and more on rapid reaction forces and augmentation forces .
Crisis management, bilateral military engagement, and conflict prevention, were viewed as increasingly important Alliance tasks in the post-Cold War environment . New responsibilities, such as crisis management, were seen as increasingly crucial .
 Collective defense remained NATO’s foundational mission, but that mission was now accomplished through ‘defense in depth’ rather than forward deployments . The mission is now accomplished by “defense in Depth’ instead of forward deployments.
 Current Posture currently, even after dramatic post-Cold War NATO force reductions, is now decidedly in NATO’s favor .
 The Alliance does have a significant advantage in military personnel over the Russian Federation . The size of forces needs to be considered alongside other factors, such as readiness levels .
 Overall, NATO’s 28 members field 3. million active military personnel, although this figure includes many U.S. forces stationed in other regions .
 Theater Employment Doctrine for the Post-Cold War Era, Santa Monica, Calif. RAND Corporation, R-4084-A, 1992b.
 U.S. Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 1995, 4 9 NATO, ‘Defence Expenditures of NATO Countries’ press release, Brussels, January 28, 2016a.
 The situation facing NATO most vulnerable to possible Russian aggression reveals a different pattern . However, the situation facing those members of NATO most likely to be at risk .
 All of the blue-shaded countries on the map indicate NATO members in Europe . The map shows all of the countries in the region.
 Those on the Alliance’s eastern flank, geographically closer to Russian territory, are shown in the two darker shades of blue . The darkest shade indicates NATO members in the Baltic region .
 The total military manpower of NATO’s eastern-flank members is about half a million active personnel . NATO's total military personnel is 3. million active people .
 The total falls even further when focusing only on NATO members in the Baltic region . Most of the NATO members are in the Polish armed forces, most of whom are Polish .
 NATO’s eastern flank includes Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Slovakia .
 We see a similar pattern when examining military power in terms of major combat units . We see similar patterns when examining the military power of major units .
 NATO forces are not deployed in Eastern Europe and would be hard pressed to quickly reach a beleaguered member state in the event of a short-warning Russian attack . Most NATO forces aren't deployed in the region .
 Russia is at a significant disadvantage when compared with overall NATO military power, according to the U.S. military power . But that disadvantage does not persist when considering the balance of forces only in certain areas of Eastern Europe, such as the Baltic region .
 Most of these forces are located outside of Eastern Europe, except for the few in the Baltic region . However, most of them are located in the eastern European region .
 Poland accounts for the vast majority of NATO-member ground forces in the Baltic region . Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania have limited military capabilities . Poland is home to the majority of ground forces .
 Most of these assets are based in Western Europe, but their utility to defend NATO members in Eastern Europe is not affected by distance in the same way ground forces are .
 NATO subset categories include United States forces stationed in Europe . U.S. forces in Europe are stationed in the NATO subset category .
 IHS Markit, Jane’s World Air Forces, London, 2016a; International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2016. IHSMarkit,Jane's World Air Force, London.
 For patrol coastal combatants, carriers and amphibious vehicles, see IHS Markit, Jane’s World Navies, London, 2016c . For principal surface combatants, see International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2016 .
 Aircraft carriers are vessels with a flat deck primarily designed to carry fixedand/or rotary-wing aircraft . Aircraft carriers, including helicopter carriers, are also known as helicopter carriers .
 The U.S. Posture in Europe and Overall Capabilities are among the factors to look at in Europe .
 The United States is the largest, most militarily capable actor in NATO . Most of the proposed enhancements focus heavily on changes to U.S. posture .
 The alliance with the United States specifically is seen as the ultimate guarantee of their security, over and above the broader NATO alliance . For many allies, such as Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, the alliance with U.S. specifically is considered as a guarantee .
 Initially, that presence was relatively small, focused more on postwar occupation duties than on the defense of Europe . Now that presence is more focused more than on military duties .
 U.S. policymakers had become alarmed at the threat posed by the Soviet Union and the Communist bloc . The threat had manifested itself in the Berlin Blockade and the Korean War .
 Growing Soviet military conventional and then nuclear capabilities provided the impetus for the United States to shift its role from postwar occupier to guarantor of European security .
 Once the need for a large United States presence in Europe was recognized, U.S. defense policy became intrinsically linked with NATO . NATO relied heavily on United States involvement .
 United States forces deployed in Europe peaked at 450,000 in the mid-1950s and hovered around 300,000 throughout the Cold War . U.S. forces in Europe were deployed in the 1950s and 1950s .
 With the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military presence fell significantly . The United States military presence dropped significantly .
 Its military personnel in Europe dropped to around 120,000 in the 1990s . The military population in Europe fell to about 120,00 in the 90s .
 The latest downsizing in Europe began in 2012 in the midst of budget constraints and changing foreign policy priorities . The decline has continued to the present, with 65,000 U.S. troops on the continent in 2015 .
 Europe at the time was seen as a relatively secure region that could afford the reductions in strength . Europe at that time was thought to be a relatively safe region .
 United States European Command by 2014 lost two infantry brigade combat teams and two Air Force squadrons to this drawdown .
 Other notable units include the 10th Army Air and Missile Defense Command and the 12th Combat Aviation Brigade . The 12th combat Aviation Brigade is also a notable unit .
 Some heavy equipment was left behind in Europe in the form of the Army’s European Activity Set to offset the withdrawal of two brigade combat teams . But this prepositioned materiel is only capable of filling out one battalion's complement of armored vehicles .
 The potential for a return of heavy U.S. forces to Europe is at the center of many current proposals and policy initiatives . The potential of a return to the United States is in the spotlight .
 The U.S. Force Posture, European Military Capability, Russian Resurgence, and Public Opinion, thesis, are all published .
 The U.S. Air Forces in Europe and Air Forces Africa, “Units,’ web page, undated. Wood, 2016; United States Army Europe,  undated .
 The U.S. Navy’s 6th Fleet is responsible for naval operations in Europe .
 Four Arleigh Burke–class guided missile destroyers and the USS Mount Whitney command ship form the core of Naval Forces Europe . The USS MountWhitney command ship is the most powerful ship in the world .
Four destroyers and a recently activated land-based Aegis system are key elements in the U.S.-led NATO missile defense program . The four destroyers are equipped with the Aegis missile defense system .
 The Marine Corps’ most significant contribution comes in the form of a 1,500-strong SPMAGTF . Several combat and logistics aviation squadrons are based in Europe under the umbrella of United States Air Forces Europe .
 Seven major bases in Italy, Turkey, Germany, and the United Kingdom are home to fighter, transport, and logistics squadrons . The United Kingdom has seven major bases.
 Russia has the ability to move forces within its own territory . Such movements also require time and are generally visible to NATO observers .
 It is still useful to identify which Russian units are based in which geographic locations . It is therefore still useful for Russian units.
 Forces in the Western Military District are most salient for considerations of a short-warning scenario involving states in the Baltic region . forces in the Southern Military District may be more relevant for scenarios involving Romania, Bulgaria, or Turkey, and the Central Military District .
Current Russian forces are substantially fewer in number than the aggregate forces that NATO can bring to bear . Current Russian forces have roughly 800,000 active Russian military personnel .
 Alex Welens, “Areas of Responsibility of the 5 Operational Strategic Commands of the Russian Armed Forces since Dec 15th, 2014,’s July 15, 2016 .
 RAND RR1879-2.2 military districts and the Arctic Joint Strategic Command are based in the Arctic.
In terms of active forces, reserve forces, main battle tanks, combat aircraft, and principal surface combatants, NATO has far more capabilities . NATO has more capabilities than ever before .
 Few of these forces belong to NATO members nearest the Russian border . However, relatively few of these are NATO members near the border .
 NATO may at least initially face a local balance of capabilities that is strongly in favor of Russia .
 NATO’s current posture implies that in the event of a short-warning, concerted attack from Russia on, the Baltic States may be unable to bring sufficient combat power to bear to defeat or substantially delay the offensive .
 European NATO Member figures count only forces from European members, and exclude United States forces stationed in Europe .
 Even similarly sized units may have radically different capabilities because of differences in technological sophistication, training, or readiness .
 This broad-brush comparison does help provide a sense of the scale of existing NATO, U.S. and Russian forces . The imbalances they reveal are revealed as we assess the planned posture initiatives taken and the proposed enhancements to NATO posture discussed .
 The Alliance is taking steps to rectify this apparent local imbalance in capabilities . The European Reassurance Initiative and the decisions taken at the Warsaw Summit in July 2016, the Alliance says .
 The situation is naturally concerning to frontline Eastern European states in the wake of Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania face the prospect of needing to have all or most of their territory retaken in a NATO counterattack . Many such states, including Estonia and Latvia, have little space to trade for time .
 Funding for the ERI was first requested for the U.S. government’s 2015 fiscal year, with subsequent requests introducing additional programs .
 ERI support intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance programs . Other components include joint U.S.-NATO exercises, training, and enhancements to defense infrastructure .
 The ERI has grown since its first iteration in 2015 . For fiscal year 2017, the initiative provides $3. billion and a number of new programs .
 Under the operation, each U.S. military branch has 29 White House, ‘Remarks by President Obama and President Komorowski of Poland in a Joint Press Conference’
 Current, Planned, and Proposed Postures in Europe 17 conducted a series of training exercises and rotational deployments . The exercises were designed to demonstrate the United States commitment to the NATO alliance .
 An open-ended operation, Atlantic Resolve will run as long as current European security situation dictates .
 The Alliance’s RAP was inaugurated at the NATO Summit in Newport, Wales .
 The former cover air patrols, maritime surveillance missions, training, and military exercises . The former primarily cover air patrol, maritime Surveillance missions and training .
 RAP's adaptation measures seek to bolster NATO force structure and improve the Alliance's ability to respond to security threats . The RAP’s adaptation measures, meanwhile, seek to boost NATO force structures .
 The NRF is not a new formation, but it was first established in 2002 . It received new attention in the wake of the Wales Summit and the adoption of the RAP. 40 NATO members contribute naval, land, air, and special operations forces .
 Before the Wales Summit, 13,000 NATO personnel fell within the NRF . The RAP emphasized increasing that number .
 The VJTF is designed to be prepared to deploy forces to threatened areas within two to three days . It is one of the RAP's more prominent innovations .
 NATO Force Integration Units were stood up in Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, and the Baltic States .
 The units comprise small headquarters staffs and function as coordination nodes between NATO forces during exercises or deployments .
 In particular, the units 35 United States European Command, “Operation Atlantic Resolve—Fact Sheet 2016,’ April 15, 2016, is 1. The units 35 U.S. European Command and 35 United Nations European Command.
 Wales RAP was not envisioned to adequately address deterrence . However, the Wales R AP was not envisaged to adequatelyaddress deterrence .
 The new VJTF was unlikely to have any marked impact in the case of a Russian invasion, given the task force's small size .
 The VJTF would be too slow to deploy to the Baltics in a defensive scenario and too vulnerable to hostile forces upon its arrival .
 NATO's easternmost members lobbied for more-robust posture improvements than those unveiled in Wales . NATO’s easternmost member members lobbied.
 Polish President Andrej Duda has called for NATO bases in Eastern Europe as part of a more permanent Alliance presence in the region .
 Polish government officials reiterated their intention to push for permanent stationing of forces during the summit in May 2016 . In May 2016, Polish officials reiterated that they wanted to stationing forces in Poland .
 Lieutenant General Riho Terras has called for the deployment of U.S. Patriot missile systems to protect the Baltic States .
 NATO agreed to create “an enhanced forward presence’ on its eastern flank by way of rotational deployments of multinational formations . NATO agrees to create an “ enhanced forward force’s” on the eastern flank .
 Four battalion-sized units will be deployed to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland in 2017 . Canada, Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom will also be deployed in 2017.
 Poland will repurpose one of its divisional headquarters to act as the headquarters of a multinational division . In addition, Poland will also act as a headquarters of its multinational division.
 A multinational framework brigade will be created in Romania using an existing Romanian brigade as a foundation . Further, a multinational framework brigade will be built in Romania .
 The NATO Warsaw Summit is held in Brussels, Belgium .
Current, Planned, and Proposed Postures in Europe 19 Posture Enhancement Proposals . Western policy and defense analysts have attempted to come to terms with the problem of deterrence on the Alliance’s eastern border and in the Baltic States .
 Many of these proposals would take many years longer to implement than the posture enhancements currently under way . Many of the proposals include recommendations that would take several years to implement .
 The Russian government has proposed new proposals in the past . The proposals will be discussed in Chapter Four of the book . The book also includes an analysis of the proposals .
 RAND Corporation, 2017, not available to the general public .
 The U.S. Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 2016 . The Atlantic Council, May 2016, is the first of its kind .
 Russian forces could reach the doorsteps of the Baltic capitals in 36 to 60 hours, according to the report . Current NATO forces are available in Europe .
 The small number of lightly equipped NATO formations able to deploy to the Baltics before the invasion proved incapable of stopping or meaningfully impeding a numerically superior and more heavily equipped Russian foe .
 The study found through subsequent games featuring different NATO posture levels that seven brigades could potentially prevent a rapid Russian takeover .
Not all of these brigades would need to be positioned in the Baltic States, study says .
 Lighter, infantry-based formations could be positioned elsewhere in Europe and rely on their high mobility to quickly respond to threatening Russian troop movements . Lighter formations could also be positioned in Europe.
 The three heavy brigades would need to be in the Baltic States ahead of the onset of hostilities .
 This posture could be achieved by placing the brigades in Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania on a full-time or rotational basis . The brigades could also be placed in Estonia or Latvia .
Only the brigades’ equipment could be prepositioned, with the necessary complement of troops arriving by air as necessary . Alternatively, only the brigade’s equipment can be pre-positioned .
 Russia says an assault on the Baltics would not be an easy proposition . These seven brigades would still be outnumbered by an opposing force, but their presence would significantly increase the costs and risks associated with an attack .
 Station and preposition equipment and sustainment for roughly three U.S. ABCTs in the Baltic States .
 Through arms sales and training, help the Baltic States to enhance the capabilities of their forces to slow, damage, and destroy mechanized ground forces .
 Work with NATO allies to identify and raise readiness and availability of armored forces that can constitute an operational reserve for forward-based forces .
 Develop and field enhancements to U.S. and allied capabilities designed to rapidly suppress and destroy enemy air defenses . Develop andField enhancements to United States and allied capability designed to quickly suppress anddestroy enemy air defense .
 New systems could include new systems for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance . These could include targeting; jamming; and strike .
Develop and field effective area munitions for attacks on armored and mechanized forces . Develop and fieldeffective area munitions. Develop and Field effective areas to attack armored forces .
 Large stocks of these weapons would need to be deployed in-theater in peacetime . The weapons would be needed to be in theater in the future .
 U.S. Army’s Indirect Fire Protection Capability Increment 2 system. Develop and field effective short-range air defense systems, such as the United States Army's Indirect fire protection system .
 These systems would be stationed in-theater at main air bases and near other critical nodes for logistics and for command and control . The systems would also be stationed at critical nodes in the air bases .
 The study includes recommendations for several long-term investments in Air Force capabilities that would take several years to come to fruition . The main ground force units recommended by this analysis are similar to those in the 2016 RAND report .
 These include, most notably, capabilities designed to degrade land-based air defense systems . These include improved anti-armor munitions and modern short-range airdefense systems .
 Such systems could have substantial strategic effects, as discussed in Chapter Four . Such systems may have significant strategic effects in the future .
 CSIS study sees a similar need for increases in U.S. Army personnel in Europe . CSIS A study by CSIS sees a same need for increase in Army personnel.
 The ratio would still leave the attacker with a good chance of success, but not without incurring serious losses . This ratio would be a good ratio of success and success .
 The authors recommend placing additional Army Prepositioned Stocks beyond the reach of the most-threatening Russian anti-access/area denial capabilities in Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands .
 European Activity Sets should be located closer to NATO's eastern flank . Three battalions’ worth in Poland and a European Activity Set for one company each .
 The 1:3 force ratio can be achieved and can provide a credible deterrent, the report says . With five other brigades provided by NATO allies, it says . The report asserts that the 1:2 force ratio is possible .
 Atlantic Council A 2016 Atlantic Council report also argues for shoring up NATO deterrence in Eastern Europe .
 The study proposes converting the Baltic States’ current light land forces into heavy units . Each state possessing one heavy armored or mechanized brigade .
 These formations should also be amply supplied with anti-air and anti-armor weaponry to increase their capabilities . These formations also should be supplied withAnti-air, anti-army weaponry .
 The report also calls for creating three multinational battalions, one for each Baltic country . The report calls for three battalions for each country .
These battalions would be supported by additional heavy mechanized or armored units . These battalions could also be equipped with armored units. The battalions will have to be armed with more than 100,000 troops .
 The report argues that initiatives analogous to those of the U.S.-specific ERI should be adopted for the wider NATO alliance . In addition to creating new forces and upgrading existing formations, the report says .
 Germany, United Kingdom and Poland would each provide one heavy brigade postured to deploy on short notice . Germany, the United Kingdom, and Poland will each provide a heavy brigade .
 Russia’s A2/AD weapons include anti-air and anti-ship missile systems . Russia also has a long-range anti- air, anti-ships missile system .
 The study recommends enhancing NATO air and naval forces in the Baltic region to counteract a Russian A2/AD advantage .
 Six Army War College students published a report on the state of NATO deterrence against Russia in May 2016 .
 ERI and NATO’s RAP argue current efforts are insufficient by themselves to support deterrence . They argue that current efforts under the U.S. may reassure NATO allies on the eastern flank .
 The authors write that ‘capability is the backbone of credibility’ But doing too much might incite a Russian response or placate allies willing to let the United States shoulder the burden for NATO defense .
 The report calls for NATO allies to contribute more to deterrence by developing their own forces and capabilities . It also calls for allies to develop their own force and capabilities.
 In general, these proposals focus on enhancing land forces, with less attention to air or naval assets . In general.
 NATO posture enhancements contained in the proposals also focus mostly on land forces . Our assessment of potential future posture enhancements also focuses on land force .
 This is not meant to imply that additional air and naval forces in Europe may not have an important role to play in enhancing the security of NATO members . However, this does not imply that extra air, naval forces may not be important role .
 Such a finding would require an operational analysis that is beyond the scope of this report . Such an analysis would require a further analysis of the report .
Air and naval forces may affect Russian calculations in a manner different from land forces, as will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Three .
 The level of additional forces discussed is likely not sufficient to allow NATO to achieve full deterrence by denial . The studies themselves often make this point .
 Russian forces could 58 Kramer and Craddock, 2016. Even if the most robust recommendations were to be implemented, they could be implemented .
 Current, Planned, and Proposed Postures in Europe 23 still attain limited military objectives in such theaters as Baltic States over the near term .
 The proposed posture changes have the potential to make an incursion a more costly proposition for Russia . Instead of fully deterring Russian military success, the proposed changes would shift the strategic calculations of Russian decisionmakers.
Several factors beyond the balance of forces deployed to the Baltics and Eastern Europe are likely to depend on several factors .
 The next chapter provides a detailed description of the full range of factors that are likely to be considered in Moscow . Russian decisionmakers will assess whether proposed United States and NATO posture enhancements will have the greater deterrent effect intended .
 The Russians have written about NATO intentions, NATO capabilities, Russian strategic objectives, and related issues . We read what the Russians themselves have written on NATO .
 Russia has a robust culture of writing and discussion regarding strategic issues . Russia has been criticized for its lack of focus on strategic issues.
 The 2014 Russian Military Doctrine1 and the 2015 National Security Strategy were reviewed . We reviewed recent official Russian publications, such as the 2014 Russian Defense Strategy .
 Russian history has not prompted strong Russian reactions in the past . Second, we examined the historical record to see what issues have and have not prompted Russian reactions .
 Russia and NATO have had more than two decades of post-Soviet strategic interactions, including notable conflicts in Kosovo, Georgia, and Ukraine . Russian economic and military capabilities have had substantial variation in relative Russian capabilities .
 Third, we reviewed the academic literature on Russian strategic issues and more generally on how states that are in strategic and political situations similar to Russia's have historically behaved .
 Many analysts of Russia have written perceptively on numerous aspects of Russian behavior and decisionmaking, and our own analysis benefited greatly from their insights .
 Russia has several distinct characteristics as a state . It also faces political and security challenges that are common to many states .
For the official version of the doctrine in Russian, see Russian Federation, Voennaya doktrina Rossiyskoy Federatsii . For the official versions of the Doctrine in Russian.
 The Russian Federation's National Security Strategy is the official version of the strategy in Russian .
Strategic context between Russia and NATO is likely to shape Russian reactions to any NATO posture enhancements in Europe .
 NATO’s current overall military superiority relative to Russia is a vital part of its ability to deter localized Russian aggression . NATO's Relative Overall Capabilities are a key part of the military's ability to defend against Russia's aggression .
 NATO’s ability to launch an effective counterattack to expel an invasion of NATO territory helps to compensate for its lack of local military parity . As will be discussed later, NATO's ability to attack is also being discussed .
 NATO has other, broader capabilities that give it additional tools to punish Russia for an attack . Further, NATO has more tools that can punish Russia.
 NATO's overall superiority has the potential to make certain types of Russian aggression more likely . These capabilities could range from economic sanctions to military response in other locations where the local balance of forces is more clearly in favor of NATO .
When a state perceives the overall balance of power to be in another state’s favor, this fuels security concerns . When a state sees a state as a potential adversary, it may be concerned about the balance of powers .
 A number of aggressive responses can prompt the vulnerable state to protect itself by spending more on defense, keeping forces at heightened levels of alert, and pursuing limited aggression to secure militarily important areas .
 NATO sees its forces as primarily defensive in nature . There are several reasons to believe Russia sees NATO forces as threatening .
 One Way to Make Putin Howl is September 4, 2014, Bloomberg Businessweek .
 Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 27 country have held in recent years . Russia feels the need to take steps to respond to this imbalance and better ensure its own security .
 Russia may not view its nuclear forces as providing absolute protection from a NATO attack . Analysts have typically pointed to Russia’s nuclear forces.
 Russia does have a huge nuclear weapon arsenal, including mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles . Russia also has a huge arsenal of nuclear weapons, including nuclear missiles .
 Russia has long been thought to have a secure second-strike capability and a strong deterrent against attacks on the Russian homeland . Together, these have long been believed to give Russia a secureSecond-strike capabilities .
 Russia's nuclear forces may have eroded after the Cold War . Despite Russian efforts to maintain spending on its nuclear forces, the readiness and reliability of Russia’s nuclear forces could have eroded .
 At the same time, U.S. intelligence capabilities against the type of mobile targets that make up the core of a secure second-strike capability have become more effective .
 Some analysts have argued that the net effect of these trends is a more vulnerable Russian nuclear arsenal . The possibility of a theoretical threat to Russia’s fundamental security from U.S. nuclear weapons is unlikely .
 Russian statements and policies also suggest that Russians have very real concerns about nuclear balance .
 Russian leaders believe that nuclear parity with the U.S. ensured Russia’s security during the Cold War . Such parity remains the best option for doing so today.
 Russia's recent nuclear modernization programs may also be related to concerns about the vulnerability of its arsenal . Russia’s recent modernization programs could also be linked to concerns over its nuclear arsenal .
Overall NATO capabilities can have complex effects on the likelihood of aggressive Russian actions . Overall NATO capabilities therefore can have a complex effect on Russia's actions .
 enhanced NATO capabilities that have potential to affect nuclear balance may be especially likely to prompt an aggressive Russian response .
 The issue is discussed in greater detail later in this chapter when we consider the characteristics of posture enhancements . That issue is also discussed in a greater detail in the chapter .
 The literature suggests that NATO’s deterrent against Russian aggression is likely to be weaker in areas where Russia has a local military advantage .
Having the local military capability to prevent an adversary from seizing any territory in the first place is typically considered the most effective form of deterrence . Having the local capability to stop an adversaries from seizing a territory is considered a most effective way of deterrence.
 Recent analysis has shown that NATO does not currently have that capability in the Baltic region . Recent analysis shows that NATO doesn't currently have the capability in that region .
 NATO did not have this capability in many locations during the Cold War, perhaps most notably in West Berlin .
 NATO’s ability to deter potential Russian aggression depends on demonstrating the capability and willingness to make such aggression unprofitable, says NATO .
 Russia has local military advantages, but the potential for aggressive Russian actions is likely greater when Russia has a local military advantage . This type of deterrence can also be effective .
 posture enhancements that help limit the extent of Russia’s local advantage have the potential to reduce the risk of conflict .
 If the location in question is near Russia’s borders, as would be the case with NATO posture enhancements in Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania, these enhancements may also be perceived by Russia as particularly threatening .
 We explore this issue in detail in the section on posture characteristics . The issue is in detail.
 Russian Perceptions of NATO’s Intentions States typically assess threats by looking at both relative capabilities and the intentions of potential adversaries .
 beliefs about intentions can become ingrained and affect how leaders interpret any new actions that a potential adversary may take . Over time, beliefs about goals can become entrenched .
 posture enhancements that take place at a time of heightened tensions between Russia and the United States or NATO could be seen as particularly threatening .
 Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 29 Russian leaders are currently deeply suspicious of U.S. intentions in particular .
 Many Russian leaders feel that the U.S. and its allies have ignored Russian interests and attempts at cooperation in the post-Cold War period .
 Russian leaders have argued that enlarging NATO to the east was a violation of the spirit . The U.S. commitments to limit NATO enlargement were made in the late 1990s .
 Putin: "NATO and the United States wanted a complete victory over the Soviet Union" In 2014, Putin argued, “NATO. and the U.S. wanted acomplete victory over Soviet Union.’
 The United States, in his view, built a biased international order and consistently violated international rules to promote its own interests at the expense of other states, he says . The U.S. built abiased international order, he adds .
 Russia’s concerns go beyond a sense of unfairness, however, to include a perception that the enlargements of NATO and the European Union constitute a clear threat to Russia .
 Russia has historically seen its influence in its ‘near abroad’ as central to the economic, political, and physical security of the Russian homeland . The former Soviet Union minus the Baltic States is most frequently characterized as the former SovietUnion minus theBalt States .
 Russia's ability to exercise its influence over former Soviet states would be greatly diminished . Russia's potential for NATO or EU influence, or even military forces, in such territory would be enhanced .
 Russia established “special relations’ with surrounding states after the fall of the Soviet Union . To ensure Russian security and maintain influence in the region, Russia built new institutions in which it maintained a privileged position .
 Putin has sought a highly integrated, Russian-led Eurasian project that would become a global economic actor of the same import as the EU, China, or the U.S. Putin discounted a revived Soviet Union, he has said .
 U.S. policymakers were divided over making such assurances and never agreed to enshrining them in a written agreement . U.N. officials were divided on whether to make such assurances .
 Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, January 15, 2016. Belfer center for science and international affairs, Harvard.
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2011, 104, is the world's most prestigious peace prize .
 The Eurasian Union and Its Discontents, Washington, D.C., and Stockholm: Central AsiaCaucasus Institute and Silk Road Studies Program .
 Russia views the United States and NATO as using such activities to threaten Russia . Russia does not see a clear line between some political activities and broader strategic issues .
 The 2014 Russian Military Doctrine discusses NATO aggression that blends traditional capabilities with nonmilitary means to achieve political objectives . It identifies this as a key threat to Russian security .
 Media manipulation, propaganda, and information operations can be leveraged to destabilize a government and bring about regime change . Media manipulation and propaganda are examples of such means, and can be used to bring about change .
 The 2014 doctrine also identifies the danger posed by the “use of information and communications technology for political-military objectives,’s 2014 doctrine .
 Russia’s actions over the past two decades suggest that it values its influence over some former Soviet states more than others .
 Russia was concerned about plans for Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to accede to NATO during 2002-2004 . But it has defended its interests in other post-Soviet states with much greater vigor .
 Ukraine has been one of Russia’s most important trading partners . It has also hosted the Russian Black Sea fleet in Crimea . Ukraine has also been a major trading partner for Russia .
 Ukraine not only has been a consumer of Russian natural gas but also is a gateway to European markets in the West .
 Russia’s “Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps, Arlington, Va.: CNA, May 2015 .
 Since the end of the Cold War, a series of pro-democracy and pro-Western protests have led to changes in government in the post-Soviet space . These have been referred to as color revolutions because participants often used flowers or colors as symbols .
 Russian analysts and officials describe the color revolutions as Western-organized coups, designed to subvert the legitimate authorities . Western governments have a positive view of these events as the expression of free choice.
 Ukraine represents a vital “buffer state’ against NATO remains powerful as well . Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 31 historical idea that Ukraine is a core part of the Russian world .
 Russia has repeatedly lashed out and used its levers of influence to discourage Ukraine from moving closer to Europe, especially through membership in the EU or NATO . Russia’s actions in 2014 demonstrate the extent to which it viewed Ukraine as a country inextricably connected to its “str
 Russia has also viewed Georgia’s integration into the West as a threat . Russia does not appear to see Georgia as as central to its interests as Ukraine is .
 Russia pressured Georgia to join the Commonwealth of Independent States in 1993 by using the separatist conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia as leverage . Georgia was pressured by Russia in 1993.
 Russia has since used trade boycotts and energy price increases to exert its influence on Georgia . As with Ukraine, Russia has used trade boycottts to exert influence on the country .
 Russia has used peacekeepers to “frozen conflicts’ in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, support for those territories’ independence . Russia has also used the deployment of peacekeepers in those territories to ‘frozen conflict’
 Russia has demonstrated a willingness to use force to keep Georgia out of NATO as well . As shown in 2008, and as is discussed in more detail later, Russia has shown more detail .
 The color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan in the early to mid-2000s were viewed by Russia as a significant security challenge .
 The prospect of a successful integration into Western institutions, especially for Ukraine or Georgia, would be a serious blow to Russia’s Eurasian project . Russia is trying to maintain its regional sphere of influence and potentially to Russia's domestic stability .
 Most Russian policymakers view continued Western efforts to expand ties with Ukraine and Georgia as clear evidence of negative intentions toward Russia .
 The extent to which future perceptions of negative NATO intent remain, worsen, or improve is likely to affect how aggressively and in what manner Russia responds to any future NATO posture enhancements .
 Russia extends large numbers of Russian passports to residents of another country . Those with family or cultural ties to Russia can then intervene in the country .
 NATO members could enhance deterrence by showing resolve to launch a counterattack to retake any lost territory . That is by strengthening the credibility of its commitments under Article 5 of the NATO treaty .
 Russia’s historical behavior and the literature on deterrence offer several insights . While it is difficult to estimate with precision Russia's current views on NATO’'s resolve, it is hard to estimate Russia's views on the issue .
 A country’s promises to defend the territory of an ally, known as extended deterrence, are generally considered less credible than threats to defend.
 NATO members have pledged to treat an attack on one member as an attack. NATO members also have several features that enhance their credibility . The commitments are made by NATO members to treat attacks as an attacks on all .
First, formal alliance commitments are costly signals about states’ willingness to defend each other . First, formal alliances are costly signs about states' willingness to defense each other.
 Empirical research shows that, historically, states uphold these commitments in the event of war about 75 percent of the time .
 Democratic states, including all current members of the NATO alliance, uphold formal commitments at even higher rates . All current members, including current member states, upholds formal commitments .
 NATO’s institutionalized military cooperation and planning even in peacetime are further signals about the depth of its commitment compared with other alliances . Second, NATO's institutionalizedMilitary cooperation is further signals of the alliance's commitment .
 Alliance commitments that involve a nuclear power tend to offer a stronger deterrent . Third, Alliance commitments with nuclear power offer stronger deterrents .
 NATO's Article 5 provisions offer a clear redline, a conventional attack on a member nation, which enhances deterrence . NATO’s Article 5 provision offers a clear Redline, which is a conventional strike on a nation .
Several pieces of evidence suggest that Russia's commitment to NATO is relatively strong . It is difficult to say how credible Russia currently views NATO’s commitment to be .
 Russia's concern about the possibility of Ukraine and Georgia joining NATO becomes more difficult to explain . If Russia did view NATO as a “paper tiger,” ultimately unwilling to bear costs to defend its members .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania became NATO 36 NATO, The North Atlantic Treaty, Washington, D.C., April 4, 1949 . NATO's concerns about the local imbalance of forces in the Baltic and other regions are warranted .
 Russia has taken several nonmilitary steps against these states, including influence operations, passportization, and funding of opposition political parties . Russia has also taken steps against Russia's influence operations and passportization .
 Russia has not initiated any military aggression against these states . Russia may ascribe weight to NATO’s Article 5 redline, although a lack of Russian interest in the Baltic States can also not be excluded .
 Explicit commitments, such as those given in President Obama’s speech in Tallinn, likely also play a role in reinforcing the credibility of NATO's commitment to the Baltic States .
 Some of the deterrence literature suggests NATO posture enhancements could improve NATO’s credibility . Russia's current assessment of the resolve of key NATO members is not clear .
 Additional enhancements in the Baltic and other regions have the potential to strengthen Russian perceptions of the credibility of NATO commitments .
 A small NATO ground force in the area could enhance deterrence by acting as a tripwire . It would help ensure a larger NATO response to a Russian attack .
 If all NATO members agreed to such a force and it included active participation by a large number of NATO members, it could further strengthen this signal .
Open disagreement within NATO over such a force would likely diminish Russia’s assessment of Alliance commitment . Conversely, open disagreement in NATO would likely lessen Russia's assessment of alliance commitment .
 Russian Domestic Context Political and economic factors inside Russia are also likely to shape Russian reactions to NATO posture enhancements .
 Putin's personal preferences could all affect Russian's foreign policy choices, says research .
 Extent of Threats to Regime Legitimacy Threats can change a state’s foreign policy . Whether it makes the state more or less aggressive appears to vary depending on the circumstances .
 RAND Corporation: RAND Corporation, RR-903-A, 2015, 35. The U.S. Army, Santa Monica, California, is based in Santa Monica .
 In other cases, crises of legitimacy can lead statesmen to provoke crises or pursue riskier foreign policies . The crises can divert attention from problems at home or to restore public unity .
 It should be noted that how frequently and under what circumstances this type of diversionary foreign policy occurs in practice remains contested in the academic literature .
 Threatened regimes may also be more willing to intervene in the domestic politics of neighboring states .
There is evidence that anti-regime protests and democracy movements in one state can make similar movements in neighboring states more likely . This appears to be a substantial concern of Russia, particularly with regard to former Soviet states .
 Antiregime and democratic groups may be inspired by or learn about the tactics of groups in a nearby state . AntireGime and democracy groups may also be inspired.
 Intentional actions by foreign governments or nongovernmental groups can also facilitate these movements by spreading ideas, technology, and resources . Intentionals by foreign government groups can help spread ideas and technology .
54 concern about such movements can lead statesmen to intervene abroad to stop sources of instability at their origin . Such movements are rarely effective in achieving regime change or democratization .
 Regime insecurity remains a pressing concern for Russian leaders . In the current context, it is likely to lead to more-competitive, rather than more-cooperative, Russian responses to NATO posture enhancements .
 Mass protests and rioting in Russia have made regime security a concern in recent years . Economic hardship and government corruption have made the country's regime security concern .
 Putin had strong support from the Russian middle and upper classes . Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 35 during a period of economic growth from 2000 to 2008 .
After this period, falling oil prices and a failure to implement structural reforms led to Russia’s second financial crisis of the decade . The fall in oil prices led to the country's first financial crisis in 10 years .
 Economic hardships combined with charges of vote rigging in 2011 elections seem to have motivated a series of protests . The Snow Revolution lasted until 2013, sometimes referred to as the Snow Revolution .
 As many as 160,000 people may have participated in a 2012 protest in Moscow .
 Large-scale protests have been less frequent in recent years as Putin’s popularity has rallied . Internal security measures have been tightened, but smaller- scale protests continue .
 The 2014 March of Peace demonstrations against the Russian annexation of Crimea brought out thousands of protesters .
 A more recent nationwide protest occurred in early 2015, after the murder of a significant opposition figure, former Deputy PM Boris Nemtsov .
Recent government policies suggest concern about internal security . Recent protests have been smaller, but recent policies suggest a concern .
 In early 2016, Putin announced the creation of a new law enforcement body known as the National Guard .
 The organization is dedicated to fighting terrorism and organized crime within Russia . Political analysts believe it will also be used to curtail civil resistance movements and protests .
 Russia could, in theory, try to reduce tensions with NATO during a period of heightened regime instability as it did at the end of the Cold War . This appears unlikely in the current context, according to the author .
 Western democracy promotion efforts, hostile media coverage, and nongovernmental organization involvement in color revolutions of nearby states have convinced Russian leaders that the U.S. is pursuing a policy of regime change in Russia .
 Russian government claimed that the U.S. government was somehow involved in planning or influencing Russian civil resistance movements . During the Snow Revolution and other protests, the Russian government said that the United States government was involved .
 Putin denounced Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for organizing the protests in Russia’s capital . This was particularly evident in 2011, when Putin denounced Hillary Clinton.
Russia does not discount the possibility that Moscow might be the scene of the next upheaval . Russia does not discounts the possibility of Moscow being involved in a political upheaval .
 This Time It’s Different,’ Open Democracy Russia, December 12, 2011; Sasha De Vogel, “From Economic Crisis to Political Crisis,” Institute of Modern Russia, November 19, 2013 . Sputnik News, February 6, 2012, is Sp
 We Must Stop a Ukraine-Style ‘Coloured Revolution’ in Russia,’ we must stop .
 President Putin has been actively cultivating “aggrieved nationalism and Anti-Americanism’s” as a unifying force in Russia .
 Putin is thought to have a great deal of control over public opinion . There is some risk that nationalism could quickly take on a life of its own . Future Russian leaders would feel greater pressure to respond to nationalist demands .
 Many Russian citizens felt that their government was solidifying its place as a resurgent power after the end of the Cold War .
 If threats to regime’s legitimacy persist or increase in the future, then lessons about the benefits of appealing to nationalism may tend to make diversionary policies an appealing response .
 Russia’s Elite Authoritarian leaders have often been considered more conflict-prone than democratic leaders .
 Recent research has shown that even in authoritarian states, elite groups can restrain leaders from pursuing risky or provocative foreign policies . But recent research has also shown that in authoritarian countries, leaders can restrain from pursuing provocative policies .
 autocratic leaders can be restrained by the threat of overthrow in the event of poor foreign policy choices . First, if the elite have an independent source of power, it can be controlled by the elite .
 elite groups have a restraining effect only if they have incentives to oppose more-confrontational foreign policies . Second, elite groups only have an incentive to oppose foreign policies to oppose them .
 The hold on power of the current regime in Moscow depends on the support of those who benefit from peaceful relations, such as foreign trade . Russian responses could be less conflictual.
 elite groups can make private gains from conflictual relations with the West, such as through ties to the defense industry, they are less likely to have a restraining effect on Russian foreign policy .
 In Russia, current indications are that the elite’s power derives from Putin rather than from independent sources .
 New Ideological Patterns After the Orange Revolution, Stuttgart, Germany: “Putin Appeals to Nationalist Support as Economy Wobbles,’
 The Impact of the War in Georgia on Russian Public Opinion,’s Abkhaz World, August 7, 2010, was published in August 2010 .
 Most important decisions are not made in a formalized or official process . Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 37 ister or adviser are not known .
 The Putin administration has instituted a “power vertical’s” structure in which individuals with positions of power are chosen by the Russian President . The structure was created by the Putin administration .
 Even nominally independent oligarchs realize that the security of their position depends on the approval of Putin . Putin's approval was made explicitly after the 2003 arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, head of energy firm Yukos .
 Given their lack of independence, these elites appear to be unlikely to impose significant restraints on Putin’s decisionmaking .
 If elite groups develop stronger independent sources of power in the future, they would likely have stronger influence on foreign policy .
 Russian leadership is likely to comprise individuals from one of the two largest factions within the government . There is a possibility that a new power group could develop, in the near term .
 The most powerful faction currently is the siloviki (persons of power/ force) Most powerful faction is the Russian intelligence services and military .
 The second most powerful group is the liberals, or liberal technocrats, who are individuals with ties to business . They generally argue for steps to further the development of the Russian economy .
 A third group, the nationalists, may also have the potential to increase its influence in the future, as discussed later in this section .
 It is important to note that there is substantial heterogeneity in the views of individuals in each of these groups . We can identify certain broad characteristics of each group, although we can identify some broad characteristics .
 Russian responses to NATO are likely to continue to be adversarial, though pragmatic . To the extent that the siloviki remain the dominant force, Russia's response to NATO is likely to be pragmatic .
 An increase in influence by nationalists could lead to more aggressive actions . An increase by nationalists may lead to a more aggressive action .
 Siloviki Individuals in the siloviki network of Putin's inner circle are associated with Putin’s security apparatus . Silovki Individuals in Putin's security apparatus are linked to Putin's family .
 Many argue that these individuals, whose careers and interests are largely centered around the military and defense sector, are the most organized and influential group within 71 Staun .
 Many of Putin's most trusted advisers hail from the Russian intelligence community . Putin previously held a career at the KGB and ran the FSB after the fall of the Soviet Union .
The siloviki consider the continuance of a strong state to be the most important thing for Russian society . The silovki consider the continuation of aStrong State to be most important things for Russian Society .
The siloviki are wary of wealthy oligarchs ruling vast swaths of Russian resources . Domestically, the silovki are wary.
 The siloviki have used nationalist ideas to mobilize support for policies designed to bring about the resurgence of Russia as a great power . They advocated the nationalization of Russian energy resources .
 The annexation of Crimea was described and promoted in nationalist terms, for example . The annexation was described as a "nationalist"
 The current siloviki-dominated administration has shown only limited support for other aspects of a Russian nationalist program, such as annexation of neighboring regions with large Russian populations .
 Support for the Novorossiya project in eastern Ukraine appears to have been limited and strategic in nature . The annexation of the territory was not pursued, according to the report .
 The nationalism of most siloviki is generally moderate in content and pragmatic in pursuit of its goal of increasing the power of the Russian state .
 The siloviki have also been strong supporters of continued high levels of defense spending . They are also strong fans of continued spending on defense .
 Military modernization programs may themselves provide increased incentives to use newly procured weapons and systems in conflicts, particularly to test equipment or train personnel .
 This was recently seen in Syria, in which the Russian military was able to test newly acquired cruise missiles .
 The second group of trusted advisors to Putin is the liberal technocrats group, or liberals, frequently associated with Dmitry Medvedev .
 Some analysts separate liberals from technocrats; see Bremmer and Charap, 2007 . Others separate liberals and technocrats .
 Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 39 liberals in Western countries, who typically advocate democratic values . Russia has a history of anti-government policies, including the use of the U.S. in the past .
 The liberal technocrats still espouse the view that Russia should have a vertical power structure with a strong executive . They argue that any re-nationalization of Russian resources should be done slowly .
 Liberal technocrats are most concerned about economic and structural reforms of the Russian government .
 Most liberal technocrats, notably Aleksei Kudrin, view the increase in defense and security spending as detrimental to the Russian economy . Many liberals feel the economy is underdeveloped and lacks diversification .
 The siloviki would be more likely to seek improved political and economic ties with the West . Any Russian government would likely continue to oppose such actions as further NATO expansion .
Nationalist rhetoric is commonly employed by the current siloviki-dominated government in support of efforts to increase the power of the Russian state .
 This is not to say that the current regime is pursuing an aggressive Russian nationalist program . However, this is not. However, it is not that the government is pursuing a nationalist program.
 Putin has resisted arguments that Russian nationalism be conceptualized in ethnic, rather than civic, terms. Domestically, he has resisted argument that Russia's nationalism should be considered in ethnic terms .
 Disappointment is thus the main nationalist feeling regarding Russia’s official foreign policy .
 Russia would not have been the status quo power it has been for the past two decades . If the most vocal nationalists had been able to shape foreign policy, Russia would have been more vocal .
 Russia has been a conservative power on the international scene, while Russian nationalists have been calling for more preemptive actions . With the exception of the 2008 recognition of South Ossetian and Abkhazian independence and the 2014 crisis in Ukraine, Moscow has been more conservative.
 Russian nationalists have had limited influence over policy, says Alexander Dugin . Russia proclaims itself to be the defender of Russians, or Russian speakers, living abroad .
 Russian government has been promoting and restraining nationalist ideas as needed to build support for its policies and maintain internal stability . The government’s ability to continue to control nationalism in this manner is not a given .
 Vladimir Putin will likely continue to have a dominant influence on Russian foreign policy . The exact strength of Putin’s control could change over time .
 The views of powerful leaders like Putin can often be discerned by their path to power and prior beliefs . Look at the record of their foreign policy actions .
 Putin’s path to power and views before becoming Russia's leader do not suggest that he has a predisposition toward using force or taking significant risks .
 His views do appear to have evolved toward a greater belief in the efficacy of the use of force . However, his views do not appear to be as much as his belief in force use .
 Autocrats that come to power through violence tend to be the greatest foreign policy risk-takers . Autocrats are most prone to using force, according to experts .
 Putin’s path to power though the bureaucratic system suggests a more moderate and calculating predisposition than a revolutionary leader .
 Putin did not come into his first term in office promising to implement expansionist policies . Also, Putin didn't come into the first term promising to improve his policies .
 Several events, including further NATO enlargement, BMD systems based in Europe, appear to have convinced him that the U.S. aims to weaken Russia .
 Putin appears to have become more convinced that the exercise of military power, and the greater risks that accompany it, is a necessary part of defending the interests of Russia .
 Putin is often described as a calculated risk-taker, highly motivated to increase the prestige of both himself and Russia .
 Putin seeks to avoid future situations in which Russia is perceived as weak . He has claimed to be deeply affected by the loss of Russian influence after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 There have been instances in which emotional factors, and particularly perceived slights, may have colored Putin's decisionmaking .
 Putin has made several comments about how Ukraine's decision to pursue closer relations with the West was a betrayal of Russia's shared history and culture with Ukraine .
 The nature and location of specific U.S. and NATO posture enhancements will also likely affect Russian responses . The nature of specific United States and NATO enhancements will likely affect Russia's responses .
 Russia's nuclear arsenal is a vital component of the strategy to ensure Russia’s security . The nuclear arsenal was discussed earlier, as discussed earlier .
 The U.S. and NATO posture enhancements that increase the vulnerability of Russia’s nuclear arsenal would likely be met with a strong Russian response . Both international relations theory and Russia's past actions and statements suggest that any United States or NATO posture enhancement would likely have a strong response .
 Russia could react to a deterioration in the security of its nuclear deterrent by behaving either more cooperatively or more aggressively . There are two aspects of Russia's power position that suggest it is likely to adopt the more aggressive response .
 Russia is in comparison with NATO and the United States, as Russia is a relatively weaker state . Russia often tries to compensate for their material disadvantages by using hardline policies .
 They fear escalating demands from the stronger state if they appear weak-willed . They do so not just for the current crisis but because they fear rising demands from stronger state .
 Russia is likely to adopt militarized and competitive behavior if they think that doing so can avert further loss or reverse decline . Second, states that fear that their relative position may be declining are particularly likely to take on militarized behavior .
 If Russia feels that its arsenal is increasingly vulnerable, it may take such steps as increasing alert levels . Russia may spend more on nuclear modernization, or undertake aggressive actions in other areas .
 Russian leaders may also think that a large, secure nuclear arsenal can encourage U.S. and Western forbearance with regard to other Russian policies in its near abroad .
 Michael Kofman: Russia's behavior is motivating Russia's current behavior . He says the Russian Air Force keeps testing America's Defenses . Kof man: "Why the Russian air force Keeps Recklessly Testing America’s Defenses"
 Some Russian military thinkers envision a further role for the nuclear arsenal . But this does not appear to be current Russian doctrine .
 Russia would launch a limited nuclear strike during a conventional conflict in order to signal its resolve and compel an enemy to end hostile actions . That role has been described as the concept of “escalate to de-escalate’s”
 In Zapad-99 military exercises, simulated nuclear first strike was carried out against hypothetical adversary . Russian conventional units appeared to be on the verge of being overrun .
 Nuclear weapons will be used only as a response to a strategic attack or a conventional attack threatening the integrity of Russia .
 Russian elites, up to and including President Putin, could raise the potential for nuclear escalation at lower thresholds through more-informal means of communication . The potential for formal Russian doctrine to shift in this direction in the future is still noteworthy .
There are several specific types of posture and capability enhancements that could threaten strategic stability between Russia and NATO in the years to come . There are several types of capability enhancements.
 Missile Defense and Prompt Global Strike Enhancements could affect Russia’s nuclear arsenal . U.S. counterforce capabilities, missile defenses, and missile defenses could affect Russian command and control systems .
 The United States has repeatedly emphasized that such conventional missile programs as BMD and PGS are aimed at rogue states and terrorist groups . The U.S. has also emphasized that these programs are aimed towards rogue states .
 U.S. officials have argued that systems simply lack the ability to degrade an arsenal as large as Russia’s .
 The Center for International and Strategic Studies, 2016a, is the latest in a series of studies by the center . The center is based in Washington.
 Kipp, ‘Russia’s Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons,’ was published in June 2001 . Kipp: “Russia's Nonstr Strategic Nuclear Weapons’ is published in the Military Review .
In Zapad Exercises, Russia Flexes Its Military Strength,’s military strength,” Austin, Tex.
There is substantial evidence that Russia believes that long-range precision weapons constitute a threat . Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 43 are factors affecting Russian decisionmaking .
 In 2012, Putin wrote that such systems will provide fundamentally new instruments for achieving political and strategic goals in addition to nuclear weapons .
 Such weapon systems will be as effective as nuclear weapons but will be more “acceptable’ from the political and military point of view . Such weapons will be better than nuclear weapons, but will also be more 'acceptable'
9.9 Writers of Russian strategic literature believe that U.S. and NATO missile defense systems are postured against Russia in an attempt to reduce the effectiveness of its strategic forces and upset strategic stability in favor of the West .
 There also exist the beliefs that BMD systems are offensive and are being deployed merely as a pretext to position U.S. nuclear forces closer to possible Russian targets .
 Russia may fear that these systems could then be used for precipitous attacks against Russian command and control systems . President Putin has routinely attacked the United States’ BMD plans and has expressed his doubts about United States intentions .
2 Objections to BMD feature heavily in official Russian policy documents . Putin states that the rationale for BMD is questionable . BMD can be retooled for offensive operations .
 The Russian fear is that a hypothetical U.S. first strike against Russian nuclear weapons or command and control systems would degrade its deterrent and complicate Russia's response .
 Russia's only comparable weapons are nuclear, so it would be unable to respond without starting a nuclear exchange . Russia’s only comparable weapon is nuclear .
 Romania ‘in Crosshairs’ After Opening NATO Missile Defense Base,’ Vladimir Putin, “Meeting of Russian Federation Ambassadors and Permanent Envoys,” Moscow, June 30, 2016 .
 PGS proliferation could have on current strategic armaments treaties that do not address this new category of weapons . Another Russian concern is the effect that PGS proliferates on strategic armament treaties .
 PGS is referred to as a “military danger’ in the 2014 Russian Military Doctrine . Like BMD, PGS has been called a "military danger"
 The 2015 Russian National Security Strategy also takes note of the ability of PGS to undermine strategic stability . PGS also sees the deployment of weapons in space as a potential threat to strategic stability.
 Russia’s concern is that U.S. and NATO research in this area could result in hypersonic unmanned vehicles that can complement PGS weaponry .
 The threat of a U.S. network of militarybiological laboratories in post-Soviet countries is mentioned as a threat for the first time in official Russian documents . The lack of a sufficient international regime for the control of space makes an arms race more likely .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry has leveled criticism at the United States’ biological research facilities for, in the view of the ministry's leaders, poor safety records .
 Russia believes that these facilities undermine international agreements designed to curtail the proliferation of biological weapons . Russia also believes that they undermine international agreement to curtail proliferation of weapons .
 U.S.-sponsored biological facilities in Russia's near abroad are not only unsafe but are military in nature and intentionally aimed at Russia and its citizens .
 Rossiyskiy Institut Strategicheskikh Issledovaniy, April 23, 2014 . The United States is forming a System of Military-Biological Objects around Russia .
6 Other Systems Russia sees potential for new threats to strategic stability from NATO capabilities on the horizon as well . The U.S. program in question is to support non­ military, civilian uses of biological skills and technologies .
 The new NATO capabilities are still in more-nascent phases of development . They could be vastly more effective than traditional technologies, according to Russian documents .
 examples include geophysical, laser, microwave, acoustic, and gene-based weaponry . Examples include geophysics, lasers, lasers and other weaponry .
 Discussions of prospective weapons do not dominate current Russian military thinking, but they are by no means relegated to the margins . Discussions are not dominated by current military thinking .
 The use of “weapons based on new physical principles’ is named as a characteristic feature of modern conflict . A 2012 article by Putin mentioned ‘beam, geophysical, wave, genetic, psychophysical and other types of weapons’ in the same context as other, more
 The result of such enhancements could be to strengthen deterrence against a conventional Russian attack and restrain NATO allies from more-provocative behavior .
 Such enhancements could also exacerbate Russia’s security concerns in the region . The enhancements could even prompt an aggressive reaction if they are large enough to be seen as a threat .
 The need to balance competing concerns highlights the importance of carefully calibrating the additional capabilities introduced in the region . The need is to balance these competing concerns.
 A larger NATO force could reduce the risk of conflict or Russian aggression in two ways . A larger conventional NATO force would reduce the threat of conflict and Russian aggression .
 A larger NATO presence could strengthen deterrence. First, as discussed earlier, a larger NATO force would strengthen deterrence .
 NATO forces could enhance NATO’s capability to deny Russia a quick victory and signal the resolve to do so . These forces could boost NATO's capability.
 Alliance forces might also signal willingness to impose stiff punishment for any aggression .
 New Russian Security Strategy,” Defense News, January 26, 2016; Oliker, 2016b.
Russia may be more likely to employ national air defense systems in the event of Russian airspace incursions . For example, these allies may be less likely to use national air defenses .
 The states may opt to mobilize and forward deploy forces in response to Russian military exercises near their borders . If they view doing so as necessary to signal resolve and ensure early NATO mobilization and deployments in case such an exercise is a precursor to a Russian invasion .
 Russia may worry that NATO's aims, even if benign now, may later expand . For several reasons, Russia might worry about NATO’s aims .
 NATO members on Russia’s periphery may be emboldened to adopt more-reckless or more-provocative policies toward Russia .
 Russia might worry that a small force increase could be the start of a slippery slope that eventually leads to a much more capable NATO force along Russia’s border .
 Enhancements, especially if accompanied by logistical or infrastructure improvements, could be seen as a "down payment" for a more robust presence in the future .
 NATO forces could make inadvertent war with NATO more likely, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Having more forces operating in close proximity to one another increases the risk of accidental encounters between Russian and NATO forces .
 A minor incident could lead to an escalatory action and reaction cycle . Each side feels it has to take a hard line to defend its interests .
 NATO posture enhancements that are insufficient to constitute a threat might be viewed by Russia as an ominous signal of NATO’s future intentions .
 Scholars have pointed to some factors that can be ameliorate concerns about future intentions .
 Russia is unlikely to err on the side of assuming that NATO capabilities are defensive in nature . Russia is not likely to err.
 Weaker states face very substantial consequences for failing to detect hostility on the part of a stronger power . Weaker States face very serious consequences for not detecting hostility on part of stronger power.
 Failing to detect and respond to threats could leave a state unprepared for a conflict with a materially superior adversary . Key systems, such as command and control, are at risk, according to experts .
 Location of forces is also likely to affect how Russia reacts to NATO posture enhancements . This makes such states particularly sensitive to changes in an adversary’s policies and much more easily threatened .
 Factors Affecting Russian Decisionmaking 47 and by signaling NATO’s willingness to do so . The extent to which the enhancements bolster deterrence will vary depending on the type of forces involved .
 Ground forces based in NATO members on Russia's border would most directly increase available NATO capabilities in a crisis . The contribution of those placed farther from the border would depend on transportation times and readiness levels .
 These transportation times are, of course, much shorter for air forces . These times are much shorter than those for air force .
Air forces are likely to lose less of their value from being based in such countries as Germany than would land forces .
 Russia's A2/AD systems could even enhance their utility by making them less vulnerable to attack while on the ground . Russia's air forces are outside of the range of the most lethal of Russia’s A2-AD systems .
 Ground forces based in such countries as Estonia or Lithuania are also likely to send a clearer signal of NATO’s commitment to defend its members .
 Aircraft could much more easily be relocated to other NATO bases than could ground forces . Both the NATO ally and Russia would be aware of this fact .
Air assets based in NATO members on Russia’s borders likely provide less value than comparable ground forces .
 posture enhancements closer to the Russian border or in symbolically important areas could be more likely to stoke a nationalist backlash in Russia .
 NATO enhancements near areas with a large number of Russian speakers could lead to pressure on Moscow to “defend co-ethnics.7 Building on these general points, it is also important to identify which countries and regions are likely to be of greatest concern to Russia .
Past Russian views regarding NATO conventional forces in Eastern Europe suggest greater strategic concern for this region as a whole .
 The 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act included language that proscribed the “permanent stationing of substantial combat forces’ by NATO in Eastern Europe . It also called on Russia to maintain a similarly less threatening presence in the region .
 The CFE Treaty was originally ratified during the Cold War . It was designed to maintain limits on military equipment deployed in Europe .
140 Russia viewed these treaties with promise but became disenchanted with them as it became more apprehensive of NATO enlargement . A 1999 update to the original treaty also included a provision for Russian restraint in its Kaliningrad and Pskov oblasts .
 In 2009, Russian officials proposed two new security treaties that would rework the European security infrastructure into a more inclusive institution .
 A complementary proposal by Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov lists more-detailed regulations for military forces . The proposal is part of the Agreement Governing Relations Among NATO-Russia Council Member States .
 Forces exceeding this threshold could not be stationed for longer than 42 days . larger deployments could be made in extreme circumstances with the consent of other states .
 Forces close to Russian territory would be modest in size, transparent, and rotationally deployed .
 Russia appears to have given up its historical sphere of influence over most of the states of Eastern Europe . Despite these concerns, Russia seems to be giving up its historic sphere of power .
 Russia’s 2003 withdrawal from Balkan peacekeeping efforts and its muted reaction to the 2004 enlargement of NATO were signs of a changed relationship with its former satellites . Russia's interests in the Balkans certainly persist, although Russian interests in Balkans continue .
 Russia tried to repair its political and economic relations with most Eastern European states even after the 2008 Georgia War heightened tensions . Russia's economic and political relations with the EU have been strained since the war .
 Eastern Europe’s westward lean was accepted, if begrudgingly, by Russia . Eastern Europe came to be seen as a business opportunity .
 Russia has pursued economic projects, notably in the energy sphere, in many Eastern European states . Russia has been involved in several economic projects in the past .
 Russia's relations with many Eastern European states have become more similar to its relations with Western Europe . Security tensions remain, as they do with the rest of the NATO alliance . For both geographic and political reasons, forces deployed in the Baltics could create more concern for Russia .
Central and Eastern Europe were considered part of a historical Russian sphere of interest . In Russia’s 1993 Foreign Policy Concept, Central and Eastern European countries were part of the Russian sphere.
 Russian politicians also proposed alternative security arrangements for Poland separate from the NATO alliance . Poland thought such plans would threaten its newly won independence . Poland, however, thought that such plans could threaten its new independence .
 Russia eventually came to grudgingly accept Poland’s accession to NATO once it appeared inevitable .
 Russian relations with Poland were generally poor, owing to disagreements over such issues as missile defense . After joining NATO, Russia's relations with the country were generally bad .
 Following the 2008 war with Georgia, Russia changed its approach and attempted to reestablish closer relations with Poland .
Visits by Putin and Medvedev to Poland include Katyn, the site of an infamous Soviet massacre of Polish military personnel during World War II .
 Russia had begun to see its former Warsaw Pact allies no longer as states within a sphere of influence but as economic partners .
 Russia's relations with Poland have deteriorated since the 2014 Ukraine crisis . We did not identify any evidence that Russian policymakers continue to think of Poland as falling within Russia’s sphere of influence .
 The presence of substantial Russian minorities in Estonia and Latvia likely give them greater salience for Russian nationalism . NATO forces there more likely to provoke an aggressive response if the Baltics were to become the object of competition between Russia and NATO .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania have had a more tumultuous relationship with Moscow . From their earliest days of independence, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia have had more tumultuous relationships with Moscow.
 The issue of withdrawing Russian Federation troops from the Baltic States was the first major ­controversy . But not the last, it was not the first. The issue was a major controversy.
 The status of sizable Russian ethnic minorities in Estonia and Latvia has been long-running disputes . The delineation of borders, and transit rights to Kaliningrad through Lithuania have also been long running disputes .
 Russia has attempted to exert influence over its Baltic neighbors using a suite of subversive tactics and threatening gestures . Russia has a relentless media and propaganda campaign and numerous airspace violations .
 The Baltic States were later able to join NATO with relatively minimal controversy . Putin reiterated the standard Russian position on NATO expansion but stressed cooperation rather than discord between Russia and West .
 Russia's relations with the Baltic States and the West as a whole have since worsened . Russia's insistence on keeping disputes over Russian minorities, border issues, and transit rights alive suggests that Russia remains unwilling to fully relinquish its influence .
 The Baltic States do not appear to occupy the same place in Russian strategic thinking as other post-Soviet states . However, the Baltic States also clearly do not seem to occupy same place.
 The efforts to keep Ukraine and Georgia out of NATO stand in stark contrast to the general acquiescence to Baltic accession . The review of Russian strategic literature did not identify any lingering interest in detaching the Baltic States from West .
 The state's independent effect on policy may be more limited, but it may be a tool that the state uses .
 The Baltic Sea Security Report is published by the Center for European Policy Analysis, Washington, D.C.
 In 2005 and 2006, the U.S. reached agreements with Romania and Bulgaria to create shared bases under the auspices of Joint Task Force East . The number of troops could vary with rotational assignments of forces .
 Russian concerns regarding this infrastructure are likely to be proportional to the potential combat capabilities that these improvements represent . Russian concerns about this infrastructure may be more serious than the potential military capabilities .
 Building transportation infrastructure, prepositioning equipment, hardening air base infrastructure, and expanding bases all have the potential to be threatening to Russia . NATO could quickly bring to bear in any potential conflict .
 Appendix A describes several case studies of prominent interactions between Russia and NATO over the past 20 years . It illustrates how these key factors can be used to better understand Russian behavior and decisions .
 The next chapter applies these key factors to the current environment, as well as to multiple potential future scenarios . The next chapters will focus on the current and future environment .
 In this chapter, we demonstrate how such a framework can be applied, in two different contexts . In the chapter of the book, we show how such an approach could be applied to other contexts .
 We assess likely Russian reactions, including potential changes in the likelihood of an attack on a NATO member . We also assess possible changes in NATO posture enhancements already proposed or in the process of being implemented .
 Russia may respond to additional potential posture enhancements under more dramatically changed circumstances . Second, we assess alternative scenarios further in the future and how Russia might respond .
 In both analyses, we do not aim for precise predictions of Russian behavior . In both analysis, we don't aim to predict Russian behavior.
 This report relies entirely on publicly available information . It is intended to show analysts how the key factors can be used to inform a more detailed, comprehensive assessment of Russian reactions .
 It is also not designed to identify what specific form Russian reactions might take, particularly reactions short of an attack . Instead it is designed to estimate the approximate direction and scale of Russian reactions .
 The 2016 NATO Warsaw Summit announced plans for the most-substantial shifts in U.S. and NATO posture on the Alliance’s eastern flank to date .
 NATO forces led by key NATO members to be placed on a persistent, rotational basis in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland .
 Germany is to take the lead in the battalion designated for Lithuania, as will the United States for Poland . The U.S. for the battalion will be designated for Poland, and Germany for Lithuania .
 The plans also call for standing up a multinational divisional headquarters in Poland and constituting a multinational framework brigade in Romania .
 U.S. plans call for storing equipment for an ABCT, as well as additional equipment, across NATO's eastern flank .
 The plans indicate that the United Kingdom will lead the battalion in Estonia, and Canada will lead it in Latvia .
 The FY2017 European Reassurance Initiative Budget Request is being sent to Washington, D.C.
 Russia has sent some signals regarding its possible reactions, according to a report . Russia has been sending some signals about its possible reaction .
 In May 2016, Russia announced three additional mechanized divisions in the Western and Southern Military Districts . It remains unclear to what extent these divisions will be constituted from existing rather than new units .
 Russia has condemned NATO’s proposals, but since the Warsaw Summit, its initial reaction has been muted .
 Russian decisionmakers may feel the need to respond to proposals from Warsaw . However, implementation of the proposals is likely to constitute another event to which Russian decision makers may feel a need to response .
 The current and near-term status of each of the key factors identified in Chapter Three . In order to assess likely Russian reactions to these plans, we begin by outlining the current andNear-term Status of each.
 Near-Term Strategic Context As can be seen from the information on NATO member and Russian forces in Chapter Two . Current balance of overall capabilities remains strongly in NATO’s favor .
 NATO states are also increasing their defense spending after years of decline . NATO's advantage would be difficult to erode in the near term, according to analysts .
 The local balance of capabilities in areas on NATO's eastern flank, such as the Baltics, remains strongly in Russia’s favor . In addition, despite the implementation of changes announced at the 2014 Wales Summit and as part of the ERI, the balance of
 Even gradual implementation of the proposals announced at the Warsaw Summit will do little to change this balance . Some changes may have greater operational relevance in certain scenarios that are not assessed here .
 The main effect of the Warsaw Summit appears to be to enhance Russian perceptions of the willingness of NATO members to defend Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland from attack .
 Russia's perceptions of NATO’s willingness to defend the Baltic region have been strengthened . The Summit is expected to be held in Moscow on Thursday .
 NATO's commitments under Article 5 are most likely to remain so over the near term . It is probable that perceptions of NATO’s commitments were already high and are likely to stay so .
 Russian perceptions of U.S. and NATO intentions are more difficult to discern over the near term using publicly available information . The Warsaw Summit and broader efforts over the past two years to increase NATO rotational presence and infrastructure in the NATO members that border Russia .
 Russian state-directed media sources continuously paint U.S. and NATO posture enhancements as aggressive moves . It is difficult to say to what extent these fears are regarding United States and NATO conventional capabilities .
 Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements 55 are shared by senior Russian decisionmakers, such as Putin .
 The current regime in Moscow appears to have a relatively strong hold on power . No apparent serious threats to Putin’s continued control over the country, and popular approval of the President remains high .
 The September 18, 2016, Duma elections gave a substantial majority of seats to United Russia, the party of President Putin . It was the party's best performance ever .
 The elections were marred by very low turnout and allegations of irregularities . But nonetheless reflected Putin's control over the country’s political system .
Future ­elections still provide focal points for potential protests . The 2011-2012 protests that followed the previous Duma elections were unexpected .
 A presidential election, with Putin almost certain to win, is currently scheduled for 2018 . There have been indications that it may be moved up to avoid holding it in a climate when the economic and fiscal situation could be worse than at present .
 Putin remains highly popular in Russia, and serious alternative candidates are unlikely to be permitted to run . The outcome of the elections may not be in doubt, but they still have the potential to coalesce opposition to the regime .
 Declines in the price of hydrocarbons have inflicted substantial damage to the state budget and the wider economy . The failure to undertake structural reforms and the imposition of Western sanctions over Ukraine have inflicted significant damage to state budget .
 To this point, Russia has limited cuts to military spending . Russia has only limited cuts.
 One of Russia's main sovereign funds is likely to be exhausted by the end of 2017 . It raises questions about how long government spending on pensions and services will be sustainable .
Economic concerns are likely to heighten regime worries over the potential for election-related protests in the near term .
 The Kremlin has recently announced many staffing changes, including the replacement of former Chief of the Presidential Administration Sergei Ivanov with Anton Valno . This does not appear to reflect a shift in power between different camps or the ascendency of contrasting viewpoints .
 It seems to represent a generational shift within the siloviki, perhaps timed to signal greater vitality and energy leading into the upcoming elections . But not an empowering of notably more-liberal or nationalist figures .
 The lack of any notable ideological shift in these staffing changes reflects continuity in Putin’s personal viewpoints as well, says Putin .
 The posture enhancements announced at the Warsaw Summit are relatively modest in comparison with the overall balance of NATO and Russian forces, as detailed in Chapter Two .
 Russian plans to add more divisions in the Western and Southern Military Districts would appear to offset any increased NATO capability from the announced rotational battalions .
 There are certain aspects of these NATO enhancements, and others being undertaken concurrently, that may be more notable from the Russian perspective . However, there are some aspects of this NATO enhancements.
 The location of many of the proposed enhancements in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania is more threatening from a Russian perspective . The potential precedent they may set for larger forces in the future, and for the deployment of forces on former Soviet territory .
 Russia does not appear to view Baltics similarly to Ukraine, Belarus, or Georgia in its strategic thinking . But these states still appear to represent a greater concern than other NATO members in Eastern Europe .
 persistent rotational deployments in the Baltics likely represent a heightened concern for Russia . Poland or Romania may also be concerned over similar deployments .
 NATO continues to maintain these forces on a persistent rotational basis, rather than as permanent deployments . NATO appears to be intended as a signal to both Russia and certain European NATO allies that Russian concerns are still being taken into account .
 Additional forces for Eastern Europe proposed at the Warsaw Summit do not appear to affect issues of nuclear stability . Other NATO projects in the region are highly relevant to Russian perceptions thereof .
 Russia to Empty One of Its Sovereign Funds Next Year. Russia to empty one of its Sovereign Funds next year . The proposal was published in July 2016 .
 Russia has repeatedly made it clear that it feels these systems constitute a long-term threat . The U.S. and Russia are debating whether missile defense systems represent any threat to Russia’s nuclear deterrent .
 The U.S. Congress is considering expanding the scope of missile defense systems . The move comes after the Iran nuclear deal was completed and concurrent with numerous posture enhancements designed with Russia in mind .
 Russian perceptions of other ongoing programs, such as PGS and U.S. nuclear modernization efforts, likely also heighten Russian concerns over long-term nuclear stability .
 The U.S. and NATO are also undertaking infrastructure improvements on the Alliance’s eastern flank . The improvements appear to be, for the most part, relatively modest in scale .
 Large-scale bases that could accommodate substantially greater numbers of U.S. or NATO forces are not being built . Transportation improvements that could allow more-substantial forces to flow into the region appear to be moving slowly .
 infrastructure improvements in Eastern Europe do not appear to represent a substantial concern for Russia . Infrastructure improvements in the region do not represent a significant concern for the country .
 The likelihood of a direct Russian attack on a NATO member over the near term was relatively low before the recent round of U.S. and NATO posture enhancements . These enhancements have likely helped to reduce it further, our analysis says .
 This assessment is based on a consideration of each of the key factors discussed in Chapter Three . This assessment was based on the consideration of every key factor discussed in the chapter Three .
 It is important to note that some factors indicate a higher or increasing risk of an aggressive Russian response than a direct attack on a NATO member .
 Russian elites appear to have increasingly concluded that U.S. and NATO long-term goals are not compatible with the current regime in Moscow .
 Russian leaders have noted with concern such factors as the steady conventional posture enhancements in Eastern Europe . Russia views as clearly within its sphere of influence .
 U.S. and NATO can likely be militarily deterred from attacking Russia directly, but prospects for a stable, long-term accommodation are limited . The prospect of a stable and stable accommodation for Russia is limited, according to the authors .
 This perception, if not reversed, represents an unstable feature of the European security order that increases the risk of conflict in the long run . This perception is an unstable factor of the EU security order, says the author .
 These concerns are discussed in more detail later, when we discuss possible future scenarios for Russia . These concerns will be discussed later in detail .
 Russia is proposing posture enhancements along the lines of those proposed at Warsaw . Russia is unlikely to directly attack a NATO member in response to posture enhancements .
 NATO retains a large edge in overall conventional capabilities, says John Sutter . Sutter: Recent actions have strongly signaled that NATO, and the United States, would respond militarily to any aggression against the Baltic States .
 Russia retains substantial defensive capabilities of its own, particularly its nuclear deterrent . The relatively modest NATO posture enhancements in progress would be used for direct aggression against Russian territory in the near term .
 Russia has taken numerous aggressive actions in post-Soviet states since 2014, and indeed since 2008 . It has undertaken numerous lower-level provocations involving NATO allies, but has taken no actions that would trigger Article 5 .
 Russia’s behavior appears to have been highly sensitive to military costs . Even in the aggressions that it has undertaken, such as in Ukraine, it appears to be highly sensitive.
 NATO posture enhancements that do not shift the overall local balance of capabilities on Russia’s borders would represent a level of cost and risk acceptance that has no precedence in prior Russian behavior. Responding directly and aggressively to NATO posture enhancement would represent an level of costs and risk accept that has
 A conventional Russian attack on NATO in the near term is highly unlikely . It also seems probable that Russia will explore other avenues to signal its displeasure with ongoing NATO posture enhancements .
 Russia has an incentive to ensure that its response is perceived as substantial enough to affect NATO’s calculation for whether further posture enhancements are advisable . Russia has also an incentive.
 Russia has signaled that it intends to adjust its domestic force posture, as discussed earlier . Russia has already signaled that its domestic forces will adjust .
 Russia has used a variety of mechanisms to respond to NATO actions that it perceives as threatening . Such mechanisms include withdrawing from multilateral security treaties, sending forces for provocative out-of-area deployments in the Americas .
 ongoing low-level provocations involving Russian air forces constitute one way in which Russia is attempting to signal its concerns . A more comprehensive review of such historical responses can be seen in Appendix B .
 Other options to protest NATO’s enhancements in the near term could include targeting cross-domain areas of asymmetric concern to the U.S. and NATO .
Tensions between Russia and NATO remain high . If tensions remain high, the plans likely will not be the end of NATO posture enhancements on the Alliance’s eastern flank .
 Chapter Two summarized proposals for further posture enhancements that, while not currently in process, could be implemented over the next decade . Chapter Two: Proposals for additional posture enhancements could be in the next 10 years .
 Russian domestic context in which these enhancements could be implemented may shift as well . Over this longer time frame, these enhancements may be implemented .
In order to properly assess likely Russian reactions to such longer-term, more-substantial shifts in NATO posture, it is useful to first assess how these underlying strategic and political conditions are likely to shift over time .
 Future events may diverge sharply from past patterns of behavior, and it may be difficult to predict the direction of this divergence .
 policymakers must prepare for scenarios that may not be likely but that are plausible and would threaten vital interests. To this point, our analysis has emphasized average-case or most likely outcomes .
 Scenario analysis seeks to discern not only the most likely futures but also less likely but plausible alternatives that would challenge current policies .
 In our scenario analysis, we first discuss what the future would look like if trends in the strategic and Russian domestic context continue on their current trajectories .
 NATO and Russia could make a conflict between the two more likely . We then explore conditions under which these trends might change over the next decade .
Less conflictual futures than the status quo may pose less risk for policymakers . But less conflictual Futures may be equally likely, they pose less threat for policymakers, they say .
 We examine how alternative posture decisions would affect the risk of an aggressive Russian reaction in our three future scenarios . We also examine how alternatives to Russian posture decisions could affect the Russian response .
 Russian reaction to NATO posture enhancements unlikely in the near term . Several features of the present situation make a direct, aggressive Russian reaction unlikely .
 Russia appears to perceive a strong commitment from NATO to defend its eastern members . The overall balance of capabilities between Russia and NATO appears to be heavily in NATO’s favor .
 There is currently little effective opposition to Putin's rule, either from within the ranks of the elites on whom he depends or from outside the regime .
 Russia is suffering from economic decline, but strong actions by the government and central bank appear to have forestalled a crisis for the near term . Russia's economic decline has been blamed for the decline in recent months .
 Russia is paying a price for its actions in both Ukraine and Syria, but the direct costs of its military activities are low . The indirect costs (in terms of Western sanctions for Russia’s violations of Ukrainian territorial integrity) seem bearable, at least for now .
 In this section, we review the key factors that underpin the status quo . We also discuss how they are most likely to evolve over the next decade .
 The overall balance of capabilities between Russia and NATO is unlikely to change dramatically over the next decade . The balance of capability between the two nations is likely to remain unchanged over the years .
 The primary risk in more-­ optimistic futures would appear to be unnecessary NATO expenditures . However, the primary risk would be unnecessaryNAT expenditures .
 The report focused on these higher-consequence, riskier scenarios . The report is based on the report's findings .
We do not assess that they are more likely to come about than futures in which the risk of conflict between Russia and NATO recedes . In doing so, we do not expect that they will come about more likely than futures .
 Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements 61 ment. Assessing Russia's reaction to the United States and NATO's Posture enhancements .
 Russia’s ability to maintain spending on its nuclear deterrent may be particularly important to watch, given the age of many of these weapons . Russia's heavy reliance on nuclear deterrent for its security may be especially important, according to experts .
 NATO defense spending has also begun to trend upward for the first time in years . Several key states have credibly pledged that these increases will continue in the years to come .
 The current overall gap between NATO and Russian capabilities is likely to increase spending on both sides . But dramatic shifts in the overall conventional balance appear unlikely .
 The balance of local capabilities in such regions as the Baltics may shift more substantially depending on which additional posture enhancements NATO members pursue, as will be discussed later in this chapter .
 Russian perceptions of NATO and U.S. intentions seem most likely to continue to deteriorate in years to come .
 Plans to deploy forces closer to Russia’s borders, to construct additional BMD sites in Europe, and to support eventual NATO membership for Ukraine and Georgia stack the deck against any Russian reassessment that NATO is a benign actor .
 Russia could shift Russia’s assessment by altering or abandoning these plans, doing so would represent a notable break with historical U.S. and NATO policy .
 Russia perceiving a marked decline in NATO’s willingness to defend its eastern members also appears unlikely, but we assess this with greater uncertainty .
In 2016, NATO's commitment to collective defense appeared strong among most NATO member governments . In 2016, the U.S. and the United States were among the most committed nations . The United States is one of the most active members of NATO .
Public opinion in many European states appears much less firmly committed to Article 5.28 . Over the next decade, the potential for such views to become reflected in government policies in key NATO members cannot be discounted .
 NATO rotational battalions in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland might shift the politics in participating countries with regard to their NATO commitments .
 The stability of the Russian regime over the next decade could be affected by both economic and political factors . Russian Domestic Context is a look at the stability of Russia's political and economic stability .
 Russia faces a difficult economic and fiscal situation, but not necessarily a catastrophic one . Going forward, Russia faces an economic and Fiscal situation, not necessarily catastrophic one.
 Demand for hydrocarbons has 24 Steven Pifer, “Pay Attention, America: Russia is Upgrading Its Military,’ he says .
 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Development and Disarmament Roundtable, January 7, 2015 .
 Hillary Clinton is running against Vladimir Putin in the 2016 presidential election .
Views of NATO and its Role are Mixed in U.S., Other Member Nations, Pew Research Center says .
 The World Bank estimates that growth is likely to resume in 2017 and continue thereafter . Russia's gross domestic product was expected to contract by more than 5 percent by the end of 2016 .
 The Russian state’s extreme dependence on hydrocarbons for government revenues means that the government is likely to face severe fiscal constraints for many years to come if relatively low prices continue .
 In 2015, Russia’s official deficit increased to 2. percent of gross domestic product . The deficit is not an enormous number in and of itself, but difficult to sustain .
 The government has drawn down its Reserve Fund by almost half in addition to cutting spending . To offset this deficit, the government has also cut spending .
 Russian economy will be hard to diversify beyond fossil fuels and other commodity exports . State's fiscal constraints will make it difficult for the state to lead efforts to diversifying the Russian economy .
 Russia's announced plans to make further large increases in defense expenditures . It will almost certainly lead to underinvestment in education, health care, and other social services . It is likely to thwart Russia’s announced plans.
 Unless Russia benefits from a rebound in oil and gas prices, it will likely have to restrict government spending considerably more in the coming years .
 The Russian economy faces considerable headwinds. Further into the future, the Russian economy is facing considerable head winds .
 Russia faces long-term population decline, partially offset by immigration from other post-Soviet countries, and a loss of skills in its workforce . actors around the world are making ever-greater investments in renewable energy .
 The Russian economy had slowed considerably because of the burden of corruption and inefficient investments . Corruption acts as a major tax on productive activities in Russia, says the author .
Political power has become highly concentrated around Putin and his inner circle, according to Chapter Three .
 Such hyper-centralization of power can be highly stable in the short run, but it carries substantial risks of instability over longer periods .
 The Russian “power vertical,’ with its highly centralized decisionmaking and weak rule of law, risks degrading Russian institutions over the long run . The Russian "power vertical" risks degrading Russia's institutions.
 Brookings Institution: "Heading for Labor-Based Stagnation" and "The Future of Domestic Politics"
 The European Union Institute for Security Studies is based in Paris, France . It is based on the U.S. National Security Council .
 Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements without collapsing . Assessing Russia's actions to United States and NATO posture enhancements .
Recent public opinion polling suggests that more Russians now believe that Russia is more unstable than at any time in the past decade .
 Such instability has not yet manifested itself in divergent elite preferences . Such instability is not yet manifesting itself in Divergent elite preference .
 The Russian elite support for the Kremlin's recent confrontational policies is notable . The strain that Western sanctions were intended to impose on Russian elites is notable.
 Heavy reliance on nationalism in state-run media as the rationale for Kremlin policy, as justification for why ordinary Russians are experiencing economic pain . The Russian economy is suffering from economic pain, which is hardening virulent anti-Western attitudes .
 The U.S. and other NATO members are willing to allow for pragmatic accommodation with the Kremlin when the Kremlin desires .
 Moscow risks backlash for making accommodations, even when doing so would further Russian interests . If Moscow becomes sufficiently strong that Moscow risks a backlash, then they begin to affect policy in ways that could prove destabilizing .
 The potential for divergence in Russian policy becomes greatly magnified if Putin is no longer the primary decisionmaker . Putin is the main decisionmaker.
 Putin could run again in 2024 or rotate power with a chosen successor . The most likely scenario is that Putin would seek to amend the Russian Constitution to run again .
 The views and identity of his eventual successor have the potential to substantially shift Russian policy . Putin has overseen the centralization of Russian decisionmaking .
 Many of the key factors related to the strategic and Russian domestic contexts that affect Russian decisionmaking are likely to continue in their current directions over the next decade. Summarizing the Baseline Scenario is a key part of the Russian national security strategy .
 NATO’s commitment to defend its members in Eastern Europe appears unlikely . Most notably, the overall strategic balance appears likely to persist .
 Russian leaders continue to believe that their nuclear arsenal gives Russia an effective deterrent to any hostile NATO intentions . These strategic factors are likely to continue to act as a stabilizing force in Russia-NATO relations .
 Putin is likely to remain in power and continue to pursue a suspicious, opportunistic, and ultimately pragmatic approach to West .
There is greater uncertainty regarding the potential for destabilizing developments if Putin were no longer the ultimate decisionmaker in Russia . However, there is more uncertainty about the potential to destabilize developments .
 Nationalist and anti-Western sentiment has metastasized, particularly among the current foreign and security policy elite . Nationalist, anti- Western sentiment has grown in recent years .
 It is not at all clear that a potential successor to Putin from within the ranks of the siloviki would be more moderate .
 The successor to Putin is unlikely to emerge over the next decade, when one eventually does . But one person may well be more confrontational.
 This section details two alternative scenarios that have the potential to materially increase the risk of direct confrontation between Russia and NATO by affecting one or more of the identified key factors . This section also details two alternatives to direct confrontation that could affect the risk .
 The first scenario, labeled Russia Lashes Out, focuses on changes to Russian regime legitimacy or elite preferences . Most likely triggered by economic shifts, the first scenario focuses on Russia's economic shifts .
 The second scenario, labeled Weakened West, focuses on changes in Russian perceptions of NATO’s willingness or ability to defend its eastern members . The third scenario focuses on changing the perception of NATO's willingness to defend members in the region .
 These alternative futures are presented as distinct scenarios, in practice, they could easily merge . In practice, aspects of the two could easily merging .
 Russia Lashes Out The Baltics hold relatively little intrinsic value for Russia . Russia Lashing Out the Baltics holds relatively little value for the country .
 Russia does not offer Russia sizable economic gains of any kind . They do not offer any kind of economic gains, nor even a greater market and labor base .
 Russia is guaranteed access to the Kaliningrad oblast . The Baltics offer few, if any, strategic advantages that Russia does not already have .
 The value of the Baltics to Russia, in fact, is almost entirely symbolic . The Baltics are the most important part of the region .
 Both Latvia and Estonia have substantial Russian-speaking minorities . The need to protect such minorities is increasingly highlighted in Russian propaganda .
 The Baltics are currently NATO members, so to the extent that Russia can score foreign policy successes against the Baltics, it can serve to weaken NATO’s prestige and Assessing Russian Reactions to United States and NATO Posture Enhancements .
 Russia has shown little willingness to bear high military or political costs to score successes against Ukraine, which is strategically, economically, and symbolically much more important to Russia . To date, to date, Russia has showed little willingness for high military and political costs.
 Ukraine has sizable markets and economic infrastructure that make it a valuable economic prize . Ukraine has a sizable market and infrastructure that makes it an economic prize.
 It has access to warm-water ports, making it an important strategic asset . It is a key strategic asset for the country .
 The Baltic countries were always considered somewhat alien territory even in the Soviet period . The Russians have never drawn as sharp a distinction between themselves and Ukrainians .
 Despite the high value Russia places on Ukraine, it has been extremely careful to limit the noneconomic price it has paid for its aggression in that country .
 Russian forces have minimized the number of casualties among Russian uniformed forces . It has sought to hide its role in the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia's political situation has potential to shift Russia's calculus regarding the costs it might be willing to bear from a conflict involving the Baltics .
 The most likely scenario to shift this calculus lies in the growing economic troubles of the Russian government and the increasing fragility of the regime, says the author .
 Russia will eventually need to bring its budget into alignment by slashing government spending . Unless hydrocarbon prices rebound, Russia will need to cut government spending.
 It is entirely possible that the regime could misjudge the public’s reaction to reduced social spending and economic decline and face large-scale anti-regime activity .
Being toppled from power would almost certainly mean imprisonment for corruption charges, at a minimum . Facing revolt, even careful, calculating leaders might be willing to take extreme gambles to remain in office .
 Under these circumstances, diversionary war may become an appealing option, despite the risks . Under this circumstances, divertary war could become an appeal, despite risks .
 More-extremist, risk-acceptant leaders could also come to power during the course of tumultuous political upheaval .
 Putin and his close advisers appear to make very careful cost-benefit calculations . Despite the risks that Russia has taken in Ukraine, Putin and close advisers seem to be making very careful costs-benefit decisions .
Post-Putin era may see leaders with extreme views gain more influence . With nationalist and virulently anti-Western discourse flourishing in Russia, a post- Putin era could see more power .
 Such leaders may doubt the willingness of the West to come to the Baltics’ aid .
 They may place a higher value on restoring Russian greatness on the international stage . They may also place a greater value on restored Russian greatness .
 Such a scenario seems highly unlikely over this period, but it cannot be ruled out . The scenario is highly unlikely, but cannot be rule out .
 It is possible that political tumult could weaken political power structures to such an extent that civilian control of the military might no longer be assured . It is also possible that the military could no longer control the military .
 The hardest-line elements of the siloviki might provoke a confrontation with the U.S. or NATO without having secured high-level approval in advance .
 Alternatively, a direct confrontation between Russia and NATO could be precipitated by international rather than domestic dynamics .
 A U.S. decision to provide arms to Ukraine might raise the stakes of the initial confrontation by initiating a crisis elsewhere . It is unlikely Russian decision­makers facing potential military or even symbolic losses in one context .
 Russian leaders might place NATO members of the Baltics at risk in an effort to compel the U.S. to de-escalate elsewhere .
 The previous scenario focused on how changes in Russian perceptions of the benefits of a direct confrontation with NATO could increase the risk of conflict . The current scenario focuses on the potential for changes in Russia's perceptions of such an action .
 For a direct conflict to occur, elements of both scenarios would likely be required . These scenarios are certainly not mutually exclusive, but they are not mutuallyexclusive .
 Russia’s perceptions of NATO unity or capabilities could be greatly weakened . That said, this scenario focuses on how Russian assessments of the costs of conflict with NATO could be diminished .
 At least two developments might lead to a weakened NATO deterrent in potential flashpoints, such as the Baltics .
 The U.S. might have committed the bulk of its military capabilities to a war elsewhere . Few forces could have responded quickly to a potential conflict in Eastern Europe .
 Assessing Russian Reactions to United States and NATO Posture Enhancements 67 constructs that the U.S. has used for its force planning . Assessing Russia's reaction to the United States' actions to Russia .
Public opinion in Europe or the U.S. might become heavily divided over the NATO Article 5 guarantee .
 A preoccupied and divided NATO alliance might be unable or unwilling to signal that it will confront a nuclear-armed Russia over aggression .
 Some countries might view such actions as a refusal to become a logistics hub for U.S. forces as helping to prevent a wider conflict .
 Other NATO-member governments with closer ties to Moscow might publicly or privately dissent from the Alliance’s collective defense goals .
 For Russian incentives to shift, all that would be required is a perception in Moscow that robust Alliance support would not be forthcoming . The Russian government has said it would not support the move .
 The scenario is offered here only as a possibility, not as a likely strategy . The scenario was offered only as an option, not a likely Strategy .
 In any event, its utility would likely be greatest if employed as a precursor to a later conventional attack rather than as a stand-alone action .
 Russia, the United States, and the rest of NATO muddle through over the next decade without sparking a major crisis . As noted earlier, the single most likely scenario is that existing strategic and political trends continue .
 The two sides find some areas where cooperation is possible, but for the most part, they seek simply to manage a difficult relationship at the lowest possible cost .
Defense planners are charged with developing U.S. and NATO force posture options for Europe . But even though it is impossible to attach precise probability estimates to more dire alternative futures, they are sufficiently plausible to warrant consideration .
Next, we assess possible Russian reactions to potential U.S. and NATO posture enhancements a decade out under all three of the future scenarios .
 We summarized numerous proposals for U.S. and NATO posture enhancements that would take some years to come to fruition . Assessing potential Russian Reactions to Proposed Posture Enhancements in Alternative Future Scenarios .
 The Alliance's eastern flank is on its eastern flank . The Alliance has a diverse set of options for how to enhance its posture .
 In this section, we assess potential Russian reactions to these proposals in each of our three future scenarios . In the section of our future scenarios, we look at each of these three scenarios .
Each of the holistic proposals outlined in Chapter Two included a different mix of force posture enhancements designed to address NATO vulnerabilities . Each of the proposed proposals included a variety of force enhancements .
 Many of the proposals include common elements, such as the recommendation for ABCTs to be deployed to the Baltics . The proposal includes a recommendation for the United States ABCTs.
 The Russian proposal is likely to have the greatest effect on the likelihood of an aggressive Russian reaction . Doing so allows us to clarify the elements of each proposal .
Analysts could assess whether the specific posture enhancements they are considering have similar characteristics to the representative examples we assess . This approach is more flexible, illustrating how other analysts could assess if they can do this .
 The four characteristics that would likely be most salient are the effect on strategic stability, effect on conventional capability, location, and extent of infrastructure improvements . As discussed in Chapter Three, we assessed that the four characteristics are the most salient .
 The cells with diamonds indicate the characteristics that have the potential to affect Russia’s strategic calculations .
 Many of the proposals argued that the lack of substantial ground forces deployed to the Baltic States was a particularly acute problem given current NATO posture and capabilities .
 The proposal would require an operational analysis that is beyond the scope of this study . Assessing whether these proposals suggest the appropriate mix of land and air forces would need an analysis . The proposal is part of a new study by the University of Manchester .
 NATO may not intend for any of its enhancements to be employed in this manner . Russia may assess that one of the enhancements has the potential to do so .
 Such capabilities could be targeted at systems protecting the Russian homeland from air or cruise missile attacks or at an even wider range of Russian capabilities . Such capabilities are possible to target systems protecting Russia from air and cruise missiles .
 All of the enhancements noted have the potential to affect Russian perceptions of the conventional balance of forces . The enhancements have been noted to affect the Russian perception of the Russian forces .
 The proposals outlined in Chapter Two also included several recommendations that would have had a more modest impact . For the sake of brevity, they are not assessed here .
 Stationing three to four armored brigades in the Baltics and fielding systems designed to degrade Russian air defenses are the most notable in this regard .
 NATO has increased the local balance of capabilities in NATO's favor . NATO says it is not necessarily sufficient on their own to shift the local balances in NATO’s favor .
 Three of the proposed enhancements are intended to be in the Baltic States . Three of these enhancements are to address the clear imbalance of forces in Russia’s favor in the region .
 None of the posture proposals we highlighted involved dramatic increases in infrastructure . Some of the proposals were intended to be a component of many of the proposal .
 Russia Lashes Out scenario is defined by Russian weakness and instability . There is likely to be the greatest risk of an aggressive Russian response to most U.S. or NATO posture enhancements .
 In Weakened West scenario, posture enhancements that were of relatively higher risk would likely not have the same effects . By contrast, in the Weakening West scenarios, posture enhancement would probably not have same effects.
 The primary danger in this scenario is Western inability or unwillingness to defend eastern NATO members . Under such circumstances, posture enhancements that strengthen NATO capabilities would likely reduce rather than increase the risk of conflict .
 We analyze one of the most prominent of the current proposals in detail . To illustrate how our framework could be applied to a specific posture enhancement across different scenarios.
 The proposal to station several ABCTs in the Baltic States represents one of the most substantial proposals to address the current sharp imbalance in local capabilities in the Baltics in favor of Russia .
 This enhancement could have competing effects on whether Russia decides to react aggressively . It could have different effects on Russia's response to Russia's actions .
 The Baltic States have the potential to substantially slow any Russian attack on the Baltic States, as well as increase the costs of such an attack .
 ABCTs represent a strong and expensive signal that the U.S. is committed to defending the Baltics .
 The United States currently has only nine ABCTs in the active component of the Army . The U.S. currently has just nine ABCTs in the Army.
 Stationing one-third of these units would represent a dramatic signal of U.S. commitment . Stationing a third or even one-quarter of the units would be a dramatic sign of United States commitment .
Russian forces would likely enhance conventional deterrence and reduce the likelihood of a direct Russian attack on the Baltics . Both this commitment and the capabilities that these forces represent once in place would likely enhanced conventional deterrence .
 It is unlikely that such native forces would have the same effective capabilities as similar U.S. or Western European units .
 Building such a new capability from scratch would take time . Building such an effective, new capability would take a time .
 The Baltic armored units could still have less deterrent value than similar United States units . But if we were to assume that these Baltic units would have the same capabilities as their U.S. counterparts, the Baltic units may still have a deterrent value .
 The U.S. could not afford to lose three ABCTs, and the deployment of these scarce assets to the Baltics would be a strong signal that the United States would be willing to fight rather than surrender the region to Russia .
 native Baltic armored units have no similar tripwire effect . By contrast, native Baltic units have a similar Tripwire effect.
 The size of any feasible Baltic armored units would likely be insufficient on their own to complicate Russian attack calculations . resources spent helping the Baltics develop such units may unintentionally signal a lower willingness on the part of other NATO states to come to theBaltics' aid .
 Another possibility is to dramatically improve rail lines or port facilities to allow for much more-rapid transit of large numbers of heavy forces from Western Europe .
 The introduction of these units into the Baltics would also likely be perceived by Russia as a threatening act. Assessing Russian Reactions to United States and NATO Posture Enhancements 71 .
 Three or four ABCTs are not enough to launch a plausible invasion of the Russian heartland . But they could be sufficient to go after smaller pieces of Russian territory .
 The Kaliningrad enclave represents a similarly exposed territory of Russia . The Baltic States represent a piece of NATO territory that is exposed and difficult to defend .
 Russia may simply not believe U.S. assurances that these units are intended to remain in the Baltic States indefinitely for purely defensive purposes .
 Russia may decide to act precipitously to prevent the deployment of ABCTs . If Russia perceives the deployment to reflect either potentially offensive intent by NATO or a direct political challenge to the Russian leadership, Russia may act.
 Russia may view Baltics as threatening, but it may see them as a threat to U.S. and NATO interests . The Baltics would likely decrease the likelihood of a direct Russian attack on the Baltics .
Russian forces in Kaliningrad and elsewhere on the Russia-NATO border could be used in a crisis . This could include a substantial buildup of Russian forces in the region .
 How these two competing effects ultimately affect Russian decisionmaking will depend on the scenario in which the ABCTs are introduced. The ABCTs will be introduced in Russia .
 In both the baseline and Russia Lashes Out scenarios, Russian feelings of weakness are more acute . Such substantial U.S. or NATO posture enhancements would likely be seen as threatening .
 In the Weakened West scenario, however, Russia is feeling relatively more confident . Russia is more confident in the West .
 NATO would represent an overall lower threat to Russia, so maintaining ABCTs in the Baltics would likely reinforce deterrence . In that scenario, NATO would likely represent a lower threat.
 Russian military posture enhancements are proposed to be implemented in Russia . Russian military officials are considering a range of options to improve their posture . Russian officials are also considering the proposed posture enhancements .
 NATO-Russia relationship over the past 20 years has been a key factor in Russia's decisionmaking . We conducted several case studies to illustrate how these key factors can help us understand Russian decisionmaking at key moments in the NATO- Russia relationship .
 The framework could be applied in practice by assessing potential Russian reactions to ongoing and planned NATO posture enhancements and to additional proposed enhancements that could be implemented over the following decade .
 Analysts consider a range of factors that are likely to influence Russian decisionmaking . This framework enables analysts to consider a wide range of Factors that arelikely to influence Russia's decision making .
 Western analysts may be habituated to conducting military analyses separately from political analyses .
 When assessing likely Russian behavior, such a division is problematic, says CNN .
 Russian policymakers are more concerned about their ability to continue to hold power domestically than their Western counterparts are . Russian policymakers often consider political threats and signals to be just as salient as military ones .
 They may also respond in military terms to what Western analysts would view as purely political developments, and vice versa . They could also respond to what analysts would see as purelypolitical developments .
 To properly anticipate Russian reactions, Western analysts will need to tightly integrate their military and political analyses .
 Russian leaders' current behavior suggests that they see a strong commitment from NATO to defend its allies . The U.S. and the United States are among the countries that have pledged to defend allies .
 Russian policymakers appear to believe that the prospects for a stable, long-term accommodation with NATO are limited . The United States and NATO can be militarily deterred for the time being, many Russian policymakers believe .
 The country’s poor economic performance, the lack of clarity regarding a post-Putin leadership, and the potential for more aggressive nationalists to become a more powerful political force. These include, most notably, the country's poor economy performance, and a lack of clear leadership .
 Declining regime stability has the potential to lead to a more unpredictable Russian foreign policy, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 The main theme of this report is that Russian reactions to U.S. and NATO posture enhancements may vary considerably depending on the context in which they take Conclusion 75 place . The main themes of the report are that Russian reaction to the United States, NATO posture enhancement may vary
 Policymakers should consider whether the advisability of certain enhancements is dependent on specific conditions that may be subject to change or could help to achieve United States goals in a wider range of possible futures .
 Russia has long maintained that such systems as BMD have the potential to affect strategic stability . Such systems are highly threatening, Russia has maintained .
 Relations between Russia and NATO have undergone numerous prominent crises and potential crises over the past 20 years .
 The key factors identified in Chapter Three affected Russian responses. By surveying Russian decisionmaking in four of these cases, we can illustrate how the key factors in these cases were identified .
 The 1999 Kosovo War, the 2008 Georgia War, and the 2014 Ukraine crisis are the most important and influential events in the NATO-Russia relationship since the end of the Cold War . We selected three cases.
 The fourth case, the 2002–2004 accession of the Baltic States to NATO, did not get as much attention at the time . It did not generate a crisis in relations with Russia .
 The Baltics for U.S. and NATO posture enhancement questions in the present are highly salient to examine . However, because of this lack of an aggressive Russian reaction, we felt this case was highly salient.
 The case studies are included as illustrative sketches of how the key factors identified in this report have affected Russian decisionmaking in the past .
 The air campaign would last 78 days, provoking what was the greatest crisis in relations between Russia and the U.S. in the post-Soviet era . The campaign would have lasted 78 days .
 Serbia's population was approximately 90 percent ethnic Albanian . The province was of tremendous cultural importance to Serbia .
 The Kosovar Albanians had pursued a nonviolent campaign of self-determination throughout the 1990s . The tensions became increasingly militarized, ultimately escalating into widespread violence in 1998 .
 NATO members have not ­undertaken any analogous posture enhancements in the post-Cold War period . However, NATO members haven't taken any similar posture enhancements .
Western and Russian decisionmakers had sharply diverging views about how to do so . But, Western and Russian officials had sharply Diverging views on how to make changes .
 Kosovo was a humanitarian concern and, indirectly, a strategic one . From the perspective of many in Washington and in European capitals, Kosovo was an humanitarian concern .
 Violence in Kosovo threatened to undermine the tentative peace that had been achieved in nearby Bosnia .
 It had the potential to spread to neighboring Macedonia, which had thus far been spared the violence that had engulfed much of the rest of the former Yugoslavia .
 Kosovo a threat to the NATO peacekeepers in Bosnia, who might be plunged back into the middle of a civil war . The risk of a new refugee crisis is only four short years after the ones in Bosnia and Croatia had ended .
 Russians tended to feel some degree of sympathy for Serbs as fellow Orthodox Slavs . But this sympathy should not be overstated, says author .
 Serbia and Kosovo held little intrinsic value for President Yeltsin or those in his inner circle .
 The way in which the Kosovo crisis was resolved, however, was of great interest to them . The way that the crisis in Kosovo was resolved was a great interest .
 Russia was heavily dependent on financial support from the West and Western-dominated institutions . Yeltsin did not want to imperil this financial lifeline by antagonizing Western powers on a critical issue .
 Many in Russia felt that NATO threats of force against Serbia posed serious dangers for Russia . On the other hand, many in Russia feel that NATO threat against Serbia poses serious dangers .
 NATO threatened Russian standing among the other countries of the former Soviet Union . Russia tried to exercise a clear sphere of influence .
 Russia failed to play any constructive role in resolving the Kosovo crisis, many in the U.S. saw it as the end result . The end result was that Russia didn't play a constructive role, as many saw it .
 Russian diplomats opposed the various peace-brokering efforts of the West . They failed to offer a viable alternative to the West's efforts .
 NATO launched air strikes against Serbia in March 1999 in an effort to force it to accept a negotiated settlement to the conflict in Kosovo .
 Lessons Learned for International Cooperative Security, Bern: Peter Lang, 2000, 215.
 Russian Decisionmaking in Key Cases 79 and demanding that NATO leaders be tried for war crimes . NATO leaders are accused of war crimes.
 Opposition among Russian foreign and defense policy elites was also intense, particularly within the military . Opposition among foreign anddefense policy elites also intense .
 Liberals and “Westernizers’ were widely seen as discredited by NATO’s actions . Many leading figures within the foreign policy establishment feared to take action to resolve the crisis for fears of political repercussions .
 These tensions within Russia came to a head just as the crisis seemed to be coming to an end . The tensions within the country have been growing for years .
 Serbia accepted a peace deal that granted NATO authority to establish a peace operation throughout the territory of Kosovo . Serbia accepted the peace deal .
 Russian diplomats strongly denied that any such troop movements were occurring .
 The crisis was resolved through a series of chaotic meetings between diplomats at the highest levels . A direct military confrontation between the U.S. and Russian military forces was only narrowly averted .
 The Kosovo War had several implications for Russia’s relations with the West and for Russian domestic politics, in both the short and long terms .
 In the short term, Russia chose to “freeze’s relations with NATO, a compromise between the liberal elites who were more Western-oriented and hawkish, particularly in the security services .
 Russia worked to develop an integrated air defense system with Belarus . For instance, Russia worked with Belarus to develop a system .
 It sought to increase military readiness in the years after the collapse of the Soviet Union . It hoped to offset the costs, in part, through increased arms sales abroad .
 Russia ceased cooperation with the West on arms control and disarmament measures . Defense policy and military doctrine placed a higher priority on Russia’s nuclear deterrent .
 Western-oriented and liberal elites in Russia were weakened by NATO’s actions. Western-orientated and liberal elite in Russia are weakened.
 All of the major Russian political parties condemned the NATO air campaign . Many leading liberals were afraid to take any actions seen as accommodating NATO for fear of being punished politically .
 Many observers have noted that Russia used NATO’s actions in Kosovo to justify Russian military actions in Georgia in 2008 and Crimea in 2014 . Many have ascribed much of the blame for these later crises to the West's use of force.
 Cooperation between Russia and NATO members had largely returned to normal within a year of the end of the Kosovo crisis .
 In the wake of the September 11 attacks, the United States and Russia found many areas of common ground and opportunities for cooperation . Russian popular perceptions of the U.S. quickly bounced back from their post-crisis lows.
Anti-Western sentiment skyrocketed in Russia during the war, liberals, reformers, and pro-Western policy elites had already been largely discredited by the economic and political chaos of the previous eight years .
 Russian public paid scant attention to foreign policy issues, such as economic distress and violence related to Chechnya .
 The precise consequences of the crisis are disputed. Even here, however, the precise consequences are disputed .
 NATO's failure to act strongly in this matter might have emboldened the hardest-line elements of the Russian policy elite .
 Explanations for Russian Behavior can be understood through three lenses, including domestic politics, and historical context . Russian Behavior Russia’s choices throughout the crisis can be explained through three lens .
 Many Russians forcefully argued that NATO’s air campaign against Serbia both revealed Western intentions . The air campaign provided a signal to third parties about the relative balance of power in Europe .
 It would seek to determine how all other countries governed themselves . It would be the first time a country would decide how to govern itself .
 The U.S. shares the Blame for the Russia-Georgia Crisis . The United States shares the blame for Russia's crisis .
 It was one thing to bomb a small, militarily weak country over human rights issues and refugee flows . Russia has its vast nuclear arsenal, with its vast arsenal .
 Throughout the 1990s, concerns of a Russian breakup similar to that of the Soviet Union were common . Throughout the 90s, there were fears of a breakup like that of Russia .
 In such circumstances of acute vulnerability, even such far-fetched arguments as ‘Serbia today, Russia tomorrow’ were able to gain currency .
 In many cases, policy elites seek to manipulate popular fears of or anger toward foreign countries to enhance their own standing with the public .
 Some Russian elites cynically exploited resentment over NATO’s actions to advance their own political agendas at the expense of the Yeltsin regime .
 Such theories explain little of the Russian government’s reactions to the war in Kosovo . But such theories explain the Russian reaction to the Kosovo war .
 Russia at the time was highly dependent on Western financial assistance . Russia was heavily dependent on financial assistance from the West .
 Yeltsin and those in his inner circle were desperately trying to placate public opinion and hardline elites . They were still maintaining cooperative relations with the West to retain access to the International Monetary Fund and other assistance .
 Many policymakers are trying to tamp down demands for a more aggressively anti-Western policy . The U.S. government is trying to push back on anti-West sentiment .
 Many of the most hardline leaders were in the Russian military and did not make public statements at all .
 The fear and anger apparent among a wide range of elites were not simply a public political ploy to enhance their own standing . Many Russians regarded NATO actions as both threatening and immoral .
 A third explanation derives from the habits of thinking that Russians acquired over many years as one of the world’s great empires .
For much of the foreign and defense policy elite, the collapse of the Soviet Union was a national catastrophe . For much of this time, the fall of the USSR was a catastrophe .
 Russia's diminished international prestige and chafed at having terms dictated to them by Western powers . They were acutely aware of Russia’s reduced international prestige .
 Russia has played in Georgia's two breakaway regions since 1992 . Russia insists that Europe and the U.S. respect Serbia’s territorial integrity .
 Russia was a great power that deserved to be able to dictate the terms of stability in the countries of the former Soviet Union . Russia was able to exercise a veto over NATO military operations further afield .
 Much of the anger felt by Russian decisionmakers was expressed in terms of Russia being denied its ‘rightful’ role as one of the world’s great powers . Russia was denied the “ rightful” role as a world's great powers.
 Russia was similar to France and the United Kingdom in their periods of postimperial retrenchment, when elites struggled to reconcile their diminished capabilities and expansive international ambitions . In this respect, Russia was like France and Britain in their period of Postimperialretrenchment .
 French and British decisionmakers were willing to pay large costs to maintain their prestige on the international stage after the loss of their empires . Many Russian elites appeared willing to paid a high economic price to counter NATO actions .
 Many in Russia, particularly among the hardliners, felt threatened by NATO’s actions . Many in the military felt threatened.
 The capabilities NATO demonstrated in the Kosovo campaign, and the willingness to employ them over Russia's objections, raised the possibility in the minds of many elites that Russia could someday be in Serbia’s place .
 The discrediting of liberals by years of political and economic chaos in Russia had already strengthened hardline voices by 1999, making a more cooperative response unlikely .
 The damage to Russian prestige that the crisis represented or revealed gave Russian policymakers strong incentives to respond aggressively to the NATO campaign . The damage was the risk of endangering further Western economic support .
 The Kosovo War was almost certainly not in itself a turning point in relations between Russia and West .
 Russia's security services have been criticized by many in the Russian security services . It has also added to the reservoir of resentments on which future Russian leaders could draw to legitimize hardline actions .
 The war highlighted that Russia’s acute domestic vulnerabilities amplified the threats Russians perceived from the West . Hardliners in Russia were willing to pay a high price to counter what they perceived as Western aggression .
 Russian policy and military elite greeted this development with suspicion . Official responses were muted, primarily focused on minimizing the impact of this expansion on Russian security by resorting to diplomacy .
 The Kremlin made certain concessions to NATO to showcase a willingness to cooperate . The Kremlin also employed aggressive negotiating tactics with the aim of limiting the types of forces that could be based in the Baltic States after NATO accession .
 The failure of this gambit helped contribute to the decline in relations and trust between Russia and NATO . The more tumultuous crises to come in Georgia and Ukraine have come in the past .
 Russia's relationship with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania differed from those with other countries in its near abroad for both historical and political reasons . Russia’s relationship with the Baltic Republics Post-Soviet Russia differed from other countries for historical andpolitical reasons .
 The Baltic States had historically been less integrated with the rest of the Russian Empire . Their populations had often faced discriminatory policies .
 The three republics swiftly asserted their independence in 1917 . By the time the Russian Empire collapsed in 1917, its government had thoroughly alienated much of the populations .
 In 1940, the Soviet Union forcibly annexed the three countries and engaged in a brutal program of Sovietization . The program was interrupted by the Nazi invasion in June 1941 .
 The Red Army recaptured the Baltic territories and restarted their integration into the Soviet Union . After three years of German occupation, the Red Army regained the Baltic territory .
 Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians enjoyed the highest standard of living in the Soviet Union . The three republics enjoyed the most high standards of living .
 Soviet economic planners based new technologically advanced industries in the area . Large numbers of immigrants moved to Estonia and Latvia from the other Soviet republics .
 Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians learned Russian lingua franca . Few of them developed fraternal feelings for their larger neighbor .
 Anti-Soviet sentiments extended into the top levels of the republic-level Communist parties in the three states . Anti- Soviet sentiments extended even into the Communist parties.
 The Baltic republics began asserting their independence even while remaining under Communist control in the 1980s . In 1991, they were the first of the Soviet republics to declare independence .
 The Baltic States and the Russian Federation had a strong relationship after the collapse of the Soviet Union . This historical legacy strongly shaped the relationship between the Baltic states and Russia .
 The three republics declared that they had been under illegal occupation between 1940 and 1991 . They delegitimized everything the Soviet Union had done within their borders .
 Latvia and Estonia, which harbored large minority populations of ethnic Russians, adopted laws demanding that individuals who were not citizens at the time of the 1940 Soviet occupation would have to pass language exams to gain citizenship .
Large numbers of ethnic Russians in the two countries stateless and angered Moscow . But it was argued to be a necessary corrective for the Soviet period when the languages and identities of the majority populations were discriminated against .
 The Baltic States immediately sought a closer relationship with Europe . Most of the former Soviet republics were willing to maintain close economic and sometimes military ties with Moscow .
 The only three of the 15 former constituents of the Soviet Union to eschew involvement with the postSoviet Commonwealth of Independent States, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania began seeking membership in both the EU and NATO in the mid-1990s .
 The three governments also sought the withdrawal of all Russian military forces from the numerous bases on their territories as quickly as possible .
 Russian leaders found themselves with few means of influencing behavior of these states . The Baltic republics’ decisive steps to distance themselves from their larger neighbor were taken by Russia .
 The historical legacy of distrust meant that there was no reason to expect that the Baltic governments would ever be friendly to Russian interests . The Baltic governments were distrustful of each other .
 Russian policymakers made clear their frustration with the prospect of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania joining NATO . But they lacked economic or political influence that might forestall these states from seeking membership .
 The Baltics' only hope lay in convincing the West to reject the Baltics’ overtures or barring them from joining the West . Russia's only hope is that the West will reject their overtures .
 Arnold Rüütel helped orchestrate the Estonian Supreme Soviet’s issuance of a declaration of sovereignty in 1988 . He later served as president of independent Estonia .
 The Russian government claimed that the disenfranchisement of the Russian population in Estonia and Latvia proved that these countries remained unworthy of NATO and EU membership . Tallinn, Vilnius, and Riga showed no interest in Yeltsin's proffered alternative of security guarantees if they stayed
 The Kremlin also attempted to employ its minor border disputes with the Baltic republics as a tool to keep them out of the Alliance .
 NATO continued the process of incorporating the three Baltic republics, inviting them to begin accession talks at the Prague Summit in November 2002 . These gambits failed to have the desired effect, however, and NATO continued to incorporate the three countries .
 Putin's government pursued a subtler diplomatic strategy seeking to limit further NATO enlargement or barring that, limit its potential strategic impact . Putin became president of Russia in December 1999 .
 This strategy comprised a program to enhance cooperation with NATO with an effort to secure international agreements limiting the ability of an expanded NATO to locate strategic forces near Russia's borders .
 Putin and his advisers sought to impress Western governments, most importantly the United States . Russia could make possible contributions to bolster Western security, particularly in the fight against terrorism after 2001 .
 Linking Chechnya with NATO's counterterrorism efforts helped legitimize Russia's war there both at home and abroad . It was hoped the West would respect Moscow’s wishes on European issues, such as NATO enlargement and missile defense .
 Russian officials hoped that a larger, more diluted NATO might lose its military character and evolve into a political organization posing less of a threat to Russia .
 Putin’s policy of selective engagement with the Western alliance was the formation in 2002 of the NATO-Russia Council, which granted Russia a voice in NATO affairs .
 Russian ambassador to NATO would help coordinate policy, particularly in counterterrorism activities . A Russian ambassador would help to coordinate policy with NATO .
 The Kremlin strategy wielded a “stick’s” threat of suspending or withdrawing from existing arms control agreements or refusing to ratify new ones . In addition to dangling the “carrot’ of security cooperation, the Kremlin strategy wields a �
 Russia connected the prospect of NATO enlargement to the amended CFE Treaty . Russia also connected the issue with the amended treaty .
 The dissolution of both the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union rendered the treaty’s provisions outdated . In light of NATO enlargement, the treaty's provisions were outdated .
 In November 1999, the parties of the CFE signed the Agreement on Adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe at the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Summit in Istanbul .
 The agreement replaced the original CFE’s bloc-based provisions with a scheme based on national and territorial divisions . It loosened the restrictions on how Russia could deploy forces, including in the volatile North Caucasus .
 Russia attempted to force the Baltics to join the Adapted CFE, albeit on Moscow’s terms . The CFE is a mechanism to block Baltic membership in the NATO alliance .
 Certain members of the Russian defense community were skeptical of the CFE Treaty before 2004 . Those who believed that it could help undergird Russian national interests overruled them .
 The Baltics represented an unacceptable gap in the CFE Treaty regime in which NATO could potentially deploy unlimited amounts of treaty-limited military equipment . In the Russians’ view, the Baltics represent an unacceptable gaps in the treaty regime .
 Russian policymakers were cautiously optimistic that the Adapted CFE would be a net benefit to their nation's security . But the attempt to use the treaty as leverage over NATO accession failed .
 NATO signatories refused to ratify the treaty before Moscow made good on promises to withdraw its forces deployed to Georgia and Moldova as part of the frozen conflicts in those states . Moscow made a promise to withdraw troops from those states before the treaty was ratified .
 The Baltics will apply for CFE membership after the treaty goes into effect . However, the three republics and their Western partners promised that the Baltics would apply for membership .
 The Russian Duma initially refused to ratify the Adapted CFE unless NATO members did so as well . The Duma has been in talks with NATO members over the CFE .
 Putin’s government adopted a more vigorous diplomatic strategy that held the CFE hostage . Stymied in its initial attempts to compel the new Baltic NATO members to join the Adapted CFE Treaty .
 In February 2007, Putin announced that the CFE was “in a state of crisis,” and in April, he suggested that Russia would suspend its compliance with the treaty’s provisions until all NATO members ratified it .
 In June, Russia called an emergency conference of all CFE states and issued a series of demands . The most important of the demands was that the Baltic republics join the treaty .
 Moscow also aimed to secure the elimination of the flank restrictions on the deployment of forces within its territory . Moscow also pressed that the treaty enter force no later than July 2008 .
 The proposals received no traction from NATO members . Russian diplomats attributed the intransigence of their U.S. counterparts to the U.N.
 Russia announced its complete withdrawal from the treaty in March 2015 . Moscow continued to propose reviving the CFE, or new similar treaties, over the next several years .
 Russia's failure to forestall NATO enlargement into the Baltics by diplomatic means undermined the faith of Russia’s policy elite . Russia continues to hope for an international legal framework over conventional forces in Europe .
 The West considered Russia's willingness to cooperate with NATO and acquiesce to NATO expansion as a major and sometimes humiliating concession . The Kremlin considered Russia’s willingness to cooperation with NATO was considered paramount for Russian security .
 Putin and his advisers to resort to more-­ aggressive measures to confront identified threats to Russian security . This experience appears to have contributed to the greater willingness of Putin and advisers to resorts to more aggressive measures .
 Russia's comparatively muted response to NATO enlargement in the Baltics resulted from the confluence of the country’s strategic context and domestic politics in the mid-2000s . Russian policymakers and Vladimir Putin believed that they might be able to influence possible NATO posture enhancements and preempt the threats
 Russian decisionmakers would surely have preferred to prevent NATO enlargement altogether, but they lacked effective means of doing so .
 NATO must defend a region sandwiched between Kaliningrad and Saint Petersburg . The region could weaken the Alliance rather than strengthen it .
 Russian observers expressed alarm at the prospect of the Baltic States hosting major NATO military installations so close to their borders . This was not an inevitable consequence of these republics’ joining the Alliance .
 NATO involvement in the war in Afghanistan suggested that posturing forces to defend the new members against possible Russian aggression might be a low priority .
 NATO enlargement might even prove to be only a symbolic gesture that would not erode Russia’s strategic position .
 Favorable domestic conditions for Putin enabled him to pursue his strategy of selective cooperation with NATO despite skepticism of Russian policy elites . Putin's strategy was successful despite skepticism from Russia's policy elites.
 Putin enjoyed widespread popularity due to improving economic conditions . Internal threats to his regime’s legitimacy were minimal .
 The color revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine occurred late in this period . They were not initially appreciated as the threat to Russian domestic stability that they were later .
 Putin and his domestic allies increasingly consolidated their domination of the country’s media in the early 2000s, muting public criticism.
No Russian policy elites openly advocated a softer line toward NATO enlargement than that taken by Putin . Opinion polling suggested that ordinary Russians were not particularly invested in the issue of Baltics becoming NATO members .
 Even Russia's marginalized liberal parties advocated an approach similar to Putin’s, and Russian critics of the President's policies accused him of being too conciliatory .
 Putin's scheme to render NATO enlargement acceptable to Russia hinged on being able to forge international agreements to limit the size and scope of any subsequent posture enhancements . Putin’s scheme torender NATO enlargements acceptable toRussia hinged upon being able.
 Russia's security might be only minimally affected by the Adapted CFE . If measures were able to keep NATO conventional capabilities in the Baltics to a minimum and discourage major defense infrastructure improvements in these countries, then Russia’s security might only be limited .
 Russian frustration with the failure to secure concessions from the West by diplomatic means set the stage for its willingness to resort to armed force in the subsequent crises in Georgia and Ukraine . Russian frustration sets the stage.
 Russian decisionmakers had few options to resist NATO enlargement in the Baltics . They attempted ineffectual diplomatic measures they attempted .
 The absence of the kind of close political and economic ties that Russia had with some former Soviet republics, such as Ukraine, left Moscow without a way of influencing the three republics’ behavior and desire for closer association with the West .
 A poll conducted by the Levada Center in April 2004 found that half of Russians thought that NATO expansion demanded a stronger army, 13 percent felt no response was necessary . 23 percent advocated greater cooperation with NATO against common enemies .
 One-third of Russians supported a closer relationship with NATO, according to a poll . Only a slightly larger share of respondents held the opposite view .
 L Sedov: "Aprel’skie zamery obshchestvennogo mneniia [April Measurements of Societal Opinion],’s May 16, 2004 .
 Putin even signaled that his country could live with an expanded NATO, so long as it respected Russia’s perceived security needs .
Hard-liners argued that NATO was an intrinsically anti-Russian organization . The Adapted CFE strengthened the position of hard-liners who argued NATO was anti-Russia .
 Moredecisive measures, including armed force, would be necessary to forestall NATO's further encroachment into Russia’s near abroad .
 Russia’s decision to intervene in Georgia also sent a sharp message to NATO . Georgia had been drawing increasingly close to Georgia, even to the point of having promised the country eventual membership in the Alliance .
 In August 2008, Georgian troops entered South Ossetia in an attempt to reestablish greater control over the region .
 Russian troops responded quickly, entering South Ossetia and quickly defeating Georgian forces . Russian troops, already positioned nearby, responded quickly.
 Russia recognized the independence of both South Ossetia and Abkhazia as states clearly within the Russian sphere of influence . Russia then recognized both the two states as states within Russia's sphere of control .
 Georgia had been drawing increasingly close to NATO since the 2003 Rose Revolution . President Saakashvili was elected to power in 2003 .
 The country had been promised eventual membership in NATO at the recently concluded Bucharest summit . NATO and Georgia had just conducted joint exercises in Georgia in July .
 NATO talks have since been delayed, apparently indefinitely, according to official statements . NATO statements continue to reiterate that they have not been abandoned .
 Russia has been trying to build a partnership with NATO based around shared concerns regarding terrorism . The Georgia War and its aftermath represented a dramatic break in relations with NATO .
 The U.S. Interests, Congressional Research Service, RL34618, March 3, 2009 .
 U.N. Cartographic Section, “Georgia High Detail Map.png,’ with amendments by User:ChrisO, August 12, 2008 .
 Several factors influenced the Russian decision to invade Georgia in 2008. RAND RR1879-A.1 Factors Influenced Russian Decisionmaking .
 Russia’s perception of the threat of NATO expansion to Georgia is related to its desire to defend a sphere of influence near its borders . Russia's longstanding policy of supporting Russians living in neighboring countries is also related to the first two factors .
 The Threat of NATO Expansion One of Russia’s main objectives in the Georgian conflict appears to have been to halt further NATO expansion on its borders .
 NATO membership typically includes a requirement that the applicant states have uncontested international borders and domestic stability . NATO membership usually includes the requirement that countries have uncontest international borders .
 Russia’s assistance to and recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia undermined any attempts by the Georgian 47 NATO, Study on NATO Enlargement .
 "Russia FM: Moscow Will Do All It Can to Prevent NATO Membership for Ukraine, Georgia,” Unian Press, April 9, 2008 .
 The existence of territorial disputes might not alone prevent a state from obtaining NATO membership . Spain joined NATO despite its ongoing dispute with the United Kingdom over Gibraltar . Russia’s demonstrated willingness to use force in these territorial disputes highlights the risk that NATO would be taking on if it were to extend
 The April 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest considered the possibility of granting membership action plans to Ukraine and Georgia . The 2008 summit considered the possible membership plans for the two countries .
 The United States pushed for this move, but opposition from key European states scuttled the attempt . The U.S. pushed for the move.
 The final communiqué for the summit did promise eventual NATO membership for both Ukraine and Georgia .
 This movement toward eventual Georgian membership in NATO also happened concurrently with heightened tensions with NATO on other issues, including the plan to develop a missile defense shield .
 The U.S. government said this enhancement to NATO defense capabilities was aimed at countering nuclear missiles that might originate from Iran . The Russian government saw this potential development as a direct threat to Russian security .
Tensions may have underlined the perception of NATO as threatening to Russians . Russia has increased their willingness to take steps to prevent further expansion of the Alliance .
 The threat that Georgian membership in NATO posed was certainly a political and strategic issue . But it was also likely to affect Russian conventional military calculations .
 Georgia began participating in NATO military exercises in 2001 . Georgia had been receiving military training and support from NATO since at least 2001 .
 Any enhanced relationship between Georgia and NATO would likely result in an increase in the capability of Georgian conventional forces, not to mention the possibility of forces from other NATO countries .
 Russia's decision to use force to prevent South Ossetia and Abkhazia from returning to Georgian control was also informed by Russia’s long-standing policy of supporting ethnic Russians and Russian speakers living abroad .
 For years, Georgian government had protested what it viewed as increasing Russian involvement in South Ossetia .
 The majority of individuals living in South Ossetia held Russian passports . The Russian government has an obligation to protect its citizens, the Russian government says .
 The Foreign Policy Research Institute, July 2016, and Janusz Bugajski, Georgian Lessons: Conflicting Russian and Western Interests in the Wider Europe, Washington, D.C.
 Atlantic Council, March 23, 2016b; and Natalie Wild, “Does a State Have the Right to Protect Its Citizens Abroad’s Abroad?’
 Russian Decisionmaking in Key Cases 91 similar to those expressed regarding Russian speakers in other post-Soviet countries . In keeping with Russia’s “Compatriots’ policy, this is in keeping with the ‘Compatriot” policy .
 Some states have often instituted educational or economic policies that appear to disadvantage Russians or those identifying more closely with Russia . But whether these populations prefer closer political ties with Moscow varies substantially .
 Russia has chosen to defend the rights of Russians or Russian speakers abroad . Russia is using force in Georgia to defend its rights in Georgia .
 Russian leaders may certainly feel genuine concern for their co-ethnics or citizens . Not all Russian speakers to whom the policy has been applied are either Russian speakers or Russian citizens .
 The policy strongly supports Russian strategic goals of maintaining influence in the post-Soviet space . However, the policy of defending Russians abroad provides numerous tools that Russia can use to interfere in the affairs of neighboring countries .
 Acting as a defender of Russians abroad provides Moscow with a rationale for intervening in the affairs of all states with sizable Russian populations . Most former Soviet states, including most former Soviet countries, have large populations .
 These interventions may be limited to passportization or information operations, as in the Baltic States . They may be more militarized, as they have been in Georgia, Ukraine, and Moldova .
 Georgia has been separated from South Ossetia from Russia for 16 years . Russian peacekeepers were killed in the process of separating the two countries .
 Russia may plan to slowly integrate both Abkhazia and South Ossetia into the Russian Federation as autonomous republics . It is also worth noting that Russia’s recent agreement on the Alliance and Integration Between the Russia Federation and the South Ossetsia was signed in February 2015
 Defense of the Russian Sphere of Influence. Concerns over NATO expansion and protection of Russians abroad directly affect Russian prestige . Russia's broader efforts to maintain a sphere of influence near its borders .
Since the 2003 Rose Revolution, Georgian President Saakashvili had pursued an increasingly independent, combative relationship with Russia . In a manner that represented a clear challenge to historical Russian influence in the region.
 Georgia has been a successful, militarily assertive Georgia with increasingly close links to 53 See, for example .
 Russian Public Opinion and the Ukraine Conflict is published on September 9, 2015b.
 It would have represented a potentially damaging template for other states to copy . It could hasten the decline of Russian influence throughout the region . It would also have represented the potential for other countries to copy.
 The Georgia War allowed Moscow to send a clear message to NATO and other non-NATO countries in the region . Russia was willing to bear substantial risks and costs to maintain this zone of influence .
 Russia has established new military bases and facilities throughout South Ossetia and Abkhazia . It occupies territory that encompasses approximately 20 percent of Georgia . The occupation is unlikely to be of any economic benefit .
 Russian involvement in the conflict also allowed Russia to demonstrate that the U.S. would not necessarily defend a country with which it had close relations, but not a treaty alliance, if doing so risked a wider war . If doing so, it would have risked a larger war, if it
 post-Soviet Eurasia is a region over which Russia is willing to fight but the U.S. and NATO are not . This affected the United States image not only in Georgia but also in other countries in the region, it has also affected the image .
 Georgia's attempts to retake control over South Ossetia in 2008 would have marked the effective end, or at least the sharp decline, of Russia's claims to have a privileged sphere of influence over other post-Soviet states .
 Russia was not willing to act to prevent other post-Soviet states from leaving its orbit . Georgia was actively seeking to gain NATO membership, and appeared to have reasonable prospects .
 The political and strategic costs of doing so, from Moscow’s perspective, would have been severe, says Moscow . The political, strategic costs would be severe.
 Russia confirmed that these developments would cross its redlines . States seeking to do so would risk direct conflict with Russia . Instead, by intervening militarily, Russia said it would cross the red lines .
 Russia could take military action within its sphere of influence with little or no major repercussions from the international community . However, this benefit could not necessarily be foreseen .
 The West's efforts to deescalate the situation were soon pursued . Rather than attempt to punish Russia for taking these actions, the West's reactions were limited .
 The Georgia War confirmed an image of Russia as an aggressive, dangerous actor . But from the Russian perspective, the prospects of facing severe punishment for acting within its near abroad must have seemed diminished .
 Both sides likely learned different lessons from the Georgia War . Both sides may have learned different Lessons from the 2014 Ukraine crisis .
 Russia launched a military intervention in Ukraine in response to the Euromaidan protests and subsequent revolution that saw then-Ukrainian president Viktor ­Yanukovych removed from power . In February 2014, Russia launched the military intervention.
Russian involvement in Ukraine's civil war helped fuel Ukraine's ongoing civil war . This initial intervention led to Russia annexing the Crimean peninsula, while a subsequent—still denied—Russian involvement .
 Russia's intervention in Ukraine represents its most aggressive reaction to what it perceives as Western encroachment into its privileged position in the former Soviet Union . Russia’s interventions in Ukraine represent its mostaggressive reaction to the West's encroachment .
 There was no direct military threat to Moscow stemming from the 2014 revolution. That reaction came in response to what was primarily a political challenge to Russia . The 2014 revolution was not a military threat.
 Russia did perceive in Ukraine's political unrest and westward shift a threat to Russia’s regional economic and security leadership . However, Russia did perceived in Ukraine”s political unrest as a threat.
 The case of Ukraine demonstrates Russia’s willingness to react militarily to a provocation mainly political in nature . The case shows Russia's willingness to respond militarily.
 Ukraine's Drift to the West Ukraine’s European Integration Efforts envisioned Ukrainian participation as an imperative . Ukraine's post-Soviet Eurasian integration efforts envisioned Ukraine participation as a imperative .
 The Eurasian Union project needed Ukraine's involvement in order to be a viable economic bloc for the near abroad . In Putin's view, the latest effort, the project, needed Ukraine’s involvement .
 Ukraine has not exhibited a similar level of enthusiasm for building such structures . Ukraine, however, has not shown a similar amount of enthusiasm.
 The first of the Eurasian integration institutions, the Commonwealth of Independent States, was regarded by Ukrainian leaders as not so much an alliance with Russia as a mechanism for a "civilized divorce" that was the first step toward closer relations with Europe . Ukraine's leaders considered the
 The Russian-Ukrainian relationship waxed and waned during the 2000s . But because of political and regional divisions of Ukraine and its leadership, Moscow was unable to secure complete influence over the country .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yuschenko was outwardly supportive of a European shift for Ukraine . Then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yuschenko was outwardly supported of European shift .
 Presidents Leonid Kuchma and Yanukovych, at best tried to strike a balance between European and Russian interests . The leaders that bookended his tenure, President Kuchmma and President Yanukovych, have tried to balance their interests .
 Even Yanukovych, a more palatable leader from Russia’s perspective, was reluctant to buy into Eurasian integration fully .
 Yanukovych reversed course in late 2013 and chose to shelve the Association Agreement and conclude an economic deal with Russia . This move precipitated Yanukovych's fall from power.
 Russia saw the EU’s Association Agreement as an acute challenge to the Eurasian Union . The EU's Association Agreement was seen as a challenge to Russia's sovereignty .
 Putin had hoped that the union, especially with Ukrainian participation, would have created deeply integrated economic relationships in the near abroad . Putin hoped that Ukrainian participation would have led to a deeper economic relationship .
 Ukraine’s importance to the Russian economy, especially in the energy sector, was paramount . Building such ties with Ukraine under the auspices of the Eurasian Union was paramount. Ukraine's importance to Russia was also paramount .
 Russia did not signal strong concerns in this area before 2013 . No less important was the political challenge .
 The Ukraine-EU relationship was also seen by Russia as a thinly veiled precursor to NATO expansion into Ukraine .
 From the early 2000s, the prospect of Ukrainian membership in NATO may have been, for Russia . Russia is the most worrisome manifestation of NATO enlargement .
 Aspirations for NATO accession began in earnest in 2003 . A Ukrainian national security law identified membership in the Alliance as an important foreign policy goal .
 The Ukrainian President at that time, Kuchma, supported this objective and believed it could be accomplished in an even-handed fashion that accounted for both European and Russian interests . The Ukrainian president at the time supported this objectives .
 President Yuschenko’s post-Orange Revolution administration was more adamant about the issue . He sought progress toward membership within a few years of the 2004 turnover .
 At the April 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest, members reviewed the possibility of granting membership plans to Ukraine and Georgia .
 Inviting states to begin talks would have initiated the formal process for eventual membership in the Alliance . Inviting these states to start these talks would be the first step to begin the process .
 NATO as a whole declined to extend membership action plans to Ukraine and Georgia . Despite U.S. support for the move, NATO did not extend membership plans to Georgia .
 The post-summit communiqué promised, without offering a timeline, NATO membership for both states . However, the communique did not offer a timeline .
 Russian Decisionmaking in Key Cases 95 still helped to guarantee Russian involvement in the 2008 Georgia War, as discussed earlier . Russian Decision making in Key Case 95 still helps to guarantee Russia involvement in 2008 Georgia war .
 Yanukovych's successor, Yanukovych, abandoned the goal of NATO membership and supported a “non-bloc” foreign policy . Yuschenko’s successor, Yuschenko, also abandoned NATO membership .
 The immediate danger of NATO accession subsided with these developments, but the potential threat was not lost on Russia .
Ukrainian membership in NATO would carry with it several negative consequences from the Russian viewpoint . Ukrainian membership would carry many negative consequences.
 Basing for the Black Sea Fleet would be compromised, creating a vacuum in the region . U.S. and its allies could easily fill through enhanced military presence or even new military bases .
 Russia’s historical perception of Ukraine as a buffer state would be irrevocably violated . In addition, Russia's historical perceptions of Ukraine would be violated .
 By intervening to destabilize and effectively partition Ukraine, Russia effectively blocked prospects for Ukraine’s accession to NATO for the foreseeable future .
 Russia’s 2014 actions in Ukraine are the decline of the ‘Putin Consensus’ and the regime's need to distract the populace from the country's economic and political shortcomings . A Diversionary Intervention is another possible factor that explains Russia's 2014 actions.
 The consensus prevailed throughout much of the early 2000s, as Russians accepted a degree of corruption and authoritarianism in the regime in exchange for economic development and an improved standard of living .
 Poor Russian economic performance began to negatively affect Putin’s approval ratings in 2011 . This arrangement started to falter in 2011 when poor Russian economy began to affect Putin.
 This dissatisfaction manifested itself in a more concrete fashion with antiregime protests in 2011 and 2012 . The protests were followed by a series of protests in 2012 and 2011 .
 The attitude of Russia’s elite made rectifying economic sluggishness an unlikely course . The attitude would have jeopardized the elite's powerful and lucrative position in Russia .
With the social contract of the 2000s failing and with poor prospects to revive it, the regime needed a new source of legitimacy to rebuild its support base .
 Putin embarked on a new ‘rally around the flag’ mission that could deflect attention away from Russia’s domestic issues . The mission has seen Russia pursue the annexation of Crimea, further intervention in Ukraine, and the attendant and ongoing conflict with the West .
 Sergei Guriev argues, ‘Another important tool of the regime in the coming years will continue to be its aggressive foreign policy.’
 How It Rose, How It Is Maintained, and How It Might End, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.
 Russia had been wary of popular unrest in its near abroad . Since the 2003 and 2004 color revolutions in parts of the former Soviet Union, including Ukraine, Russia was wary .
 The Putin regime has seen a Western hand in political upheavals in Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, and the Middle East . The Russian president has been in power since 2008 .
 Russia has been suspicious of U.S.-led democracy promotion efforts in Ukraine . Russia sees the 2014 revolution as their end product .
 The Euromaidan and other uprisings were threatening to Russia because of its fears that it may be next in line . Throngs of disaffected citizens in Kyiv might lead to similar events playing out in Moscow .
 The Orange Revolution in 2004 had elicited similar fears of subversive Western designs for the post-Soviet space . The aftermath did not bring this outcome to fruition, but it did worsen Russian-Ukrainian relations .
 Russia could not help but see a repeat of the challenge to its regional hegemony and its relationship with a strategically important neighbor . Ten years later, Russia is seen as a key ally in the region .
 The Putin regime is struggling to maintain power in Russia . The challenge might develop into a regional trend toward popular uprisings that could leave the Putin regime struggling .
 Moscow’s decision to respond to the change of government in Kyiv with military intervention and territorial annexation highlights the extent of political developments in post-Soviet states . The current Russian regime is seen as high-level strategic challenges.
 Ukraine is a state of vital interest for Russia. Russia demonstrated the lengths to which it is willing to go to prevent Ukraine from fully joining Western institutions .
 Moscow appears to have calculated that the downside risks of allowing Ukraine to possibly be integrated into key Western institutions represented the greater cost . But these actions also appear to have created a fundamental rupture between Russia and the remainder of Ukraine .
 Russia’s intervention in Ukraine has been highly sensitive to costs. It is important to emphasize, however, that even in this area of vital interest, Russia's intervention has been very sensitive .
 Russian support for anti-Kyiv rebels in the Donbass was initially limited . Only later expanded to include regular Russian army units when it looked like defeat was possible .
 The Causes of Russia’s Near Abroad Assertion Revisited, ‘International Studies Review, 2016,’ is published .
 Putin’s War in Ukraine, Washington, D.C.: Atlantic Council, May 2015.
 Russian Decisionmaking in Key Cases 97 occur are not acknowledged in state-run media . Russian Decision making in Key Case 97 occur not acknowledged by state media .
 The economic costs that Russia has born in the wake of the Ukraine crisis appear to be substantially greater . The decline in oil prices has been primarily a result of the decline in the oil prices rather than the effects of Western sanctions .
 Most analyses have concluded that the effect of sanctions on Russian government revenue and the value of the ruble have been relatively modest in comparison with declines in hydrocarbon prices that occurred over roughly the same period .
Where sanctions do appear to have had notable impact is on financial flows needed for long-term investment and the ability of nonsanctioned firms to borrow to facilitate trade .
 The Kremlin appears to have taken steps to ensure that elites close to the regime are insulated from negative economic effects . This further limits domestic sources of capital to nonpolitically connected economic actors .
 Russia is blamed on the West as an attempt to punish Russia for trying to reclaim its rightful role in the world . There seems to be a much greater willingness to allow the ordinary economy to bear a substantial burden .
 Russia has demonstrated it is willing to bear to defend its privileged sphere of influence in eastern Ukraine . Overall, the intervention in Ukraine certainly represents a substantial increase in the costs that Russia has shown it's willing tobear .
 Russia has generally acted opportunistically, both to seize Crimea and to destabilize eastern Ukraine at Kyiv's moment of maximal weakness . Instead, Russia has acted opportunically, both in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine, it has been acting opportunistically .
 Russia's balance of capabilities between Russia and NATO did not vary dramatically across these cases . Other factors did, and their variation helps to explain the very different Russian responses .
 Georgia and Ukraine cases were particularly salient for Russia, involving challenges to Russian authority and influence in locations of vital strategic concern . Russia is not military threats to Russia, although not military threat.
 A failure to respond aggressively in these two cases would have risked abandoning claims to a sphere of influence in Russia’s near abroad, says Thomas Gibbons-Neff .
 ‘Sanctions Bind Russia’s Energy Elite to Putin,’ says Timothy Heritage . “SanctionsBind Russia's Energy Elite.’
 Kosovo and the Baltics are still areas of historical concern for Russia . The political and strategic challenges they present did not and do not appear to rise to the same level as Georgia and Ukraine .
 Russia lacked clear advantage in local capabilities that it would leverage in both Georgia and Ukraine . In Kosovo, Russia lacked the clear advantage.
Russian perceptions of U.S. and NATO intentions over the past 20 years have changed . These cases also illustrate the evolution in Russian perceptions of the United States and NATO .
 Russian leaders note with concern such factors as successive rounds of NATO expansion . Russia regards the development of other capabilities that Russia regards as threatening .
 The broader goals of the U.S. and NATO do not appear to be compatible with Russia’s security interests and must therefore be more actively resisted .
 The Kosovo and Baltic accession cases were resolved against Russia’s wishes . The manner in which the Kosovo andBaltic accessions were resolved was against the wishes of Russia and without substantive concession .
 The cases also show the heightening of Russian concerns about the potential threats to regime security . Western integration and democratization of states in its near abroad represent the cases .
 Russian sensitivity to domestic threats to regime stability appears to have intensified, particularly since the 2011 elections . Russia has seen large protests following the 2011 election in Russia .
 Russian reactions to the 2004 Orange Revolution and the 2014 Euromaidan are treated with much greater concern, as can be seen in Russia .
 The views of Russia’s elite, and particularly of Putin, have hardened since the latest, 2007 . Overall, the views of the Russia's elite appear to have softened since the last year .
 From the Russian perspective, the apparent benefits of cooperation have shrunk . The apparent dangers of failing to aggressively assert Russian interests have expanded, according to the author .
 Russia demonstrated a substantial willingness to incur large economic costs to achieve its goals. It should be emphasized, however, that in these cases, Russia shows a very limited willingness to risk military losses .
 Western measures likely to deter Russian aggression but also for the types of aggression that Russia is likely to undertake . This has implications for the type of measures that are likely to be used by Russia .
 The threat of losing access to Western markets may not be sufficient to deter Russia from taking actions . There is little evidence that the current Russian leadership would be willing to risk a direct confrontation that has potential for substantial military losses or defeat .
 These observations are most relevant in conditions broadly similar to what we have seen in the past . These observations, however, are most important in conditions similar to that of the past.
 The potential for important underlying conditions to change in the near future must also be considered . This is the period when decisions will be made about possible future NATO posture enhancements on the Alliance’s eastern flank .
 Russia and NATO have a long, eventful history of interactions since 1995 . The two countries have been involved in a number of events since then .
 There have been numerous perceived provocations on both sides over vital political, economic, and strategic issues . There have also been perceived provocation on both side over the issue .
 patterns of action and reaction from the past will not necessarily hold in the future . But they still provide important context and can be essential for understanding current perceptions and motivations .
 The NATO-Russia relationship has been tense since 1995 . It is intended as a quick reference to notable events and points of tension in the relationship .
 For discussions about how these events reflect and have informed Russian actions and perceptions, see Chapter Three . See Chapter Three.
 Russia has a minor participation in Kazakhstan in an exercise with Central the exercise . The exercise expresses substantial Asian states concerns .
 The Czech Republic, Hungary, and Russia express strong diplomatic Poland officially join NATO . The Baltic protest against NATO expansion and States are given a path to do so .
 In response to the Kosovo campaign, Kosovar Albanians. May–Jun: NATO bombs Yugoslavia to protect .
 Russia suspends cooperation with NATO; attempts to seize the Pristina International Airport in Yugoslavia . Russia revises Russian security doctrine and revises its security doctrine .
 Conflicts and Peacekeeping in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, NATO-EAPC Research Fellowship Award Final Report, 2001 .
Between Cooperation and Containment, Oslo: Institutt for Forsvarsstudier, 2008. Between Cooperation andcontainment.
 Russia’s official response to the Baltic Air Policing mission starts. May–Jun: The NATO Baltic AirPolicing mission begins .
 Russia issues statements that it did not see this as a threat . Policing mission is muted; Russia issues statement that it does not see it as athreat .
 Russia strongly opposes the Orange reversal of Ukraine’s presidential Revolution . Russia accuses the United States election of a loss for the Kremlinof orchestrating the change in regime .
 As a result of a pricing dispute, some countries (such as the EU) explore diversification . The shutdown is affecting supplies to some countries .
 Russia opposes the Joint Task Force East a basing agreement (Joint Task Force agreement, which it later cites as part of East). 31 the rationale for Russian suspension of the CFE Treaty .
 Russia issues strong denunciations of Based Interceptors for missile defense in missile defense as a “clear threat’s” Poland and the Czech Republic begin . Poland and Czech Republic threaten “negative consequences’ for host states .
 Russia suspends participation in the CFE memorial dedicated to the Red Treaty . Russia encourages protests for minority rights in Estonia . Estonia sees massive cyber attacks with possible links to the Russian government .
 Russia resumes long-range strategic bomber flights for the first time since the Cold War .
Russia Turns Off Supplies to Ukraine in Payment Row, and EU Feels the Chill, says Tom Parfitt .
 Russia issues a warning that Georgia and Georgia and Ukraine eventual NATO Ukraine joining NATO would be a “direct membership’s threat’ to Russia . The NATO promise contributes to Russia's later decision to intervene in Georgia .
 The United States and Georgia hold an exercise joint Immediate Response exercise . Georgia moves troops into South Ossetia to lay the groundwork for the invasion .
 Russia sends two Tu-160 strategic bombers to Venezuela to conduct exercises. Sep–Oct.
 Russia strengthens links with far-right Hungarian party Jobbik, including alleged financial ties . Russia has a pattern of support for European farright parties .
 Albania, Croatia, and Possible Future Candidates, Washington, D.C.
 President Bakiyev Wants to Close United States Military Base Outside Bishkek,’ EurasiaNet, February 2, 2009 .
 Russia's initial reaction is positive on European Phased Adaptive Approach to news that the U.S. cancels missile defense . Russia’s reaction is negative.
 NATO begins military intervention in Libya . Russia abstains on the United Nations Libya . NATO begins its military intervention .
 Security Council’s Libya resolution grows critical of the shift from humanitarian protection to regime change .
NATO Secretary General Welcomes Albania and Croatia as NATO Members . May–Jun Jul–Aug 51 NATO, “NATO secretary General Welches Albania and Croatian as NATO members’
 A ‘Phased, Adaptive Approach’ for Missile Defense in Europe was launched in September 2009 .
Russia simulates bombing military targets in Sweden . Russia simulates bombings of military targets .
 The United States threatens strikes and weapons strikes in Syria . Russia facilitates removal of Syrian against Syria over use of chemical weapons . Russia reinforces its own role in Syria to avoid United States strikes .
 Russia invades and annexes Crimea, then in favor of a pro-Western government . Russia intervenes in eastern Ukraine . Ukraine's president has been in power since November .
 Russia shuts off gas deliveries to Ukraine temporarily expanded to 12 fighters in a pricing dispute . The Baltic Air Policing mission is now on a temporary basis .
 Russia further restricts trade and expanded sanctions against Russia over its involvement in eastern Ukraine . The United States and EU put in place. The U.S. and EU are putting in place to impose sanctions on Russia .
 President Obama gives a speech in Estonia . Russia allegedly abducts an Estonian Tallinn. U.S. commitment counterintelligence agent from Estonian to NATO .
 Russia provides loans to the French National Front political party, allegedly for supporting the annexation of Crimea . Russia is accused of supporting Crimea's annexation .
 EU and U.S. Impose Sanctions over Crimea .
 Montenegro receives formal invitation to join NATO . Montenegro received a formal invitation from the European Union .
 "Albania, Croatia Become NATO Members," April 1, 2009. References ‘Albanian, Croatia become NATO Members,’
 Moscow Times: “Kremlin Threatens Response to United States Nuclear Bomb Deployment in Germany’s U.S.
 Conflicting Russian and Western Interests in the Wider Europe, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies .
 Russian Air Force looks Towards a Brighter Future, says Jane's International Defence Review .
 The European Reassurance Initiative is based in London, England . The initiative is based on the European Union's "Reassurance initiative"
 The United States Army in Europe, 1951-1962, Washington, D.C. The U.S. Army Center for Military History, 2015, is located in Washington .
 An Examination of Russian Compatriot Policy in Estonia, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 2011 .
 NATO’s War to Save Kosovo, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2000 .
 Congress looks to change a Legacy of Nuclear Defense, says Demirjian .
 Dzutsev, Valeriy, “Russia to Strip Abkhazia and South Ossetia of Their Limited Sovereignty,’.
 Russia says it will respond to U.S. military build-up in Baltics .
 Feifer, Gregory, “Tensions Rise in U.S.-Russia Relationship’s Relationship,” NPR, November 30, 2007 .
Russia is only a threat if we let it be one, says Mark Galeotti . Galeotti: "Russia Is Only a Threat If We Let It Be One,’ he says .
 Moscow's Exercise of Power, London: Chatham House, Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2016 .
 Gillert, Douglas J., “United States Ventures Cautiously into Former Soviet Territory,’ American Forces Press Service, October 6, 1997 . Gillert: “ United States VenturesCautiously Into Former Soviet territory’
 Goldman, Marshall I., “Putin and the Oligarchs,’s Foreign Affairs, November/December 2004. Goldman: ‘Putin and Oligarch’
 Gutterman, Steve, and Gleb Bryanski, “Putin Says United States Stoked Russian Protests,’
 Conflict Management and Peace Science, 2015. Demonizing Enemies or Demonstrating Competence, 2015 .
 Hildreth, Steven A., and Carl Ek, Long-Range Ballistic Missile Defense in Europe, were all named in 2008 . They were named by Congressional Research Service .
German Defense Spending Hike Reflects Regional Trend, says Lars Hoffmann. Hoffmann, Lars, “German Defense spending Hikereflects regional Trend,’s regional trend .
 IHS Markit, Jane’s World Air Forces, London, 2016a. — — — . — — Jane's World Armies, London. ———. —– Jane‘s World Navies,London, 2016c. — – Jane”s World
 The Atlantic Council calls for Patriot Shield to Deter Russia in the Baltic Region .
 "The End of the Putin Consensus" was published on March 1, 2012 . It was published by the European Council on Foreign Relations .
 Testimony Presented to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on April 3, 2003 .
 "Russia’s Nuclear Paranoia Fuels Its Nuclear Propaganda," Foreign Policy, August 22, 2016 .
 "How Putin Uses Missile Defence in Europe to Distract Russian Voters,’ says Bilyana .
 The Baltic Sea Security Report, Washington, D.C.: Center for European Policy Analysis, June 2015 .
Russia S-400 Syria Missile Deployment Sends Robust Signal,’.
 Menkiszak, Marek, and Piotr Żochowski, “Russia’s Reaction to the NATO Summit in Warsaw,” Ośrodek Studiów Wschodnich, said .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Kontseptsiya vneshney politiki Rossiyskoy Federatsii .
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, 1949 . North Atlantic treaty Organization, 1949, was formed in 1949 .
 The U.S. Department of Defense releases its budget for 2017 . The Defense Department releases its annual budget for the year .
 "Unpacking Russia’s New National Security Strategy" is a new book by the Center for International and Strategic Studies . The book will be published in January 2016 .
 "Russia Turns Off Supplies to Ukraine in Payment Row, and EU Feels the Chill,’ says Tom Parfitt . “Russia turns off supplies to Ukraine, and Europe turns off supply,” he says .
 Ukrainians Want to Remain One Country, May 8, 2014, says Putin .
 Piper, Elizabeth, and Timothy Heritage, “Sanctions Bind Russia’s Energy Elite to Putin,’
 Rossiyskiy Institut Strategicheskikh Issledovaniy, April 23, 2014 . The U.S. is forming a System of Military-Biological Objects around Russia .
 Rising State Perceptions of Threats and Opportunities, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 2015 .
 Public Opinion Foundation: “Stabil’nost’s ili reformy?” July 22, 2016 .
 Rachman, Gideon, ‘Vladimir Putin’s Survival Strategy Is Lies and Violence,’ says Gideon .
 "Economics Not Impacting Russian Support for Georgian Separatists," says Rimple, Paul .
 The Russia-Georgia War is the result of a war between Russia and Georgia . The conflict began September 8, 2009 .
 The U.S. Shares the Blame for the Russia-Georgia Crisis .
S. Sedov, L., “Aprel’skie zamery obshchestvennogo mneniia’s” May 16, 2004 .
 "The Impact of the War in Georgia on Russian Public Opinion,” Abkhaz World, August 7, 2010 .
 Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. Comparative Government and Politics, Basingstoke, UK: PalgraveMacmillan .
 Smith, Aivar, ‘Eston Kohver Gets Back to Work,’ is a Baltic Times columnist . Smith, a former journalist, has been married for more than 20 years .
Russia's 2000 Military Doctrine, "Russia’s 2000 Military doctrine," was released on October 1, 1999 .
 Soper, Karl, “Russia Receives Two MiG-31BM Squadrons,’ Jane’s Defence Weekly, April 10, 2015 .
 "Russia is using Syria as a Training Ground for its Revamped Military and Shiny New Toys," says Reid .
Views of NATO and its Role are Mixed in U.S., Other Member Nations, Pew Research Center says .
 ‘Back-to-Back Rotations to Europe Could Stress the Army’s Armored BCTs,’ says Army Times . “Army Expands Operation Atlantic Resolve to Six Countries,” Army Times.
 "Russia Accused of Unleashing Cyberwar to Disable Estonia,’ says Ian. Traynor.
 United States European Command, “Operation Atlantic Resolve—Fact Sheet 2016,’s April 15, 2016 . U.S. European Command: ‘OperationAtlantic Resolve’ 2016 .
 "Understanding the Russian Response to the Intervention in Libya," says Hannah VanHoose . " understanding the Russian response to the intervention in Libya,’ she says . “Understanding the Russians response to Libya's intervention is a key part of the U.S.
 "EU Airlines could Suffer from Russian Airspace Sanctions,’ says Bloomberg .
 The Russian Armed Forces have been in charge of the 5 Operational Strategic Commands since Dec 15th, 2014 . The U.S. military says it has been in control of the Russian military since July 15, 2016 .
 "Does a State Have the Right to Protect Its Citizens Abroad?’s Natalie. Wild, Natalie, “does a State have the right to Protect its citizens Abroad,’ she says .
 Yoon, Sangwon, “Obama Saw Too Late Putin’s Return Would Undermine Reset,” Bloomberg, 2015. Yoon.
 Russia's Strategy, Tactics, and Influence in the Former Soviet Union, Arlington, Va.: CNA, November 2015 .
 Russia’s likely reactions to such posture enhancements remain understudied .
Analysts can assess likely Russian reactions to proposed NATO posture enhancements in Europe . In this report, we develop a framework that analysts can use to assess Russian reactions .
 Russian reactions will depend on 11 key factors that capture the strategic context, the Russian domestic context, and the characteristics of the proposed posture enhancements .
 Russia's proposed enhancements could be applied in practice by assessing Russia’s potential reactions to both planned and proposed enhancements . We then illustrate how this framework can be used in practice .
 The assessments highlight the importance of clear analysis of Russian perceptions of NATO’s intentions and commitment . They also highlight the cost sensitivity of the Russian leadership .