 Yuri Lutsenko, one of the leaders of the protests, is injured during clashes with the police . He was injured in clashes with police .
Violent clashes erupt in Ukraine as a reaction to new strict anti-protest laws . Ukraine has been hit by new laws in response to new laws .
 Violent clashes occur for a second day between protesters and police in Kiev . Protesters and police clash for the second day on January 21 .
 At least five people shot dead and hundreds injured as demonstrators clash with police over new laws limiting the right to protest in Ukraine .
 January 24 Unrest in Ukraine spreads to cities of Khmelnitsky, Zhytomyr, Cherkasy, Lviv, Ternopil, Ivano-Frankivsk, Lutsk, Rivne and Chernivtsi .
 Lviv regional governor was forced to sign a letter of resignation . The offices of the governors were broken into .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov submits his resignation to President Viktor Yanukovych in a bid to defuse the conflict in Ukraine . Azarov says he wants to end Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich accepts the resignation of Prime Minister Nikolay Azarov and his cabinet . The cabinet will continue to work until a new government is formed .
 Activist Dymtro Bulatov reappears after allegedly being tortured by the government . The activist was allegedly tortured by government .
 At least 13 people die and five others are injured when a commuter train slams into a shuttle bus in Sumy Oblast, Ukraine .
 A man attempts to hijack a Pegasus Airlines flight from Kharkiv, and demands to be flown to Sochi . The pilots turned off the inflight monitors and landed in Istanbul, Turkey, where the passenger was arrested .
 French pole vaulter Renaud Lavillenie breaks Sergey Bubka's 21-year-old record with a 6.16 metres leap in Donetsk .
 Anti-government protesters in Ukraine end a two-month occupation of Kiev's city hall . An amnesty offer aimed at easing a standoff over President Viktor Yanukovych’s rule .
Violent clashes between police forces and opposition demonstrators reignite in Kiev . February 18 Violent clashes between the police and opposition protesters reignite .
 The death toll rises to 14, six of them policemen who were shot dead during the confrontation .
 Seven miners are killed and nine injured in an explosion at the Pivnichna coal mine in Ukraine's Donetsk Oblast .
After protesters had resisted the police, opposition and President Viktor Yanukovych hold talks and reach a truce .
 President Viktor Yanukovych sacks Volodymyr Zamana as Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . He replaces him with Yuriy Ilyin, who replaces him in the role of General Staff .
 In a few cities in Western Ukraine, anti-government protesters seize government buildings . The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption .
 A shaky truce is broken with police and protesters renewing clashes on Kiev's Maidan Nezalezhnosti . Scores of deaths are reported .
 The EU imposes sanctions against Ukraine including asset freezes and visa bans . The European Union imposes sanctions on Ukraine . The sanctions include asset freezes, visa bans.
 At least 77 people are dead and large parts of Kiev's occupied Independence Square are burning . Ukraine's three-month political crisis has seen a bloody escalation in the country's political crisis .
 Bogdana Matsotska of the Ukraine olympic team decides to pull out of the Winter Games in Sochi . Anti-government protests back home leave dozens dead and hundreds injured .
 The Ukrainian government and opposition agree to form a unity government and to hold early elections . February 21 the Ukrainian government, opposition and the government agree to hold elections .
 The Parliament of Ukraine removes President Viktor Yanukovych from office and frees ex-Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko . The Parliament also frees former PM YuliaTymoshenko.
 Protesters claim control of the capital Kiev with reports that President Viktor Yanukovych has fled to eastern Ukraine . President Yanukovych is reported to have fled to east Ukraine .
 Oleksandr Turchynov is voted Speaker of the Parliament, and in that capacity acting President of Ukraine . The Ukrainian economist and writer is a former journalist and author .
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych is blocked by Ukraine's customs in Donetsk from taking a plane to Russia .
 The European Commission recognizes Oleksandr Turchynov as Ukraine’s legitimate interim president . The EU recognizes him as Ukraine's legitimate president .
 Stepan Kubiv is selected as governor of the National Bank of Ukraine . Kubiv worked as one of the commandants for the EuroMaidan demonstrations .
 An arrest warrant is issued for the former President Viktor Yanukovych and other officials for their alleged role in killing protesters . The former President Yanukovych and others are accused of killing protesters.
 The Parliament of Ukraine removes the five-pointed red star from its spire . The move is aimed at erasing the nation's Soviet legacy .
 Ukraine's interim President Oleksandr Turchynov formally becomes the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . Oleksander Turchyv formally becomes Supreme Commander.
 Ukraine's acting interior minister Arsen Avakov says the elite Berkut police unit has been disbanded . The unit is blamed for the deaths of protesters .
 The President of Russia, Vladimir Putin, orders snap military exercises near the Ukraine border . The Russian President orders the exercises near Ukraine border.
 The Parliament of Ukraine's Autonomous Republic of Crimea announces a referendum to determine the region’s future and ousts the regional government . The referendum will take place in the Crimea region in Crimea .
 Ousted President Viktor Yanukovich issues a statement saying he is still the legitimate president . He says he is ready to fight to the end to fulfill his deal with the opposition .
 Around 50 armed men bearing Russian national symbols seize the building of the Supreme Council of Crimea . Clashes between ethnic Tatar and Russian protesters took place in Crimea .
 The Verkhovna Rada or parliament of Ukraine appoints Arseniy Yatsenyuk as the Prime Minister of Ukraine . The PM will be the first Ukrainian Prime Minister to be elected .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea has announced that it plans to hold a referendum for independence the same day as the elections in Ukraine .
 Members of the Russian Parliament propose new laws that would make it easier for Russia to incorporate parts of Ukraine . The laws would make the country's borders easier to incorporate .
 Russia finally confirms that it has moved troops in Ukraine's Crimea region to protect its own interests . Russia says it is moving troops in Crimea to protect itself .
 Mykhailo Kutsyn is appointed Chief of the General Staff and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . Kutsyn has been appointed as the Chief of General Staff .
 Acting General Prosecutor General Oleh Makhnitsky formally calls on Russia to extradite ousted President Viktor Yanukovych . The list includes former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka, former Interior Minister Vitaliy Zakharchenko, Yanukovich aide Andriy Klyuyev, and
Pro-Russian men have taken over control of two airports, one of which Simferopol International Airport, and raised the Russian Navy flag . News agency Interfax-Ukraine reports that armed pro-Russianmen have taken control of the airports .
 The Federation Council of Russia authorizes President Vladimir Putin to use force in Ukraine's Crimea .
 Crimean parliament and the Sevastopol City Council issued a letter of intent to unilaterally declare independence from Ukraine March 11 .
 Crimean status referendum results show a large majority voted in favour of independence of Crimea from Ukraine and joining Russia as a federal subject . March 16 Official results of the Crimeanstatus referendum show a big majority voted for independence from Ukraine .
 Clashes between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian groups broke out in Odessa on May 2 .
 Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down and crashed near Torez in Donetsk Oblast .
 Ukrainian forces battle pro-Russian rebels near Luhansk International Airport . Ukrainian forces are fighting pro-Russia rebels.
 RIA Novosti news agency reports that Russian photojournalist Andrey Stenin has been found dead in Ukraine .
 NATO sources claim that there are ""several thousand" Russian troops inside Ukraine . NATO sources say there are "several thousands" of Russian troops in Ukraine .
 The government of Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels agree to a cease-fire on September 5 . Fighting continues after the announcement .
 Patriarch Filaret heads the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyivan Patriarchate . Putin faces eternal damnation to hell unless he repents, he says .
 September 8 Pro-Russian rebels release 1,200 prisoners under ceasefire deal . September 8 is September 8 .
 The Government of Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists agreed to a ceasefire a week ago . Dozens of prisoners were exchanged as part of the ceasefire .
 Heavy fighting resumes between Ukraine forces and rebels near Donetsk International Airport . At least six people are dead in the fighting, with at least six dead .
September 15 Heavy shelling on the city of Donetsk leaves 6 people dead and 15 wounded . September 15 heavy shelling leaves 6 dead.
Lawmakers from Ukraine ratify a landmark agreement with the European Union in tandem with a meeting of the European Parliament . September 16 Lawmakers from the Ukraine ratified the deal with the EU .
 A rocket attack by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine kills 10 civilians and injures 12 others in the village of Nyzhnya Krynka near Donetsk .
 The President of Ukraine visits the U.S. to seek assistance in combating separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 More than 26,000 people in Moscow participate in the largest demonstration so far against Russian president Vladimir Putin and the War in Donbass .
 Vladimir Putin warns in letter to his Ukrainian counterpart Petro Poroshenko that Moscow will restrict Ukraine's access to Russian markets if Kiev implements any part of a trade agreement with the European Union .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko announces wide-ranging reform program entitled Strategy 2020 to prepare Ukraine for applying for European Union membership in 2020 .
Clashes between pro-Russian rebels and Ukrainian government troops kill at least 12 people in the worst flare-up of violence since the ceasefire accord earlier in September .
 The Ukrainian military say they have repelled a renewed assault by the pro-Russian forces on the Donetsk International Airport .
 The airport has been under sustained assaults for over 2 weeks despite an official ceasefire . The airport is under sustained assault for over two weeks despite the ceasefire .
 shells hit a school and a bus station in the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk . At least 12 people were killed in the shelling .
 Donetsk and Luhansk go to the polls for parliamentary and presidential elections . November 2 Voters in break away "people's republics" in Donetsk and Luhansk .
Rebel leaders Alexander Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnisky appear set for victory in early counting in Russia . The elections will be recognised in Russia but not elsewhere .
 NATO claims Russian Army troops and military equipment have entered Ukraine . November 12 NATO claims that Russian army troops and equipment are in Ukraine .
 At least three people die in new round of fighting between the Armed Forces of Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists .
 The Parliament of Ukraine meets for the first time since recent elections . Arseniy Yatsenyuk expected to be confirmed as Prime Minister .
 Georgian-born Alexander Kvitashvili, US-born Natalie Jaresko and Lithuanian Aivaras Abromavičius are three of the world's most famous people .
 Prosecutors at Sary-Arqa District Court in Astana charge 30-year-old Yevgeny Vdovenko of intentional and illegal participation in a military conflict abroad . He had fought alongside pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 The European Union imposes sanctions on Russia-occupied Crimea by banning investments and tourism in the region and halting oil explorations . The EU imposed sanctions on Crimea on December 18 .
 Kazakhstan renews its military cooperation with Ukraine . Kazakh leader Nursultan Nazarbayev visited Kiev on December 22 .