 Nuclear saber-rattling and bizarre demands continue . U.S. demands the United States destroy its Aegis Ashore BMD system in Romania over an imagined Tomahawk capability .
Baltics threatened over imagined deployment of imagined nuclear-armed missiles in Baltic states territory . Baltics threatened to deploy the missiles in the Baltic states .
 France sides with EU against Germany on Nordstream 2 – this Russian play may yet crash and burn . Russia is already laying the pipeline to build the pipeline for Russia .
 Galeotti on Prigozhine, and Whitmore on Lithuanian FM on rebooted now CEPA Power Vertical podcast series . Galeotti also on the LithuanianFM podcast series.
 Carnegie report on increasing infighting within Chekist Power Vertical structures – every man for himself it seems .
 How Butina played the NRA while helping anti-American groups elsewhere . Butina also helped anti- American groups elsewhere.
 Ukrainians publish a list of 66 Wagner mercenaries KIA by United States forces in the Syrian turkey shoot .
 Turkey restricts the ever-increasing volume of Russian oil tanker traffic via Bosporus . The spate of recent maritime accidents involving Russian shipping has a prudent policy .
Latest Bellingcat OSINT report connects the third Salisbury attacker with a near fatal and unexplained poisoning attack in Bulgaria in 2015 . Third Salisbury attack in 2015.
 New Stugna ATGW fire teams appear to be performing well . Azov and Donbas fire teams are performing well, according to reports .
 IOC of Vilkha 300mm GMLRS in now imminent and performance claims include a Mk. class warhead, and Mach 3. class terminal velocity making it difficult to engage by Counter-PGM systems .
 Mammadova argues on lessons to be learned in the West on countering Russian meddling . Mammadov: Russia is a great place to learn from the West .
 Yanukovich update and analysis of Russian invasion preparations in 2010 . The Russian president has been in power since 2008 .
 Church reports – Russian JW persecution and more bizarre aspects of ROC promotion . Church reports.
 Russia says the U.S. should destroy its MK-41 missile-defense launch system deployed in NATO-member Romania . The move would return to compliance with a landmark Cold War-era nuclear treaty .
 Russia accused Norway of pushing ahead with a military build-up which it said increased the risks of military action . Russia said it required some kind of Russian response .
 Russia's Ministry of Foreign Affairs says Norway has become more and more active in helping the Western military alliance build up its presence in the Arctic region .
 Norwegian port near Tromso to be able to receive nuclear submarines . Zakharova singled out what she said was a Norwegian plan to this year equip a port.
 Russia says it will mirror the United States’ withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces treaty . The U.S. will formally exit the agreement in six months .
 The test is the thirteenth to date to involve the experimental Burevestnik . It is the first time the test has been carried out by the Bure vestnik .
 Russia conducted a partially successful test of its developmental nuclear-powered cruise missile, the Burevestnik, on January 29, 2019, according to U.S. government sources .
 The test took place at Russia’s Kapustin Yar missile test range . It is the thirteenth to date involving the missile .
 The U.S. intelligence assesses that Russia’s development efforts on the missile continues .
Only one test of the missile has been moderately successful to date, according to U.S. intelligence .
 Russia's Pank’ovo test site in Novaya Zemlya was used to retrieve missile debris and nuclear materials from the Barents Sea after a crash . The test took place in November 2017.
 Russia has tested the reactor of the Poseidon, the unmanned underwater vehicle which Russian President Vladimir Putin boasted of last year . The Poseidon is a Russian military-defense vehicle .
 Poseidon will be equipped with both conventional and nuclear payloads and will be able to destroy the enemy targets from a distance .
 The weapons of the Russian Status-6 project were called the ‘doomsday machine’ by British media . British media called the project the “doomsdayMachine’
 The United States plans to withdraw from the Treaty on the Elimination of Medium and Shorter-Range Missiles due to the fact that Russia has been violating the terms of the agreement for years .
 The United States called on the Russian Federation to renounce the use of the 9M729 missile or to modernize it . The U.S. called on Russia to renounces the use.
 The Kremlin decided to give the United States ‘a mirror-like response’ and withdrew from the INF Treaty . The U.S. was given a “mirror-like’ response, the Kremlin said .
 Combat ready MiG-31BMs will protect Russia’s northern regions by circumnavigating the airspace around the North Pole, Defense Ministry announces .
 The recently released National Defense Review spells out plans for the U.S. to develop a more robust missile defense system .
 The United States Missile Defense Review envisions the allocation of resources for military projects that would give the U.S. an edge in its competition with Russia and China .
Developing and fielding missile defenses will be no easy task, considering financial and technological barriers . Developing missile defenses that could counter the other great powers will not be easy task .
 The potential for progress on missile defense systems will alarm Russia and China, according to the U.S. State Department . It will further intensify the great power competition and the global arms race .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin cannot afford to get sucked into a costly nuclear arms race with the United States . Putin's ratings down and state funds needed to hedge against new Western sanctions and raise living standards .
 Washington said this month it was suspending its obligations under the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty . Washington said it was starting the process of quitting it, untying its hands to develop new missiles .
 Washington and Moscow deny flouting the treaty . That raises the prospect of a new arms race between the two countries .
 Putin responded by saying Russia would mirror the U.S. moves by suspending its own obligations and quitting the pact .
 Putin has sometimes used bellicose rhetoric to talk up Russia’s standoff with the West . But Putin did not up the ante.
 Putin said money for new systems must come from existing budget funds . He said Moscow would not deploy new land-based missiles in Europe or elsewhere unless Washington did so first .
 France plans to back an EU proposal to regulate Russia’s Nord Stream 2 pipeline, its foreign ministry says . Germany has been trying to garner support for the project .
 France is set to challenge a controversial gas pipeline project between Germany and Russia . It is the first sign of a rift between Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel .
 Republican and Democratic United States senators unveiled a resolution calling for the cancellation of Russia's Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline . The pipeline is a link under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany .
 In a time when much of politics is about signal and drama, it needs figures to represent the worst, the most dangerous side of the system .
 Russia has a Power Theatrical, with all its implications of rigid discipline and a clear, universal hierarchy of command .
There are many more expressions of governance by hint and whisper, shadowplay and pantomime . Beyond the overt expressions of Kremlin will, the presidential decrees and ministerial resolutions, there are many other expressions of leadership .
 A particular role in these dramas is that of the ogre-oprichnik, the fearsome agent of the Kremlin . He is only partly bound by his chains .
 The sacral king is known in part by his ability to keep the ogre in check . His role is at once to be a cautionary tale, and also a legitimate role .
 Ramzan Kadyrov is the longest-running ogre in Chechnya . He can bring together the traditional Russian image of the wild man of the south and modern image of gangster .
 The very fact that even today there are those who believe — implausibly — that he could be a king or kingmaker outside Chechnya speaks to the power of his performance .
 Kadyrov is an increasingly uncomfortable ogre for the Kremlin itself . He plays violent border games with Ingushetia and demands absolute guarantees for the generous federal subsidies .
 The Power Vertical Podcast is a weekly podcast by Brian Whitmore . Download past episodes or subscribe to future episodes of the podcast at CEPA .
 Don’t rely on common sense if you want to understand how modern Russia is run .
 President Vladimir Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, gave advice to Vladimir Putin . Peskov: "I'm not sure what I'm doing"
 Critics have long alleged that the Kremlin has bent parliament, the courts and the media to his personal will . It's unclear whether the law and common sense are entirely separate concepts in Putin's Russia .
 Peskov was responding to a question on a six-year jail term handed to Dennis Christensen, a Danish Jehovah’s Witness .
 The powerful, monolithic, and robust state that Putin has been building since he came to power in 2000 is now devouring itself from within, demonstratively and ruthlessly locking up governors, ministers, and senators . There were no Putin system or Putin appointees.
 The president has focused too much of his attention on geopolitics, has opened the floodgates for the de-Putinization of the power vertical . The situation is creating a situation in which virtually no one except the head of state remains protected by the system's legitimacy .
 Rauf Arashukov, a senator in the Federation Council, was arrested on suspicion of ordering contract killings . The arrest came as a complete shock to all of Russia's political establishment, according to the senator .
 The situation is reminiscent of the arrest of Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev in 2016 . He was leaving Rosneft after meeting with the oil giant’s CEO, Igor Sechin .
In previous years the siloviki mostly moved against politicians on a regional scale . Even federal figures have become vulnerable, and the value of parliamentary immunity has fallen .
Sechin is the head of a major company, the company's chief executive . It was also a chance for him to demonstrate his power and teach state officials .
 NRA leadership embraced Russian double agent Maria Butina during the same period that she helped to arm anti-American groups overseas .
 Russia's leadership and the editors and journalists on RT, Sputnik, and the Russian domestic TV channels. Hypothetically, one could imagine that propaganda narratives would appear spontaneously .
 New investigation carried out by independent Russian journalists confirms and adds further details about a centralized media control system managed from the top of the Kremlin .
 The idea of a Shadow World Government has always been popular among conspiracy theorists . The idea is very popular with conspiracy theorists.
 The concept conjures up the image of a small group of men, deciding the fate of the world behind the scenes . The concept might be different, but generally, the concept conjure up a smallGroup of men .
 EUvsDisinfo has described such cases frequently; here, for instance, or here .
 The appeal of conspiracy theories is that they are virtually impossible to debunk . The appeal is that the theories are almost impossible to debunked .
 The premise on which they are based is the fact that everything is going on behind the scenes . Behind veils, covertly, in the shadows, carried out by the world’s most powerful people .
 The complete absence of proof of the existence of the Shadow Rulers is actually the proof that they exist and that they are successful .
 As the Deep State, by definition, it must, logically, be malign . As the Shadow Government, bydefinition is covert, it is malign, as it must be .
 John Richardson calls for the U.S. to go on the offensive against Russia and China . Richardson: Great power United States adversaries use their navies in increasingly aggressive land, sea, and power grabs .
 John Richardson called for the United States to go on the offensive against Russia and China . The great power rivals use their navies in increasingly aggressive land, sea, and power grabs .
 Russia and China have both directly challenged the U.S. Navy with dangerous and aggressive flying and sailing . The United States Navy wants to start moving first .
 Richardson emphasised the need for patience, diplomacy, and establishing rules . He said if the rules are broken, the United States needs to crack down . Richardson said the U.S. should crack down on the issue of patience .
 The list of Wagner PMC mercenaries, who were defeated by the United States military near Deir ez-Zor, Syria on Feb. 2018 and in Sudan, has been published . The list was published by the Russian Ministry of Defense .
 Turkey has changed rules for ships passing through the Bosporus and the Dardanelles . Shipments of Russian oil to Europe through the Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea face difficulties .
 The congestion of Russian oil tankers and grain carriers departing from Novorossiysk keeps growing . It is reaching all-time records .
 55 ships were waiting for permission to enter the Turkish straits on 6 February, including 26 Aframax-class and 21 Suezmax-class tankers . More than 51 million barrels of oil on board, with a total of more than 50 million barrels on board .
 In one day, the congestion grew by another 4 tankers with 2. million barrels of oil, Bloomberg reports . The Turkish port operator Tribeca Shipping.
 The waiting period is now 16 days for ships leaving the Black Sea and 15 for those entering it . In summer there was a 1-2 day waiting list for the straits, and not more than 5-6 days last winter .
 Every tanker transporting Russian oil and then returning to the port for a new load must take into account nearly a month of waiting on the border of Turkey’s territorial waters .
 The delays began in autumn after Turkey tightened its rules, adding to the list of ships obligated to use tugboats in the straits .
 The Novorossiysk Port, through which Russia ships roughly 14% of all its oil exports, is falling behind schedule due to the delays with the tankers .
 The Primorsk and Ust-Luga ports are expected to offload 18. million tons between January and March, roughly one third of all Russia's oil exports .
 Bellingcat has determined that a third Russian GRU officer was in the United Kingdom at the time of the Skripals’ Novichok poisoning in March 2018 . A local entrepreneur and his son became seriously ill after being poisoned with an unidentified substance . The
 The third man, a 45-year-old Russian travelling under the alias Sergey Vyacheslavovich Fedotov, has been conclusively identified by Bellingcat as a senior GRU officer .
 GRU officers Anatoliy Chepiga and Alexander Mishkin are suspects in the Skripal case . Their cover identity was created in 2010, with no prior records of a person with this name ever existing .
 Sergey Fedotov was first identified as a person of interest by the Russian news outlet Fontanka . The Russian media outlet first identified him as a man of interest .
 Bellingcat and its investigative partner The Insider traced Fedotov’s travel itinerary since his cover identity was created in 2010 . The Insider has traced the Russian to his last overseas trip to London in March 2018 .
 "Fedotov" traveled extensively in Europe, Asia and the Middle East, often appearing in hot spots just days before news-making events .
 A trip taken by Fedotov to Bulgaria in April 2015 stands out due to its eerie resemblance to the circumstances around the Skripals’ poisoning in March 2018 .
 "Sergey Fedotov" arrived on a flight from Moscow to the Bulgarian seaside resort of Burgas .
 He had a return flight for a week later, on April 30, from Sofia back to Moscow . He had been flying back to the capital city of Sofia .
 He bought a last-minute ticket to a flight to Moscow. Instead, he showed up at Istanbul’s Ataturk airport late on April 28th .
 Emilian Gebrev was hospitalized after collapsing at a reception he was hosting in Sofia . Earlier that day, a Bulgarian entrepreneur was hospitalized in Bulgaria .
 At around the same time, his adult son and one of the executives at his company fell suddenly ill .
 Emilian Gebrev’s condition quickly deteriorated and he fell into a coma . He was in a coma for more than two hours .
 Doctors surmised that the poison had been applied or consumed in the day or days before April 28 .
 The poison could not be identified, as it is not sure of its effects or mode of progression . It is not known if the poison will be used in the future .
 Bulgarian journalist Emilian Gebrev requested assistance in identifying the poison from two leading laboratories specializing in control of chemical weapons .
 One of these they managed to identify as a strong pesticide, while the other remained unidentifiable with the standard testing tools for chemical weapons .
 Emilian Gebrev’s status improved substantially and he was released . A month after initially being admitted to hospital, Emilian's status improved significantly .
 In late May, he felt ill again and was re-admitted to hospital . He told Bellingcat that several days later, he had felt ill once again . He said he felt sick again in late May .
 Gebrev could think of two hypothetical reasons why he might have been targeted . He could also think of a hypothetical reason why he was targeted .
 One of his company’s exports of specialized defense-related equipment to Ukraine was his company's exports of defense- related equipment .
 The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine under ex-President Viktor Yanukovych suspended preparations for the signing the Association Agreement with the EU on November 21, 2013 . The agreement is the main tool for bringing Ukraine and the EU closer together .
 The Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement provides Ukraine with the opportunity to expand trade relations and economic development, opening up new markets and contributing to harmonization of legislation, standards and regulations in various economic sectors .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization recognizes Ukraine’s desire to join the Alliance . It urges Ukraine to continue to implement a wide range of reforms .
 The European Union has said each country has the right to make changes to its Constitution . But reiterated the need for the full implementation of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement .
Ukrinform. MP Refat Chubarov believes the introduction of amendments on Ukraine’s course for NATO and the EU to the Constitution of Ukraine draws near the return of Crimea .
 U.S. Secretary of State Michael Pompeo will be on a European tour next week . He will visit at least five countries and discuss issues of security, economy, Ukraine, and threats .
 Harriett Baldwin made a relevant statement during a meeting with Olena Zerkal, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine for European Integration .
 Olena Zerkal told Harriett Baldwin about the current situation in the Azov-Black Sea region related to Russia’s illegal restrictions on shipping, blockade of Ukrainian ports .
 The parties agreed to further mobilize the joint efforts to release the Ukrainian sailors . The Ukrainian sailors had been captured in the Kerch Strait .
 The issue of legislative regulation of mine action in Ukraine was separately discussed . The issue was also discussed .
 specialists of the British foundation “HALO Trust’ have cleared more than 25 million square meters of land in eastern Ukraine .
 The parties agreed that one of the important steps in this area was the adoption of the Law of Ukraine “On Mine Action in Ukraine’s ‘On Mine action in Ukraine, which entered into force on January 25’
 The parties noted the deepening of bilateral cooperation between Ukraine and the United Kingdom . The parties also noted the deepen of bilateral relations between the two countries .
 The issues of Ukrainian-British cooperation in the field of countering Russia’s meddling in the presidential and parliamentary elections in Ukraine were discussed . The visa issues related to Brexit were discussed.
 The issue of Russia’s occupation of Crimea remains relevant on the agenda of the German Bundestag . The issue is still relevant.
 Russia’s violation of the norms of international law concerning the blockage of navigation in the waters of the Azov and Black Seas is unacceptable . Russia's violation of international laws concerning the blocking of navigation is unacceptable.
 The Embassy of the United States of America in Ukraine has called on the Russian Federation to immediately release 24 Ukrainian sailors . The 24 sailors have been held captive for 75 days .
 Ukraine's envoy to the Trilateral Contact Group's humanitarian subgroup Iryna Gerashchenko has responded to a response from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights office . Ukraine's refusal to allow Russian citizens to monitor Ukraine�
 Ukraine will continue to prohibit Russian citizens from taking part in missions until Russia ends its occupation of Crimea and Donbas . She said Ukraine would continue to ban Russian citizens.
 Crimea and Donbass are de-occupied. We will continue to squeeze Russians out of all missions until Crimea and donbass are De-occupied .
 Gerashchenko: "We remind the OSCE and other organizations that we should not play along with evil and allow Russia to discredit these organizations and contribute to their degradation"
 Ukraine's parliament adopted a law that prohibited citizens of Russia and persons nominated by Russia to be official observers at the presidential, parliamentary and local elections in Ukraine .
 Defense Minister of Ukraine Stepan Poltorak met with Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of France to Ukraine Isabelle Dumont .
 Russian Federation occupied Crimea in 2014 . Almost five years have passed since the Russian Federation occupy Crimea .
 The Russian Federation has consistently denied international monitoring missions access to the peninsula . The Russian government has denied international monitors access.
 Crimea was inaccessible until representatives from Human Rights Houses managed to get in during 14 – 18 September 2018 . Crimea was accessible for only 14-18 September 2018.
 The findings from this visit were summarized in the report and presented in Strasbourg at the PACE January session .
 Ukrainian diplomats expect his statements will be condemned by the leadership of the Chamber of Deputies .
 Militants launched six attacks, using weapons banned under the Minsk agreements twice, on positions of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Joint Forces Operation area in Donbas over the past day .
 Russian-led forces mounted six attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, in the past 24 hours .
 The enemy group tried to come closer to Ukrainian positions under cover of mortar shelling . The servicemen of a separate detachment of the special purpose 'Azov' made the destruction of the enemy group .
 As a result of the opening of the fire by the fighters “Azov’ in response to the enemy, a group of mercenaries was eliminated .
 The troops received the departmental awards and certificates from the hands of the command of the Joint Operations Command on February 6 . The troops were awarded for the successful defeat of the enemy.
 According to fighters, the density of fire was such that the opponents could not even raise their goals .
 Azov returned to “zero’ after the withdrawal from the advanced summer of 2015 . The 30th individual mechanized brigade named after Konstantin Ostrozky was part of the Grouping of the Joint Operations .
 The ATO is the term officially used by the Ukrainian government for Russia’s war against Ukraine in the Donbas . The war has been ongoing since April 2014 .
 Nine pensioners have died going through the checkpoints between Ukraine's controlled and uncontrolled territories since the start of 2019 .
 The latest reported case was about a man born in 1951 who died at Stanytsia Luhanska, Luhansk region’s only official entry-exit checkpoint .
 There are 1. million Ukrainian pensioners living in the non-government controlled territories of Ukraine .
 Most of them received Ukrainian pensions at least once in their life since the start of occupation . Most received Ukrainian pension at least one time in their lives since occupation began .
 The remaining 500,000 could have personal reasons for not claiming their payments . The difficulty of this process can play a big part in the decision .
 The Luhansk and Donetsk People’s Republics are the only way to survive in their homes . Technically this is breaking Ukrainian law, but for them it is the only thing to survive . The so-called Luhans and Donetsk people’
Ukrainian political prisoners Roman Sushchenko and Volodymyr Balukh have not broken down and remained courageous and committed to their ideals, despite the methodical pressure of the Russian repressive machine .
 Operations are underway to upgrade the roads in Belarus's Brest Oblast, which borders with Ukraine . The roads could be used for military purposes, according to a source in Ukraine’s ministries .
 The road infrastructure being built in Belarus will make it easier for border guards to reach their service locations . It will also provide an additional way to move Belarusian military equipment to the Polessky training ground .
 The motorway infrastructure could also be used to transport soldiers, weapons and military equipment right up to the Ukrainian border . The motorways could be used as a way to transport military equipment and weapons .
 Belarusian government constructed a number of access roads and forest roads from the country’s rear regions . Between 2014-2017, the country's roads and forests were constructed between 2014- 2017 .
 Access roads have been built up to the Almany border outpost, which borders with the Ukrainian town of Perebrody, as well as to the Mutvitsa, Khinichev and Selishche border posts .
 The Ukrainian cities of Zhytomyr and Novohrad-Volynskyi are in the close vicinity of this stretch of the Belarusian-Ukrainian border .
 Lithuania's intelligence agency says Russia is using Belarus as a “buffer’s state. As reported previously, Lithuania's intel agency said that Russia is showing its military might and planning military operations .
 Already this year, the first launches of the national missile complex ‘Vilkha’ will arrive in the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 The estimated number of launchers will be ready for deployment to the troops in the first half of 2019 . It's about a hundred rockets ordered this year .
 The Ministry of Defense paid us an advance payment for the mass production of hundreds of missiles .
 The rocket’s velocity on the final section of the trajectory is within 3.5 miles . The rocket's velocity on its final section is within three miles .
 The "Rebranding" of the Ukrainian Army has been going on for several years . The first results of the rebranding have brought the first results . The Ukrainian Army is the largest army in the country .
 The Ukrainian military received a new form of clothing, new signs of distinguishing titles, emblems of the troops, and more .
 The development of a new ‘content’ is impossible without an integrated approach to this issue . However, the development of the new “content” is impossible .
 The recognition of the servicemen of the armies of the developed countries depends on the use of uniform to the creation of armored emblems of military units .
 The key to this issue is the shape of the emblem’s shield and its colors . The emblem's shield and colors are key to the issue .
 The question of colors has already been considered in the expert environment . But the shape of the shield remains insufficiently studied .
 The Ukrainian Army has worked its own approach to armored emblems . The experience of the armed forces of other countries, in particular, deserves careful analysis .
 The second one does not set strict rules that would restrict designers of the armband symbols . It allows them to use different forms of boards, depending on each case .
 monotony allows for the construction of a clear system that simplifies the identification of the soldier at a distance . On the one hand, monotoney allows for a simple system that allows the construction.
 The only form allows us to form a peculiar set of symbolic parts, which provides uniform military personnel of one or another uniqueness and identity . The only way to form the only form is to form symbolic parts .
 The United States Army is considered to be one of the largest and most professional armies in the world . The U.S. Army is one of world's most advanced institutes of military symbolism .
Experts say limiting itself to the only form of shield for all parts is not worth it . American experts have worked out their own approach to armhole emblems .
 The insoles emblem is an elongated rectangle with rounded upper and lower sides . For example, on the sleeves of servicemen who serve in parts of the air defense, you can see the same shape of the shield .
 Under this scheme, the use of the diamond-shaped shield with rounded corners is foreseen . Under the scheme, armlets of the training units will be used .
 The unifying element in them is the image of a burning torch, the only one for all educational units of the species .
 The colors of the emblem clearly correspond to the distribution of colors, the U.S. Army says . The colors are assigned to the families and services of the Army .
 One of the largest armies in the world is equipped with laconic and intelligible armored emblems . This practice allows one of the world's largest armies to be equipped with such emblems. This practice has been used by the U.S. Army of the
 Larysa Holnyk publicly exposed an attempt originating from the Mayor of Poltava to bribe her into providing the ruling he wanted . The Supreme Court has revoked a questionable reprimand issued against the judge .
 The reprimand has already served to prevent Holnyk from competing for a post in the new Anti-Corruption Court . A very large number of judges whose professional integrity and commitment to fighting corruption have been questioned .
 Holnyk’s courage in blowing the whistle on corruption has earned her the respect of many civic organizations both in Ukraine and abroad . She has been praised for her courage in the fight against corruption .
 It has also highlighted everything that judicial reform in Ukraine, five years after Euromaidan, has still not become . It's also highlighted how judicial reform has not become.
 Since 2015, she appears to have suffered considerable harassment from the president of her court, and numerous court suits . The president of the court has been trying to get her life tenure confirmed .
 She and her husband were also the victims of a vicious attack on 22 November 2017 .
 In 2018 Holnyk was placed on the ‘Handziuk List’ of 55 Ukrainians who had been the victims of attacks which were either entirely unsolved or only partially solved . It was in connection with this that in 2018 HolNYk was place on the
 Kateryna Handziuk died on 4 November 2018 of injuries after being sprayed with sulphuric acid . The list is named after the civic activist who died in November 2018 .
 Poles have shown better attitudes toward almost all nations mentioned in the survey . Poles have showed better attitudes to almost all countries mentioned in survey .
In 2018, Ukraine imported 10. billion cubic meters of gas, 24.8% down compared with 2017 . In 2018, Ukrainian gas imports were 24.7% down .
 Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan says the Cabinet of Ministers is not Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry so it is unable to repair roads that have not been overhauled for decades .
 Europe faces a twin threat to its security – internal incompetence and external provocation . Europe faces internal incompetence, external provocation and internal incompetence .
 Ukraine has lessons for the West on how to deal with the tide of Russian disinformation . Ukraine has learned from Russia to be wary of Russian propaganda .
 The wise man learns from the mistakes of others, goes a famous line from Otto von Bismarck .
 European societies currently face a twin threat – the inability of their own elites to deal with internal crises and external agents using those same crises to stoke unrest .
 Ukraine’s Security Service has claimed that the Russian secret service has trained the ‘radicals’ involved in disturbances . Germany, Belgium, Spain and Bulgaria have also been trained .
 UK has been dealing with sabotage and disinformation efforts backed by the Russian state . Ukraine has been engaged in a military conflict with Kremlin-backed separatists .
 Those in power may not start learning from the experiences of their not-so-distant-neighbours . Things may change if those in power don't learn from their experiences .
 Ukraine is holding presidential elections in March. Security services have already raised the alarm about what to expect from Russian saboteurs . Ukraine is due to hold its presidential election in March .
 Hacking of the electoral system to sway the results, as well as escalating military clashes in the eastern region of Donbass, are only part of the problem .
 The Russian secret services also use a network of agents of influence, working to undermine Ukraine's sovereignty without the authorities being aware of its true extent .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has called “real a threat that Russian observers may pose to the presidential election in Ukraine . Volker: Ukrinform is a threat to Russian observers.
 The European Union has commented on Ukraine’s ban for Russian citizens to monitor Ukraine elections .
 Ukraine should ensure that ODIHR will be able to carry out observation “in full accordance with the usual practice,’ the EU says .
 Presidential candidates Yulia Tymoshenko, Anatoly Hrytsenko, Andriy Sadovy, Oleksandr Shevchenko, Viktor Bondar, and Volodymyr Zelensky signed a memorandum on fair elections .
Politicians will create a coordinating council in the coming days. The said politicians will create the council in coming days .
 First Deputy Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine Iryna Gerashchenko has said the Ukrainian side is deeply disappointed and concerned over the fact that the OSCE reports on the results of the Russian presidential elections and the State Duma are silent about falsified and illegal
 Ukraine regards such position as playing along with Moscow’s scenarios of creeping legitimization of Crimea seizure . Ukraine regards it as playing with Moscow's scenario of creeping legitimacy.
We will continue to express deep concern over this shameful fact at all of our meetings with the OSCE and other international partners . We will continue the deep concern. We will still express deep concerns over this shame.
 OSCE SMM fails to monitor the security and humanitarian situation in the Kerch Strait and Crimea, she wrote on Facebook . The organization expressed disappointment about Kyiv’s decision to ban election observers from Russia .
 Ukrainian lawmakers have voted to ban Russian citizens from serving as election monitors in the country .
 The Chairman of the political council of “Opposition Platform – For Life’ Viktor Medvedchuk outlined his attitude to criticism on air of ‘Maga’ program . Medveduk is the chairman of the Political Council of the opposition party .
 I have adapted to this dirt, to this negativity, as one should be strong for this. I've adapted to the dirt. I have adapted to this Dirt, to the negativity, and I have been strong for it .
 When you see that it’s a lie, and you understand that you are better than this. So that when you see the lie, you understand it, and that you're better than that .
 Dirt is everywhere, and you know that dirt spreads and it becomes relevant, when it spreads . You can be a media representative for the media .
 The court has a verdict and one has to deny, first of all, they don't want to deny . Second, they say, the as a rule, any story lives three days, it’s not interesting .
 I react all the time and appeal to the courts. Though I am in a place where this is radical and uncontrollably, I react to the court's decision .
 The National TV and Radio Council has fined Novyny 24 Hodyny Ltd based on the results of the 5 October 2018 inspection . The fine is based on results of an inspection by the National TV & Radio Council .
 Hate speech found in statements by the TV channel’s guests and presenters . Olena Lukash, Vyacheslav Pykhovshek, Ruslan Kotsaba, Yevhen Chervonenko, Andriy Lesyk, Mykhaylo Dob
 The reversal has spanned a variety of countries in every region, from long-standing democracies to consolidated authoritarian regimes like China and Russia .
 The overall losses are still shallow compared with the gains of the late 20th century . The pattern is consistent and ominous, but it's ominous .
 On 24 January, the one-and-a-half year long treason trial of ex-President Viktor Yanukovych finally ended . The trial of Viktor Yanukovych ended on 24 January .
 The fugitive ex-head of state was charged with high treason, encroachment on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and complicity in Russia’s aggressive warfare .
 Yanukovych has been hiding in Russia since early spring of 2014, he was tried in absentia . He has been trying to stay in the country since then .
 The court summoned Yanukovych several times, but he ignored the requests . He ignored the court's requests .
 Former president planned to give evidence via video connection from Russia but it failed . Later, the ex-president planned to talk to Russia via video link .
 Yanukovych was going to remotely deliver his final statement but the hearings were postponed as his attorney stated that his client was taken to a hospital . Yanukovych was due to deliver his last statement on Thursday .
 The courtroom testimonies of Ukrainian officials shed light on the unknown and disregarded details of Russia's occupation of Crimea .
 The Press Secretary of the Russian President Dmitry Peskov stated that Ukraine's ex-President Viktor Yanukovych uses Russia’s state security, as Interfax reported .
 The Kremlin insists he initially came to Russia as a legitimate president of Ukraine . The Kremlin says he first came to the country as aitimate president .
 Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras has boosted a long-running campaign to reopen a Christian theological school in Turkey .
 Halki Seminary in Istanbul was the main school of theology for the Eastern Orthodox Church in the country until the Turkish government shut it down in 1971 . The Turkish government closed the school in 1971 after it was shut down by 1971 .
 Authorities sent a clear signal to all religious minorities in Russia .
 'Tsar phone Golden Vladimir' refers to a 10th-century ruler credited with bringing Christianity to Russian soil .
 The phone features a massive cross on its back, but is also meant to resemble the sword of Vladimir the Great . The phone also features the exuberant finery of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 The head of Russia's Investigative Committee is reportedly seeking donations for the construction of a bronze Archangel Michael statue at the entrance of his agency's new headquarters in Moscow . Religious symbols gain an increasingly prominent place in Russian state institutions .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has become a powerful political force since the anointment of Patriarch Kirill as its leader in 2009 . The Patriarch has been the head of the church since 2009 .
 The Russian military began collecting donations for its state-of-the-art military cathedral last year . The cathedral has six golden domes dedicating to the patron saint of each military branch .