 Since the outbreak of hostilities in Ukraine in spring 2014, relations between Moscow and the Western world have entered a downward spiral . Many regard it as a new Cold War .
 Russia and Ukraine at the center of the global geopolitical debate for the first time ever . This deteriorating security climate has placed the troubled relationship between the two countries at the top of the world's geopolitical debate .
 A timely new book by academics Taras Kuzio and Paul D’Anieri entitled ‘The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics – Ukraine and the Challenge to the European Order’ The book also seeks to explain why Russia views the democratization of Ukraine as
 Kuzio and D’Anieri’s analysis argues that the current crisis has deep roots in post-Soviet Russia . Russia's refusal to come to terms with an independent Ukrainian state is behind the crisis .
 Kremlin's apparent inability to understand that most Russian-speaking Ukrainians do not want to rejoin Russia . They identify a number of key issues in the relationship such as Moscow's view of Ukraine’s Orange and Euromaidan revolutions .
 The authors reach the conclusion that in Moscow’s eyes, Ukraine is simply too important to the process of rebuilding a sphere of influence within the former Soviet space .
 Co-author Paul Anieri spoke to Business Ukraine magazine about the impact of the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict . He explained why he is not particularly optimistic about the chances of a lasting peace emerging without dangerous compromises from Ukraine and the West .
 Your new book seeks to explore the historic origins of the current Russia-Ukraine conflict .
 Russian imperial policies towards Ukraine had traditionally received little academic attention . Prior to the outbreak of hostilities in 2014, the theme of Russia's imperial policies had previously received little attention .
 For a long time, scholars paid very little attention to Ukraine because in the Soviet era we assumed that everything important happened in Moscow .
 Many people felt the relationship between Russia and Ukraine was relatively unimportant when compared to other matters in international politics or even other issues involving Russia itself .
 It was reasonable to believe that the disputes between Ukraine and Russia would continue to be addressed peacefully and so were not urgent. Moreover, it was reasonable.
 There has been some degree of "Ukraine fatigue" throughout the Western world . Ukraine never quite managed to embrace reform, and again after the 2004 Orange Revolution . There was a great deal of unrealized hope in the West for Ukraine to make a dramatic transformation .
 Some people who previously focused disproportionately on Russia have studied this conflict and learned a great deal more about Ukraine in the process . Some also dramatically revised their understanding of the Putin regime .
 Others have retained or even reinforced their Russocentrism . Others have adopted the Russian government position on the causes of the conflict .
 Russia now appears to be a “revisionist power’ in a broader sense, in that it seems to be trying to overturn the existing order in Europe and globally .
 Its intervention in domestic politics all over the world reinforces that view, says the U.S. government .
 Many people previously considered Russia to be essentially a conservative power rather than a revisionist one .
There is still a strong desire among some business leaders, policy makers, and academics to get back to business with Russia . Despite those concerns, there is still an interest in business in Russia .
 Russia would accept the annexation of Crimea, adopt Russia’s position on eastern Ukraine, and reach some kind of deal with Russia . That desire leads to proposed solutions for the conflict that would accept Crimea's annexation .
 This would mean returning to the old world order in which the “great powers’ get to decide what happens to the less powerful countries of Eastern Europe and elsewhere . This would be a change in the world order .
 Your book places Ukraine firmly at the center of the current confrontation between Russia and the West . Your book is published in the summer of 2014 .
 Russian policymakers view Ukraine as so crucial. Our book points to several reasons why Russian policymakers see Ukraine as crucial .
 Ukraine is very important to Russia’s sense of its own national identity . Ukraine is a very important part of Russia's national identity.
Every country has myths about its origins, and in Russia’s story, Kyiv was the first Russian city .
If Kyiv is not Russian, then Russia’s origin story needs to be completely rewritten . If Kyiv's origin story is wrong, it should be rewritten .
 Ukraine was an integral part of the Soviet Union, as Soviet leaders Khrushchev and Brezhnev, among many others, hailed from Ukraine . More recently, Ukraine was a key part of Soviet Union .
 For many in Moscow, Ukraine is still very much part of the historic Russian heartlands . For many, Ukraine remains very much of the Russian heartland .
 Ukraine has become a direct threat to Putin’s rule because the emergence of a democratic Ukraine undermines Putin's argument that democracy cannot succeed in Russia .
 Ukraine’s two anti-authoritarian post-Soviet revolutions created a dangerous precedent for overturning authoritarianism inside Russia itself .
 Russian leaders perceived Russia as having lost one disagreement after another with the West since the end of the Cold War . The eastward spread of European institutions has also been seen in Yugoslavia and elsewhere .
 Many observers have portrayed the hybrid war techniques employed by Russia in Ukraine as innovative but you argue that in many ways they are an extension of tactics first developed in the Soviet era .
 Many of the tactics Putin has employed against Ukraine, including falsehoods, assassinations, are actually long-established and time-tested Soviet techniques . However, many of Putin's tactics against Ukraine are actually time- tested .
 The Soviets used many of these tactics precisely against Ukrainian nationalism in the past, according to a report .
 Painting Ukrainian nationalism as synonymous with fascism was a tactic used consistently throughout the Soviet period . Similarly, painting Ukrainian nationalism was used consistently during the Soviet era .
 Other techniques, such as using Russian forces to back separatist movements, emerged in early post-Soviet era .
 Putin has taken advantage of newer technologies, especially social media, and deployed them in ways that the Soviets could not have imagined . Putin has been taking advantage of social media in recent years .
 He has figured out how tactics used to fight autocracy could also work against the new government in Ukraine . He has worked out how to fight the new Ukrainian government .
 There is one particularly significant innovation in Putin’s information warfare tactics .
 The Soviet Union usually had a clearly defined alternative position to promote via its propaganda . The Soviets usually had an alternative position.
 Soviet propaganda was still based on the notion of a single truth. In other words, Soviet propaganda still was based on a notion of one truth .
 Russia puts out so many alternative stories that it seems to the uncritical reader that it is simply impossible to know the truth . Rather than putting out an alternative story and defending it, Russia put out anAlternative story and defended it .
 The Russian response to the shooting down of flight MH17 was a prime example of the Russian response . The Russian reaction to the MH17 shooting was an example of how Russia responded .
 Russia did not advance an alternative theory of the shootdown and defend it . Russia has not said what it would like to do to stop it .
 The theory that Russia was innocent has proliferated around the internet and the news outlets it controlled, feeding the notion that it was impossible to know what happened to the plane .
 We see these tactics exploited now in democracies throughout the Western world . We see the same tactics exploited in democracies across the world .
 Russian and Western influence in Ukraine from 1991 onwards . One of the themes you address in your book is the issue of Russian and West influence in the Ukraine .
 The post-Soviet era was already deeply embedded in the Ukrainian elite and Ukrainian institutions . It began in the post- Soviet era.
 The Ukrainian part of the Soviet KGB simply became the Security Service of Ukraine . For example, when Ukraine became independent, it simply became a security service .
 The Security Service of Ukraine came into being with the Russian successor to the KGB .
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych appointed several Russian citizens to high positions in the security apparatus after taking office in 2010 .
 Russia had incredible economic power over Ukraine, especially in the field of energy . Russia had huge economic power in Ukraine, particularly in energy .
 Russia has shut off the gas supply to Ukraine or threatened to do so. Repeatedly throughout the post-Soviet era, Russia has closed off the energy supply .
Ukrainian leaders are wary of doing anything that might irritate Russia . This is not only damaging to Ukraine’s economy, but makes Ukrainian leaders understandably wary of anything .
 The gas trade also corrupted the Ukrainian elite so thoroughly that it made it much easier for Russia to exert influence . The trade also made it easier for the Russian government to exert its influence .
After 1991 Russia continued to provide much of the television coverage watched by Ukrainian audiences . Most Western news reporting on Ukraine came from the Ukraine .
 Russia was already in the driver’s seat in 2014, when ‘information warfare’ became an important factor in 2014 . “Information warfare” became a key factor in Russia's dominance in the information sphere .
 The Kremlin was in the ideal position to influence opinion inside Ukraine and to shape how the West viewed the deteriorating relationship between Russia and Ukraine . The Kremlin wanted to shape the West's view of the situation in Ukraine .
 The West's political and economic models are highly attractive, while Russia's is not . The West’s political and financial models are very attractive .
 Economically and politically, Ukrainians wanted to join Europe, not Russia . Ukraine's economy and political interests were both important .
 Russia had to use coercion to force Ukraine to align with Moscow, Ukraine begged the EU and NATO for deeper connections . Western organizations resisting and demanding reforms in return for integration .
 Russia chose to deploy military force. For all of Russia's advantages, it could not match this “soft power,’s advantages,” it said .
 The positions of the two sides are currently incompatible, so any progress will depend on dramatic change in someone’s position .
 In the short term, the best we can hope for is a real ceasefire that would stop the steady occurrence of casualties along the contact line .
 Many dismiss the idea of a ‘frozen conflict’ as a negative outcome . But it is still preferable to the ongoing killing and is probably a necessary first step towards any further agreement .
 Ukraine's sovereignty should be limited to appease Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Any compromise would undermine some important principles by legitimizing Russia's takeover of Crimea .
 For the West and for the EU in particular, that would be a dangerous precedent . It would discredit the rules against the use of force and encourage the practice of big states cutting deals over the heads of smaller states .
 The rules have succeeded in preserving peace and prosperity in Western Europe since 1945 . Those rules have been successful since 1945.
 There are signs that the Trump administration might accept just such a deal . However, there are signs of a possible deal with the White House .
 Many European elites hope to get beyond conflict with Russia, so the appeasement of Russia at Ukraine’s expense is a real possibility .
 Ukraine’s resistance to reform also does not help inspire Western support. Ukraine's opposition to reform does not inspire western support, says CNN .
 Russia seems unlikely to moderate its position. Progress towards peace will rely on Ukraine and the West making concessions .
 That means compromising important principles and hoping that such concessions appease Russia rather than convince the Kremlin that it can get away with more . That means compromise principles and hopes that such compromises appease Russia instead of convincing the Kremlin.
 If the West defends its principles, we can expect to face a long-term conflict with Russia . Russia has a long term conflict with the West.
 The Cold War only ended when far-reaching change took place in Moscow . Putin seems determined to make sure that does not happen again .