 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says he and Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed on a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine . The statement was brief and ambiguous, but gave no details .
 Poroshenko's Twitter account even tweeted that the two presidents had agreed on a "permanent" cease-fire in Donbass . Pro-Russian rebels have been battling Ukrainian forces in eastern Ukraine .
 Russian President reached an agreement on a permanent ceasefire on Donbass . It was a result of a telephone conversation with Russian President .
 Putin's office seemed to have no idea what Poroshenko was talking about . No cease-fire deal had been reached because Russia wasn't involved in eastern Ukraine .
 The Kremlin confirmed that Putin and Poroshenko spoke over the phone on Wednesday . The official statement on that conversation was just as vague as Poroshenko's .
 The changes appeared in Ukrainian, Russian and English-language versions issued by the office .
Top rebel figure says no cease-fire could be possible without Ukraine withdrawing its forces . There have been previous statements of agreements on steps for peace in the east .
 President Barack Obama arrives in Estonia in a show of solidarity with NATO allies who fear they could be Russia's next target . Obama's statement comes as the U.S. President arrives in the Estonian capital .
Peace hasn't yet reached the front lines after Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 was shot down . There have been attempted cease-fires before — most notably after the shooting down of Flight 17 .
The rebels ignored a 10-day unilateral cease-fire that Poroshenko had called in June . The rebels ignored the 10- day cease- fire that the president had called for in June.
 Obama said it was too early to tell what the announcement meant . For his part, Obama said the announcement was a surprise .
 He noted previous unsuccessful attempts and questioned whether pro-Russian separatists would abide by any cease-fire . He also questioned whether they will abide by a cease- fire .
 Ukraine and the West have accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to support pro-Russian insurgents in eastern Ukraine . Pro-Russian rebels have been fighting government forces in Ukraine since mid-April .
 NATO and Ukrainian leaders have accused Russia of sending tanks and troops into strategic cities . Russia annexed Crimea region earlier this year, just north of Crimea region .
 Russia has denied this claim, and NATO then released images showing troop presence inside Ukraine . Russia has also denied the claim, but NATO has also released images of troop presence .
 A satellite image released by NATO appears to show Russian military units moving in a convoy formation with self-propelled artillery in the area of Krasnodon, Ukraine .
 Putin had said a cease-fire was not discussed because Russia was not a party to the conflict . Peskov gave the statement to CNN on Wednesday .
 Peskov was quoted by Russian news agencies on Wednesday as saying the leaders had "largely agreed on steps that would be conducive to a cease-fire" But he repeated that Russia is not involved in the fighting .
 rebel leaders say they just want autonomy, and that's why they continue to fight Ukrainian troops . On the ground, they say they want autonomy .
 The separatists previously have called for full independence for their regions or possible absorption into Russia . The separatists have even held referendums .
 Nearly 2,600 people have been killed and more than 340,000 have been forced to flee their homes since the conflict began in eastern Ukraine . More than 300,000 people have fled their homes in Ukraine since the war began .