 Donetsk People's Republic may consider a possibility of negotiations with the Kyiv authorities only if the latter quit the aggressive form of the conflict resolution, government official says .
"Probably, they are doing so on purpose in order to involve Russia in this conflict," he presumed . "Probably, it's on purpose," he said .
 Ukrainian interim President Oleksandr Turchynov has removed from office . Mykhailo Bolotskykh is the head of the Luhansk Region State Administration .
 Bolotskykh was appointed as the head of the Luhansk Region State Administration on March 2 .
Prior to that he was in charge of the State Emergency Service of Ukraine . Prior to that, he was the head of the state emergency service .
 Over a hundred armed people have seized the Miners' Dawns sanatorium in the Budyonovskiy district of Donetsk .
 Militia surrounded the sanatorium outside Donetsk, in which interior forces servicemen are accommodated . Government co-chairman Myroslav Rudenko said .
 Ukrainian authorities are ready to negotiate with regions, including Donbas, interim President Oleksandr Turchynov said .
 He recalled the initiative he had put forward with Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk to hold national unity roundtables across the country .
 Local self-government bodies, Donbas scientists, cultural figures, and representatives of political movements and public organizations invited to take part .
"We are ready to sit down and talk no matter what is going on and what slogans are being proclaimed," Turchynov said .
 Ukraine is independently moving along the de-centralization path. In his words, Ukraine is independent moving along a de- centralization path .
 The regions will be able to form their executive committees that will make important decisions and be responsible for them . We are interested in strong regions, with strong regions.
"This is the path we are following in preparation for the constitutional amendments," Turchynov concluded . "This is a path we're following," he said .
 The International Committee of the Red Cross employees who were taken hostage on Friday have been freed in Donetsk . The Red Cross workers have been released from Donetsk .
 Iryna Tsaryuk from the ICRC Ukrainian office told Interfax . "One is severely beaten, he is staying at a hospital," she said .
 Online media outlet Novosti Donbassa reported earlier that unknown men had taken hostage seven employees of the International Committee of the Red Cross .
 The humanitarian organization's office on Vatutina Avenue in the center of Donetsk was attacked on Friday night . It said the humanitarian organization was attacked Friday night.
 ICRC employees told the media outlet the attackers let women go and abducted seven men . ICRC workers said the attackers were letting women go, they said .
 The hostages are ICRC volunteers from Kyiv, who brought drugs to the Donetsk office in the evening of May 9 .
 The attackers grabbed the drugs and took away the hostages in an unknown direction . The hostages were taken away in unknown direction.
 The media outlet reported the hostages were being held in the seized building of the Donetsk region state administration .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchy confirmed that a priest was killed in the Donetsk region .
 Archpriest Georgy Kovalenko told Interfax that "no details exist" for now .
 The priest killed was outside staff for several years and did not maintain contact with eparchial leadership . Kovalenko says getting information is complicated by the fact that the priest was killed outside staff .
"Everything the eparchy knows is what happened and the rest is rumors," Kovalenko said . "Everything the Eparchy knows was what happened"
 Priest of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchy Pavel Zhuchenko was killed near a block post in the Donetsk region .
 At the same time, mutually exclusive versions of what happened were given . At the time, mutual exclusive versions were given.
 Editor-in-chief of Island on-line mass media outlet Sergei Garmash twitted . The priest lived next to the block post, tried to urge opponents of Kyiv authorities to surrender arms .
 Orthodox activist says Orthodox priest killed guided militia spiritually . Orthodox activist Kirill Frolov is head of the Orthodox action corporation .
 The crime was committed at a block post at the exit from the town of Druzhovka on May 8 .
 The law enforcement authorities have started an investigation of the incident . The incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Ukrainian Defense Ministry denies reports of seizure of rocket launchers near Slovyansk in the Donetsk region .
Self-defense forces claim that Slovyansk militia has seized two Grad multiple rocket launchers . Self-defence forces claim two Grad launchers have been seized .
 Three people died and 25 were injured during a forceful operation in Mariupol, the Donetsk regional administration healthcare department says . The operation took place May 12 .
 A concert for veterans and anti-governmental rally are being held simultaneously at Svoboda Square . The two events are separated by a police cordon .
 Up to 1,500 activists of the South-East, Russian East and Borotba movements participate in the rally . Some of them came from the Glory memorial, where flowers were laid in the morning .
 Protestors have brought a giant S George's ribbon, flags of their organizations, and portraits of Georgy Zhukov and Stalin .
 The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry has issued a statement protesting Russian President Vladimir Putin's arrival to Crimea . The visit has not been accorded with the Ukrainian authorities considering Crimea to be Ukraine's territory .
 The trip is considered "a serious violation of Ukraine's sovereignty by Russia," the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said . The trip was considered as "Russia ignoring the existing Ukrainian law standards"
 Russia "escalates further tension in the Ukrainian-Russian relations" Russia has no wish to resolve diplomatically the issues existing in the bilateral relations .
 Certain countries use the events in Ukraine as a pretext to enhance NATO activities near the Belarusian borders . Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko says this is disturbing .
 Clouds of the civil war have piled up over the brotherly country and brother has laid a hand on brother .
 Lukashenko lays wreaths to Victory monument in Minsk on Friday . "We must stop this, whatever it costs is," he says .
 "All this requires special vigilance and solidarity of the nation," the president said . "AllThis requires special vigilantes and solidarity," he said .
 Belarus will celebrate two significant dates in 2014 . The 70th anniversary since the country was freed from the German fascist invaders will be marked in June . The 100th anniversary of World War I began in August .
 Lukashenko: Some politicians forget history lessons, try to diminish the role of the Soviet nation in fighting fascism and encourage Nazism revival . It is regrettable that some politicians forgetHistory lessons, he says .
"We observe such examples in the Middle East, North Africa and other trouble spots of the planet," the president said .
 Belarusian neighbor Ukraine has recently become one more trouble spot, Lukashenko said . Belarusian neighbors have recently become more trouble spots, he said .
 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said Minsk will not obstruct the signing of the Eurasian Economic Union at the Astana summit on May 29 . Minsk is expected to sign a treaty on the formation of the Economic Union on May 28 .
 Belarus' position is that the union must be formed without any exemptions and limitations . Lukashenko also said that Belarus must form without any exemption and limitations. The union must also be formed with no exemptions or limitations .
Almost all of the bilateral issues of interest to Belarus were settled. But he said that during his visit to Moscow almost all of his bilateral issues were settled . He said that almost all the issues of interests to Belarus are settled .
 Belarusian government to prepare thoroughly for signing the treaty on the formation of the Eurasian Economic Union . "It becomes clear what we are going to sign and how," he said .
 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said the country's next president must not destroy what was achieved during his tenure . The Belarus president said he would not destroy his tenure as president .
"I am not an eternal president and I will have to go some day," he said . He said he was "not an eternal President"
 Self-defense forces in Mariupol claimed that a Ukrainian law enforcement contingent has made use of military hardware while storming the city police department .
Self-defense command says it is an old building with thick walls that "can't be crushed by gunfire" A spokesman for the self- defense command told Interfax on Friday .
Several dozen police officers remain inside the building, he says . He says, citing immediate reports, that several dozen officers remain in the building .
Local media reported that the city police department and military garrison are being stormed . Local media reported, meanwhile, that the military garrison and police department were being stormed.
 Streets are closed for traffic and local residents have been denied access to this part of the city . Streets are being closed for Traffic and residents are denied access .
 Bursts are fired with automatic rifles in the center, according to the city medical services .
 May 12 National-unity roundtable discussions will start in Ukraine on May 14, says Ukraine's interim prime minister .
 Ukraine's parliamentary speaker and interim president Oleksandr Turchynov and Yatsenyuk released a joint statemenet on Thursday . All-Ukrainian national-unity roundtable discussions would be held .
 We are prepared to join dialogue with all the parties that pursue legitimate political goals . We intend to defend them using legal means those who have not stained their hands with blood .
"We invite representatives of all political forces from all regions, civil society and experts to start a dialogue on all issues and problems facing the Ukrainian people today," the joint statement says .
 The leaders of the "Donetsk People's Republic" claimed self-defense forces in Mariupol came under a chemical attack when the City Council building was being stormed by Kyiv-controlled armed units .
 Many of them had their breathing systems damaged, a statement says . "Many of them may have consequences and probably be a danger to their lives," it says .
 No confirmation of this information from other sources is available to Interfax . No confirmation from other Sources .
 The Ukrainian leadership is initiating national-unity roundtable discussions . It will involve all political forces representing all regions, including public figures and experts .
 The proposals to be forged in dialogue between all political forces will be implemented by the Verkhovna Rada, the statement says . "The proposals will be forged," it says .
 Turchynov and Yatsenyuk invited all parties in the political process, as well as representatives of the public, to play and active role in implementing this initiative .
 The Ukrainian leaders also said that all of the illegal armed groups must surrender their weapons and free the hostages and seized buildings .
 Ukrainian leadership is ready to propose additional steps to form national consensus and compromise . Turchynov and Yatsenyuk again urged all signatories to the Geneva agreements to abide by them strictly .
 Moscow court upholds investigators' request to arrest in absentia Hennadiy Balashov . Russian Investigative Committee spokesman Vladimir Markin says Russian citizens living in Ukraine are accused of extremist statements .
 Balashov is a defendant in the criminal case on inciting hatred and abetting attempted murder . A spokesman said the defendant is a suspect in the case .
 Russian investigators opened a criminal case regarding Ukrainian businessman Balashov, Markin says .
 At the same time, similar criminal case was opened against Right Sector leader Dmytro Yarosh . Yarosh is accused of public appeals to anti-Russian forces for extremist actions and terror on Russia .
 Ukrainian police arrested alleged organizers of "mass riots" in Odesa on May 2, Interior Ministry says .
 The governor of Ukraine's Kharkiv region has said 24 large checkpoints have been put up on the border with two other regions in the east of the country Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia is an irreplaceable strategic partner, Kyrgyz President Almazbek Atambaev said on Thursday . The CIS borders should unite, not separate countries, he said .
 leading pro-Russian activist who was arrested in Kharkiv on April 30 on charges of a coup attempt has been released from jail and put under house arrest . His allies said on Thursday that his allies said he had been put on house arrest.
 Yury Apukhtin is a member of the coordinating council of the Southwest alliance and leader of the Great Russia group . He will go on trial but will be under house arrest before that, Kharkiv Militia says .
Ukrainian security services claim allies of Apukhtin plotted terrorist attacks for May Day . Security services claim that allies plotted attacks for the day .
 Two-months in custody was initially ordered for Apukhtin, who was detained by the Security Service .
 A shooting has occurred near a checkpoint at Bahmutskiy way in Ukraine's Luhansk region .
 Two VAZ-2105 cars and a Daewoo Nexia approached the blockpost near the Teplychnoye-Aleksandivka-Metallyst crossing .
 These vehicles were followed by a Niva car and people driving in these cars were shooting . People driving in the Niva cars were also shooting .
 Armed people opened fire at cars approaching upon seeing what was happening . Armed people were at the blockpost .
 The person who was in Niva died of their sustained injuries, the press office said . The person in the Niva hospital died of his sustained injuries .
 An Odessa resident and a Luhansk resident were sent to a hospital with injuries . The two were in Daewoo Nexia in Odessa .
 The Odessa resident left the hospital upon getting medical care, the Interior Ministry says . The resident was hospitalized in Odessa .
 The Donetsk region appointed by the pro-Russian insurgency has demanded that Ukrainian authorities stop their practice of abducting rebels .
 Dmitry Gubarev wrote on Facebook on Thursday. "Otherwise we will be forced to react commensurately and continue to take Ukrainian soldiers"
 Gubarev was arrested by the Ukrainian Security Service in Donetsk city on March 6 . He was appointed as "people's governor" at a rally in Donetsk City on March 1 .
 The rebels freed three members of the Alfa special forces unit . However, he and Igor Perepechayenko, deputy leader of the "Slovyansk Self-Defense," were released .
 Roman Lyagin, head of the Central Elections Commission of the Donetsk People's Republic, is not sure if the Commission will be able to produce a final referendum report shortly . Lyagin suggests looking to the tentative data he announced earlier 89.07% support to the independence of the region .
"We can hardly do so because of tensions in the Donetsk region," Lyagin told Interfax on the phone on Monday .
 He could not say when the official referendum report would be available . He has not said when it will be available.
"I fear for my own life and the life of my team who has prepared and held the referendum," he said . He said he feared for his own life .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions held referenda on their self-determination on May 11 . The Donetsk andLuhansk region held referendations on May 12 .
 Novaya Gazeta journalist Pavel Kanygin abducted by unknown individuals in Ukraine, Ekho Moskvy radio reports .
 Ekho Moskvy sent a text message to some of his colleagues saying 'I have been abducted, call Moscow'
 The Novaya Gazeta administration has declined to comment on the information on Kanygin's abduction . The administration has refused to comment.
 The so-called referendums in Donetsk and Luhansk regions will not have any legal consequences . Their organizers will be prosecuted .