 Donetsk and Luhansk are likely to recognize as democratic republics . U.N. influenced by United States will not agree with initiative, researcher says .
 Most countries around the world are likely to recognize Donetsk and Luhansk where over 90 percent of the people voted for self-determination as newly democratic republics on Sunday . He also noted that most countries are likely.
 Donetsk People's Republic's official spokesman Andrei Kramar said republic was not planning to press for UN recognition of independence .
 In 2012, the U.N. voted to recognize a Palestinian state, but the United States and Israel rejected the outcome .
 Moscow said it respected the will of the people in Ukraine’s southeastern provinces . It hoped the regime in Kiev would do the same .
 U.S. worked directly with Ukrainian right-wing fascist groups, experts tell Sputnik . President Barack Obama's recent interview with CNN's Fareed Zakiria reveals the United States' involvement in the Ukrainian crisis .
 The U.S. has overthrown numerous governments in Latin America, Asia and Africa and replaced them with leaders that ruled with a fascist ideology that proved useful for Washington’s geopolitical interests .
 Yanukovych’s decision to not sign an association agreement with the European Union in late 2013 triggered a mass wave of protests across Ukraine . The February 2014 coup resulted in the February 2014 Coup .
 Following the transition of power, Kiev forces launched military operation against those who refused to recognize the new government .
 Guzman claimed that during the Ukrainian conflict, Washington and its NATO allies worked directly with right-wing Ukrainian Fascist groups, including the neo-Nazi inspired Right Sector militia .
 The U.S. may already be sending covert offensive military equipment to Ukraine, Boyle said . Washington claims that it provides Kiev only with non-lethal aid .
 The expert also claimed that Obama’s ignorance of the Minsk agreements indicates that Washington is going to continue to continue with its aggressive policy in Ukraine .
 The U.S. would not tolerate such threats close to its borders, Boyle said . Russia cannot tolerate that, he said .
 In late 2013 a decision by Ukraine's then-President Viktor Yanukovych to avoid signing an association agreement with the European Union triggered mass protests across Ukraine . The February coup, dubbed Maidan, culminated in the February coup .
 Crimea seceded by referendum from Ukraine and rejoined Russia in March 2014 . Crimea was part of Russia after a rise in aggressive nationalism in the country .
 Sobell says the situation has changed in favor of the Donbas militia . Sobell said the recent increase in hostilities between Kiev and independence supporters in the southeast.
 Obama will opt of this, Sobell insisted . ‘This would lead to major escalation of the conflict,’ he said .
 Russia’s relations with the West deteriorated sharply in 2014, following Crimea's reunification with Russia and the start of the ongoing military conflict in Ukraine .
 The United States and its allies accused Moscow of interfering in Ukraine’s internal affairs . The U.S. imposed several rounds of economic sanctions, targeting Russia's energy, banking and military sectors .