 From the Tsarist era, Kyiv and Crimea have featured centrally in Russian national mythology as the cradle of Russian Christianity .
 The Russian Orthodox Church's historic jurisdiction in Ukraine has a historic jurisdiction . This nationalist conception of space persisted after political borders changed .
 Russian Orthodox believers retain a special affinity for Kyiv and Crimea . Many Ukrainian citizens have looked to Moscow for matters of faith .
 Subjects of inquiry include religious nationalism, the baptism of Slavic Prince Vladimir, Orthodox holy places in Crimea and Ukraine . Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World concept, and religious violence in Ukraine and Crimea .
 The preamble to President Vladimir Putin's speech on 18 March 2014, explaining Russia's absorption of Crimea, cast the affair in a religious light . Orthodoxy; Ukraine; Crimea; Russia; religious nationalism; antiSemitism; anti-Islam; Church and State; Patriarch Kirill .
 This is the location of ancient Khersones, where Prince Vladimir was baptized . This is where he was baptised .
 His spiritual feat of adopting Orthodoxy predetermined the basis of the culture, civilization and human values that unite the peoples of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus .
Russian annexation of Crimea in 1954 questioned the legality of the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 and promised Crimean Tatars protection . These words formed a small portion of a much longer justification of the Russian annexation.
 President Putin's allusion to Crimea as a Russian holy place at the opening of his address underscores the importance of religion in this crisis .
 The religious dimension in the Russian-Ukrainian conflict has become everywhere apparent . The violence committed against priests, the nationalist rhetoric of Orthodox prelates, or the existence of self-styled Orthodox militia in breakaway regions .
 Religion, and more specifically religious nationalism, permeates the conflict, as this article argues .
 Religious nationalism is the potent infusion of national identity with religious belief . Religious nationalism has a strong influence on national identity .
 Studies of religious nationalism have grown considerably in the last few decades . The terrible events of 9/11 forced Western attention upon religiously inspired violence .
 He dismissed the formerly popular Marxist critiques of religion as ‘a smoke screen’ for ‘real’ material, political and social issues .
 religious belief lies at the very foundation of identity construction and motivates behaviour, says van der Veer .
 Isolating the causes and effects of religious nationalism can often be difficult because religious institutions operate outside traditional political channels .
 Terms range widely from ‘religious politics’ to ‘ecclesiastic politics.’ and ‘confessional politics' Terms include the ordering of imperial Russian state and society .
 No other place in Europe came as close as pre-Revolutionary Russia to theocratic interpretation of state power . No other country in Europe comes as close to theocracy .
 The Russian government appears to have invoked aspects of the pre-Revolutionary model . Some scholars have described it as a 're-sacralization' or 'Orthodoxization' of political behaviour and public consciousness .
 The goal here is not to parse the exact nature of Russia’s evolving church – state relationship .
 Orthodoxy’s penetration of Russian political culture provides a critical context for understanding the crisis in Ukraine .
 The importance of religion for the crisis in Ukraine should not be underestimated, says David Frum .
 Orthodoxy has inspired individuals to commit acts of violence in as much as religious belief has framed the way many Russians and Ukrainians regard each other . This is not to say that Orthodoxy is inspired by its religious beliefs .
 Dmitrii S Likhachev attributed the creation of the Russian state to the conversion of Slavic tribes to Christianity .
 Filatov has traced the resurgence of religion in Russian mass consciousness and political behaviour .
 Knox, Russian Society and the Orthodox Church. The Religious Factor in Russia’s Foreign Policy . The Orthodox Church and Russian Politics.
19th-century religious nationalists came to view Kyiv and Crimea as the cradle of Russian Christianity . The medieval story of Prince Vladimir/Volodymyr’s Christian conversion.
 During the reign of Nicholas I, Russian religious scholars and nationalists cast Ukraine and Crimea as the core of Russian identity .
 The Russian Orthodox Church embarked on a massive programme of spiritual colonisation . It coincided with ever-expanding Russian borders . The Orthodox Church, meanwhile, embarked on the massive programme .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has assumed authority over churches and holy places . This spiritual colonisation was material as well as metaphorical, as the Orthodox Church .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has led the re-Christianising of Ukraine and Crimea . The process has encoded these distant regions in a cognitive Russian map of faith and practice .
Long-term context for the religious dimension of the Ukrainian crisis dates to the 19th century and earlier . immediate antecedents can be seen in the post-Soviet era .
State relationship has been reconstituted in Russia over the last twenty years . Religion has assumed an increasing presence in Russian domestic and foreign policy .
 religious-nationalist ideas positioning Kyiv and Crimea as cradles of Russian Christianity have resurfaced . Simultaneously, as the church – state relationship evolves, religious- nationalist ideas are resurfaced.
 This article discusses the entwining of Orthodoxy, identity and politics in the post-Soviet period . It also explores the nineteenth-century roots of Russian religious nationalism .
 Patriarch Kirill's Russian World concept recasts Ukraine at the centre of Russia’s religious identity .
 This article reviews the implications of religious nationalism in the Ukrainian crisis . It also reviews the growing discord among Orthodox churches in Ukraine as well as episodes of religious violence .
 Crimea and Kyiv One could argue that the current crisis began with medieval monks, who recorded in vivid detail the origin of the Rus .
 The Rus established a network of trading outposts southward from the Baltic Sea along the 10 Likhachev, Reflections on Russia, 160 . It is believed to have been Vikings .
 In the British context, much of the literature concentrates on the connection between Christianity and commerce . In the UK context, for example, the literature focuses on the relationship .
 Other studies have shown that nineteenth-century missionaries viewed Christianisation as a companion to civilisation .
 In Russia, the importance of religion for empire was perhaps even stronger, given the close relationship between church and state .
Porter: Stanley, Stanley, ‘Commerce and Christianity’ and van der Veer, Conversion to Modernities . Porter: For general literature on the topic, see Porter ‘ commerce and Christianity'
 With Kyiv as the leading city-state, the Vikings gave the roaming Slavic peoples political structures, settled local disputes, pulled order from chaos . Kyiv is now the world's leading city state .
 Vladimir 14 converted to Christianity in 988 . He was not Russian until Vladimir 14 .
 Some historians called into question the veracity of this ancient tale . The Normanist Controversy emerged .
 The Chronicle of Nestor describes how peoples of Kyivan Rus received Christianity through Vladimir, a Kyivan prince who converted from paganism in 988 .
 Vladimir sent out representatives to study Western Christianity, Greek Christianity, Judaism and Islam . Vladimir sends out representatives from all over the world .
 Prince Vladimir chose Orthodoxy, not Judaism, in a similar, earlier, quest16 .
 Vladimir's envoys found Western Christianity, which they experienced in German lands, as stuffy and uninspiring . Vladimir’s envoys said Western Christianity was 'uninspiring'
Bulan chose Judaism because it sat at the foundation of Islam and Christianity, so must have been the one true faith . Vladimir rejected it, concluding that the Jews’ loss of Jerusalem boded poorly .
 At last, Vladimir's envoys returned from Byzantium awed by the transcendent beauty of Orthodoxy .
 Vladimir took some time before committing to conversion to the Byzantine Emperor . The Byzantine Emperor was not quite ready to relinquish his hundreds of concubines .
 Vladimir did convert in 988, and it was in Crimea, in the small ancient village of Chersonesos, just outside Sevastopol, that he received baptism and the miracle of transformation .
 The Byzantine emperor sailed from Constantinople for the event, and gave his niece, Anna, to Vladimir in marriage . He gave her a baby girl to Vladimir .
From Chersonesos, Vladimir travelled to Kyiv and forced conversion upon his people . From Chersoneos, he travelled to the city of Kyiv .
 Christianity spread from an epicentre in Kyiv through the various trading centres along the Volga . Christianity spread across the region.
 Ukrainian historians have argued that The Chronicle of Nestor depicts a uniquely Ukrainian experience, and had nothing to do with Russia, which then did not exist .
Russian historians have seen in these medieval Kyivan chronicles origins of the Russian state . Nevertheless, Russian historians have been able to find out the origins of Kyivan .
 The only Russian 14 Vladimir is the Russian form of the name and Volodymyr the Ukrainian form . Catherine the Great was known for attempting a separation of church and state .
 The choice of name may indicate a political stance. As will be appreciated, the choice of names may indicate political stance .
 Nicholas I believed that ‘the State was to serve God, not God the State’ This religious interpretation of state power infused Nicholas’s reign, demonstrated in the official nationality platform ‘Orthodoxy, autocracy, nationality’
 Uvarov viewed the 'advent of Christianity' as the 'turning point of civilization' and understood Russia 'within a Christian framework' This conviction translated into a Christianising of Russian history and empire .
 The territory of present-day Ukraine and Crimea, both of which Russia conquered in the eighteenth century, became the heart of Russian spiritual and political landscapes .
 Metropolitan Makarii established the foundation for present-day Russian interpretations in his classic history of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 Vladimir’s conversion to a small, ancient city in Crimea, Chersonesos. With moral and financial support from the Russian Tsars.
 Before and after the Crimean War, the Russian Orthodox Church constructed an elaborate network of shrines to commemorate Russia's Cradle of Christianity .
 Pilgrims travelled southward through the Russian empire, through Kyiv, southern Ukraine and Crimea, to visit Russia's very own holy places .
 The location of Vladimir’s conversion as a holy place is etched deeply into the historical memory of Russian Orthodox believers . It is deeply enshrined in the origin myths of the Russian state .
 In the nineteenth century and through the Revolution, Russian writers identified myriad other religious figures and saints of Ukraine and Crimea who played foundational roles in Russia's religious national identity .
 Biblical scholars debated whether Scythia, depicted as the home of a proto-Slavic nation, was a mission field of Andrew .
 From there, Andrew travelled up towards the future site of Kyiv in AD 63 .
 Andrew claimed that several early, first-century Christian communities were formed . In consequence of Andrew’s visit, he claimed that a population of over 2000 near Chersonesos was formed .
 Makarii’s work revitalised the myth of Andrew, 21 Riasanovsky, Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825– 1855, 16.16 .
 Russians, who lived in the region and who constituted Andrew’s mission field, were Andrew's mission field . They lived in Russia and were part of his mission field.
 Pope Clement was exiled to Crimea in the first century by the Roman Emperor Trajan . He is another Christian martyr whom Russians closely associate with Crimea .
 At Inkerman cliffs in Makarii, Clement found Christian communities inspired by Andrew and converted more Christians himself .
 Andrew and Clement gave Russia a first-century pedigree . For Russia’s nineteenth-century religious nationalists, these foundational figures, Andrew andlement, gave Russia the title .
 This elaborate spiritual landscape connected the territory of southern Ukraine and Crimea to Russia .
 In Crimea, the Christianising of landscapes served to dissociate Muslim Tatars’ claims to their homeland .
 The first-century pedigree bolstered the Russian Orthodox Church’s claims to primacy over the ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople .
 The Russian Revolution in 1917 brought a quick end to religious identity formulated on an Orthodox platform . The Russian revolution was the first time a religious identity was formulated on a religious platform .
 Efforts to unite Ukraine to Russia through the spiritual feats of Vladimir waned, although they did not entirely disappear . The spiritual feats were not entirely disappeared .
 The church touted Kyiv as the cradle of Christianity . For instance, the thaw towards religion under Gorbachev coincided with the 1988 millennial celebration of Vladimir’s conversion to Orthodoxy .
 Archbishop Innokentii is a theologian and architect of Crimea’s transformation into a Russian holy place .
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, religion re-emerged throughout the postSoviet states . Orthodoxy, identity and politics in the post-Soviet period Russia.
 Well-meaning foreign missionaries inundated former atheist republics with the message of the Gospel .
 Official religion proved to be as resilient as popular faith, and the Orthodox Church arose 28 years ago .
 The history of the Russian Orthodox Church during the Soviet regime is much more complex than can be represented in this article . The Soviet period was a time of extraordinary trauma for its members, and this experience cannot be forgotten in an assessment of its current resurgence .
 For a good survey, see Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime, 1917- 1982 . For a great survey, See Pospieovsky, the Russian Church.
 Resurgent interest relates in part to the prelate's work in Crimea . He earned the epitaph ‘Patriot of the Fatherland’ as well as his extraordinary contribution to Russian Orthodox theology .
 Religion offered postSoviet states a tool to rally populations ‘when the older twentieth-century political identities rooted in the October Revolution no longer viable'
 The Russian Federation had listed more than 21,000 organisations by the early 2000s .
 The high number of religious organisations around the turn of the millennium reveals in part the proliferation of denominations inspired by western missionaries . The smaller state of Ukraine had registered more than 30,000 religious organisations .
 The presence of well-funded Western evangelicals soon became evident throughout Russia and Ukraine during the terrible economic crisis of 1990s .
Russian lawmakers passed the 1997 Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organisations . Subsequently, Russian lawmakers passed a law on freedom of conscience and religious organisations .
 The Law on Freedom of Conscience limited the ability of foreign missions to operate in Russia .
 Both groups are unable to operate legally in Moscow . It has been invoked against the Salvation Army and Jehovah's Witnesses .
 The Catholic Church has not fallen foul of the law, but the state has thrown up other obstacles, such as visa restrictions for priests .
 Russian agents have accused missionaries of CIA activities . The Church of The Latter Day Saints fare somewhat worse, as Russian agents say .
 The above law is symbolic of a tightening relationship between church and state in Russia . Patriarch Kirill described it as a necessary foil to Western ‘colonial habits’
 The Russian Orthodox Church also sought to retain its sphere of influence among all Orthodox believers in the former Russian/Soviet Empires . Both post-Soviet patriarchs, Aleksii II and his successor Kirill I have taken an interest in Russian political affairs .
 Patriarch Aleksii supported Yeltsin’s presidency and campaigned against communist 34 Sysyn, ‘Politics and Orthodoxy in Independent Ukraine’
 Patriarch Kirill has been even more politically active, throwing open support behind Dmitrii Medvedev and Putin .
 The church has taken to political behaviour to pursue its own agenda, not to reinforce the agenda of the state . This political activity can be compared to that of a strong lobby, as the church has been taking to politics to pursue their own agenda .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has gained considerable ground toward achieving the goals of the original platform established by Patriarch Aleksii .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has struggled to retain its historical jurisdiction in the space of the former Russian and Soviet empires . The church has been struggling to retain the historical jurisdiction .
 The Russian Orthodox Church faces the loss of parishes and important religious monuments . With the emergence of movements to create nationally based Orthodox churches or as has occurred in Estonia, a switch of canonical jurisdiction from Russia to Constantinople has occurred .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has invested heavily in reclaiming and renovating Orthodox holy places . To shore up its authority in its traditional territory outside the Russian state, the church is investing heavily .
 Its desire to protect holy places, however, is not necessarily political, nor territorial in nature . It's not necessarily a political or territorial issue .
 Rather, the protection of holy places is intrinsic to its spiritual mission, says the author .
 In nearly all religions that attach significance to place, religious authorities take great care to stake claims and to protect landscapes .
 Jews, Muslims and Christians are concerned that a holy place might be ‘in danger of contamination’ by those who are spiritually ‘unclean’ or who do not know how to worship correctly .
 It is imperative that they are in the hands of the rightful guardians. Therefore, ‘to guarantee the spiritual cleanliness of the holy places’ is imperative .
 The Russian Orthodox Church's efforts to preserve its canonical jurisdiction in spaces outside Russian borders can be seen in a similar light . The Church is not always welcome.
 Ukraine has had a much stronger record of church –state separation than Russia . Ukraine has a greater plurality of religious communities than Russia, according to the report .
 Of its nearly 35,000 registered religious communities, approximately 9000 are Protestant . Of the 20,000 Orthodox congregations, only two-thirds are associated with the Moscow Patriarchate .
 When Ukraine separated from the Soviet Union in 1991, Orthodox hierarchs made a bid for independence from the Russian Orthodox Church .
 The Moscow Patriarchate has registered approximately 12,000 communities with the Ukrainian State Committee for Nationalities . It has registered 4400 communities associated with the Kyivan Patriarchate .
 Orthodoxy in Ukraine has become enmeshed in questions of national identity . The UAOC registered approximately 1190 communities and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, about 3650 .
 UAOC, UOC-KP and UGCC have found more support among Russian-speaking populations in the east and Crimea . Lines of faith have tended to follow geography as well .
 Some members of the Ukrainian leadership have seen religious divisions as an obstacle to the unity of the state and nation . Some have encouraged a single Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
 Most recently, on the election of Metropolitan Onufriy of Chernivtsi and Bukovyna as the new head of the UOC-MP, President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk reminded the Council of Bishops of the church’
 The Ukrainian Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organisations established that religious institutions should have access to their former religious property, whether by direct ownership or free access for services .
 Law granted local communities the right to adjudicate among competing claims from various Orthodox and Catholic churches .
Post-Soviet Ukraine found itself granting national monuments with deep historical and cultural value to Russian administration .
 Russian Orthodox Church is chief claimant of Orthodox property in Ukraine . Property restitution in Ukraine has been relatively straightforward in Russia .
 The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople is the Patriarchates of Constantinople, Patriarchate and Patriarchate. The Patriarchate is the patriarchate of Alexandria, Patriarchal of Alexandria and Patriarchalate of Jerusalem . The Patriarchates are also the Patriarchate in Moscow and the
 Soviet era occupants of religious institutions could little afford to relocate . In the plummeting economy of the 1990s, religious institutions were unable to move .
 municipalities often return property selectively, favouring some faiths and discriminating against others . More seriously, municipalities often back property selectively .
From 1992, the UOCMP managed to exert control over at least the Lower Caves of the famous Kyiv Lavra . From 1992, UOC MP managed to exerted control over a matter which upset its rival .
 Neither the UOC-MP nor the U OC-KP has been able to establish control over St Sophia . Neither the MP or the Uoc-KKP is able to control St Sophia.
 Ukrainian government has chosen to administer the cathedral directly . The cathedral has fallen to one church or the other .
 The apparent delicacy of guardianship over this holy site was publicised as early as 1990 . Patriarch Aleksii attempted to visit the cathedral but was met by advocates of the autocephalous movement .
 The patriarch did manage to enter the side door, but the tricky circumstances of his visit were a forewarning of trouble to come .
 Patriarch Volodymyr of the UOC-KP stipulated his wishes to be buried in the grounds of St Sophia . Most memorable was the stand-off between the Orthodox churches and the Ukrainian government .
 The funeral procession transported the body of the deceased patriarch to the grounds of St Sophia, blatantly disregarding the government’s decision .
 Several people were injured in this fight over a holy place in Ukraine . The episode was remembered as ‘Black Tuesday’
 Ukrainian churches have called in Ukrainian police and Ukrainian courts to resolve disputes . Repeatedly the churches call in police and Ukraine courts to resolved disputes .
 The problem of religious property restitution plagued Yanukovich's presidency . It became one of a number of stumbling blocks in Ukraine’s EU bid .
 The Russian Orthodox Church's efforts to establish its authority in post-Soviet space extended to Crimea . waves of conversion to Christianity and Islam over the centuries complicated claims upon religious monuments, even more so than in Kyiv .
 Chersonesos is the location of Prince Vladimir’s baptism . Prince Vladimir was baptised at the age of 18 . Chersoneos was born in September 2013 .
 The Russian Orthodox Church sought to reclaim space in the preserve . Chersonesos became an archaeological preserve for its vast array of ruins dating back to the fifth century BC .
 Archaeologists used the former monastery for the museum . Archaeologists ran active excavations of the ruins .
 Church officials fear church plans might impinge upon previous and ongoing research . They did not object to property restitution in principle .
 Complaints about the futility of drawing comparisons between Pompeii and Chersonesos are also old . Complaints are also quite old .
 The monk’s living quarters spread, first with a small garden plot, then with aSmall shed, then a small shed . The monk's living quarters then with new monks.
 A community of monks were squatting on a space significantly larger than originally allotted them . The preserve realised that the monks had been squatting.
 Father Paissy led other land reclamation initiatives elsewhere using similar, indirect methods .
 Conflict between the church and preserve escalated as President Kuchma approved the reconstruction of the church of St. St. John's Church . The church was built in the 1930s.
 UOC-MP expansion in Chersonesos continued in assertive manner until 1997 . Church hired a helicopter to airlift a gazebo to mark the baptismal font of Vladimir .
 The act was accomplished against the express wishes of the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture . This act was done against the Ministry of culture's wishes .
Once church officials installed the gazebo, it proved impossible to remove for it had the devotion of Orthodox believers . Once church officials install it, it proves impossible for it to be removed .
 Father Paissy, with several other monks, took over the museum’s property at gun-point .
 The relationship between the archaeological preserve and the Russian Orthodox Church reached peaceful resolution . The archaeological preserve is a Russian archaeological preserve .
 President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President Kuchma attended the elevation of the church’s cross on July 28, 2001 . Putin was the first Russian leader to attend the consecration of the cathedral .
 In 1861, Tsar Aleksander and his family toured Crimean holy places, with Chersonesos as their first stop .
 The ceremony featured Christian artifacts found in Chersonesos, including a cross with a Greek inscription believed to be 1000 years old and relics of St Vladimir, which the monastery acquired from Kyiv .
 Elite officials, including Count Stroganov, the Governor General of New Russia, and Eduard Totleben, the Crimean War hero, also attended .
 Patriarch Aleksii II of Russia gave his support to the recreation of Crimea as a holy place . He encouraged Russian pilgrims to travel there .
Almost one thousand years from the preaching of the Apostle Andrew the First Called in Chersonesos, comes the great event of the Christianizing of Russia .
 Tauride became for many people from all of Eastern Europe the source of life-giving water, quenching the spiritual thirst of each person striving to find the way to the Holy Land .
 Popes Clement and Martin, Martin, the Seven Martyrs, Stefan of Surozh, Cyril and Methodius, and of course, Vladimir . The Seven Martyrs were the seven Martyrs .
 He presided at a liturgy attended by thousands on the ruins of Chersonesos . The liturgy was held at the site of the town's ruins .
 Orthodox clergy from Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova attended, as did local and national Ukrainian dignitaries . Orthodox clergy also attended .
 Former President Kuchma was there, as was the Russian Admiral of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet .
 Metropolitan Lazar of Simferopol and Crimea delivered an address after the liturgy that knit Crimea to Russia in a seamless spiritual landscape . Metropolitans of Odessa and Donetsk have been consistently Russian leaning .
 His words revealed the growing significance of Crimea for the Russian Orthodox Church . Crimea’s place in the new agenda of Patriarch Kirill .
 He laid out the conceptual framework for the Church’s mission field during the opening celebration of the third Russian World Assembly .
 The Russian World forum evolved from a presidential decree of two years earlier . It became the foundation of many of the Russian nationalist projects that have appeared in the last few years . It underscores Russian nationalist interest in Ukraine .
 Religion constituted the focus of the third conference of the Russian World Fund . The conference was held in Moscow, Russia.
 Ravil Gaynutdin, a leader of the Russian Muslim community, reminded participants that Muslims and Islam were an historic part of the Russia World .
 He encouraged the maintenance of ties with diaspora Russian Jews . He offered the particular recommendation of youth exchange programmes .
 He gave Putin’s Russian World concept spiritual legs and defined the Russian World along older, imperial lines .
 He invoked a transnational idea of the Russian World, one that coincided with the Church’s historic jurisdiction in Russian imperial and Soviet space .
Russian Orthodox Concordat would be a ‘sin 68 Papkova,’ he argued, 671. He argued, ‘Russia’ and ‘Russian Orthodox. Concordat?’ would be ‘Sin 68 PapKova’
 Ushakov was the Russian Admiral who led the Russian victory over the Turks in the Black Sea . He helped secure southern Ukraine for the Russian Empire .
Post-Soviet canonisation, transfer of part of his relics to Sevastopol, offers another symbol of blending Russian Orthodox patriotism on Ukrainian territory .
 It would artificially exclude ‘many millions of people’ who identify with Russia . It would also exclude 'many millions' of people who identified with Russia.
 Kirill did consider Russian Orthodox communities abroad 2 in Europe, the Americas, Asia 2 as part of the Russian World . He mainly focused on Russia, Ukraine and Belarus .
73 Patriarch Kirill invoked the words of the Ukrainian-born Orthodox saint Lavrentiy Chernigovskii . He suggested that the Russian World included anyone who might base their national identity on Russian spiritual and cultural foundations, like Moldovans .
 Instead, shared space, history, language, and respect for national differences within Holy Rus defined the Russian World .
 Patriarch Kirill outlined several ways in which to shore up the Russian World . He outlined ways to maintain active lay communities, churches, and monasteries .
 Other methods involved drawing upon civil society and cultivating elites inside and outside Russia to foster the Church's mission .
 Patriarch Kirill described the Church’s position as a-political . Throughout his speech, he described the church's position as political .
 Patriarch Kirill proposed that the Russian World could play an active role in world politics . He also proposed that 'activities of the Church and civil society' would fail without 'co-ordinating efforts with governments'
 The official narrative of the event summarised the patriarch as having argued that ‘state borders put up obstacles for inter-relations’ between Ukrainians, Belorusians and Russians .
 Chernomyrdin, former Russian Prime Minister and consul in Ukraine, made a case for strengthening the Russian language in Russian communities outside Russia .
Two other speakers discussed the necessity of protecting the rights of Russians living in Latvia and Ukraine . Two other speakers also discussed the need to protect the right of Russians in Latvia.
 Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World concept quickly attracted criticism within Ukraine . Kirill's concept quickly drew criticism from Ukraine .
 Kirill’s Russian World concept is interconnected with his ‘Holy Rus’ concept, he says .
 Kirill's Russian World concept is only one articulation of many visions expressed in the Russian World conferences . However, it is important to bear in mind that Kirill’s concept is just one of many visionaries .
 It is an alternate chain that someone is trying to throw on the UOC-MP and use for the benefit of a foreign state . The chain is an alternative chain that is being used by someone who wants to use it for the benefits of foreign states .
 Patriarch Kirill began annual trips to commemorate the baptism of Prince Vladimir in July . The faithful of this church understand this.
 Ukrainian government permitted the Russian Patriarch to hold services in the Cathedral of St Sophia, hitherto limited to ecumenical services .
 Patriarch Kirill refused to meet with Patriarch Filaret of the UOC-KP despite repeated requests from the former president .
 Patriarch Kirill increased his call for the UOC-KP 'schismatics' to return to the one, true Church .
 Patriarch Kirill's visit during 2013 for the 1025th anniversary of the baptism of Vladimir embodied his Russian World concept . Kirill’s visit can be seen as a direct precursor to the current crisis .
 Patriarch Kirill organised a spiritual journey for the Cross of Saint Andrew . In coordination with the celebration for Vladimir, he organised the journey .
 The 8-foot tall cross arrived from its home in Patras, Greece, from 11 July to 2 August . It travelled through Russia, Belarus and Ukraine .
 Orthodox hierarchs from around the world gathered in Moscow before flying to Kyiv to commemorate Vladimir’s baptism .
 President Putin played a leading role, reprising, as it seems, the preRevolutionary Tsarist identity of protector of Orthodoxy .
 The acceptance of Christianity determined Russia's fate and choice of civilization . It became a decisive turning point in the Russian state’s ecclesiastical and secular history .
 The moral foundations of the Orthodox faith played a major role in the formation of our national character and the mentality of Russia’s peoples . Russia holds a dignified place among the European and global civilizations, says the author .
 Orthodoxy has become a spiritual buttress for the Russian state and for our national consciousness, uniting Russia, Ukraine and Belarus through strong bonds of brotherhood .
 A joint steering committee headed by Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia was formed to organize the combined celebrations of the 1025th anniversary of the Baptism of Rus in our three nations .
 President Putin along with state and church dignitaries travelled to Kyiv with the cross of Saint Andrew .
 Putin's visit seamlessly blended religion and politics on an imperial scale . Putin’s visit is a huge media event for Russian national news outlets .
 It began with a stop at the heart of Kyiv, the hill upon which stands the monument to St. Vladimir .
 Putin’s busy day continued with an evening service at the Kyivan Monastery of the Caves .
 The next day, 28 July, the Russian president travelled to Sevastopol for the parade of the Black Sea fleet . The Russian president is expected to attend the parade .
 Patriarch Kirill presided over the main prayer services at Kyiv’s holy sites . The cross of Andrew had travelled from Moscow .
 Russian involvement in the 1025th anniversary met multiple protests in Ukraine . Portrayed as a great success in Russia, it was subject of extensive criticism leading up to the event .
 Ukrainian Association for Religious Freedom President Viktor Yelensky called the 1025th anniversary ceremonies ‘divisive’ and ‘a humiliation for millions of Ukrainian Christians’ Representatives of the UGCC and UOC-KP concurred with the portrayal .
 Ukrainian sources suggest that the successful gloss placed on the event by the Russian media did not match the reality .
 President Viktor Yanukovich reportedly reduced the scheduled meeting with President Putin from 40 minutes to 15 minutes . President Yanukovich of Ukraine rolled out the carpet .
 To some, Yanukovich’s cautious behaviour signalled a move towards independence from Moscow .
The collapse of Ukraine’s EU talks dashed such optimism a few months later . The collapse of the Ukraine's EU talks was a setback for many months .
 Religious nationalism in Russia and Ukraine has intensified with the Ukraine crisis . Religious leaders have taken a leading role in framing the conflict for their adherents and world at large .
 Analysis of rhetoric during Euromaidan could easily become the sole focus of an extended study . Analysis of their rhetoric during the annexation of Crimea could be the only focus of the study .
 The annexation of Crimea is the confluence of religion and politics . Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in March 2014 . Crimea has been annexed since then .
 Patriarch Kirill has done nothing to stop the flow of blood. We are deeply disappointed in the position of the Russian Orthodox Church and her head .
 The responsibility in front of God for the consequences of Russian aggression against Ukraine also resides with the Russian Orthodox Church .
 The UOC-KP accused the Russian Orthodox Church of contributing to the Crimea crisis . The bishops say the church is not of mere silence, but of contributing.
 Patriarch Filaret of UOC-KP has repeatedly condemned the Russian state and the Russian Church for aggression .
 The UOC-KP has adopted the role of a national voice and conscience for Ukrainian territorial integrity . The U OC-Kp has adopted a role of an international voice for Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The Holy Synod presented the Russian Orthodox Church’s official statement regarding the event on 19 March 2014, just three days after the Crimean Referendum .
 These events were portrayed as a fratricidal conflict, with brothers fighting against brothers, over the direction Ukraine should take . These events are portrayed as the conflict between brothers and brothers .
 Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World view permeated the statement . The Patriarch's Russian World View permeated his statement .
 The mission of the Church and the sacred duty of all the faithful are to strive for peace in the land inhabited by Holy Rus’ and to call for the abandonment of the language of hatred and enmity .
 The unity in faith and brotherhood of people baptized in one and the same baptismal font can't be deleted from their common past .
 The Byelorussian, Russian, Ukrainian and other people should live in peace, love and solidarity . We believe that it can neither be deleted from our common future .
 Here, the Church advocates peace, promoting a transnational Orthodox community united by shared faith .
 Critics have interpreted this message as a failure to recognise Ukraine’s desire to have an identity distinct from Russia .
 The press has produced a great deal of speculation about Patriarch Kirill's relative silence on events in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The principle statements have come from the Office of External Relations .
 Kirill's reticence is symptomatic of regret over divisions caused by the Russian World concept . Some have seen Kirill’s reticency as symptomatic.
 Metropolitan Hilarion's office has been responsible for implementing the Russian World view over the last few years . It is also possible that the Patriarch is content to allow Metropolitan to take a leading role .
 In Crimea, religious nationalism has taken a dangerous turn from the moment of Russian annexation .
 Religious freedoms have been restricted, religious minorities have experienced persecution . Religious believers have become the first refugees .
 The official Russian Union of Evangelical Christians entered Crimea to register local Baptists .
 The clergy of the UOC-KP have lost religious property to the U OC-MP . Some priests have fled, and some have fled .
 stories of violence and persecution of Greek Catholics in Crimea have appeared . Similarly, stories of Violence and persecution have appeared in Crimea .
 Father Mykola Kyvich, a Greek Catholic priest, was detained and roughly interrogated for eight hours . The priest was detained by police for about eight hours.
 Mufti Ravil Gaynutdin, Chair of the Council of Russian Muslims, visited Crimea very soon after annexation to register Crimean Muslims within official state structures .
 Registration entails loss of religious autonomy for the Tatars, as well as de-legalisation of Islamic groups not recognised by the Russian state .
 Orthodox nationalism has been on the rise in eastern Ukraine and Crimea for the last two decades . In addition to the pressures of Russia’s religious law, Crimean Muslims have faced violent outbursts of Orthodox nationalism .
 In March 2014, Tatars in Bakhchisarai reported that many of their homes had been identified with crosses by ‘unknown individuals’ While stories of terrible violence against individuals have surfaced .
 Other Tatar leaders have been harassed or kidnapped or kidnapped . Tatar buildings have been desecrated and Tatar building has been damaged .
 In other areas of Ukraine, similar episodes of religious violence have appeared .
 The Institute for Religious Freedom in Ukraine has assembled a damning portrait of the Donetsk People’s Republic . Members of which have been identified as terrorists by the Ukrainian Government .
 This priest had visited the region to secure the release of two local priests from prison .
 Donetsk militia made international news when it allegedly distributed notices at a synagogue that Jews must register with the government .
 Oleh Tyhanybok, head of the Svoboda party, is a central leader of the Euromaidan party . The emergence of the new leader prompted widespread scepticism about the direction of the interim government .
 Scepticism appeared justified, for example, when a New Year’s Eve celebration featured an anti-Semitic skit . In Russia, observers report anti-Semitism creeping into the official media, in tandem with nationalist enthusiasm for Crimean annexation .
 Many Crimean Jews saw no real option between Russia and Ukraine as the referendum approached . Unlike Crimean Tatars, many Crimean Jews had not been tainted by ethnic chauvinism . The referendum in Crimea was held in Crimea on Sunday .
 Religion is a significant factor in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, says the author . Religion is an important factor in Ukraine's conflict with Russia .
 The Russian Orthodox Church has administered religious space in Crimea and Ukraine 2 parishes, Christian monuments, and holy places 2 for hundreds of years . The Orthodox Church managed to keep its spiritual territory when the Soviet Union collapsed .
 The Russian Orthodox Church maintains its jurisdiction among Ukrainian citizens .
 The result has been, for lack of a better word, a Russifying of Ukrainian and Crimean laity and spiritual space . The result is a Russified of Ukrainian, Crimean and Ukrainian laity.
 Many Russian believers retain a sense of ownership over Kyiv and Crimea, the Cradle of Russian Christianity .
 In Ukraine and Crimea, the Russian Orthodox Church has provided an enduring bond with Moscow . The church has provided a constant reminder of shared past and faith .
 Religious nationalism has permeated the Ukrainian crisis deeply and broadly . The Ukrainian crisis has been the focus of the crisis for years .
 Russian and Ukrainian leaders have appealed to religion, while religious chauvinism and religious violence has been a feature of the separatist movements .
 Given evolving events, it would seem likely that religious divisions will deteriorate before they improve .
 Many of the Ukrainian Orthodox clergy have condemned the annexation of Crimea and support the territorial integrity of Ukraine . This includes the potential for a secession from the Moscow Patriarchate .
 The nature of anti-Semitism within the Ukrainian crisis has become muddled by propaganda from all sides . Of more immediate concern, however, is 98 .
 Joseph Zissel, President of the Association for Jewish organisations and societies, has argued that anti-Semitism has not figured as significantly within Euromaidan as the media suggest .
 Putin made the promise to protect the Tatars in his 18 March address . He will need to act swiftly to quell the tide of local, violent nationalism, he said .
International intermediaries should not lose sight of the need to ensure that Crimea’s religious minorities safely make the transition to their changing political landscape .
 We must hope that peace-brokers can bring the conflict to resolution. Meanwhile, we must hope for a resolution .
 Currently, she is working on a book about the Crimean War . She is tentatively titled War and Recovery .
 Andrzej Poppe and Frank E Sysyn (Ed.-inChief), with assistance of Uliana M Pasicznyk (Ed-in-Chief) Andrzesj Popp, Frank E.Sysyn and Uliana P Pasiczn (Ed
 The Contest for the Legacy of Kievan Rus’, Eastern European Monographs is held in London . The winner of the contest will be known as the winner of a European Monograph contest .
 Povest’ Vremennykh Let po Lavrent’skoi Letopisi 1377 Chast’ Pervaia, Tekst i Perevod, Comp. Pervovest. Vremenennykh. Letopi
 Mission, Governance and Confessional Politics in Russia’s Volga-Kama Region, 1827- 1905 .
 Literatura i gosudarstvennaia v rossii v poslednei treti XVIII-pervoi tReti veka. Literatur a gosudsi v rosudsii v rosa .