 On May 14, 2018, Oleg Sentsov went on an indefinite hunger strike in a penal colony located north of the Arctic Circle .
 His only demand is the release of all Ukrainian political prisoners in Russia . He also wants all political prisoners released in Russia.
 In August 2015, Sentsov was sentenced to twenty years for organizing a terrorist community and planning terrorist attacks . Sentsov has been sentenced to 20 years in prison for organizing terrorist community .
 The second defendant in the case, Alexander Kolchenko, was sentenced to ten years in prison . The other defendant is sentenced to 10 years in jail .
 The transcripts make it plain the only evidence of the alleged terrorist organization’s existence was the testimony of Alexei Chirniy, who was not personally acquainted with Sentsov .
 Police footage of Chirniy’s arrest while he was carrying a rucksack containing a fake explosive device that propagandists pass off as police footage .
 In the spring of 2014, he organized peaceful protests against Crimea’s annexation by Russia . He organized protests against the annexation of Crimea .
 Russian authorities tried to prove both Sentsov and Kolchenko were linked with Right Sector . The charge was unsubstantiated in Sentsov's case and absurd in the latter case due to Kolchenko’s well-known leftist and anarchist convictions .
 Gennady Afanasyev claimed he had been tortured and coerced into testifying against the two men . He is the second witness on whose testimony the charges against the men were based .
 Sentsov and Kolchenko’s show trial, like the Bolotnaya Square Case, were supposed to show that only a handful of terrorists opposed the referendum on Crimea's annexation .
 The Russian authorities wanted to stage a quick, one-off event to intimidate and crack down on anti-Russian forces . The event was planned to be held in a bid to intimidate the Russian authorities .
 Two circumstances prevented the repressive apparatus from working smoothly . But two circumstances prevented it from working properly .
 The defendants did not make a deal with prosecutors and refused to acknowledge the trial’s legitimacy . The first was that the defendants didn't make a deals with prosecutors .
 Oleg Sentsov unexpectedly turned out to be a filmmaker, provoking a series of public reactions . European Film Academy questions whether cultural producers would be capable of blowing up cultural landmarks .
 Segments of the Russian film community reacted to the situation with cold irritation . The Russian film industry reacted to cold irritation.
 Sentsov was a Ukrainian filmmaker, not a Russian filmmaker, and not a major filmmaker . He was not a filmmaker, but he was a filmmaker .
 The owner of a computer club in Simferopol, his semi-amateur debut film, Gamer, had been screened at the festivals in Rotterdam and Khanty-Mansiysk . Release of Rhino had been postponed due to Euromaidan .
 Ukrainian intelligentsia equated Sentsov with other political prisoners of the empire . Sentsov spent most of his life in Soviet prisons and died in Perm-36 in the autumn of 1985 .
 Sentsov, a Crimean who was made a Russian national against his will, is not eligible for prisoner exchanges . He smashes the stereotype of the treacherous peninsula, a part of Ukraine bereft of righteous patriots .
 Sentsov’s death on the eve of the 2018 FIFA World Cup would be a vexing, extremely annoying nuisance to the Russian authorities . Sentsov's death will be a nuisance to Russian authorities, according to Russian media .
 Sentsov is an annoyance to nearly everyone, but he is a particular annoyance to those who, while part of the Russian establishment, have openly defended him . The Russian government has tried to avoid noticing what an inconvenient figure he has been .
 His trial and hunger strike have been a slowly ticking time bomb planted under the entire four-year-long post-Crimean consensus . Some have been on cloud nine, others have put down stakes, and still others have kept their mouths shut .
 Everyone reports on the success of their new endeavors on Facebook while ignoring wars abroad and torture on the home front . Yet everyone reports on their success on Facebook.
Google Maps tells you Crimea is Russian and Ukrainian depending on your preferences . Sentsov represents a rebellion against hybrid reality and utter compromise .
 The success of Gamer on the film festival circuit made Sentsov part of the international film world . Sentsov's current address in a prison north of the Arctic Circle begs three questions .
 Culture is a tool for reflection, a means for individuals and societies to achieve self-awareness and define themselves . It is a way for people to define themselves, says author .
 In this case, we could also be talking about pop music, fashion, and rap . We could also talk about popMusic, fashion and rap.
 Culture can be a means of spending leisure time for people with sufficient income, short work days, and long weekends . On the contrary, culture can be of spending time for those with sufficient money, and time for leisure .
 The founders of Theater.Doc have both recently died, while Artdocfest has finally been forced to relocate to Riga .
 Russia still enjoyed vast and all-pervasive ties only five years ago . Donbass and the rest of Ukraine are blank spots . Russia still enjoys vast, all-Pervasive ties .
 cultural producers have to keep on making culture, and it is easier to say no one is interested in painful subjects . The film is about the complicated family life of a doctor with a drinking problem and a teetotalling nurse .
 Moscow is brimming over with premieres, lectures, and exhibitions, and to a much lesser extent, Russia’s other major cities .
 Moscow's itinerant three-ring circus on the paternalist model to the delight of enlightened regional governors . All the rest are produced by Moscow’s itinerant Three-ring Circus .
 The Sayano-Shushenskaya Dam, where 75 people perished in 2009, was the site of a brutal assault on a journalist . It matters not a whit that one of them ordered the assault, nor that another was in cahoots with the companies responsible for safety .
 There can be no free discussion generated by works of art when everyone is engaged in total self-censorship . There is no free talk generated by work of art.
 Festival 86 in Slavutych has been conceptually reassessing the post-Soviet individual . It's painful to think about Russian film festivals, he says .
 There are two more possible answers to the question of what culture is . There are also two more potential answers.
 Culture is only the marquee on a commercial enterprise profiting at the taxpayer’s expense. Or, finally, culture is just the marquee.
 It is not a big choice, and the kicker is that by agreeing today to be involved in churning out propaganda, milking taxpayers, supplying optional leisure time activities, producing censored works .
 The public has an increasingly hostile reaction to cultural producers and their work . It is no wonder the public has a hostile reaction. It's no wonder why the public is increasingly hostile to producers .
 Everyone without exception is now threatened with being sent down, the innocent and the guilty alike . The events of recent months and years, however, should have transported us beyond dread .
 It affects the so-called intelligentsia no less than the ordinary folk . The so- called ordinary folk are more likely to suffer from this type of condition .
 Infantilism means being unable to empathize, or put yourself in another person's shoes . President Putin has been studied backwards and forwards for 20 years .
 The message sent to creative communities through the arrest of Kirill Serebrennikov was not registered .
 If you want to be a dissident, start down the hard road of doing jail time for misdemeanor charges . You face insuperable difficulties in renting performance and exhibition spaces .
 Putin regarded the creative intelligentsia with respect at the outset of his presidential career . Like your average late-Soviet philistine, Putin regarded them with respect .
 A few years later, he was convinced the creative intelligentsia was a rampantly conformist social group who would never move even a millimeter out of its comfort zone . He would make one concession after another .
 Cultural figures currently protesting the arrests of colleagues are viewed as part of the prison’s gen pop . People who live outside Moscow see them as accomplices in looting and genocide .
 Agency is acquired only by taking action, including voluntarily turning down benefits for the sake of loftier goals . Agency is only acquired by taking actions, such as voluntarily taking down benefits .
 The acquisition of agency is practical, because it is the only thing that compels other people to pay heed to someone’s words . The acquisition is practical.
 Sentsov has made the choice between slow decay in a penal colony and suicide in order to draw attention not to his own plight, but to the plight of other political prisoners .
 Regardless of his hunger strike’s outcome, he has generated a new scale for measuring human and professional dignity .
 It is an personal matter whether we apply the scale or not, but now it is impossible to ignore. It is a personal matter if we apply to the size or not.
 FSB officers came to Kaluga resident’s Roman Grishin workplace and took him away to an investigator .
 Grishin was told he stood accused of inciting enmity and hatred for reposting a video in 2014 . He was interrogated on camera after being told he was accused of inciteing enmities and hatred .
 He was released on his own recognizance as a suspect in a criminal case . He has been released on the same basis as the suspect in the case .
 Grishin told OVD Info by telephone that the main topic of his interrogation by FSB officers was his regular trips to Ukraine .
 Grishin visits the country as a tourist and stays with friends . He stresses that he does not collaborate with any organizations in Ukraine .
 In April 2016, Krasnodar LGBT activist Nina Solovyova was convicted of commmitting a misdemeanor for posting a video . She was sentenced to ten days in jail for posting the video .
 Two years later, it is clear the annexation of Crimea has had only negative consequences for Russia . Now, two years after the annexation, Russia has only had negative consequences .
 Crimea set off a chain reaction that gave rise to the war in eastern Ukraine . Thousands of people were killed and hundreds of thousands of refugees were displaced .
 Ukraine, Russia’s closest neighbor, has been made an enemy for years to come . Ukraine is Russia's closest neighbor to Ukraine .
 Russia has been excluded from a number of international organizations and clubs . Russia's voice is no longer taken into account, meaning a huge blow has been dealt to the country's image and its international status .
 The sanctions have greatly exacerbated the economic crisis in Russia, which has hit the quality of life in Russia hard . Russia's economy has been hit hard by the sanctions .
 The number of poor people has increased, investments have decreased, and future prospects have worsened . The numbers of poor have increased, and investments have also decreased .
 The annexation has opened the way for the rise of hysteria and aggression and a political clampdown at home . The annexation is the result of a clampdown in the UK.
 This has had a devastating effect on culture, human relations, and human rights, and has generated all the conditions for Russia’s political self-destruction . This has been a devastating impact on culture and human relations .
 The negative consequences are so numerous that it will be difficult to turn the situation in a positive direction . The negative effects are so many that the situation will be hard to turn into a positive Direction .
 If the annexation continues, these negative effects will continue to grow, however, if the annexation is not stopped . The annexation will continue, but the negative effects of annexation will remain .
 In terms of Russia’s interests, it was definitely a rash, mistaken, and criminal move . Russia's interest in Russia's interests was a rash and mistaken move .
 The European Union called on Friday for more countries to impose sanctions on Russia . But the Kremlin said Crimea was Russian land and its status non-negotiable .
 The 28-nation EU said it was very worried about Moscow’s military build-up in the region .
 The EU said it would maintain sanctions that ban European companies from investing in Russian Black Sea oil and gas exploration . The EU also said it will maintain sanctions against European companies.
 Russia has not discussed and will never discuss its regions with anyone, Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov says . Russia has never discussed its regions, he says .
 Peskov was referring to Crimea’s referendum on secession from Ukraine in March 2014 . The referendum was followed by a formal request from the local parliament to the Russian Federation to admit it as a new subject .
 Putin will visit the construction site of a bridge being built to Crimea across the Kerch Strait on Friday . The bridge will connect the Russian mainland with the peninsula .
 NATO and the EU are concerned by Russia’s military build-up in Crimea . They say it is part of a strategy to set up defensive zones of influence .
 The EU, the United States, Japan and other major economies have also imposed sanctions on Russia over Crimea . Others including China and Brazil have avoided direct criticism of Moscow .
 The 28-nation EU imposed its Crimea sanctions in July 2014 and then tightened them in December 2014 . Crimea's annexation has prompted the worst East-West stand-off since the Cold War .
 After Russia’s annexation of Crimea, an armed separatist revolt erupted in mainly Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine . Kiev and its Western backers say the revolt is fueled and funded by Moscow .
 Russia is a third-world country, with a totalitarian regime and a petty tyrant-dictator, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I want the whole democratic civilized world to realize that Russia is the third- world country"
 In Russia, there are no trials or investigations in Russia, only a farce played out by Kremlin puppets .
After the verdict, I will continue my hunger strike for 10 more days, until the verdict comes into force . This is regardless of the translation into Ukrainian, because they can drag that out for a long time, too .
 I have heard that Petro Oleksiyovych Poroshenko is quite adept at diplomacy . I have also heard that he is quite good at diplomacy. He is a good diplomat .
 I hope his diplomatic skills will suffice to reach agreement in Russia with a certain idiot . After all, he promised my mother that I would be home in time for the May holidays of 2015 .
 Throughout these 10 days, day and night, my sister will be standing at the jail gates . She will wait and see whether they release me or not .
Putin is a tyrant with imperial manners and a Napoleon and Hitler complex put together . Putin is a dictator with imperial manner and imperial manners . He is also a dictator.
 The bear doesn’t understand human language, he understands only the language of force . The bear does not know human language .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for more than a decade . Putin has said he won't shake Russia’s hand in the political arena .
 It is not right to extend a hand to someone who kept you in handcuffs and your people in chains . It is right to keep people in handcuffs or in chains.
Every time I make a political decision, I will always think how it would affect ordinary people, both in Ukraine and Russia . But every time I made a political decisions, I'll always think about ordinary people .
 In Russia, in spite of everything, there are many honest, kind, and decent people. Because in Russia, there is many honest and kind people .
 Ekaterina Vologzheninova was found guilty of inciting social hatred and enmity .
 Vologzheninova had incited “ethnic hatred and enmity towards volunteers from Russia’s involvement in the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine, as well as towards public officials . The court based its verdict on the conclusion reached by a forensic linguist .
 Vologzheninova posted Anatoly Marushkevich’s poem “Katsaps,” along with an image of a young Ukrainian woman and the caption ‘Death to the Moscow Occupiers,’ and a caricature featuring a man resembling Vladimir Putin leaning
Osipova has turned seventy, but it is her debut exhibition . The exhibition marks a milestone .
 She has never been a member of any artist unions and groups . She has stood outside in the rain, frost, and heat at nearly all the protest rallies in Petersburg .
 The striking posters that Osipova holds at rallies expose the latest injustices or crimes, warn of dangers .
 Osipova's paintings, mainly portraits and landscapes, are part of a series of political posters . The organizers set out to show her best political posters and paintings .
 The show also includes two large genre scenes, the first featuring an ordinary Soviet beer hall, the second, a group of punks . The show is set in Moscow, Russia .
 The posters call to mind not only the tradition of political satire but also primitivist painting .
 The latest poster is about the dead Tajik boy Umarali Nazarov . The first was prompted by the Nord-Ost tragedy in 2002 .
 The Mariinsky Palace has a simple lettered poster, handwritten on a sheet of wove paper .
 I just could not understand why no one took to the streets then, why everyone was silent . I just couldn't understand why nobody took the streets .
 On the fortieth day after the deaths of the hostages, I made a poster in which I painted a picture in acrylics on fabric .
 Nord-Ost is known for its posters, but it's also known as Nord- Ost . The company is known to be the most popular in the world .
 Umarali Nazarov was taken away from his mother when he was born . The Tajik baby's mother was also taken away .
 The police detained me then, and I have been detained many times since, sometimes quite roughly . The police have detained me many times, sometimes very roughly .
 People who go to these events think like you do, and that is quite important . But people who attend these events are not the people who do, they say .
 You feel you are not alone with your thoughts, that there are other people who think the same way . You feel like you're not alone. You feel there are others who think of you as a person .
 A theatrical motif was a theatrical motif in his thesis painting . He was really into the theater then .
 There are also three paintings from my Vologda series, pictures of fields in VologDA .
 The big painting shows a beer hall that was behind the Nekrasov Market . The painting shows the beer hall behind the market's entrance .
 It had these big round arches, and the beer was poured straight from a tap . The beer was served straight from the tap. It was served in a glass of beer .
 She wrote it in Germany, and I saw the resemblance with our circumstances . I saw it in German, and saw the similarities with our circumstance .
 The poster not everyone who is naked is needy is about the death of Berezovsky .
 At the entrance to the exhibition is a small poster, Vote for the bird . The exhibition is being held in London .
 At the bottom of the poster is a heavy United Russia, pumped full of oil . On the top is a bird, on the bottom is a United Russia.
 Russia’s color is blue, as in a certain painting by Wassily Kandinsky .
 Osipova now sees less and less of the color in her homeland's plumage .
Yelena Osipova’s work will be on view at 19 Fontanka Embankment until November 25, 2015 .
 Petersburg police detained two activists and a photojournalist near Park Pobedy metro station on May 8 . Pro-Kremlin provocateurs attempted to prevent Democratic Petersburg activists from handing out buttons and leaflets dealing with the end of the Second World War in Europe .
 The Democratic Petersburg coalition opposes Russia’s current Second World War victory symbol . The St. Petersburg coalition, which opposes Russia's current victory symbol, is in Russia .
 George’s Ribbon passed out buttons featuring the red remembrance poppy, a European symbol for war victims .
 George’s Ribbon, used by Russia-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine and Russian officialdom, was chosen instead . The poppy was used by the Russian-backed rebel group in Ukraine .
 The buttons were emblazoned with the red poppy and the phrase ‘1939–1945 Never Again,’ in Russian and Ukrainian . The leaflets quoted John McCrae’s famous poem “In Flanders Fields,” which described the symbol’
 Activists said Victory Day should be commemorated on May 8, because Russia was part of Europe, rather than on May 9, in keeping with Soviet tradition .
 The Great Patriotic War was launched in 1939 by both Germany and the Soviet Union, rather than in 1941, when Germany suddenly attacked its formal nominal ally the Soviets .
 The pro-Kremlin provocateurs, mostly young people, were already waiting outside the metro station . Two older men were apparently led by two older men .
 Democratic Petersburg activists hand out leaflets. George’s Ribbons.
 The provocateurs approached them and started an argument, justifying Joseph Stalin and promoting what they saw as the Kremlin's current interpretation of the war’s history . The provocatedurs approached the provocateur and began an argument.
 Some provocateurs took photos and videos as the argument proceeded . Some of the provocateur took photos of the argument .
 One of the young provocateurs said he was “just passing by’s. He denied he had come deliberately with the others to harass the Democratic Petersburg activists .
 The colonel argued with the activists before detaining Igor “Stepanych’s” Andreyev and, seconds later, our correspondent had tried to photograph his arrest .
 One of the provocateurs filed a false complaint with the police against Kalinyak, according to Democratic Petersburg . Police officers at the scene corroborated his accusations .