 The Problem of Definitions Evhen Tsybulenko and J’moul A Francis Contents 6.2 . The problem of Definitions is the problem of definitions .
 A distorted view of the conflict in Donbas has led to a distorted view. As a result, the conflict has been described as a 'conflict' in the region .
 This chapter argues that the conflict is an international armed conflict under international law . The notion of both international and non-international armed conflicts ought to be debunked .
 This chapter examines the nature and role of individuals fighting in Donbas . It also examines the role of people fighting.
 Attention is also given to the relationship between Russian troops and local collaborators in Donbas . Russian troops are involved in a cohesive effort that sustains Russian aggression .
 The issue of distortions is part of the pool of information used at public, legal, and diplomatic levels . It is also part of a pool of data used by the world's top officials .
 This chapter analyses the consequential issues concerning the normative backlash, the attribution of responsibility, and the manner of response to the conflict from the international community . Fourthly, this chapter also analyses the consequences of the backlash .
 The analysis focuses on the argument that distorted information could be used to influence future decisions . The analysis then focuses on how the use of distorted information can lead to futile solutions .
 This chapter concludes by discussing the propagation of incorrect definitions, which has an undermining effect on the principles and doctrines of international law . This chapter also discusses the propagating of incorrect Definitions .
 emphasis is given to the importance of the responsibility of definitional accuracy during times of perilous conflict . The importance is also given to responsibility of accuracy during perilous conflict.
 Ukraine. Donbas: Donbas; Donbas. Ukraine: Russian aggression . Ukraine: Russia's Donbas . Russia's Crimea: Ukraine's Crimea .
 The conflict in Ukraine presents a unique challenge, in that there is a general lack of understanding about the players on the ground and the conflict itself .
 A corollary of the aggression is the occupation and unlawful annexation of Crimea1 and the unlawful occupation,2,3 or at least effective control, of Donbas .
 Much is known, to a degree, about the unlawful annexation of Crimea that took place on 20 March 2014 . Little is known about the continuous unlawful activities in Donbas .
 There are varying alternative and misleading terms used to tell the story of the conflict . Despite the fact that varying specific international resolutions and statements defined constitutive elements of the Conflict within their right contexts, there are varying alternatives to these terms .
 The European Union 2016 is the first time the European Union has been in charge of the EU . The EU is the largest body in the EU and the EU in the world .
 The lines between Russian regular forces and local fighters are blurred and may create a degree of doubt .
 This clash of labels could affect how international law is accurately viewed and applied . This clash could affect international law. As such, this clash of labeling could affect the way international law was viewed .
 If tensions are not resolved, there could be undesirable results in relation to attribution, liability and responsibility under international law . This diametrical tension of definitions is reflected in a 2016 preliminary examination report .
 It is important for the parties to the conflict to be properly defined in the eyes of the public and the international community. Hence, it is important to the parties.
 There is a duty not to introduce and incorporate alternative definitions of critical terms into the language around any international conflict . There is also a duty to include alternative terms in the language.
 The primary objective of this duty is to combat and repel the spread of distorted information, unfounded claims, baseless evidence and mistaken policy positions, which could arise during times of conflict .
 The problem of definitions around the conflict in Donbas ought to be resolved before it is too late to correct the distorted information .
 The collaborators rose to power through the seizure of Ukrainian government buildings in Donbas . Defining the Separatists, Russian Troops and Local Collaborators .
 The first inter plurima alia is a plurima-alia, a form of plurima . The first plurimaalia was created in 2009 .
 Francis enabled them to gain ‘effective control’ over the local government administration . Francis enabled the government to gain 'effective control'
 These buildings are located in the major cities in Donbas including Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The 'referendum' process is known for its de facto control of Ukraine's oblasts . Those areas were declared independent from the rest of Ukraine via the ‘Referendum’ process .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were self-declared as the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the ‘Luhansk People's Republic’ , respectively .
 Alexander Borodai was the first prime minister of the ‘DPR’ He was a Russian citizen with close connections to the Russian intelligence services . He was also the first Russian prime minister.
 Alexander Zakharchenko is currently leading the “DPR,21’,21, while the ‘LPR, 21’ is currently led by another Ukrainian, Igor Plotnitsky .
 Thousands of Russian citizens and soldiers are supporting the fulfilment of their agenda . ‘leaders’ and their associates have admitted that thousands of Russians are supporting them .
 The vehicles, machinery and weaponry used by Russian troops and collaborators in the “DPR’ and “LPR” include infantry mobility vehicles, BTR and BMP armoured personnel carriers, battle tanks, self-propelled and towed howitzers and guns .
 Some of the weapons employed in the Russian Federation after the collapse of the Soviet Union were never supplied to Ukraine .
 The weapons were never part and parcel of the Ukrainian Army, local collaborators claim . The weapons could not be seized from the Ukrainian forces, as the local collaborators say .
 Russian-made and -supplied military equipment is an organized military command . The command supports Russian military personnel in waging war against the Ukrainian military .
 Russian 58th Army Command posted military personnel from Russia’s 136th Motorized Rifle Brigade to fight against the Ukrainian Army in Donbas .
 Battle of Ilovaisk took place in 2014, in an attempt to gain control of the city. One such fight against this army took place during the Battle ofIlovaisk .
 Russian military personnel opened fire on a previously agreed “live corridor’ for treating Ukrainian soldiers . This battle saw a number of Ukrainian military personnel killed .
 Another battle near Debaltseve in 2015 saw the loss of life of a number of Ukrainian troops . A flagrant breach of the Minsk II Agreement also saw the death of several Ukrainian troops.
 Regular Russian troops were actively engaged in the Battle of Debaltseve, fighting alongside local collaborators .
Russian tanks and soldiers have been “decisive’ in winning key battles against government troops in eastern Ukraine’s eastern Ukraine, says commander of a separatist “special forces’ detachment.”
 It would be a mistake to merely limit Russian aggression in Donbas to participation through the supply of weaponry and agents,e., a proxy war .
 Francis is evident through the movement of Russian military personnel and weaponry into Donbas to fight against Ukrainian resistance . Francis is seen as an example of the Russian military.
 The placement of Russian military personnel in this manner also highlights a military agenda, which seeks the sustainability of hostilities . The placement in this way also highlights the military agenda .
 The identification of Russian military apparatus and personnel further proves that labelling the participants of the conflict as “rebels’ and “separatists’ is irreconcilable with the reality of the war .
 The full list of regular Russian troops taking part in active hostilities in Donbas can be retrieved from the Inform Napalm database .
 The sustainability objective is not only limited to the supply of personnel and equipment . It also includes the use of local personnel who are used for strategic military advantages in order to harness local knowledge .
 Russian troops, with the assistance of local collaborators, wage war against the Ukrainian state on Ukrainian soil . This cooperation presents another dimension of the Russian aggression .
 The collaboration between local Russian sympathizers and Russian troopers could be viewed as a 'proxy war' Both state actors – the Russian and Ukrainian military – are directly fighting each other .
 Non-state actors playing a significant secondary role in the conflict . However, there are non- state actors playing significant secondary roles .
 As mentioned, alongside the military personnel are Russian voluntary fighters . The Russian army is also known as the Russian National Guard .
Over 10,000 individuals were enlisted to fight in Donbas through the “Union of Donbas Volunteers’s” organization .
 The Russian Federation's policy guarantees the destabilization of Donbas through the supply of sustained levels of personnel through collaborating recruitment agencies .
 A further policy implication is the expansion of the Russian military to reinforce its direct resistance against the Ukrainian Army on Ukrainian territory . The Russian military is said to be expanding its own military presence in Ukraine .
 The idea of a ‘Greater Russia’ appeals to many young local Russian nationalists, 35 who also form part of the military command .
 Russian military personnel have been expanding in Russia to assist in the execution of military objectives . As such, this results in the further expansion of Russia's military personnel, while establishing relations with Russian sympathizers .
 Local fighters are said to be paid to fight as mercenaries, working alongside imported fighters in the same vein . Local fighters said to have been paid as mercenaries to fight for local interests .
Local fighters form part of a very small minority in a region where the appetite for separation or reconnection with Russia is very low . It is important to note that local fighters form a very little minority in the region .
 The extent of local collaborators’ participation is miniscule in the larger scheme and hierarchy of Russia’s operations in Donbas .
Military personnel and local collaborators are part and parcel of what is effectively the Russian agenda of open aggression in Donbas .
Local collaborators are subordinate to the command of the Russian military and its agenda, according to the evidence . The evidence is based on the evidence concerning the de facto power of the military in Donbas .
 It is necessary to examine how such terms ought to be construed in a conflict . It is needed to examine the use of such terms in conflict .
 As terms or labels, “rebels’ and “separatists” infer the presence of an agenda of independence, theoretically free of the military support of another state .
 It is important to engage with the definitions of “rebels’ and “separatists’ in order to determine whether local collaborators are acting in their own right .
 Rebels are defined as militant organizations fighting against a central government employing confrontational and violent methods . Rebels are described as militant groups fighting against the central government using confrontational methods .
39 Rebels primarily fight for political causes, independence and the rights of minorities in society . Rebels can be classified as “armed opposition groups’, “guerrillas” or “non-state armed groups”
 Separatists are similar to rebels, but they fight for a cause in connection with a specific territory . They fight for the value of land and the security of an area of economic interest .
 The use of “rebels’ and “separatists’ interchangeably translates into local collaborators being viewed as fighting for a political cause, rights and independence, premised upon the significance of the land in Donbas .
 This notion falsely implies that the situation in Donbas is an internal conflict over political and civil rights . This notion also gives the impression that the conflict existed before the Euromaidan Revolution .
 It is important to determine whether the conflict was triggered by the existing sociopolitical intricacies of Donbas . It is also important to find out if the conflict has been triggered by Donbas.
 The situation in Donbas before Euromaidan was one of peace and normalcy, rather than years of suppressed political tensions over independence . The fact is that the situation before Eurmaidan is one of the peace andnormalcy, instead of years of suppression of
 The fight for independence, and other political and social rights, would entail pre-existing issues of territoriality, language and economics . As such, the inaccurate labels would lead one to conclude that the fight for independent rights would also involve pre- existing issues .
Three issues cannot be regarded as contributing factors of the conflict . However, those three issues can be considered contributing factors to the conflict.
 There have also been no issues in relation to territorial demarcation . The delineation of the border occurred without conflict when the USSR collapsed .
 The border was established according to the old border of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic . Ukrainians represent the ethnic majority in Donbas; however, Russian is the predominant native language .
 The majority of individuals residing in Donbas are fluent in both Ukrainian and Russian .
 Donbas was at an economic disadvantage compared to the rest of Ukraine . It had a viable economy due to its output of steel and agricultural products .
 The pre-existing Russian influence is evident from the pressure placed on the then pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych succumbed to pressure and made the decision not to sever ties with Russia in favour of the EU .
 The causes that are purported to inspire “separatism’ or “independence’ in Donbas are not compatible with factual history and current statistics, according to current statistics .
 The terms “rebels’ and separatists’ were incorporated into the language around the conflict in Donbas .
 The uniqueness of Russian collaborators at this juncture is that they tend to resurrect themselves in former Soviet states during times of diminishing Russian influence .
 Russian collaborators take on the persona of “rebels and “separatists’ as a cover for a geopolitical and military strategy . As such, these Russian collaborators are known as ‘rebels’
 Similar tactics were used in Georgia in 2008 when Russia was losing its grip on its sphere of influence in the Caucuses . This strategy fits in with the ‘Grachev Doctrine’ which holds that Russia must maintain a degree of political and economic influence .
 Russia’s actions were also triggered by the thought of NATO being on its doorstep .
 doctrine demands that Russia must act to protect its 'legitimate interests' The doctrine is then used as justification for aggression .
 Ukraine sought to shift its attention towards the West, like Ukraine . This was the same excuse used to justify the invasion of Georgia .
 As in Georgia and Crimea, Russia tends to justify its occupation on the grounds of 'protecting' its citizens .
 The Baltic States are starting to see subtle movements by Russia similar to those used in Georgia and Ukraine . From another perspective, Russian border region, the Baltic states are also seeing subtle movements .
 The Baltic States are extremely fearful that Russia may eventually pursue a similar agenda against them .
 The events in Donbas do not relate in any way to mere internal strife, says the author .
 Donbas is part of a large-scale plan to maintain the ‘Grachev Doctrine’ in an effort to remain as a regional superpower . What is playing out in Donbas has been part of the "Grachev doctrine" in the region .
 The collaborators on the ground are the ones giving effective assistance to the doctrine . The collaborators are not pursuing a cause for liberalization, independent of both Ukraine and Russia .
 consideration must now turn to whether the collaborators acted under directions from or control of the Russian state .
 Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine on PBS News in 2013 . See also the interview with a former United States ambassador to Ukraine .
 All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state .
 Article 2 ought to be interpreted as being applicable not only to direct actions, but also indirect actions through private actors .
 If no such actions can be attributed to a state, one can conclude that the collaborators acted independently . If no one is attributed to such actions, it can be concluded that they acted independently.
 A state is liable for an internationally wrongful act when there is an act or omission, attributable to the state under international law, which constitutes a breach of an international obligation . General Assembly Resolution 56/8355 emphasizes this view by confirming this view .
In Article 8 of the same resolution, attribution to a state will be found if the conduct in question was “directed or controlled’ by the state through a person or group of persons’s conduct .
 A violation of Article 2 of the UN Charter will suffice when considered with Article 12 of General Assembly Resolution 56/83 . With regard to a breach of international obligations, the breach will suffice.
 The link between Russia's large-scale plan and policy and its collaborators must be established to dispel the notion of the collaborators being “rebels’ and “separatists’ under international law .
 The International Court of Justice Nicaragua United States case established the “effective control’ test to determine the degree of control over collaborators violating Article 2 of the UN Charter . Such was the contention.
 Article 3 of General Assembly Resolution 3314 on the Definition of Aggression defines aggression as sending armed bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries to conduct acts of armed forced against another State .
 ICJ case held that the threshold of state responsibility for groups acting upon the territory of another must go beyond encouraging, supporting, supplying, training and assistance .
 Article 8 of General Assembly Resolution 56/83 requires conduct by persons or group of persons to be “directed or controlled’ by the state . The threshold is linked with the hurdle in Article 8.
 The ICJ Nicaragua case and its “effective control’ test requires that the collaborators “participated in the planning, direction, support, and execution’ of unlawful actions’s unlawful actions .
 The US was not held liable because its military personnel did not take part in the “execution of unlawful actions’s ‘execution’ of unlawful action . In this case, the U.S. was not charged with unlawful actions by military personnel .
 To apply this concept to Russian collaborators, it can be 54 Charter of the United Nations – opened for signature on 26 June 1945 .
 Russia cannot be held liable for the collaborators’ actions because its military personnel did not participate ‘directly’ in the execution of acts in Donbas,e., Francis argued . Francis argued that Russia can’t be held liability for the actions .
 There is evidence of regular Russian military personnel actively engaged on the ground in Donbas . However, as discussed above, there is evidence that regular Russian personnel are actively engaged in military operations .
 The Russian Federation can be established upon the basis of the Nicaragua case, the Russian Federation says .
 It must be noted that the “effective control’ test presents a hurdle requiring command, rather than a direct mandate . The ‘effective control test’ is a hurdle.
 If command cannot be established, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia established the much preferred and more realistic “overall control’s test in the Tadić case .
 This test requires not only equipping, financing, training and support, but also “coordinating or helping in the general execution of the act’s act. This test includes equipping and financing, financing and training .
 Russia is not only equipping, financing, training and supporting the collaborators, but it also organizing and assisting in the execution of unlawful actions in Donbas . Based on the evidence, Russia has been involved in the executions of unlawful acts in the region .
 This is evident through the continuous supply of weapons, machinery, vehicles and so-called ‘humanitarian assistance’ in the occupied region . This is seen through the continued supply of arms and machinery .
 Russia is paying salaries and pensions of individuals, including its collaborators, living on what is lawfully Ukrainian territory . Russia is also paying the salaries and pension of individuals.
 It is suggested that the collaborators are not fighting for the separation of a race, creed, or religious minority for the purpose of independence .
 The collaborators are in fact fighting for Russia and the maintenance of its sphere of influence . The collaborators have been fighting for the Russian government for years .
 The situation in Donbas is an armed conflict according to customary international humanitarian law . Defining the Conflict to all intents and purposes, the situation is an Armed Conflict according to international law .
66 collaborators on the ground resorted to armed force in the pursuit of their objectives . This is premised on the fact that, according to the definition of an armed conflict, 66 collaborators in the Tadić case were involved in the conflict .
 The situation is indeed an IAC, but it would not be so simple to establish such a fact . One may conclude, based on the analysis in the previous section, that the situation is actually an Iac .
 The conflict in Donbas is one between Russia and Ukraine, or between Ukraine and Russian collaborators . Article 2 of the UN Charter is once again the default starting point .
 This principle derives from every state’s right to political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity . This principle is based on every state's right to sovereignty, sovereignty, territorial integrity.
 The principle is restated in Article 2 of the UN Charter prohibiting nations from intervening in domestic jurisdiction of any other state .
 The implication of these principles is that there is a conflict between two states, the aggressor state has very little grounds to justify its actions .
NIACs entail situations where belligerent forces are a product of a purely domestic crisis . NIACs involve situations where  belligerent forces are a result of a disgraceful crisis .
 Such conflicts will be within the remit of the jurisdiction of the state and should be free from external intervention . Such conflicts should be within a state's remit, says author .
 Some authors argue that any intervention must be pursued with the aim of upholding imperative treaty obligations and to protect the nationals of the intervening state . Others argue that the only exception to this rule is to protect nationals of intervening state.
 The exception is disputed by jurists,69 which results in doctrinal and interpretative uncertainty about it . It must be noted that this exception is contested by jurist,69 .
 Russia sought to legitimize its military actions in Georgia, Crimea and Donbas . The latter justification is the one for protecting nationals, which Russia sought .
 In the Donbas region, Russian citizens are not in the majority of Russian citizens . However, in the region, there are not many Russians .
 Russian citizens were not under any form of threat from the anti-Russian protests due to the fact of their peaceful coexistence during the protests and prior to the conflict .
 Donbas was fully represented in the Ukrainian Parliament . There was no appetite in the region for separatism, reunification with Russia or independence .
 Russia submitted to the contrary view that ‘radical extremists’ linked to Euromaidan threatened its citizen . However, these ‘extremists’ were protesters who enjoyed national and international support .
 Russia used in South Ossetia and Crimea under the guise of protecting Russia’s interests . This is the same line that Russia used to protect Russia's interests in Crimea .
 It seems that the collaborators are using NIAC tactics as a cover for a greater IAC agenda . NIAC has been accused of using tactics to cover up the IAC's agenda .
 The situation in Donbas was first triggered by an FSB colonel, 67 Jennings and Watts 2008, 428 . It must be noted that the situation was first trigger by the Russian Federal Security Service through an F SB colonel .
 Francis Igor Strelkov, also known as ‘Igor Girkin’ confessed to being the own who ‘fired the trigger for the war’ His rationale for being instrumental in starting the conflict in Donbas was to take control of populated areas and stop the “
 Over time, the situation was joined by a host of collaborators engaging in disturbances before an armed conflict came into being .
 The collaborators took on the persona of belligerents with an agenda. Subsequently, they took on a persona of belligerents .
 In turn, they have sought to be recognized as belligerents, a status that enjoys legal benefits and consequences . The status has been seen as a form of neutrality .
 Both states seek to solidify their possession of parts of legitimate Ukrainian territory . Both “states’s’ aim to conduct their objectives against a legitimate government .
 Israel, the UK, China, Spain, Spain and Catalonia have declared ‘separatism’ is not of the kind faced by Israel . This approach is gravely mistaken because of the overwhelming evidence .
 Russian political “tourists’ and regular military personnel propping up the “DPR” and “LPR’ to the total exclusion of the Ukrainian Government, the conflict, ipso facto, became international ab initio .
 An IAC exists when states resort to armed force against each other . Under international law, an IAC can be used to protect states from armed force .
An IAC will come into being when a state, inter alia, occupies the territory of another state through armed force . This definition is read alongside Common Article 2 of the Geneva Conventions .
 There is an IAC between Ukraine and Russia, which started at the time of the occupation of Crimea .
 Donbas was not subjected to Ukrainian colonial domination, racism, nor alien domination . Prior to Euromaidan, Donbas had not been pursuing independence .
 Some would argue that the movement behind the ‘restoration of Novorossiya’ was the basis for the start of the conflict in Donbas .
 The ‘restoration of Novorossiya’ was simply a Kremlin propaganda exercise, it is evident . However, based on the discussion above, it's evident that it was just a propaganda exercise .
 The conflict in question was not one of self-determination, it became clear . Later, with the shooting-down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 and other grisly criminal activities, it was clear .
 Dutch-led Joint Investigation Team says there is "irrefutable evidence" MH17 was shot down by a Russian-made BUK missile from the 9M38 series . MH17 is believed to have been shot down.
 It was the 69th Separate Logistics Brigade 75 Chekalkin 2017 . It was also the 69rd Separatelogistics Brigade.
After the missile was fired, the vehicles were transported back to Russia over the border . The vehicles were then transported to the Russian border .
 There is damning evidence that Russia used its territory to fire its military artillery into Ukraine . In addition to shooting down flight MH17, there is also damning evidence.
 U.S. intelligence says weapons were supplied to Ukrainian military positions and to boost the resources of “pro-Russian rebels’s’.86 . These abhorrent acts both highlight the brutishness of the so-called “rebels’
 The region has, in part, turned into a cesspit of criminality and corruption. Therefore, as a result of an absurd agenda, one can understand why the region has become a cess pit .
 The notion of a “civil war’ or “separatist conflict’ in Donbas has an unfounded premise in international law . The notion is unfounded, says the author of the book .
With the absence of an agenda linked to liberalization and independence, there can be no parallel conflict . The absence of a parallel conflict can be seen as a result of liberalization.
 Russia has created a situation in which to destabilize Ukraine for its own 'advantage' and as a warning to other border states, should they attempt to look to the West .
 The conflict in Donbas has nothing to do with the people in that region . The conflict is about penalizing Ukraine, as was the case in Georgia, for ditching its pro-Russian government .
 The military intervention has been to maintain a degree of control in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has been trying to keep control of Ukraine .
 The situation in Donbas is an IAC on the basis of Russia’s military intervention under the overall control of armed collaborators . The situation is based on ICTY jurisprudence in the Blaskic, Kordic and Rajic cases .
 The distortions surrounding the definitions of the collaborators and the conflict have resulted in the distortion of the real conflict . The Effect of the Distortion is the result of the distortion.
 The media portrayal of the collaborators as “rebels’ and “separatists’ gives the impression that the collaborators are seeking to be liberated, when, in fact, there is a greater agenda at hand .
 collaborators may take advantage of distortion of definitions to solidify their ‘justified’ position in the public .
 The Kremlin's media machine is keen to portray its actions in Ukraine as being in conformity with international law .
 Broadcasters will then republish and even incorporate certain terms, such as “rebels’, “separatists” and “civil war’s” into their mediated language .
 Many people do not understand how such labels ought to be ascribed, says the author . "These terms feed into the everyday discourse about the conflict"
 Ukraine's UN Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev saw the need to correct the distortions around the conflict . This distortion of definitions has also infected the diplomatic realm .
 The distortions are continually republished in academic literature and the reports of certain international organizations . Despite this correction, the distortions are constantly republished .
 This could only be a consequence of ‘reporting language’ - which has a legitimizing effect on the terminologies around the conflict . This could be a result of 'reporting language'
In the spheres of international law, such distortions are now absent from the language used by international courts . The language used in international law is no longer used by the courts .
 The ICC refrained from ascribing such labels to Russian collaborators in Ukraine . For example, the ICC, in its preliminary report, refrained from assigning such labels .
 This apparent policy is in fact due to the evidence of a larger Russian agenda, which goes beyond mere internal conflict between “separatists’, “rebels’ and the Ukrainian Government .
 Another problem lies with how distorted broadcasts are translated and interpreted through their dissemination on social media . Another problem is how distorted broadcast is translated through social media.
 The manner in which armed conflicts are broadcast to the public has changed significantly over the years due to the rise in social media,92 . The rise in the use of social media gives everyone the tools needed to address the public and mass media .
 Journalists who are active on social media will absorb the means by which conflicts are interpreted, which will then influence the composition of their reports .
 Such influence could stem from how terms are applied and used en masse during times of conflict . Such influence can be seen as an example of how terms can be applied during conflict .
Social media editor in the field of journalism is becoming more prominent in social media . This form of newsgathering and interaction is evident with the increasing prominence of the social media editor .
 Many hold that the traditional principles of journalism ought to remain steadfast to ensure that accuracy continues to be the primary goal of reporting . However, despite the evolution of this new form of journalism, many hold that it should remain steadfast .
 Even with the traditional model of journalism, conflicts have been subjected to inaccuracies and sensationalist reporting .
 Security Council Briefed on Fast-breaking Developments in Ukraine, as Political Official Warns Failure to Secure Russian-Ukrainian Border Obstructing Peace, UN Doc.
 The interaction between traditional and social media journalism can have a direct and indirect influence on the conflict and its participants .
 Alternative facts are borne out of the tensions between authority and authenticity during times of international conflict .
 Social media provides a voice for everyone, including those in and around conflict zones . Since social media, social media provides the voice for all, individuals will publish information .
 Some information may be deemed ‘credible’ in the eyes of the wider public because of the 'professional’ manner in which it is published .
 The Kremlin will use social media in such a manner as to spread their propaganda, which will be picked up by global broadcasters .
 When broadcasters republish inaccurate information and terminology, individuals and even experts will form their opinions based on the presumption of authority being equated to accuracy .
 Issues of credibility will arise when distorted definitions are challenged by more prudent experts, thus creating an environment of intellectual misunderstanding .
 Many people feel that they are an authority on issues because they absorb a plethora of publications available on social media . Alternatively, a negative by-product of social media is that many people feel they are a authority on matters .
 Some are even emboldened to challenge and discredit experts, who are qualified and spend most of their time in researching the area in question . Some are still skeptical of experts who have been trained in the past .
 Social media provides a platform, not only to share ‘opinions’ but to spread them at frightening speed . This problem is made even worse because social media is a platform for people to share their opinions .
 The Kremlin uses social media to distribute their propaganda, which will consequently reach a vast audience who will think the ‘information’ is credible .
 The ‘information’ will also incorporate twisted terms in an effort to divide public opinion and lessen the opposition against the situation in Donbas .
 As it stands, the public and even diplomatic circles are divided over the conflict in Donbas . The Russian agenda has been effective to a degree.
 The EU is seeking to aggressively confront the problem of alternative facts . This is why the EU, in particular, is trying to confront the issue of alternativefacts .
 It is the duty of the media to ensure that accuracy is given primacy over authority .
This disrupts the mission behind the distorted definitions, which seeks to galvanize a certain narrative about the conflict by the parties involved . This disrupts a mission that seeks to energize the narrative of the conflict, according to the author .
 As demonstrated in Sects.. and 6.3, alternative definitions can alter the characterization of the participants in a conflict and nature of the conflict .
 persons who are not entrenched in research around the conflict could be intellectually led astray because they have no other sources of information . Also, persons who aren't entrenched in the conflict may be intellectually leading astray .
 Francis given priority in broadcasting in order to combat the tide of alternative facts . Francis is given priority to broadcasting to combat tide ofAlternative facts .
Journalists must not be too eager to compile reports based on material published on social media .
 There should be a process of cross-checking and prudent expert-checking to ensure that everyone outside of a conflict is not led towards intellectual peril .
 The Importance of Definitional Accuracy During International Conflicts During times of international conflicts, especially regarding the conflict in Donbas, is important .
Labelling collaborators as “rebels’ and “separatists’ has led to the notion that there is a “civil war’s being waged in Ukraine .
 Russia's propaganda machinery has been successful. This is what the narrative of Russia’s propaganda machinery wants to achieve, and to a degree, it has been success .
 The aim is to portray Russia as the great protector of its citizens and the high paragon of international virtue . Russia is the world's most powerful nation, according to the Kremlin .
 incorrect definitions that feed into the language surrounding the conflict legitimizes the role and actions of the collaborators . Second, incorrect definitions of the conflict are also incorrect .
 flagrant violators of international law must be called out for all that they erroneously embody . This builds upon the previous point, whereby flagrant Violators of International Law must becalled out .
 By ascribing alternative definitions to them and their actions, their public image is softened and not regarded as a serious problem in international law .
 History shows that such actions had dire consequences for the future of Europe and the rest of the world . History shows such actions have dire consequences.
 mistaken labels can also be likened to Russian troops who fought for Germany during the Second World War as separatists .
 The presence of Russian military in Donbas cannot be classed as a situation involving “rebels’ and separatists’ in straightforward internal conflict . The point is that the presence of Russia's military in the region cannot be classified as a conflict involving separatists .
 The conflict is one in which one country seeks to maintain a degree of control through unlawful methods over another . The conflict should be framed as such, says the author .
 The aim of definitional accuracy is to create a specific mindset, which ensures that the collaborators know that their time is short and that there will be consequences for their actions .
 The information war waged by Russia will fail if individuals become acquainted with the correct terminology and can ascribe them accordingly .
 incorrect definitions have undermined the normative and moral treatment of the reality in Donbas. Building upon the third point, incorrect definitions ultimately undermined the moral Treatment of the real world .
 Russian leaders are seen as corrupt and war-like, but their response to their unlawful actions has been less than adequate . As it stands, even though Russian leaders have been criticized, the response has not been adequate .
 This creates a dampening effect on the minds of not only onlookers, but also those living in Ukraine and Donbas in particular .
 Some commentators are of the view that the Ukrainian Government ‘gave up’ on Crimea because it saw no incentive to do otherwise .
 The situation in Donbas is not seen as serious as the conflict in Syria . Russia’s focus on Syria is also seen as a focus elsewhere, with Russia's focus elsewhere .
 The Russian occupation in Donbas was a temporary de facto win in terms of the Russian occupation . The conflict began in the early 1990s .
 This is based on the fact that the conflict was not viewed as it should have been because of the promulgation of alternative definitions creating alternative facts . This is the fact the conflict wasn't viewed as a conflict as it shouldn't have been .
 Different standards and expectations clashed, causing the conflict to worsen . As a result, divisions were created at all levels, where different standards were created .
 The normative and moral treatment of the situation in Donbas must be recalibrated in order to prevent such future actions in other border states .
 incorrect definitions ascribed to the conflict in Donbas will negatively affect the way the international community responds to similar conflicts in the future . Finally, incorrect definitions will negatively impact the way in which the world responds to such conflicts .
 The Russian occupation of Georgia led to the conflict in Ukraine . This was the case with the woeful response to the Russian occupation.
 The conflict was inaccurately framed, while policy responses were misguided . Reports from international broadcasters and organizations used distorted definitions .
General misunderstanding surrounding the conflict in Donbas contributed to a lacklustre response from certain national governments around the world .
 A lack of a common, accurate understanding will even impede diplomatic efforts to find a solution . It is inevitable, with differing views based on differing definitions, it is inevitable .
 Another explanation could be that any response would have led to direct conflict with Russia, for which there was no appetite .
 An improper attribution cannot invoke an appropriate response to a violation of international law . The central point is that an improper attribution can't invoke anappropriate response to an international law.
 ICC may not have had to conduct an additional attribution process. If accurate definitions had been ascribed ab initio, the ICC may have to conduct a further attribution process .
 Russian foreign policy has been able to violate international law with impunity because the seeds of doubt had been planted . Russian foreign policies have been allowed to violate the laws with impunity .
 Embedded within the alternative facts concerning Donbas, are the seeds of definitional accuracies, which are wreaking havoc on a united and coherent solution to the conflict’s end .
 The labels “rebels’, “separatists” and “Russian-backed separatists’ are incompatible with the reality of the conflict in Donbas .
In 2016, attri103 Bershidsky 2016 will be the first year in the history of the world's most successful international law . It will also be the second year in a row that the law has been applied to the United States .
 The situation must be deemed to be an IAC, with the involvement of Russian regular and irregular troops aided by local collaborators . The situation is considered to be a IAC .
 The collaborators’ characterization of fighting for their own cause is a fallacy. What is true is that they are fighting to support Russian aggression on the sovereign territory of another state .
 The collaborators are emissaries of the Russian Federation . They are fighting to preserve a zone of pro-Russian influence through the use of force .
 The conflict cannot be classified as an NIAC for the simple fact that Russia exercises effective or even overall control over its collaborators . As such, the conflict cannot been classified as a NIAC .
In fact, the collaborators are embedded with Russian military personnel, jointly and collectively, engaging in the active destabilization of Ukraine . In fact, they're embedded with Russia's military personnel .
 To create a positive narrative, inaccurate labels have been ascribed to create an ‘idealistic’ picture of the conflict and its participants .
 The sources of these inaccurate characterizations are those who flagrantly violate international law and norms . The sources are people who violate international laws and norms.
 The labels are then incorporated into the broadcasts, reports and findings of international media and other organizations . These labels are later absorbed by the public and diplomats . They are then integrated into the broadcast, reports, and other reports .
 The openness of social media further deepens the problem in which authority no longer means accuracy in the world of information .
As a result, divisive opinions are formed over the conflict, which in turn produce a distorted and counterproductive view of the real conflict . As a result.
 The role of the media is now more than ever, paramount in combatting alternative facts buoyed by alternative definitions . "The media is the most important in combating alternative facts," says the author .
 incorrect labels undermine the realities of the conflict, authors say . This is because incorrect labels contribute to the legitimization of aggressors’ actions, they say . They say .
 incorrect definitions will negatively affect the manner of response to similar conflicts in the future, according to experts .
International law is based on well-defined principles and norms that maintain the rule of law . International law is not based on a single law, but a single principle .
 If principles and standards are distorted, the rule of law will be further weakened, says the author . "If these principles are distorted," he says .
 This has been evident from Russia’s actions around its borders for decades and decades . This is not the first time this has been seen in Russia .
Violators of international law are duly held responsible in the courts of law and public opinion . Therefore, definitional accuracies will ensure that conflicts are precisely described, such that violators of International law are held responsible .
European Parliament Ukraine and the Minsk II agreement. Accessed 7 April 2017 European Parliament .
 Jennings R, Watts A Oppenheim’s International Law, 3rd edn. Accessed 23 April 2017.
 Killingsworth M, Sussex M, Pakulski J Violence and the State. Accessed 2 April 2017 .
 Rodrigues L, Dubovyk V Perceptions of NATO and the New Strategic Concept .
 Lessons to be learned from the role of the International Community and the Media during the Rwandan Genocide and the Conflict in Former Yugoslavia .
 UN Security Council Security Council Briefed on Fast-Breaking Developments in Ukraine . Political Official Warns Failure to Secure Russian-Ukrainian Border Obstructing Peace .