 Russian President Vladimir Putin said in a February 23 speech that a "special military operation" would begin in Ukraine . The 2014 annexation of Crimea is the subject of a special military operation .
 Explosions and outbreaks of fighting have since been reported across the country .
 The Soviet Union was part of the Soviet Union until 1991 . Since then it has been a less-than-perfect democracy with a very weak economy and foreign policy .
 President Viktor Yanukovych rejected a deal for greater integration with the European Union in November 2013, sparking mass protests . Yanukovych attempted to put down violently .
 Russia backed Yanukovych in the crisis, while the U.S. and Europe supported the protesters . The United States and Europe backed the protesters.
In February, anti-government protests toppled the government and ran Yanukovych out of the country . In February, the government was forced to step down from the government .
 Russia, trying to salvage its lost influence in Ukraine, invaded and annexed Crimea the next month . Russia has annexed Crimea and annexed the Crimea next month.
 In April, pro-Russia separatist rebels began seizing territory in eastern Ukraine . The rebels have been fighting in Ukraine since April .
 Fighting between the rebels and the Ukrainian military intensified in August . In August, the Russian army overtly invaded eastern Ukraine to support the rebels .
 This has all brought the relationship between Russia and the West to its lowest point since the Cold War . The relationship between the West and Russia is now at the lowest point in the world's history .
 Sanctions are pushing the Russian economy to the brink of recession . More than 2,500 Ukrainians have been killed in the past year .
 A lot of this comes down to Ukraine's centuries-long history of Russian domination . The country has a long history of Russia's domination .
 Ukraine has been divided more or less evenly between Ukrainians who see Ukraine as part of Europe and those who see it as intrinsically linked to Russia . The country has been split more or more than half of its population .
 An internal political crisis over that disagreement may have been inevitable . The political dispute may have led to an internal crisis .
 Putin is pushing an imperial-revival, nationalist worldview that sees Ukraine as part of greater Russia . In Russia, he is pushing a nationalist worldview, and as the victim of ever-encroaching Western hostility .
 It remains unclear whether Russian forces will try to annex parts of eastern Ukraine as well . How the fighting there will end, and what this means for the future of Ukraine, remains unclear .
 That distinction actually turns out to be pretty important for understanding the current crisis .
 Ukraine has a very long history of being subjugated by outside powers, and a very short history of national independence . Ukraine has also had a veryShort history of independence .
 In other words, it may have been called "the"" because it was considered more of a geographic region than an independent country . It was considered a region defined by its in-between-ness .
 Ukraine was independent from 1991 to 1991 . It was the last time the country was independent, before 1991 .
 There were a few years right after World War I, and before that a short time in the 1600s .
 The country has been under partial or total Russian rule for centuries . One in six Ukrainians is actually an ethnic Russian, one in three speaks Russian as their native language . Much of the country's media is in Russian .
 Crimea is considered by most of the world to be a region of Ukraine that's under hostile Russian occupation . Ukraine is considered to be one of the most hostile regions in the world .
 Russia considers it a rightful and historical region of Russia that it helped to liberate in March . The region was liberated by Russia in March, and is considered a historical region .
Geographically, it is a peninsula in the Black Sea with a location so strategically important that it has been fought over for centuries . Geographically, the peninsula is in a strategically important location .
 Crimea spent a very long time before 1991 as part of the Soviet Union and the Russian Empire . Most of its citizens are Russians themselves .
 In late February, a few days after Ukraine's pro-Moscow president was ousted from power, strange bands of armed gunmen began seizing government buildings .
 Some Crimeans held rallies to show support for the ousted president and to call to secede from Ukraine and re-join Russia . Many Crimeans also held rallies in support of Ukraine's ousted president .
 The bands of gunmen grew until it became obvious they were Russian military forces . They forcefully but bloodlessly brought the peninsula under military occupation .
 On March 16, Crimeans voted overwhelmingly for their region to become a part of Russia . The region will be part of the Russian Federation .
 Crimea has effectively become part of Russia. Still, legitimate or not, Crimea has been part of the Russian state .
 The United States and European Union have imposed economic sanctions on Russia to punish Moscow . There is no sign that Crimea will return to Ukraine .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine began in April 2014 with low-level fighting between the Ukrainian military and Russian-backed separatist rebels . Some towns in predominantly Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine have been seized .
 It has since escalated to outright-if-undeclared war between Russia and Ukraine . It has now escalated to an outright-If-unded war between the two countries .
 Separatist rebels began popping up in eastern Ukraine shortly after Russia had annexed Crimea . The supposed Crimean separatists actually turned out to be unmarked Russian special forces .
Donbas seized towns like Sloviansk and Donetsk, in the eastern region known as Donbas . It was ostensibly in outrage against the protests that had toppled Ukraine's pro-Russia President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The rebels likely do have some organic, local support. That feeling of disenfranchisement among eastern Ukrainians is real, and that feeling is real .
 Igor "Strelkov"" Girkin is a Russian citizen and military veteran who retired from Russia's internal security services just weeks before he began leading the rebels . The rebels are widely thought to include unmarked Russian special forces .
 Thousands of Russian troops massed on the border just across from the rebellion .
 Putin had not-so-subtly hinted that he would blame the Ukrainian government for any deaths and invade to protect the Russian-speaking citizens of eastern Ukraine . He implicitly considers to be more Russian than Ukrainian .
 Things got bad in early July, when the Ukrainian government launched an offensive to push out the rebels .
 In mid-August Russia escalated from covertly supporting the rebels to overtly invading with Russian military troops . Ukraine redoubled its offensive, the rebels looked on the verge of getting overrun .
 The Russian military is one of the largest in the world and is pushing back the Ukrainian forces fairly quickly . The Ukrainian forces have been pushed back by the Russian military .
 It is not clear whether Putin even has a strategy at all. It is unclear whether they plan to occupy and annex eastern Ukraine as they did .
 The U.S. and Europe have no plan to intervene with Russia . Putting Western troops into direct combat with Russian troops could make the risk of World War Three too great .
 Russian soldiers, tanks, and self-propelled artillery have been crossing the border since mid-August . President Vladimir Putin insists that Russia is not invading eastern Ukraine .
 Putin is trying to overturn to the rebels' losses because he wants something from Ukraine on the surface . The Russian invasion looks like it is meant to bolster the pro-Russia rebels in eastern Ukraine .
 In this thinking, Russian troops are there to keep the rebels from being entirely overrun . In the thinking, Russia is there to stop the rebels being overrun .
 Putin has been backing the rebels for months and fomenting violence in eastern Ukraine . Putin has backed the rebels in Ukraine for months .
 Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin wants to maintain a perpetual separatist crisis in Ukraine . He's doing this either because he wants to keep it from crossing him, or because he wanted to give himself an excuse to invade on the premise of saving eastern Ukrainians .
 Another possibility is that he wants to force some concession from the Ukrainian government and/or from the West . He also wants some concessions from the Ukraine government .
 Putin is after some immediate strategic goal, and will stop once he feels he's achieved it, he says . In any case, the thinking here is that Putin will stop after he has achieved it .
 Putin was sucked into an irrational invasion he didn't want by his own rhetoric and propaganda . Since taking power in 2000, Putin governed through an implicit deal with the Russian people .
 Putin shifted strategies after the economy slowed and some Russians protested his sham reelection in 2012 . He focused on stirring up old-school anti-Western paranoia and imperial-style Russian nationalism .
 Putin's state media spun up a narrative that the Ukrainian protests were an American conspiracy to isolate Russia . The new Ukrainian government is run by secret Nazis bent on expansion, he says .
 Sponsoring the rebels and saving Ukraine became a matter of national pride, of asserting Russia's defiance of the West . Sponsoring Ukraine is really part of Russia's national pride .
 Putin's slouching approval rating skyrocketed when he annexed Crimea in March . Putin's approval rating soared when he invaded and annexed Crimea .
 Putin has played up the nationalist cause in eastern Ukraine, the heroism of the rebels, his own heroism in backing them, and the threat of Ukraine's fascist government .
 Were he to sit idly by while the rebels were defeated, it would show that his rhetoric was a lie and leave him without the nationalist cause on which he now bases his political legitimacy .
 Putin is not crazy, but he may have created a crisis with an internal momentum so great that it has broken beyond his control .
 Russia seized Crimea by force from Ukraine this March was hostile and extremely illegal . There is no doubt about this, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The more abstract question of whether Crimea is deep down Russian or Ukrainian is much less clear . But the more abstract questions are still not clear .
 There are three ways to think about this question, and they all contradict . There are four ways to answer the question, but all contradict.
 Probably Ukraine Crimea has technically been part of Ukraine since 1954, when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev transferred it from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Socialist Republic .
 The reasons for this are esoteric and it didn't actually do much since both "republics" were part of the Soviet Union . The reasons are esoteric.
In 1991, when the Soviet Union broke up, everyone expected Moscow to demand Crimea back . In 1991, Moscow was expected to demand the Crimea back.
 A slight majority of Crimeans voted for independence from Russia . Russia promised to honor and respect this when Crimea formally joined Ukraine .
 In February, some Crimeans held pro-Russia rallies . It was not shocking when, in February, the rallies were held .
 Some Crimeans have been holding pro-Moscow rallies calling to rejoin Russia . It's not clear since the crisis began, some Crimeans are calling for Russia to return .
 In mid-February, a poll found that 41 percent of Crimeans wanted Russia to become part of Russia .
 Crimea's March referendum on leaving Ukraine for Russia garnered 97 percent support . It occurred in a rush, without international monitors, and under Russian military occupation .
 Had the referendum been held in a transparent and legal manner, it's not clear which way the vote would have gone . It is not clear how the referendum would have been held .
 Yanukovych rejected a deal for greater integration with the European Union, taking a $15 billion bailout from Russia instead . The first, surface reason for the protests was that President Yanukovych had rejected the deal .
 Lots of Ukrainians had wanted the EU deal, partly because they thought it would help Ukraine's deeply troubled economy . They also saw closer ties with Europe as culturally and politically desirable .
 Ukrainians saw Yanukovych as corrupt and autocratic and as a stooge of Russia . The second, deeper reason for the protests was that many Ukrainians saw him as corrupt .
 Many Ukrainians felt he had sold out their country to Moscow . So his decision to reject the EU deal felt, to many Ukrainians, like he'd sold out his country to Russia .
 Yanukovych tried to break up the protests, first by sending in the dreaded "berkut" internal security forces to crack down . He also passed a series of laws that severely restricted Ukrainians' basic rights of speech and assembly .
 In February, the parliament turned against Yanukovych, first voting to remove lots of his powers and end the crackdown . Then voting to vote to remove him outright, then voting to oust him outright .
 Many Ukrainians wanted the Russia bailout and wanted Yanukovych to stay . Not all Ukrainians supported the protests or their agenda .
 Euromaidan also included a number of far-right ultra-nationalist groups, some of whom have been violent . Some of the groups have also been violent.
 Some Ukrainians see the protests as effectively disenfranchising Russian-speaking Ukrainians . This is why the Russian government and some Ukrainians, particularly in the more Russian- speaking east, see them as disenfranchising .
 He was ousted by popular protests and his own parliament in February 2014 . But he was ousted from his parliament by protests and the government .
 The protests succeeded in blocking him from taking office, but he ran again in 2010 . He appeared to win legitimately .
 Yanukovych alienated many Ukrainians, including his supporters, with his mishandling of the economy and especially his crackdowns on the Euromaidan protests . He alienated many of his supporters with his handling of his economy and the crackdowns .
 Ukrainians were happy to see him go, but others saw his ouster as illegitimate and undemocratic .
 This is particularly true in Ukraine's Russian-speaking east and in the heavily Russian region of Crimea . This is especially true in the region of Ukraine's Russia-speaking west .
 Since declaring independence in 1991, Ukraine has been divided, and this crisis is an extension of that . Since then, the crisis has been an extension to that .
 About two-thirds of Ukrainians speak Ukrainian as their native language . About a third are native Russian-speakers, mostly in the east .
 Language is really just a shorthand for describing a much more complicated political and ideological division .
 Ukrainians have voted in national elections. This all becomes clearer if we look at how Ukrainians voted in the elections .
 Ukraine-map-composite People in the west of Ukraine tend to regard Russia with suspicion . They see themselves as European, and want to break away from Russia's orbit .
 In every election, this half of the country has voted overwhelmingly for pro-European political candidates . In all elections, the majority of voters have voted for pro European political candidates.
 The eastern half of Ukraine, on the other hand, has voted overwhelmingly in favor of political candidates who are more sympathetic to Russia, including Yanukovych, who is from the east .
 Russia and Russia are more historically linked than the other two countries . They tend to look more fondly on Russia and see their two countries as more Historically linked .
There are still lots of statues of Soviet founder Vladimir Lenin in the east . There are still many statues of the Soviet founder in the East .
 Ukrainians never really resolved the national identity crisis between Russia-facing east and pro-European west that was sparked by 1991 independence from the Soviet Union .
 The current crisis is, in many ways, an extension and perhaps culmination of that internal dispute about their country's identity . The crisis is an extension to that internal and external dispute about its identity .
 It is also the culmination of some Russians' belief that eastern Ukraine — or even all of Ukraine — is not actually a separate country .
 The east and west of Ukraine disagree so fundamentally about what sort of country they want to have, about what it means to be Ukrainian . It may have been quite likely that a big, internal political battle may be quite likely .
 The EU trade deal that sparked all this only had about 43 percent support, mostly in the west . Another 31 percent of Ukrainians said they wanted a trade deal with the Russia-led Customs Union instead .
 When Yanukovych rejected the EU deal, many western Ukrainians saw it as a betrayal . But eastern Ukrainians may have regarded a different decision the same way .
 Some Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the country's east and south have not reconciled themselves to being citizens of Ukraine over Russia .
 Ideas that their region should be absorbed into Russia are very much alive . The idea is alive, and it's not very much dead .
 Yanukovych was removed from power by protesters, mostly in the west, but this has not resolved the nation's deeper identity crisis .
All it did was shift power from pro-Russian, eastern-based political party to a pro-European, western-based party . All it did is shift power to a Pro-European political party .
Pro-Russian protesters in Crimea are upset by the new government . They're upset by new government, including in Crimea .
 The Kremlin quietly backed those protests, including by sending in unmarked Russian troops . The Russian troops took over government buildings in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine .
 In Crimea, Crimea, that ended with a Russian military occupation and annexation . In Ukraine, Crimea was annexed by the Russian government .
 In eastern Ukraine, it's led to ongoing fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian security forces . In August, the Russian military overtly invaded Ukraine, and in August, it was overtly invading .
 Ukraine's present-day borders are very new and that its historical ties to Russia are very old . You have to remember that Ukraine's current borders arevery new .
 The distinction between Ukraine and Russia is a bit blurrier than the distinction between France and Germany .
 Russian leader Catherine the Great began a process of "Russifying" Ukraine in the 1700s . The process continued right up through the 1950s .
 Russian troops are stationed in the area of Ukraine . This meant shipping in ethnic Russians, imposing laws that required schools to teach the Russian rather than Ukrainian language .
 At some points in the 1800s, the Ukrainian language was banned outright . The language was also banned outright.
 In the 1930s, Soviet leader Josef Stalin caused a famine in Ukraine that killed several million Ukrainians, mostly in the east .
 In the 1940s, Stalin forcibly relocated the ethnic Tatars who dominated Crimea's population, replacing them with Russians as well .
 Russia has vast coal, iron, and some of the most fertile farmland on earth . For most of this process, Russia focused overwhelmingly on the east, which has vast Coal and iron .
 Ukraine's linguistic dividing line matches up almost perfectly with the line between its farmland in the east and forestland in the west . Ukraine's language dividing line is almost perfectly similar to that of the east .
 The effect of all this history is that lots of Ukrainians, very understandably, despise Russia and want nothing to do with it . Many Ukrainians want nothing.
 Ukrainians have substantial connections to Russia, and do not want to break away so fully as does the west . But there's also a significant proportion of Ukrainians whose families have substantial ties to Russia .
 This national identity crisis has been centuries in the making, and it is a big issue today . The identity crisis is a major issue today, says David Cameron .
 Ukraine has a lot of native Russian-speakers and ethnic Russians . Many voted for Yanukovych in 2010 and did not support the Euromaidan protests that led to his removal .
 Russian leaders might be myopically ignoring the very valid reasons that Yanukovych was ousted, but they do mean it .
 Russians have long felt a special historical connection to Ukraine . Ukraine plays a central role in Russian national mythology .
 Tsarist leaders cultivated the idea that Russia's cultural roots go back to ancient Greeks who settled on the Crimean peninsula in modern-day Ukraine .
 Russia's first iteration as a great empire had its capital in present-day Ukraine . While this is mostly made-up, it is true that Russia had its first iteration of its great empire .
 The idea of a special, ancient connection to Ukraine is especially important for Russian nationalists, who see it as a vital and eternal component of the greater Russian empire .
 Russian nationalism has seen a dramatic rise in the last few years, cultivated by Vladimir Putin . Putin has used this to distract Russians from their sinking economy and his tightening authoritarianism .
 A special bond with Ukraine, and perhaps even even the reacquisition of Ukraine, is in the Russian nationalist view . It is not just about historic links but about reacquiring Russia's rightful place as a great power .
 It is also about righting the injustices of the Soviet Union's collapse . Many Russians see Russian territory and many Russians under the control of an unworthy Ukrainian government .
 Russia's meddling has been about preventing Ukraine from breaking away from Russian influence . Moscow sees as an ever-encroaching Western conspiracy to encircle Russia with hostile governments .
 Russia may well have seen this crisis as a make-or-break moment for its special connection to Ukraine . Russia wanted to intervene lest it lose Ukraine permanently .
 Putin's overheated nationalist rhetoric has forced him to escalate far beyond what he probably wanted . Since then, his state media's insistence that the Ukrainian government is a US-backed Nazi regime has forced Putin to escalate .
 President Vladimir Putin's decision to annex the Ukrainian region of Crimea is to support separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine . There are three different ways to think about the decision to invade Ukraine .
 In March 2014, he used these ideas as justification for annexing Crimea, which sent his popularity skyrocketing .
 Putin has also been cracking down severely on dissent within Russia, something it's easier to get away with while the world is distracted by Ukraine . Since the crisis began, Putin is cracking down on dissent in Russia .
 Russia's far-right is more powerful than ever, with the economy on the verge of sanctions-imposed recession . Putin is so reliant on maintaining the nationalist fervor that he invaded eastern Ukraine even though this will clearly make things worse for him .
 Putin likely saw a chance to quietly seize Crimea on the pretense of protecting it from Ukraine's chaos and serving the wishes of Crimeans to rejoin Russia .
 The United States and Europe are doing a lot to punish Putin for annexing Crimea and invading eastern Ukraine . The U.S. and Europe is doing a much more to punish Russia for its actions .
 Putin is not doing anything that will physically force him to turn back his tanks, or return Crimea to Ukraine . If he wants to keep invading Ukraine, despite those punishments, he can and will . But they are not doing something that will physical force Putin to return Crimea .
 The United States and Europe are punishing Russia by imposing several rounds of very tough economic sanctions . The sanctions are meant as punishment and to deter Russia from invading further .
 The sanctions initially targeted Putin and his inner political circle . They have since broadened to include the larger Russian economy, which was at the edge of a recession .
 The sanctions are working in that they're hurting the Kremlin and the larger Russian economy . It's possible that they have kept Putin from escalating even further than they would have otherwise . But they have definitely not gotten him to back down or withdraw from Crimea .
 The burden of imposing these sanctions falls on the European Union, which is heavily reliant on Russian natural gas exports . The European Union will hurt its own economy by sanctioning Russia .
 Angela Merkel has been supporting broad economic sanctions since Russian-backed rebels shot down Malaysian Airlines flight 17 in July . Russian troops overtly invaded in August .
 The United States and Europe are also isolating Russia diplomatically, for example . The U.S. is booting Russia from the Group of Eight, an annual conference of the world's leading industrialized nations .
 NATO has suspended all practical cooperation with the Russian military . The suspension comes after a series of high-profile incidents .
 This has not been enough to turn back Russian troops, and it probably won't succeed in getting Crimea back for Ukraine . Still, this has not be enough to turned back Russian forces, and this has been enough .
 The U.S. and Europe have made clear that they do not see any sort of military response as an option . Russia has one of the world's largest armies and thousands of nuclear warheads .
 The U.S. and Europe have no mutual defense treaty with Ukraine . The Ukrainian military is largely on its own .
 The U.S. and Europe can make a big show of defense of other eastern European countries along Russia's borders . The United States, Europe can do is make a show of committing to the defense of those countries, as well .
 The Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are concerned that they could be next . Western European countries are publicly committed by treaty to defending them .
 The Cold War was a global struggle for hegemony between two, roughly co-equal powers .
 Europe divided Europe between west and east and then divided much of the world . It divided Europe into Europe between West and East .
 It included bloody proxy wars on just about every continent, and raised a very serious risk of global thermonuclear war . The threat of a nuclear war is a serious risk to the world, according to experts .
 The U.S. is many times more powerful and influential than Russia . Neither America nor the Western world nor democracy itself are at any real risk .
Almost the entire world opposes Russia's annexation of Crimea . More to the point, almost the whole world opposes it .
 President Obama has described Russia's actions as the behavior of a weak country . President Obama described Russia as a weak nation .
 Russia is clearly still strong enough to annex neighboring territory . He is broadly correct, but he is still not clear how far away from annexing neighboring territory.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is acting as if his country is in geopolitical competition with the West . Putin is seen as a leader of Russia in the West.
 Putin clearly wants to reclaim some of Russia's past greatness . In practice has meant asserting Russian power and positioning himself as a legitimate competitor to the Western world .
 The competition is limited to former Soviet republics and Syria . Still, this competition is only limited to ex-Soviet republics, Syria .
 The US-Russia reset was an effort first championed by then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in 2009 . Russia had deteriorated during the Bush administration .
 The idea of the reset was that the U.S. and Russia might not like one another very much . The two countries have enough shared interests that they're both better off if they cooperate .
 Russia supported US-led efforts to sanction Iran over its nuclear program . The two countries cooperated on the Afghanistan War .
 The reset began collapsing in 2012 with disagreements over the Syria conflict, as the two countries are backing very different sides .
 Both American and Russian domestic politics are becoming less predisposed to good relations, partly because of rising nationalism in Russia . American concern about Russian human rights abuses, particularly against LGBT people .
 The U.S. and Russia just don't have as many shared interests anymore, says CNN's John Sutter . The United States and Russia have no shared interests now, he says .
 The reset became unofficially dead in March 2014, when the U.S. imposed some tough economic sanctions against Russia over its annexation of Crimea .
 It's a user-generated, meme-based series of political cartoons that focus on international relations .
 They began in 2009 on a German Web forum and have become popular across Europe . They have no defined authors or home; anyone can make one .
 Polandball's jokey simplicity, its nerdy love of history, and its focus on current affairs have made it well suited for the Ukraine crisis . Polandball has made the form well suited to the Ukrainian crisis .
 What is disputed is whether Putin looked at this and calculated that he could get away with annexing Crimea .
 The strongest data point in favor of this case is Obama's threat to launch air strikes against Syria in September 2013 . It was ultimately held back by political opposition and a Russia-brokered deal to disarm Syria's chemical weapons .
 The strongest data point against this case is that the U.S. is objectively much stronger than Russia . Putin would not be so paranoid about ever-encroaching American influence if he thought the United States were weak .
 Former U.S. Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul has suggested some truth to both of these arguments . McFaul is a supporter of the Obama administration in Russia .
 McFaul also thinks that Putin believes that President Obama is seeking to foment revolution around the world against regimes that are unfriendly to the U.S. But McFaul believes that Putin also believes that Obama is trying to change the world .
 Putin has repeatedly justified Russia's annexation of Crimea by comparing it to Kosovo's 2008 independence from Serbia .
 In 1999, Yugoslavia fought a civil war in the now-gone southeastern European nation of Yugoslavia . The war ended in 1999, when Yugoslavia was part of the European Union .
 It was between the Serbian government and ethnic-minority rebels in the autonomous region of Kosovo .
 The Serbian forces committed major abuses, including violence against civilians . NATO launched air strikes against the Serbs to make them withdraw .
 Kosovo and Serbia tried for nine years to reconcile, but in 2008 Kosovo declared independence . The West supported and Russia opposed as illegitimate, but Kosovo declared its independence .
 Putin's comparison is not really valid for several reasons that you can read here .
 He sees Russia as in conflict with a hostile and untrustworthy West . But he believes Western countries hold Russia to an unfair double standard . There is a conspiracy to remove any government that is friendly to Moscow, he says .
 Ukraine's pro-Western government might not be very inclined to cooperate with Moscow . The reason Moscow wants this is that in the current system, Ukraine's current system is very different .
 In a federal Ukrainian system, regional governments will have much more autonomy and power . Moscow can get what it wants by calling up pro-Russian regional governors in Ukraine's pro- Russian east .
 These eastern regions have lots of important natural resources, such as coal . The eastern regions are also rich in natural resources .
 Russia has factories that produce essential military equipment for Russia . They also have factories that make essential military gear for the country .
 Russia can count on keeping Ukraine pro-Russian by forcing Ukraine to adopt a federal system . Russia may well be enough to appease Moscow .
 This could ultimately worsen Ukraine's already-severe political divide between west and east . It could allow pro-Russia and pro-Europe socio-political factions to move even further apart rather than coming together .
 Russia had recently supplied the rebels with a sophisticated, long-range surface-to-air missile system known as Buk or SA-11 .
 The rebels had shot down two other high-flying airplanes — both Ukrainian military planes — in the previous week . The rebels have shot down three other planes in the past week .
 It appears most likely that the rebels misidentified flight 17 as a military craft and shot it down . The rebels are believed to have shot down the flight 17 .
 The conflict had already been worsening, as Ukraine had recently retaken several rebel-held towns . Russia had been supplying weapons to Ukrainian rebels .
 The shoot-down led the U.S. and Europe to impose even tougher sanctions on Russia . It led the Ukrainian military to accelerate its campaign to finally defeat the rebels .
 Russia responded in mid-August by overtly invading in support of the rebels . When it looked like the rebels would be overrun, Russia responded by invading .