 Russia’s Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and City of Sevastopol made the decision to start its invasion of Ukraine from the peninsula quite logical . The extensive presence in Crimea of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, as well as a large percentage of the population loyal
 The apparent alert of a probable Russian intervention to Crimea appeared on February 20, 2014 . The alert was posted on March 1, 2014.
 The Speaker of the Supreme Council of Crimea, Vladimir Konstantinov, was in Moscow on the same day . He was in Russia when he was in Crimea .
 He announced the possibility of secession of Crimea from Ukraine . He welcomed Moscow's intervention into Ukraine’s internal affairs .
 Three days later, on February 23, pro-Russian separatists started demonstrations in Crimea . Three days earlier, on Feb. 23, in Crimea, the pro- Russian separatists started protests .
Pro-Ukrainian demonstrators in the streets of Simferopol, Ukraine, clash with pro-Ukraine demonstrators .
 Russian special forces seized Crimean government buildings in Simferopol, Crimea on February 27 .
 Crimean lawmakers have appointed new Crimean leadership and voted to hold a referendum on independence from Ukraine . Russian troops seized governmental buildings, objects of critical infrastructure, and besieged Ukraine’s military facilities .
 On March 1st, the President Putin got authorization form Russian parliament to use force against Ukraine ‘to protect Russian interests’ On March 16, Russia conducted a direct referendum in Crimea where voters had a choice between joining Russia or obtaining independence from Ukraine .
 Russia and its local separatists were spreading the ideas of a “fascist coup’s taking place in Kyiv . They trumpeted the necessity to protect the Russian-speaking population from farright Ukrainian radicalism to justify Russia's military intervention in Crimea .
 The process of the referendum and its results were quite controversial, as it showed a significant percentage of votes in favor of Russia . The results suggest that the referendum was not conducted in a free and fair manner .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin signed the “treaty of accession’s” formalizing incorporation into the Russian Federation of Crimea as a republic . The city of Sevastopol is now a federal district .
 Much of the International community strongly condemned Russia’s occupational actions . Russia's occupational actions have been condemned by the international community .
 The UN General Assembly adopted the resolution, declaring the Russian-backed referendum in Crimea as illegal and affirming Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 Russian armed formations stormed Ukrainian military bases and seized Ukrainian Navy vessels deployed in the Crimean Peninsula . Eventually, Russian forces seized Ukrainian navy vessels deployed on Crimean Peninsula.
 Russia's Chief of Defense announced that the Russian armed forces succeeded to subjugate all Ukrainian military facilities in Crimea . On March 26, Russia’s chief of Defense said that the military had succeeded to take over the Crimea area .
 Russia’s invasion of Donbas triggered waves of pro-Russian protests in the eastern and southeastern regions of Ukraine . Yanukovych's removal from the Presidential Office and his retreat to Russia sparked waves of protests .
 Most of the protesters were local Ukrainians, but there is evidence of the presence of Russian citizens participating in the demonstrations as instigators and agitators .
 Russia used the rhetoric of Novorossiya to justify the invasion, establish separatist enclaves, and create an "alternative political geography" for eastern and southeastern Ukraine . Russia used its rhetoric to justify its invasion, create an “alternativePolitical geography’
 The strategy included the consolidation of massive troops on Ukraine’s borders, recruiting and dispatching armed combatants and weaponry to eastern Ukraine . The strategy includes the use of special forces and mercenaries to seize government buildings and suppress pro-Ukrainian opposition .
 During March and April of 2014 anti-Ukrainian protesters and armed separatists took over government buildings in major cities in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 In April 2014, the pro-Russian separatists proclaimed the creation of the People’s Republic of Donetsk . The People's Republic of Luhansk and Novorossiya are a confederated Union of these two People's republics .
 In response to the insurgency in Donetsk and Luhansk regions, Ukraine’s government launched an “anti-terrorist operation” aimed at regaining government control over occupied territories .
 The operation was conducted by the Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions that became a part of Ukraine's National Guard .
 The Russian Federation was supplying the armed insurgency in eastern Ukraine with mechanized equipment, armored vehicles, tanks, artillery, air-defense assets, and other advanced munitions .
 The 53rd Russian Kursk Anti-aircraft Brigade was operated by a professional Russian military crew . Ukraine's military gained some success in pushing Russian proxies out of Ukraine’s territory .
 Russia launched an offensive operation that subsequently changed the character of conflict by transferring it into full-scale inter-state warfare .
 The operation was accompanied by massive cross-border artillery shelling of Ukraine's army positions from Russia’s territory . The operation.
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine with its regular troops cost Ukraine’s government forces severe losses . DPR and LPR expanded their control over Donbas territory .
 The new government sought to use diplomacy to stop the violence in Donbas . Major defeats of Ukrainian forces where Russian regular troops reportedly were involved included the battles for Ilovaisk, Donetsk Airport, and Debaltseve .
 Normandy Four has participated in Ukraine’s peace-seeking processes . The group includes German, French, Ukrainian, and Russian political stakeholders .
 The first package of Minsk agreements was signed by the TCG in September 2014 . The TCG signed the first package in September.
 The documents outlined de-escalation measures, including a bilateral ceasefire, area demilitarization, and their monitoring and verification by an OSCE Special Monitoring Mission . The documents include withdrawal of illegal armed formations and military equipment.
 The Minsk Protocol failed to achieve a diplomatic resolution of the conflict . However, the Minsk protocol failed to reach a diplomatic solution .
 Normandy Four states met in Minsk in February 2015 to negotiate another solution to mitigate the conflict . In February 2015 the leaders of the Normandy four states met to negotiate a new solution to the conflict.
After 16 hours of talks, they agreed on a new package of measures known as Minsk-II . This package was a more detailed version of the previous agreements . However, many of the measures remain unfulfilled to date .
 Normandy-Four format meetings failed to produce significant results in conflict resolution . In 2015 and 2016, two additional Normandy- four format meetings didn't produce significant result in conflict resolutions .
 In 2019, newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyi attempted to renovate the Normandy-Four meetings to resolve the Donbas conflict .
 French President Emmanuel Macron hosted German, Ukrainian, and Russian leaders to negotiate further steps to resolve the war in Donbas . The French President hosted German and Ukrainian leaders in December .
 This meeting facilitated some success in hostage exchange, establishment of new disengagement areas, and implementations of humanitarian and demining programs . The meeting was held in London .
 At the time of February 2020, the number of conflict-related causalities in Donbas ranges between 41,000 and 44,000 .
 This force is under the command of the 8th Army headquarters of Southern Military District of the Russian Armed Forces . The force is also under the control of the 7th Army Headquarters of the Russia's Russian Armed forces .
 The latter uses occupied Ukrainian territories as a training ground to test Russian military equipment and personnel . The Russian military uses occupied Ukraine as a testing ground for its military equipment .
 Despite Russia's denial of its involvement in the Donbas turmoil, the Kremlin’s impact on conflict dynamics, as well as military, political and economic life within the occupied territories is apparent .
 In 1991, Ukraine gained independence and international recognition of its borders . Ukraine embarked on its autonomous path .
 It included closer cooperation with the Euro and Euro-Atlantic community . It included close cooperation with Euro and European community .
 Moscow was constantly trying to influence Kyiv’s domestic and foreign policies . Moscow was always trying to Influence Kyiv's domestic and Foreign policies .
 Ukraine became an influential factor in Russia’s relations with the West . At the same time, Ukraine became a key part of Russia's relations with West .
 Since the 2000s, these relations suffered significant turbulences and possessed apparent features of both confrontation and cooperation . Since the2000s, the relations have suffered major turbulence .
 Russia’s perceived threat to its security, status, or regime, became reflected in its assertive foreign policy choices towards its neighboring states, first in Georgia, then in Ukraine . The consequences of that relations were reflected in Russia's perceived threat.
 Since independence, Ukraine has experienced two pro-European revolutions . The Orange Revolution in 2004 and the Revolution of Dignity in 2014 were both held in 2014 .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine’s eastern provinces created opportunity for Russian aggression . The latter event created an opportunity for Russia's aggression .
 Ukraine's discourse in Russia highlighted multiple sets of reasons why the Kremlin aggressed in Ukraine . Ukraine’s discourse in Russian highlighted multiple set of reasons.
It touches deep historical, cultural, ethnic, and geostrategic importance of Donbas and Crimea for Russia . It touches deep historic, cultural and ethnic importance of the region for Russia. It touchesDeep historical,cultural, and cultural, and ethnic,  importance of
 Russian aggression could serve as primary reasons for Russian aggression . In turn, it generates material, ideational, or regime survival factors, which could be key to Russia's aggression .
 Crimea and Donbas cases were more influential during Kremlin's decision-making with respect to Ukraine . Russia's influence was more influential in Ukraine than in other parts of the country .