 Russia has in the past focused on intensifying its activities in the south, as exemplified by the conflict with Ukraine and Moscow’s armed intervention in the Syrian civil war .
 Sochi is the Black Sea city of Sochi Russia’s ‘summer capital’ and a place where Vladimir Putin hosts world leaders and Kremlin officials .
 The Black Sea is to become a platform from where Russia is able to exert influence on neighboring regions, including the Middle East, the Balkans and the Mediterranean countries . Russia is to be able to influence the Black Sea from where it can exert influence .
 The Kremlin’s accomplishments in the Black Sea region and friendly ties with the Turkish authorities successfully obstructed shipping Caspian hydrocarbon supplies to Europe . The Kremlin's accomplishments were achieved by the Russian government .
 Russia finally regained dominance across the Black Sea it had lost in 1991 . The annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 and increased combat capabilities in the immediate vicinity of the peninsula.
 Russia will permit the Kremlin to hold Kiev in check while extending field reconnaissance activities and firing capabilities to the Black Sea . For Russia, it is vital to exert full control over Crimea .
 Russia felt free to use the Black Sea Fleet as a tool for extending the Kremlin’s sphere of influence across the region . The Black Sea is Russia's most powerful naval fleet .
 Once developed, the Fleet will need to safeguard the Black Sea, preventing all enemy forces from launching an attack on Russian territory, including the Crimean Peninsula .
 The Fleet serves an essential function in carrying out offensive operations . The Fleet performs in the eastern Mediterranean all necessary activities to expand Russia’s combat readiness in the Middle East .
 Russia's expansion in the Black Sea is nurtured by vulnerable NATO's flank located nearby . Russia’s expansion in Black Sea also nurtures NATO’'s flank .
 Bulgaria's unclear policy hinders strengthening of the Alliance’s defensive capabilities . The phenomenon is particularly noticeable at most crucial moments .
 Formally a NATO member state, Turkey is committed to carrying out a policy that remains in line with its own interests . Turkey is a member state of NATO member states .
 Romania is now the Alliance's most reliable member in the Black Sea region, posing the last major hindrance to the Kremlin's further expansion . Romania is the Alliance’s most reliable members in the region .
 The Crimean Peninsula is occupied by Russian servicemen . The country's opportunities are quite faint if to take into account limited access to the sea .
 Russia’s top goal of its southwestern policy was to exert influence on the Black Sea . Russia's top goal was to secure power over the Turkish straits or retain the right of freedom navigation through them .
 Moscow’s dominance over the Black Sea region will bear no fruits if the reservoir remains closed, instead of becoming a springboard for further expansion to the Mediterranean region and the Middle East . Moscow's dominance will not bear any fruits if it remains closed.
 Russia's annexation of Crimea from Ukraine has paved the Kremlin’s way to achieve all its political goals . The annexation has renewed the Soviet concept of the Black Sea as Russia's ‘inner lake’ that permitted to develop the country's southwestern expansion to the Balkans, Middle East
 The Maritime Doctrine of the Russian Federation emphasizes the improvement of naval capabilities through infrastructure development in Crimea and along the coast of Krasnodar .
 The lost cold war eventually turned out to be costly for Moscow, as a result of pushing it to the northeastern corner of the Black Sea .
 Romania and Bulgaria were the first to take decisive steps to diminish the Soviet influence over their republics . They were later followed by two independent states of Ukraine and Georgia that emerged at the Black Sea coast .
 Russia managed to retain a strip of coastline located between Anapa and Sochi . Russia needed to acknowledge Ukraine’s presence in the Kerch Strait, which aggravated their situation .
 Back in 2004, NATO’s coastline extended after Bulgaria and Romania joined the Alliance, coinciding with color revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine .
 The Kremlin needed to reckon that the Black Sea might become ‘NATO’s internal lake’ It prompted Moscow to launch a counter-attack .
 The Russian army was free to officially invade Abkhazia, a strategic region that stretches along the Black Sea coast with the seaport of Sukhumi and an import naval base.
 Moscow could extend its controlled Black Sea shoreline while making a considerable step to cut off the eastern part of the reservoir . Moscow could also extend its control of the Black Sea reservoir .
 The Kremlin sought also to go for expansion towards the west . More importantly, the Kremlin sought to go to the west.
After the fall of Yanukovych’s regime in Ukraine, there emerged a threat to eliminate Russia's limited military presidency in Crimea . The threat could also be to host NATO forces in the peninsula .
 Russia responded promptly using Crimean facilities that dated back to the Yanukovych era . Russia used Crimean facilities to seize power over the peninsula without a single shot .
 Moscow’s authority over Crimea, whose strategic value has been long emphasized, dramatically shifted the military situation in the Black Sea . Moscow's authority over the Crimea has long been emphasized .
 Russia had sent only one combat ship to the fleet between 1991 and 2004 . Tensions with Ukraine and a lack of investment in military procurement were behind the change .
 Russia established control over part of the Ukrainian fleet while taking efforts to upgrade the Black Sea Fleet . Russia also received six Admiral Grigorovich-class frigates, six Vasily Bykov-class patrol ships and six Kilo-class attack submarines .
 The Black Sea Fleet’s firepower doubled in the period from 2014 to 2017 . The Black sea Fleet”s firepower double in the year from 2014-2017 .
 The Black Sea Fleet has three of the six frigates, while the remaining part is scheduled to be delivered in a few years due to the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . The remaining part of the fleet will be delivered by the end of the year .
 The Fleet will be additionally reinforced by Buyan-M and Karakurt class corvettes, designed to operate in littoral zones . The Fleet is also designed to be reinforced by Buyan- M andKarakurt corvettes .
 In summer 2018, five units of the Caspian Flotilla ships were deployed to the Sea of Azov . Current plans call for two Black Sea Fleet coastal defense brigades, one near Sevastopol and the other close to Novorossiisk .
Each brigade would be equipped with 3-5 Bastion battalions and 1-2 Bal battalions . Each brigade would have three battalions, each would have two battalions. Each brigade was equipped with three Bastion Battalions .
 The Black Sea Fleet recently received a variety of new aircraft, including 12 new Su-30SM and a large yet unspecified number of Ka-52 and Mi-28N helicopters .
Ground force units were also strengthened with the deployment of Msta artillery and Tornado multiple rocket launcher systems . Ground force units also strengthened.
 Russian military units sent to the peninsula in recent years . The move has altered the military situation in the region . Russia has deployed modern radars and missile weapons .
 Moscow's annexation of Crimea has augmented fire range of Russian missiles to NATO’s southern flank . Russia can attack any Black Sea surface facility from the Crimean shore .
 The Black Sea naval bases finally managed to be secured, owing to an uncertain Ukrainian politics . It had earlier been taken into account to expand and transfer the core of the fleet along with its command to Novorossiisk .
 Following the annexation of Crimea, this role was eventually assumed by the port of Sevastopol .
 Moscow, in its turn, gained free access to local infrastructure, including training grounds, airbases, naval bases and harbors . All of which they had used only after being granted a permit from Ukraine .
 Russian annexation of Crimea has shifted the country’s military presence more to the west . S-400 and Pantsir surface-to-air missile systems and Bastion and Bar coastal defense missile systems have been deployed .
 Russia's dominance both in the air and on the sea was limited to the eastern part of the Black Sea . Prior to 2014, Russia’s dominance in the sea and in air was limited.
 The S-400 air defense system can be outfitted with long-range or medium-range munitions . The system can also be fitted with a range of munitions .
 Before the Kerch Incident, Russia deployed four S-400 battalions to Crimea . The fifth one was put into active service to Crimea’s Dzhankoy city after what happened on November 25, 2018 .
 Crimea also disposes of the Monolit-B radar system that provides coverage of nearly the entire Black Sea when positioned at Sevastopol . Crimea also Disposes of Monolit B radar system.
 In 2019, Russia plans to build a Voronezh-M over-the-horizon early warning radar . It will be capable of detecting ballistic missiles and tracking them within a total range of 3,500 kilometers .
 Crimean airbases will receive new types of aircraft while increasing the reach of Russian aviation to the south and west . Once expanded, Crimean air bases will get new aircraft and aircraft .
 Su-27SM and Su-30 fighters landed at the airfield in the autumn of 2014 . The first deployment of these aircraft took place in the fall of 2014.
 Russian combat aircraft are also stationed at Novofedorivka on Crimea’s west coast, as well as at Gvardeyskoye in central Crimea .
 Russia has established an air defense division, an aviation division, a naval base, and an army corps . Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia Valery Gerasimov said in November 2017 that Russia has a “self-sufficient military formation’
 According to Ukrainian sources, 32,000 Russian troops were deployed to Crimea . In fact, this figure was rather close to 20,000 .
 Once sent to Crimea, Russian navy forces and Spetsnaz may be rapidly transferred to the Balkans or Ukraine .
 Moscow could have achieved this goal thanks to the earlier annexation of Crimea . Moscow could also have achieved it thanks to Crimea's annexation .
Local ports are also used by Russian naval and cargo vessels operating within the framework of the Syrian Express plan . Local ports are used by Russia and Russia's military vessels .
 Russia had to acknowledge the fact that its naval forces would have been blocked in the eastern part of the Black Sea if Ukraine strengthened ties with the North Atlantic Alliance .
 Russia could no longer maintain the status quo in Crimea following the Revolution of Dignity events in Kiev . This is yet another reason why Russia could not maintain thestatus quo in the Crimea .
 Annexation of the peninsula boosted Russia’s position while contributing to the weakened status of Ukraine . Annexation boosted Russia's position while boosting Ukraine's position .
 Kiev lost most of its army and the entire fleet in the peninsula, managing to keep only the frigate Hetman Sahaydachniy because she had stationed outside of Crimea .
 Ukraine no longer handles any air bases or naval bases in the peninsula . In addition, Ukraine does not handle air bases and naval bases .
 The country that disposes of the world’s third-largest fleet ceased to be an important player in the global game .
 Ukraine could boast of its long coastline, Crimea as a jewel in its crown . Many naval vessels dating back to the Soviet era, are increasingly pushed away from the sea .
 Russia's easy access to the hub in Odessa, Mykolaiv and Kherson . The loss of Crimea proved increasingly complex for other Ukrainian ports, both east and west .
 Russia occupied a number of Ukraine's drilling rig systems in the Black Sea while leaving a narrow sea corridor to Odessa and other Ukrainian seaports west of Crimea .
 The situation of Ukraine's ports in the Sea of Azov is deplorable, with Mariupol constituting the gateway for Ukraine’s metallurgical production and a window to Donbas's industrial world .
 Kiev is de-facto in charge of controlling dozens of mines and plants . Even if one-third of its area remains under Russia’s occupation, Kiev is still in charge .
 Russia exerted control over both banks of the Kerch Strait in 2014 . Russia would seek to tighten its grip on Ukraine's Azov seaports in a bid to obstruct trade and military shipping .
 This was due to a failed attempt to seize Mariupol in spring 2014 . This was also due to an attempt to seized Mariupols in 2014 .
 Moscow launched its strategy of restricting access to the Sea of Azov shortly after the opening of the Kerch Strait Bridge . Russia is trying to limit maritime traffic to and from Ukraine-based ports .
 Russia would seek to tighten its grip on Ukraine’s Azov seaports in bid to obstruct trade and military shipping . Russia exerted control over both banks of the Kerch Strait .
 Ukraine attempted to react by increasing its navy forces in the Sea of Azov . Russian side responded with what was later referred to as the Kerch incident of November 25, 2018 .
 Russian vessels blocked access for two Ukrainian trawlers and a tugboat . They then seized them after a shoot-out .
 This was followed by blocked access to the Sea of Azov that lasted for several days . This is the second time in a row that has been blocked by the government .
 The economic blockade might have been complemented by a military operation . The main objective would be to seize both Mariupol and Berdyansk along with the entire strip of land running from the front line in Donbas to the Crimean Peninsula .
 Moscow's former goal is to set up a land link with Crimea, which is naturally bound to translate into Russia’s ever-deeper military presence in the peninsula and this part of the Black Sea . This would be conducive to satisfying Moscow”s former goal to setting up
 The Kremlin sought to permanently safeguard a strategic maritime route used by the Caspian Flotilla warships to enter the open seas . The Kremlin also sought to safeguard the strategic maritime routes used by Caspians .
 Western countries have long dismissed the potential of the above Caspian Flotilla . Western countries are now considering a coast guard unit stationed in a closed reservoir .
 In 2015, its warships launched Kalibr cruise missiles into Syrian targets, thus attracting the attention of the global public opinion .
 Some of the Caspian Flotilla units joined this year a Russian naval grouping stationed in the Sea of Azov .
 They navigate the Caspian Sea through the Volga River, passing through Volga-Don Canal, before reaching the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea . They also navigate the Kerch Strait through the KerCh Strait .
 NATO-backed Ukrainian naval base in Berdyansk would pose a strategic threat to the key maritime route for Russian warship . The Sea of Azov could be closed by closing the Sea ofAzov .
 NATO ships sailing into the Black Sea remain under the close supervision of Russian tracking ships and radio intelligence systems .
 Under the Montreaux Convention, vessels belonging to non-riparian states cannot stay more than 21 days in the Black Sea . The Convention is under the rule that ships belonging to the non-parian state cannot stay longer in the sea .
 In June 2015, Russia's Defense Ministry said that the U.S. missile defense base in Romania will be both the first and most important targets in the event of a conflict in the Black Sea region .
 Following Russian-Georgian war of 2008, Bucharest increasingly pushed for NATO to consider the Black Sea region its top priority .
 The Alliance failed to do much there while it was too late to impede Moscow’s invasion in the eastern part of the basin after Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Russia is de-facto Romania’s maritime neighbor, hindering research and exploration activities on the shelf and obstructing trade shipping from the Danube to the Black Sea .
 The A2/AD air bubble over the Crimea intimidates Romania’s free movement in the Black Sea . Russia is capable of targeting Romanian territory from both ground and air positions .
 Romania’s NATO allies will have to provide greater military support if Moscow does not yield control over Crimea .
 Romania has begun to upgrade its military equipment after Moscow’s seizure of Crimean Peninsula .
 NATO allies have been committed to spending at least 2 percent of GDP on defense since 2017 . Since 2017, NATO allies are committed to spend at least 1 percent of the GDP ondefense .
 Bucharest has signed deals to purchase Patriot air-and-missile defense systems, HIMARS launchers and Spike anti-tank missiles . So far, Bucharest's deal has been signed to buy Patriot air and missile systems .
 Romania's fleet mainly includes vessels that date back to 1970s and 1980s . Referred to as relatively small, Romania’s fleet is mostly small .
 The government in Bucharest announced its intention to acquire multi-purpose corvettes and three attack submarines . The government is also interested in upgrading two British Type 22 frigates .
 Romania is increasingly striving to deepen ties with NATO . A growing number of Romanian units are actively involved in the Sea Breeze military drills . Bucharest agreed to host the Alliance’s Multinational Division Southeast headquarters .
 The Romanian authorities have drawn attention to developing NATO's military potential in the Baltic and the Black Sea .
 Bucharest is the only member of the Alliance's to voice necessity to strengthen NATO's southern flank . Most of the countries agree that it is vital to intensify defense capabilities on the northern flank .
 Bulgaria is among most pro-Russian NATO member states . Prime Minister Boyko Borisov brought to a halt Romania's idea to set up a regional fleet tasked with stopping Russian navy forces .
 Turkey has long maintained its friendly ties with Moscow . Turkey was rather reluctant to see other NATO vessels in the Black Sea .
 Romania first and foremost seeks to focus on a bilateral alliance with the U.S. The country has a missile-defense system in Deveselu .
 Turkey remains Russia’s chief rival in the Black Sea region . As in the Cold War period, Turkey is Russia's chief rival.
 Russian-Turkish mutual relationships have apparently improved following Moscow’s expansion in that area .
 This depends on factors that are independent of Russia, including Erdogan’s domestic policy and Ankara's cooled relations with the West . This is based on factors such as Erdogan's domestic policy.
 Turkey has experienced a rapprochement with Russia, which was mostly induced by its political goals in Syria . Turkey has had an uneasy ties with other NATO allies .
 This issue is greatly discussed within the framework of the Astana Triangle consisting of Russia, Turkey and Iran . This issue has been discussed in the framework. It is also considered a major issue in the region of the region .
 Turkey has purchased modern military equipment from Russia, though it still belongs to the North Atlantic Alliance . Turkey has also purchased S-400 air defense systems from Russia .
 Russia is involved in a number of economic ventures, including increased gas exports from Russia to Turkey . It plans to build the first nuclear power plant and build a nuclear plant .
 Ankara strives for impeding Moscow’s activities in the Black Sea . Regardless of its good relations with Moscow, Ankara strives to keep it out of the black sea .
 Turkey holds the largest fleet in the region, also exerting control over the Bosphorus . Turkey also exerts control on the region's largest fleet .
 Turkey has never recognized Russia's seizure of Crimea while seconding Ukraine’s sovereignty on all international levels . Turkey has also never recognized the seizure of Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Ankara is trying to balance Russia’s augmenting influence in the Black Sea . It is to be done by granting diplomatic support for Ukraine's security and territorial integrity .
 Kiev and Ankara are engaged in cooperation within the Black Sea Naval Cooperation Task Group . Turkish vessels also took part in the Turkish Navy-hosted exercise Sea Breeze 2018 .
 Erdogan held on November 28 separate phone calls with Vladimir Putin and Petro Poroshenko . Turkey even offered to mediate while Erdogan held a separate phone call with Putin and Poroshenko. Turkey offered to Mediate.
 Admiral Ihor Voronchenko announced Ukraine's intention to close the Turkish straits for Russian warships . Russia detained Ukrainian vessels in the Kerch Strait .
 He invoked the 1936 Montreux Convention, which acknowledges such a possibility based on paragraph 20 of the document . The Convention acknowledges such an possibility.
 Turkish Naval Forces informed about plans to build a naval base in Turkey’s Black Sea province of Trabzon . In December, the Turkish naval forces informed about the plans .
 The UN General Assembly adopted the resolution on December 17, 2018, urging the Russian Federation to withdraw its forces from Crimea .
 Ankara will neither engage in further aid for Ukraine nor increase NATO’s defensive capabilities . Russia does not present a direct threat to Turkey, Turkey says .
 This is equivalent to setting up a bipolar Russian-Turkish alliance in the Black Sea, resulting with weaker NATO’s Balkan flank . This is the same as setting up an alliance with the Russian- Turkish alliance .
 Ankara will neither engage in further aid for Ukraine nor will it increase NATO’s defensive capabilities .
 This is equivalent to setting up a bipolar Russian-Turkish alliance in the Black Sea, resulting with weaker NATO’s Balkan flank . Many years ago, NATO's Balkan alliance was set up .
 He is the author of many books and publications on the inside scoop of Russian politics . He is also the editor of many Russian books, publications and publications .