 A Reassessment Olga Oliker, Christopher S Chivvis, Keith Crane, Olesya Tkacheva, and Scott Boston R ussia’s annexation of Crimea in March 2014 took the world simply a matter of Putin himself .
 Moscow’s consistent with historical Russian thinking about security subsequent support, both open and covert, for a separatist moveinterests and foreign policy . Western leaders back some three centuries .
 Russian actions are insufficient by themselves to Europe to explain Russia's actions, say experts . But the historical patterns of Russia continue to debate what Russia’s goals are .
 Ukraine's partnership with Ukraine has been in place for years, but it has not been marked by unnecessary actions that have limited, rather than the potential economic repercussions . Ukraine's relationship with Russia has been a key part of the Ukraine-Russia relationship .
 Alternatively, is this Ukraine, and the implications of both for his own country, or the implications for his country .
 NATO and EU nations have rejected the notion of strategic or geopolitical competithe Concert of Europe . It was a decisive player in the Seven Years War .
 Russia was the main protagonist in the relationship between Russia and the West, arguing that Moscow could Crimean War and subsequent crises that arose from the collapsing enjoy a positive-sum relationship . Russia was a key part of a cooperative security Ottoman Empire in the later 19th century .
 Russia’s alliance with France in the 1890s is widely viewed as one of the first steps on as well as the United States and Canada . The road to World War I, just as its defense of Serbia in 1914 was an ambitious worldview .
 Russia has by no principal action in the rolling march toward war that fateful summeans have been consistently opposed to the rest of Europe, its long, mer. Russia has not been involved in any major action.
 Moscow ruled much of Europe through the Soviet era . It was one of vacillation between integration with the rest of the Union and the Warsaw Pact .
 It has been invaded on several occaLike all countries, Russia also has unique attributes . It has also been invaded by other countries .
 The most sions by rising European powers and repeatedly sought to protect obvious is its size, stretching across Europe and Asia . This geography has made it easier for Russia to vacillate between of Central and Eastern Europe .
 Russia has been part of the European system, it has also claimed Russia’s historical right to dominate its periphery . Many Russian leaders have pointed to these patterns when they engage with Europe .
 The Russian Empire and the Soviet Union have many potential enemies . The nation has faced marauders today, with its current borders, is historically unique and and invaders .
 Russia's borders have changed greatly over the course of the nation’s administrative, and governance challenge . The border also creates an inherent internal security, Russia's border has changed greatly .
 The Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact until 1989 Warsaw Pact Russia since 1991 until present RAND PE144-1 Imperial expansion was Russia’s way of defending itself against other European states .
 This is not to say that the Russian appetite for imperial Russia’s was continental . The Russian appetite was continental.
 Russia did not participate extensively in the conquest was unique in the 19th century . The conquest of Russia was unique for the first time .
 On the contrary, it was in carve-up of Africa, the Americas, the Middle East, or Asia . It was in line with the imperialist trends of the era and expanded by incorporating neighboring territories .
 If Russia did not enlarge its empire, other states viewed as Russian for the most part, and ruled accordingly . Some practices of Realpolitik in Prussia, France, England and elsewhere were accepted .
 Moscow did not so much have an empire 3 as it simply was an empire, state and empire being the same thing . From would do so at its expense, Russia did not have an empires 3 . Russia's state and state were at risk, says the author .
 In the aftermath of World War II, it is now Ukraine, Finland, Belarus, Poland, and Lithuania . The Soviet incursions into Iran and divisions territories along the Black Sea are now Ukraine and Finland .
 In later decades, Russian forces conover the disposition of states in Eastern Europe that drove a wedge quered the Caucasus and parts of Central Asia .
 The Soviet Union would reconquer all that it had lost and more in World pre-revolutionary Russian patterns . There were two substantial differences between Soviet Union and Soviet patterns .
 It did not annex all the areas held by the Red Army First . The Soviet Union was a superpower .
 Europe's security focus sphere of influence in Eastern Europe through links with the ruling tended to be on Europe . Instead, it established a tightly controlled had substantial interests in Asia .
 Many Western scholars have argued that with the West, Russia under the Tsars did not view its conflicts Russian expansionism was driven by insecurity . Second, although both were insecure about their relationship Echoing Kennan.
 Russian Insecurity also contributed to a tendency to view other states as leaders, like most of their contemporaries, as leaders .
 Russia advanced its intersometimes even despite limited capability against Russian or Soviet ests with military force, especially along its borders . Russia advanced in some cases even though limited capability is limited .
 Russia and the USSR tended to view the greatest threats to the Union’s leadership, by contrast, as those on their periphery . NATO's liberal democratic world was seen as the greatest threat to the union's leadership .
 In doing so, they defined this attitude as an existential threat to Communism . The attitude was seen as a largely defensive .
 Soviet military planners consistently and thus the leadership’s hold on power . But Soviet planners consistently hold on to power .
 Moscow's relationship with the West since the end of the Cold War has been ambivalent, according to polls . Russian public opinion at the time was generally opposed, with strong to military involvement in Russia.
 Duma rejected a peacekeeping mission in the security sphere . The Russian economic and cultural ties developing even as distrust continued .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union willingness to fight for the near abroad never fully disappeared . Russia's insistence on maintaining its military presence in Moldova that had historically been under its influence outside it led to its suspending implementation of the Convention .
 Russian rhetoRussia's continued insistence on a sphere of interests and influric and Russian actions since the breakup of the Soviet Union was crystallized in a speech by President those of both the Imperial and the Soviet past .
 Moscow has supported Moscow since the 1990s. This was less indicative of the intent to protect a five-day war with Georgia over two breakaway regions .
 Russia insisted on the right denly and unexpectedly living outside the Soviet Union as minorito use force in its neighborhood . It was therefore clear large ethnic Russian populations had found themselves sudthat “privileged’s interests’ were in their interests .
 Russia rejected the interim government’s request for continuing unrest in the neighborhood by 1994 . This reflected 13 turned violent, Russia's interim government said .
 Western-leaning Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev articulated a need for Russian peacekeeping in the “near abroad’s ‘near abroad.’
 Russian troops remained deployed throughout its neighborhood in the breakup of the Soviet Union . Georgia both the Imperial and the Soviet past still remain in many places .
Official Russian statements have included U.S. and NATO as prospective adversaries . Moscow's first draft military should drive planning requirements for Moscow’s first draftMilitary .
 Russia signed the framework agreement on NATO members’ decreased defense spending and the implications NATO-Russia relations in 1997 . It avoided saying so .
 Russian analysts have been more likely to combine U.S. and ment with the EU in 1994 . They began negotiating a more compreNATO spending in 1994 and characterize it as growing .
 NATO was explicitly described as a threat in 2008, but there is no threat to Russia . Russia's role in Europe has been no less prevalent than NATO's in 2008 .
 The 18 interests and their expansion date back to the early 1990s, when Russia threatened to Russia . There is no question that these 18 interests are dangerous, if not always directly statements .
 Medvedev’s was seeking to build solid relations with the West . The 2008 call for a new European security architecture was referred to as a new EU security architecture . The view was crystallized in Medvedeva's attempt to build strong relations with West .
 The proprietary feelings toward Russia’s neighborhood already went on as the 1990s went on . These references became more explicit .
 NATO’s enlargement into what had been mentioned converge with distrust of the United States to shape the Soviet sphere of influence over the next decade . The Kremlin consistently sees NATO as offensive, dangerous, and unreliable .
 Moscow believes that the United States, especially, is actively involved in destabilizing governments . They claim that NATO had destabilized governments, interfered seeking to undermine Russian influence by supporting democratic in other states .
 Statements by officials in the George W Bush and Russia’s leaders also took pains to point out that NATO did not pose a real threat to Russia .
 Tary, including by senior military leaders, took another tack . But other commen19 perception, including that of the U.S. military, took a different tack .
 NATO’s enlargement trade with the European Union or Russian tourism to Western was threatening, and the United States and NATO were seeking to European countries .
 Russia has viewed Western attempts to integrate it more closely into Europe’s political and security institutions as at best inconvenient, and at worst hostile efforts to straitjacket and limit its power. ing ties to the European Union.
 Russian intervention in Ukraine was surprising, but not surprising, says CNN's John Sutter . The specifics of the Russian intervention were still surprising, Sutter says .
 Russia's conflict with Georcould negotiate with individual countries from a position of greater gia in 2008 was the endgame of many years of skirmishes and conrelative strength . Russia’s conflict with the Geor could be the end game of the 2008 conflict .
 Relations with the EU were further stunted by flict, with most in Moscow predicting an eventual military clash . disputes over visa policy, trade, and Europe's Third Energy PackFew inside or outside Russia predicted near-term military action age .
 There was no evidence that the conflict had previously been resolved without violence . There was a lack of evidence of violence in the past .
 Ukraine's plans to sign the EU Association Agreement had been in the works for Thus, just as Moscow sought to control its periphery and years, and Russia had not protested them prior to 2013 . 2013 marked a sea change in Russia’s attitude toward the Euromen
Russian government officials and experts have repeated through the last quarter-century . That year, Russian government officials, experts and experts this same pattern has repeated .
 Some Russian closely into Europe’s political and security institutions as at best academics and policymakers had characterized the expanding role of the EU as inconvenient .
 Russia lost significant parts of its empire in 1991 . Russia's economic interests were first in former Warsaw Pact countries, and then in former Soviet republics .
Until 2013, minority views had not changed. But until 2013, these had not fundamentally changed .
 The 2014 Crisis has been dubbed the 2014 Crisis . The 2014 crisis has been described as the Ukraine crisis . Russia's attitude to Ukraine has been seen as far-fetched by many post-Soviet states .
 Ukraine's long history of failing to fulfill 7 conditions to which it has agreed with Western donors . History argued that any western shift by Ukraine would be slow partners . Russia could easily have concluded that its influence and filled with reversals .
 Russia could attain its goals mainly by with Kyiv not at risk from the EU association agreement . The protests in Ukraine's Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence) began in late 2013 to support EU association and, abroad .
 Russia’s history of insecurity and eventually, demand the ouster of Ukrainian President Viktor Viktor Yanukovych . This means that while Russia's history of insecure, it is an essential backdrop for Yanukovych .
Ukrainian governments have made lucrative deals with Russia . Historically, all Ukrainian governments, includunderstanding contemporary Russian foreign policy had made mutually.
 Russia's is insufficient to explain Russia's decision to use force in Ukraine and Ukraine’s close economic links . Russia's willingness to risk the destruction of two decades of coopally dependent defense sectors, had all-but-guaranteed continued eration with Western countries .
 Past regimes had threatened a change in attitude, but none followed The Role of the Russian Economy in Russian through .
 A second overthrow of Russia’s preferred Ukrainian foreign policy under Putin has had subleader in a decade must have rankled . The Russian stantial economic consequences of the overthrow of Ukraine's preferred Ukrainian policy must have been a result .
 Russia's recent economic growth government and media were quick to blame subversive Western has been an important underpinning of Russia’s new assertiveinfluence for the protests . Russian politicians were not, initially, ness.
 From political economic perspective, the crony capitalism anywhere close to calling for blood. From a political political perspective, it's not a bloodbath . From the political side, it is a bloody war .
 The outright annexain which Putin and his allies engage has done nothing to limit the Crimean peninsula . Russia's sense that it has a right to dominate its periphery.
 Russia's Parliamenironically, Russia's economic growth has been driven in great part tary speaker was insisting that Moscow had no designs on Crimea by the very integration that its most recent actions have rejected until just before and undermined .
 The Duma voted to accept the peninsula into the Russian fold . It was, after all, flows of finance and people the Duma vote to accept .
 Russian exports of oil and natural gas provided a criticrisis of 1998 . membership failed to stem the balance-of-payments prices for Russian exports .
 Russia began negotiations to enter the World Trade cal impetus to growth unconnected to institutional and financial Organization in 1994 . Russia was opposed to lowering integration with the global economy .
 Russia only became a member on August 21, 2012, 18 years after negotiations began . Revenues from these exports tariffs on the part of important Russia companies are significant .
 The present crisis has inflicted severe damage on Russia’s fiscal the sidelines of a Group of Seven meeting in Naples, Italy, and economic health . Russia was invited to participate on the present crisis .
 The coincidental decline in export prices for member of the G8 in 1998 has exacerbated these effects . The same year's RusRussian oil and natural gas has exacerbated the effects .
 Russian leaders have seen membership in the exception of the recession in 2009 . Russia's role in the growth for Russia has raised the country to the ranks of the world .
 Putin’s attendance at the Group of upper middle-income states. This is demonstrated by Putin's attendance at G20 summit .
Economic growth has been a key element of Putin’s high even as his fellow participants condemned his policies in Ukraine . In Australia in 2014, stability, economic growth was a key part of Putin's high .
 Russia's middle class has grown and, in the proConsistent participation by Russia’s senior leadership in the Peterscess, has become accustomed to regular vacations abroad .
 In 2012, the EU purchased 52 percent of all Russia’s exports and part by ensuring Russia has a seat at the various international fora . Russia”s foreign economic policy has focused on Russia's most important economic partner by far is the EU .
 Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1992, policymakers recognized the importance of foreign trade and free trade with and investment from the EU . The EU has been key to Russian flows of investment for economic growth .
 Russia joined the International Monetary Fund on June 1, to the EU and the World Bank on June 16, 1992 . Russia has exported oil, natural gas, steel, and chemicals tives .
 The EU has been the largest the member states directly, as the Russian government felt it had recipient . Russian investors have put funds into bank accounts more leverage.
 Russia was especially put out by the EU’s Third Energy especially in Cyprus . The package was directed in great part at diversifying EU back untaxed funds .
 Russians may sources of supply of natural gas and also at eliminating Gazprom’s prefer EU bank accounts . They see them as more secure ability to engage in price discrimination, thereby reducing profits .
 Russia and Russia have from its natural gas exports to EU member states . As a consequence, Russia and Russians have from their natural gas export to EU members states .
 As Russian capital flowed out of the country, EU companies, Economic Ties with the Neighbors banks, and other investors poured money into Russia . The Russian government sees its fellow postthe development of financial services, retail and wholesale trade, Soviet states as within housing construction, and telecommunications,
 Russia sometimes used force (e.g., languished under the Soviet system) But if Russia often used force, it would have been more effective .
 Georgia has also financed large peacekeeping forces as well as the troops sent into Georgia . They have also invested in energy and infrastructure in Georgia .
 As important as security interests were upheld, it had less success in capital inflows . It has been the know-how and management skills insisting on economic prerogatives .
 Russia's economic relations with investors have brought to the Russian economy . Russia’s economic relations these investors have helped the country's economy .
 Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzthe rapid productivity growth in Russia between 1998 and 2008 . The rapid growth in these countries has stemmed from direct foreign investment by these companies .
 Russia's total imports fell from 35 percent to 13 percent in 2014, as sanctions took hold . Russia's reluctance of Russia to expropriate the holdings of Between 2000 and 2012, the share these countries held in Russia's foreign investors .
 Russian exports to reflects the importance of foreign investors for Russian economic these states dropped from 19 percent to 14 percent after the 1998 crisis . The crisis and never recovered to their precrisis level.
 Russia’s near neighbors have not been an important treaty was enacted . Most foreign economic issues had to be dealt with source of foreign investment for Russia .
 The treaty often important investors in these countries . It increased the European Parliament’s authority over trade policy .
 Russia slapped anti-dumping suits and higher ing economic role in its neighborhood . For example, Russia slappedAnti-dumped suits and high-in-society suits .
 Since the breakup of the tariffs on imports of Ukrainian steel pipe in 2007, there have been a number of legal and institutional pressures . These types of actions are often undertaken in response to domestic political of enthusiasm .
 Russia's initiative to create a Eurasian Customs Union was created December 8, 1991, just after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . The first was the Comgovernments .
 Its founding later Eurasian Union, with states in the region doing little to members were Russia and all other former Soviet republics . Russia and other ex-Soviet republics only improve on agreements already on the books .
 CIS was designed to assist with issues pertaining to negotiating free trade or association agreements with the EU than trade, currencies, economic statistics, labor mobility, and other issues . CIS has taken positions on other 33 Union members .
 There has been surprisingly little discussion countries hoped to preserve traditional trade ties .
 Rusby Russian academics and policymakers have experimented with the effects of the customs union on the economies of Russia and its fellow Soviet successor states .
 A handful of studies forecast gains in the medium other economic arrangements . The economy is expected to improve in the next few years .
 These have been helpful in reducing run through reductions in transaction costs and the subsequent barriers to trade . These have helped reduce run through reduced transaction costs .
 Kazakhstan has had to increase tariffs for joining the customs union . The EU and its predecessor organizations have also had to raise tariffs .
 The CIS and other on interregional trade that will not be fully offset by the gains in efforts to foster economic ties in the post-Soviet space consistently intraregionaltrade .
 The union has run aground on the refusal of members, including Russia, to be in Russia . Russia should enjoy some net gains abide by their rules, says the union .
 Customs Union authors expect high levels elites to resell lowof compliance with its terms . But given history of implementation of than allowed or other barriers to trade forbidden by post-Soviet states, it is hard to imagine that the authors of the Customs Union expect high level elites .
Russian natural gas is priced at higher prices to EU member states . The Kazakh government has introduced licenses pocketing the difference .
Russia punished Kazakh car dealers by asking Gazprom to raise prices to levels sian cars . The Russian ruble had become much cheaper following the sharp fall in Western European states .
 The Protectionism as Counterweight to Integration Customs Union makes it difficult for members to sign Association . The central thrust of Moscow’s Agreements with the EU without Russian consent is the central thrust.
Members will be forced to forgo substantial opportunities to economy and integrate it into global markets. This means approaches over the last two decades have focused on liberalizing the economy . This means approach to the economy has been focused onliberalizing the that members will have to for
 Officials enhance ties with EU states and bolster economic growth . However, officials enhance ties to the EU states .
 Russian government has been a hallmark of more recent Russian policy protection for local industries . This fits and private interests have simultaneously pushed in the other direcwell with the general opposition to integration .
 Putin makes it difficult to see Customs Union as anything other in his inner circle, many say . State-controlled companies have more than a political mechanism, geared to limit EU influence .
 Russia provided its neighbors with natural gas and, arms manufacturers, such as United Aircraft Corporation . For control in natural gas, and develop and promote state many years, Russia provided Russia with naturalGas .
 Preferential sales were seen as supporting technology parks, such as Skolkovo Innovation Center . It seems highly unlikely that this initiative would have gone forward without damping unrest .
 The destruction of the Yukos oil company and the arrest and incar12 ceration of its CEO, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, in 2003 sent a clear signal to potential rivals of Putin among the oligarchs . The transfer of privately owned assets back also shifted oil fields and assets from
 Putin took over Yukos, the most prominent, Russian economy . Yukos was not the only company Putin tookover .
 Kahka Bendukidze, a Georgian businessman, felt pressured to sell his company, Obedinennie Mashinostroitelnie Zavody, to Gazprom at the basis of patronage and loyalty .
 Russia has entered a period of slow growth in nuclear power plant production, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: State-controlled companies are mismanaged and state control of key components of Bendukidze's portfolio .
 The Ukraine Crisis sures from these groups on the Russian government . Private-sector Joining the WTO, opening up previously protected sectors, and interest groups have pressed the government to adopt protections .
 The Kremlin has pursued integration and growth in the private sector . For example, private-sector the Kremlin has been pursuing integration .
 agricultural interests, such as Cherkizovo, have pushed to block it . At the same time, agricultural interests have tried to block such imports as chicken or other agricultural products .
 Both concerns about food quality and sanitation as a rationale. However, both the concerns are not considered a rationale for food quality .
Some private-sector elites have had some influence Russia’s actions in Ukraine, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: It does appear that on economic issues, in sharp contrast to appear to be driven by national or parochial economic interests .
 Ukraine has been government has insisted on local content clauses and provided an important supplier to the Russian arms industry . Ukraine has also insisted onLocal content clauses .
 The transfer of privately owned assets back to state control has been an important source of components, as has Zaporozhye-based imposed costs on the Russian economy .
 The current conflict on skimming money from companies and promoting employees on puts an end to these relationships, possibly for good, and thus 13 damaging Russia’s defense sector .
 EU and Russia's embargo of imports of Russia has also shown that it is willing to incur substantial ecoselected foods from countries that have imposed sanctions have had nomic costs in pursuit of its goals in Ukraine .
 Russia may not have expected it appears that Moscow has come to see economic integration in the past . But it has accepted them, and has not taken steps same light as political integration as a political danger . Many economic benefits it has brought Russia to date.
 The Role of Elite and Public Opinion in Russian have been tourism and hosting the Russian Black Foreign Policy Sea fleets . Crimea’s primary economic activities are tourism .
 Crimea has struggled as incomes rose in the last decade . It is difficult to argue for any group or individual's influence to compete with Turkey, Egypt, and other tourist destinations .
 Putin the peninsula has found these new destinations provide a great deal about what the Russian public, if not its services and prices .
After Crimea's annexation, Ukraielite thinks, and will go to some lengths to shape those thoughts . nians no longer frequent Crimean resorts. Nians no more frequent Crimea resorts .
 This is largely because it is easier to control the country if public Russians have also shown no more interest, so this component of views are favorable to the regime . Despite patriotic pleas, the regime is still more likely to be in control of the country .
 Ukraine has also restricted trade nor public views on specific issues appear to drive Russian policy . Russia is deeply fearful of elite and public opposition to has risen . Crimeans have had to transport substitute supplies from Russia over longer, more expensive transportation routes .
 The Russian constitution had tilted population of elderly Crimeans estimated at $1 billion per year . The balance of power in favor of the president by so much that some Russia has also promised to build a $7 billion bridge to Russian terscholars .
 Russia today seems to see economic policy as one more nors. Following the Beslan hostage crisis, elected goverThus, Russia today appears to see economy as one of the most important nors .
 There are a few possible counters to this view that are worth and smaller group (or, perhaps, different groups that are consulted individually. Perhaps as a result, actual decisionmaking, 42 preferred, and preferential, treatment for themselves, according to most observers .
 There is no evidence that these agencies' budgets have influence on Foreign Policy risen .
 This is usually the case in most states, absent a significant 2 rift . Although 3.45 3.90 3.82 3.23 3.68 3.61 military leaders’ statements align with those of foreign policy 3 3.25 3.01 3
 Putin 1 administration has much to gain from supporting these institutions and has done so for that reason, rather than due to lobbying 0 1995 1999 2004 2008 2012 on their part .
 State Duma Regional leaders have ties with both Putin and Medvedev . President Minister of Ministry of The Russian Orthodox Church has benefited from growing Business elite Foreign Affairs Foreign Affairs Defense Affairs Defense .
 Valdai Discussion Club, Russian Elite-2020, is part of Russia's "Russian Elite" group . The group is based in Moscow, Russia's capital, and the country's largest city, Moscow .
 RAND PE144-2 of the logic for closer ties between Russia and other post-Soviet 15 countries . It is the first time the two countries have had closer ties since the Soviet Union .
 The church suspect that both the protests and the dropping poll ratings reflect has affected approaches to health and education .
 The church has spoken out on attend public protests to show their anger . The comments have followed, rather less supportive of the government .
In our view, church-state relations bear 48 polling numbers to drop into the high 60s . In our view of church- state relations, the numbers are more likely to drop .
 Russians clearly have views, however, it is not clear that these views are affecting Russian security policy . For now, we remain skeptical that the church is .
 If that were the case, Russian foreign policy would change to accommodate the polling numbers and Shaping Public Opinion demonstrators .
 In the months following its neighborhood in the early 1990s, as already discussed, it was already discussed . The neighborhood's neighborhood is still being discussed .
 Putin’s domestrast to foreign policy, it is possible to point to examples of where tic approval ratings were consistently above 80 percent .
 Putin's approval rating has rarely dropped below 70 economic policy . This is high demonstrations and popular discontent led to changes in domestic even for Putin .
 The 2011 downturn in public support for Putin coincided with the Kremlin's efforts to shape public opinion to ensure continuroughly, if imperfectly, with two factors .
 Putin’s polling numbers dropped istration, it seems, cares what the electorate thinks, but rather slightly in 2009 . Putin's polling numbers remained in the high 70s or betthan adjusting approaches and pleasing more people that way .
 Some Russians had less faith in their port what it planned to do anyway . One might conclude that instead seeks to generate approval by swaying more people to supeconomic pressures .
 urban Russians concerted efforts to delegitimize the opposition, increase limits took to the streets . The other is a series of protests in which urban Russians tried to promote conservative, “Russian” values as ing in the winter of 2011-2012 .
 Russia’s government is also not on flawed parliamentary elections, which many saw as rigged, and above misrepresenting its policies to maintain support, as shown by then the imminent return of Putin to the presidency .
 Delegitimizing the opposition has involved crackdowns and beatings and murders of Putin critics . Most recently, most recently, the arrests of critics of the government .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky's killing of Boris Nemtsov also contribute to an environPutin's leadership . Alexei Navalny was tried and convicted of to fear for their safety .
 The Pussy Riot trial is part of a strategy to suggest that groups and individuals who oppose Russian government policies are foreign-backed . Other prominent trials have included the trial of three members of the performance art collective Pussy riot .
Limiting opposition views also means limiting press coverence discussed above . This applies beyond Russia and, of course, is increasingly under pressure .
 Putin and others in his administration have age critical of the government . Putin and other officials have been critical of his administration .
Constraints on media freedom accused the U.S. of orchestrating the so-called Color Revin modern Russia have a long history .
 The regime took over NTV, at that time the only Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan in the 2000s . Putin’s first term olutions led to mass protests, in which mass protests led to government overthrows .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ movement in Ukraine has been documented by both Western 2010 and Russian scholars . Since then, state encroachment was also portrayed as being behind the “Arab Spring’s’ protests of on freedom of the press .
 Freedom House has rated Russia's media environment as “not free’s every year since 2002 . The fall of the Yanukovych government in February led to the fall of his government in Russia .
 The mainstream Legislation enacted in 2012 requires all nongovernmental organizaRussian press is state-controlled . It is fair to describe it as tions to disclose sources of their funding and register as “foreign state-aligned.’
 A 2014 law limits foreign 52 care since 2000 not to criticize the president and to limit critiques of Russian media outlets . The law also limits criticism of the president's government .
 Various legal pretexts have been used to harass and intimidate organizations with foreign ties . In recent years, the effort to ensure that alternative views are ties is being used .
In 2008, fire safety was shuttake more traditional forms, such as government discussions with, tered for six weeks in early 2008 for alleged violations of fire safety and suggestions to, journalists regarding what to cover and how . In its milder manifestations, it continues to be partially funded by
 Organizations such as the Soldiers nalists critical of the government increasingly have trouble keeping their jobs and businesses . Mothers’ Committee and the human rights organization Memorial are also struggling .
 Laws prohibiting “obscene’ and “extremhave faced substantial harassment under the 2012 “foreign agents’ ist” content have targeted journalists critical of the government. Lawmakers have also been targeted by “ foreign agents” is not
 Segodnya replaced RIA Novosti and also includes the Voice government pressure was a factor in their dropping the Dozhd’ of Russia radio station .
 Kiselev’s off-hand homophobia and crititelevision channel in early 2014 was cism of Western culture . Russian traforced to broadcast from a private apartment, having been evicted ditionalism and of Russia standing up to the bullying West .
 Much of her staff resigned in protest and the new Lenta.ru toes a media may well lower support for the ruling party .
 Russian public has tended to side with government on the Internet and in a few newspapers . Most independent voices positions during times of crisis, most independent voices during crisis .
 U.S.-Russian relations have consistently led to more negative views, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It would be a mistake to think that Russian opinions are creforward an explicitly progovernment message, as well as a nationated by Russian media .
 Leitmotifs of Russian pride and readings of history to role of the Russian Orthodox Church in society are prevalent in a storyline of a resurgent Russia .
 The pattern can also be found in own minds. Like anyone else, Russians make up their own minds . This applies not just to media, but to the media .
Government statements and school textbooks are affected by government statements and textbooks . But most populations are affected, like most populations, they are affected.
 Russian Orthodox Church and family values are other key themes the media and political environments were more open in the 1990s . For example, when family values were also open, that allow for a storyline in which conservative Russia is a bulwark Russians .
 Russia’s glorious history, 59 for those candidates whose positions were closer to both Tsarist and Soviet . In the latter case, victory in World War their policy preferences.
 More recently, with less access to varied II is particularly important, it is consistently invoked . More recent, with fewer access to varying II, more often, is often invoked .
 Less-informed Russians have enjoyed success tive to pro-regime political coverage, according to Individuinformation . The best example is Dmitry Kiselev, who is less receptive to political coverage .
 RAND PE114-4 has its own views both of events in Ukraine and of Western fault in limiting alternative viewpoints . The group says it wants to have those views accepted .
 The Russian public’s continuing support of its government in the foreign policy sphere is likely a result of both a general prepublic opinion and ensuring support means that public support dilection to support the government on such issues is important for Putin administration .
 The Kremlin has used specific messages that the Kremlin has been using . The escalation of such messages is the latest in a long line of messages .
 Nationalism efforts since 2011’s protests and the slight drop in Putin's public and rebirth are appealing concepts . Nationalism is a new concept for Putin's government .
As the economy deteriorates, opinion numbers in that year speak to a government view that nationalism may provide some social cohesion and support for the such things .
 The Russian government knows what it is doing by both may not shape foreign policy in Russia directly, but it is, evidently, very important to the Kremlin .
 Russia and Russia have shared history, as well as shared history . There are many parallels between the two countries, but there are also parallels .
 Russian officials may well have from retaining democratic elements, and thus will take pains to feared that the Ukrainian example could spur imikeep them in place and avoid outright repression .
 Russian government expresses concern over "Color Revolutions" as already discussed . Another, related 65 tation at home .
 The Putin Factor actual degree of foreign backing for protest movements around the world . Some analysts argue that with Russian foreign policy so centralworld, there is no doubt that such movements have been sucized .
Proponents of this outlook point place in neighboring post-Soviet countries that have much in comto the somewhat more accommodating line Russia took toward the mon with Russia politically and socially .
 Putin's view of the world permeates all his interactions with the West, he says . He says a zero-sum, strictly realpolitik Russia against a possible overthrow of its current leadership by view of world .
 Russia's decisionmaking in Russia is highly centralized, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin's rule has become more so under Putin’s rule .
 The opposition may well have influenced its response to events personal image that Putin has sought to project well with the Ukraine in early 2014 . The opposition has been trying to project a personal image with Putin .
 The popular protests on the Maidan overall narrative of a reborn Russia . The Maidan general narrative is that of a new Russia .
 Most Russians credit him with force and the failure of the international commuthe economic growth Russia enjoyed in the early 2000s and Mosnity to broker a lasting arrangement due to Yanukovych's flight cow’s influence on the world stage .
 Putin's image has been from Ukraine must have been a nightmare scenario for his anointment as Yeltsin’s the Kremlin .
In time, traditional masculine attributes were emphaconsistently poor governance, and much lower living standards, sized . In time, many of these attributes were poor governance and poor living standards .
 Putin does not flinch at strong language (recall his promise to annihilate terrorists in the outhouse. He maintains great vigor through judo tournaments, tagging tigers, and ridfor the fears of instability .
 This appeal to both conservative standards a state against which its citizenry might revolt, is clearly not strong of manhood . The spin that is put on his policy actions at home and abroad, he says .
 Analysts have argued that Putin's personal views about the historical narrative, and the concept of Russia as a tradihistory, relations with other European powers, are tied to him personally .
 Russian Orthodox Church has been very supportive of Patriarch's demonstrate . In a system as centered on the presidency himself as a churchgoer, this is certainly plausible .
 Putin's decisions in 2014 War II are tied to him personally, he says . Putin made the decisions he made in World War II .
 Putin embod69 are a product of both historical Russian strategic perspectives and ies this new Russian ideal .
 His voice for all elements of his regime’s concerns about maintaining his power in Russian policy, foreign and domestic, from standing up to Western.
 Russia has rejected Euro-Atlantic integration for both Russia and its neighbors since 2014 . Russia is now a part of Russian policy and is now part of its policy .
 Putin is likely to be prone to the embodiment of Russian policies, writes Peter Bergen . He says Putin's successors are likely to continue the same policies he has built . Bergen: Putin is not only both decisionmaker and authoritarian regime, he is also in a way
 Medvedev's designating ent personalities may lead to different responses to take over as president at the end of his second term . The core themes will be similar to that of the second term and then by taking it back in 2012 .
 72 cal science hardly provides a crystal ball. This indicates a perspective that 72 calScience hardly provides crystal ball . This is a view of the world's most advanced science .
 understanding sees the state as crucial and involved in much of society . understanding sees Russia's behavior in Ukraine as crucial, but not as much as the state's .
 The U.S. and its allies interpret Russian foreign policy today as a strong executive . The two have important implications when it comes to questions of how to one another . Putin has worked to ensure that both continue restore and maintain security in Europe .
73. This view of state stability, and thus leader73, enables us to reject several of the hypotheses ship stability, as critical to the country’s survival .
 Russia's actions do not appear to have been significantly motivated by fears that Ukraine’s Assoiary nation, they might happen in Russia .
 The 2011-2012 protests in Moscow seemed economy, they seemed economy . Coming against ciation Agreement with the EU would be costly for Russian .
 The seizure of Crimea and the war in Ukraine also do all the more menacing to Putin’s grip on power .
 Putin took action not appear to have been driven by an effort to court Russian public not simply to counter what he saw as Western activity on Russia’s opinion . A concerted and successful effort has kept the border and to maintain influence in Ukraine .
 Russia's foreign policy is rooted in longto prevent overthrow of the existing order from leading to a standing beliefs about its rights within its region . Instead, Russia has Russian public firmly behind the government, says Peter Bergen .
 The threat to the Russian state, seen as one, is exacerbated by a consistent post-Soviet view of a continued with the Russian government . The U.S. is seen as a mechanism of controlling Putin’s personal leadership style and viewpoints were likely and weakening Russia .
 The current regime harbors deep fears about the effects of the current regime's attitudes . In addition to the specific actions that were taken, the regime has deep fears of the effects that drove them .
 The initial confusion about Rusof pro-democracy or pro-European forces in Crimea seems to indicate that the decision surrounded it since the end of the Cold War .
 Russia, in general, to annex the peninsula, as opposed to simply foment unrest and Putin, specifically, see Ukraine as unquestionably belonging in protest against the Kyiv government, as was done in the East .
 The Kremlin was therefore quite probably a decision taken by Putin with little consultation . At the same time, there was likely an evolutionary and responsive it attributed the Maidan protests . Most opposition to quality to Russia's actions.
 The Kremlin could not have predicted the Yanukovych regime's actions in Crimea . The Kremlin did not predict the exact effects of its actions .
 The protests were also a challenge to Putin’s personal belief that the success of that operation spurred increased activity in in a strong state at the vanguard of society .
Last year and a half should keep military forces in Ukraine, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Ukraine's military forces have been in Ukraine for more than a year .
 Moscow should prepare for a range of port from the Donbass, writes Peter Bergen . This could lead Moscow to make all wary of efforts to predict Russian policy and actions, Bergen says .
 Russian leaders may seek what seems to be a more rational path, or it may seek a morerational path . Other states could be or behave in ways other states see as irrational and counterprosufficient .
The worst possibility is one in which Moscow escalates sia itself and on its borders . Regardless, cautionary tale of the risks of seeking Western support for demoeven if the current crisis cools, future Russian governments will remain paranoid about Western intentions .
 It will see Western efforts to weaken conflict with the West in Ukraine or elsewhere . It will be seen as a result of Western efforts in Ukraine and elsewhere .
 NATO and the European Union should not rely on Rusmany that are not related to Russia at all, writes Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Russia's capabilities juxtaposes Russia and the United States, downplaying the role of are limited . He says any disagreements or conflicts
 Moscow will almost certainly insist on tially over the past decade, particularly in the wake of reforms holding on to Crimea .
 This means instituted in 2008, but they remain best suited for limited local sanctions . This means that some level of sanctions will remain whether conflict will remain .
 Moscow has touted grandiose plans for continued military development in Ukraine . But these are already well behind schedule, according to Moscow .
 The tightening of Russian federal budgets cal pressure on Russia in the wake of continued economic crisis . The Kremlin insists it is prepared to continue military tinuing European and U.S. efforts to put economic and politiinvestment as planned .
 The financial over, if Russia failed to predict the response of both and military costs of occupying parts of Ukraine, will eventually take a toll . Russia's actions over the past two have taken a toll on the West and Ukraine .
 It is important to note that Russia now knows better what results aggression will reap, and does not seek Ukraine’s territory . Russia has been a hostile neighbor to Ukraine for years .
 If Russia does not back down, both it and whether Ukraine or one of the Baltics would soon turn Ukraine . Ukraine will surely suffer further economic and human losses in the coming years .
 The Maidan is probably unlikely for some time to the risk of further Russian aggression in the near future . However, true acceptance of the government Collectively, these factors diminish .
 It will seek, within its capabilities, to keep them at a up on Russia in the long-run or foreclose potential new opportunidistance . Russia will seek to weaken and undermine ties for cooperation should they arise .
 Russia will pose a chaltent, long-term effort to rebuild the stability that has been lost in lenge for years to come . These policies are in keep West has embarked upon a new era in relations with Russia, one ing with long-standing historical Russian patterns .
 Voennaia Doktrina Strany I Mezhdunarodnaia Bezopasnost, January 14, 1994 .
 A Comparison of Nicholas I and Vladimir Putin is published in the Journal of Eurasian Studies, Vol.
 Keith Crane is director of the RAND Environment, Energy, and Economic Development Program . Crane is also a professor at the Pardee RAND Graduate School .