 Yulia Tymoshenko’s bid for the presidency in Ukraine now includes promises of revisiting an ineffective treaty .
 In the 2019 Ukrainian elections, the war in the Donbas is a dominant issue . The war is the dominant issue in the Ukrainian elections .
 Yulia Tymoshenko and Anatoliy Grytsenko want to show they are better than President Petro Poroshenko in the foreign and defence policy domains . But even candidates claiming to be pro-European, such as YuliaTymoshenko, want to prove they are good .
 There is nothing wrong with competition of ideas in a democracy, as long as they are not products of a fantasy world, says David Cameron . "There's nothing wrong" with competition in democracy, he says .
 It is a commonly held view in Ukraine, also held by this author, that Ukraine gave away its nuclear weapons too cheaply .
 Leonid Kuchma bought into the Soviet myth of ‘brotherly Russian-Ukrainian peoples’ and never believed Russia would unleash military aggression against Ukraine . But eastern Ukrainian elites never believed it would constitute a security threat .
 France, Germany, Germany and the EU are already involved in the Minsk agreement and Normandy format . French, German and EU are also involved in Minsk deal .
 China has supported Russia and abstained in every vote at the UN that deals with the Crimea or Donbas . It is not at all clear why Tymoshenko has included China, which has support for Russia .
 The only outcome that Putin will accept is a ‘Finlandised’ neutral Ukraine remaining within the Russian World .
 Pro-Russian candidates Yuriy Boyko and Vadym Rabinovich would agree to this deal . The deal would be a deal between the two candidates .
 Ukraine's neutral status in 2014 did nothing to prevent Russia's annexation of Ukrainian territory or Russia's military invasion . The elephant in the room that pro-Russian politicians will have to explain is why Ukraine’s neutral status was not prevented .
 The first is the transformation of Ukraine into a federal state so that his puppet DNR and LNR will possess a veto on his behalf over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy .
 The second is for Ukraine to remain part of the Russian World civilisation . The third is for the country to remain in the world of Russia .
 Moscow also believes that Tymoshenko is somebody with whom they can negotiate a deal . Moscow also thinks that Tyloshenko is someone with whom he can negotiate .
 A recent opinion poll asked Ukrainians who they believe Russia wants to see as Ukraine's next president . 46,5 per cent believed Boyko was Moscow's favourite, followed by Rabinovich with 37. per cent and Tymoshenko at 28 per cent .
 Ukrainian president will only do that if a Ukrainian president agrees to implement the Minsk agreement in his way . He will only be able to implement that if he agrees to do that .
 The DNR and LNR are changing the constitution to give the DNR 'special status' and accepting the results of Russian-controlled local elections . That means changing the Constitution to give them ' special status'
 President Poroshenko and Western governments believe that there needs to be first a withdrawal of Russia’s troops from Ukraine .
 Russia's constitution could be changed after local elections . Local elections could be held and the constitution may be changed .
 Tymoshenko provides no evidence that a new ‘Budapest Plus’ format would change Putin’s views of Ukraine and Ukrainians .
Anti-war populism is used by Tymoshenko to promote herself as a peacemaker to Ukrainian voters who are weary of the war . It is anti-war populist, used by the Ukrainian president.
 The idea is an idea that will have no power to change a painful reality . Sadly it is a bad idea. It will not be able to change the reality .