 The Kremlin has inaugurated a new ‘state of exception’ in Crimea, invoking the prerogative to circumvent normative legal and juridical procedures in response to a perceived emergency .
 Crimea’s state of exception resembles those initiated elsewhere by some Western states and Russia itself as part of the global War on Terror . Crimea has provided the pretext for a particularly severe degree of repression, persecution, and human rights violations .
 The Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group discusses the state of exception, its broader applications within the Russian Federation, and its troubling repercussions for residents of Crimea . This article also discusses the theoretical groundings of the state.
 Casting the Kremlin’s actions as belonging to a state of exception helps draw attention to its alarming human rights violations . It may bolster resistance to the creeping normalization of the Russian occupation of Crimea .
 Many Western states have responded with sanctions against key agencies and individuals involved in the annexation and occupation of the region . The majority of UN member states continue to recognize Crimea’s de jure status as Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 Many Western pundits continue to employ and legitimize imperialist narratives of Russian history that subsume Crimea and Ukraine as a whole .
 Crimea as intrinsically Russian requires that its indigenous peoples be erased from the region’s history, and their opposition to Russian irredentism be disregarded .
 Crimea’s ‘reuniﬁcation’ with the Russian Federation represented the will of the Crimean people to an overwhelming degree . Defenders of the justness – if not the legality – of the annexation may also point to the results of the contentious referendum on 16 March
 Russia's sovereignty over Crimea is the cover it lends to Russian authorities to curtail freedoms and commit egregious human rights violations within the occupied region in the name of this contested sovereignty .
 Russian authorities operating within Crimea have aggressively targeted opponents of the occupation through censorship, intimidation, extra-legal prosecutions, and state violence . Russia has imposed a liminal sovereign status they have imposed .
 Ukraine and international organizations are committed to documenting the mounting human rights abuses perpetrated in occupied Crimea under the guise of anti-extremism measures . Russia's possession of Crimea is gradually normalized as Russia’s possession of the Crimea is slowly normalized .
 First articulated in the 1920s by German political theorist Carl Schmitt and further theorized by Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben .
 The concept of the ‘state of exception’ has proven a powerful tool for theorizing the extra-legal and extra-territorial methods of combat and detention employed in the U.S.-led War on Terror . applications also extend to Russian contexts .
Russian occupation of Crimea is an eﬀective strategy for focusing attention on human rights situation in occupied Crimea . We argue that this is nevertheless an appropriate framework and an appropriate strategy for focus on the situation in Crimea .
 Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group, an organization committed to investigating, monitoring, analyzing, and reporting on human rights abuses in Ukraine, along with human rights advocacy.
 The Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group has monitored and reported on the deteriorating human rights conditions in Crimea since its annexation to Russia in 2014 . The group regularly issues extensive reports on the latest developments from occupied Crimea .
 Schmitt argues that sovereignty rests in the hands of those with the authority to declare unilaterally the suspension of the juridical order .
State of exception as theorized by Schmitt does not exist outside of the rule of law . authority to declare the exception is an inherent prerogative of the very sovereignty under which the legal order is established .
 homo sacer refers to an individual legally stripped of all rights as a citizen, rendering their lives valueless and therefore ineligible for sacriﬁce to the gods on the one hand . Also permitting their murder without legal consequence on the other, while permitting
Homo sacer is paradoxically included as an object of the juridical order only through his exclusion from it . "bare life" is reduced in this way to “bare life without political qualiﬁcation, yet deriving this status through legal decree, hom
 The power to declare a state of exception is equivalent to the power to symbolically reduce human life to the status of homo sacer . For Agamben, the power of declaring an exception is similar to that of reducing life to a status of a homo Sacer .
 Agamben’s work initially relied on Nazi concentration camps as the most salient example of ‘the camp’ as inductive metaphor . The United States’ initiation of the War on Terror after the terrorist attacks against the United States on 11 September 2001 revealed the true pres
 Following Agamben, social scientists have deployed the “state of exception’s associated concepts as a powerful analytical lens for theorizing discourses and practices of sovereignty .
 Others have endorsed 32 H COYNASH and A CHARRON . Others have supported 32 HCOYNASH AND A CHarron . The Agambian perspectives of the camp (Diken and Laustsen 2005) and the state of exception are also considered .
 Political geographers have been especially active in engaging with Agamben's ideas and their relevance to the War on Terror . Many caution against applying his theories too generally and without careful consideration for their discrete geographies .
 Many political geographers have argued against viewing the spatially unbounded pervasion of the camp system as the essential modern paradigm . Instead, they point to particular sites where biopolitical spaces of exception have been produced .
 Much of the recent scholarly literature concerning the proliferation of states/spaces of exception has primarily addressed American discourses and practices undergirding the War on Terror . This framework has also been employed to make sense of the increasingly illiberal and authoritarian tendencies of sovereign discourse and practice in post
 The Kremlin invoked its power to declare a state of exception in its brutal assault against Chechen separatists, eﬀectively rendering them – and anybody else impeding the struggle2 – homines sacri .
 Rigi characterizes the emergent form of Russian sovereignty as “chaotic’ and “post-hegemonic,’ where the rule of law is transactional and may be overridden through force .
 Rigi also reﬁnes his analysis to describe a postmodern ‘corrupt state of exception’ in Russia . His analysis is echoed by Makarychev and Medvedev in their discussion of Russia’s ‘biopolitical turn’ during Putin
 Putin voiced his vitriolic anger at Western policies towards Russia during his speech at the Munich Security Conference . But perhaps the most signiﬁcant application of the state of exception is toward Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia .
 Prozorov identiﬁes the brief Russo-Georgian War as the moment when the Russian state of exception spilled over into the rest of the post-Soviet space . The Kremlin invoked a heretofore unexercised sovereign prerogative to unilaterally redraw the
 Artman considers the exceptional statuses of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . He argues that they are made doubly exceptional by, on the one hand, the process of “passportization” that bestowed Russian citizenship to the regions’ residents .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea must also be viewed through the prism of exception . Few have yet drawn this connection with Russia's annexation.
 Kremlin evoked threats of terrorism and extremism to justify annexation and use of violence in occupied Crimea . In another clear parallel to its own War on Terror, the Kremlin has also evoked the threats of terror and extremism .
Russian state media and the Kremlin's own oﬃcial rhetoric proclaimed violent far-right Ukrainian nationalism boiling over from the Euromaidan to be an imminent threat .
 Russian authorities have continued to cite Ukrainian nationalism – and, increasingly, Islamic fundamentalism allegedly emanating from Crimean Tatar community .
 The exceptional nature of Russian rule in Crimea should come as no surprise considering the Kremlin’s increasingly brazen tendencies to invoke its sovereign prerogative to exceptional measures .
 Crimea's population's transformation into homines sacri is exceptionally stark . But even within this Russian context, there appears to be something rather exceptional about the state of exception .
 Gregory and Minca: Crimea is not “to transform the victims of the new geographies of exception into the objects of theories conceived merely as academic capital’
 In this spirit, we now turn to a discussion of the deteriorating human rights conditions in occupied Crimea .
 Crimea prior to Russia’s annexation was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of the rest of Ukraine . The human rights situation in Crimea before the annexation wasn't signi.
 The country had experienced a sharp degradation of all law enforcement bodies and the judiciary after four years under President Viktor Yanukovych . The country has experienced a particularly sharp degradation.
 There were regular and unobstructed protests, pickets, and civic campaigns against corruption, illegal construction, or environmental issues . Nevertheless, there were regular, unobstructed demonstrations against corruption .
 In Crimea, there were few of the same formal restrictions on press freedom as in Russia . But the situation had sharply deteriorated under Yanukovych .
 Independent media, including the popular Crimean television channel Chernomorska, came under considerable pressure .
 There were other media outlets and many civic activists highlighting and campaigning against the monopolization of the media .
 The lingering problems that the indigenous Crimean Tatars faced had never been properly resolved since they began returning to Crimea in the late 1980s . Under Yanukovych there was no pretense of even engaging in a dialogue .
 Questions regarding what arrangements Yanukovych had made with President Putin on the eve of the Euromaidan protests are beyond the scope of this article .
 The messages were intended to bolster support for Yanukovych over the protesters in Kyiv . They served equally well to build the argument for the Kremlin’s exceptional use of force in Crimea in defense of its Russian and Russophone population .
 Russian state media reported heavily on the supposed threat of Ukrainian nationalism during and after the Euromaidan in a coordinated eﬀort to portray the Russian authorities as saviors of the Crimean people .
 The discontinuation of broadcasts from mainland Ukraine was preceded by the forced closure of Ukrainian television networks based in Crimea . The Television-Radio Companies Krym and Chеrnomorska also sustained a distributed denial of service attack prior to its closure .
 Crimean referendum held on 16 March 2014, but there were many more alarming irregularities . The vast majority of Crimeans received only in  misinformation regarding the new government in Kyiv .
 The referendum was a transparent attempt to validate a violent coup of the Crimean government . It was accordingly held under hostile occupation by the military of a foreign state aided by Russian and pro-Russian paramilitary forces .
 The ballot used in the referendum itself oﬀered no possibility to vote for maintaining Crimea's status quo . Voters were permitted to choose only between Crimea’s ‘reuniﬁcation’ with Russia and the restoration of a short-lived 1992 Crimean constitution
There are strong grounds for doubting the validity of the referendum’s reported results and voter turnout rates . The referendum was held in Crimea, with Russia at 96.77% in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 Crimean Tatars form only a minority of Crimea’s population . Crimea's national representative body, the Mejlis, declared a boycott of the referendum .
 Many reputable scholars have accepted the Russian ﬁgures as though they are valid . This legitimizes the annexation and the narrative of Crimea’s inherent Russian-ness .
 The revocation of freedoms of speech and press in Crimea was backed by Russian legislative maneuvers .
 A law requiring Crimean companies and organizations to re-register as Russian entities has served as a pretext to outlaw several Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian-language media outlets . registration often denied on the spurious grounds that required documents were not included.
 ATR, a popular independent Crimean Tatar television network, was forced off the air on 1 April 2015 . It was later resurrected, along with other shuttered Crimean media outlets – in mainland Ukraine .
 Russia’s control over the Crimean media landscape extends to the internet as well . Russia's control over Crimean media also extends to its internet .
 Russian authorities have also targeted individuals in Crimea for their social media activity, including that which occurred years before the annexation . Alarmingly, Russia has also targeted people in Crimea.
 The Kremlin's most insidious legislative tool against free speech in Crimea is Article 280 of the Russian criminal code .
Russian law punishes “public calls to action aimed at violating Russia’s territorial integrity’ The law includes Crimea as of 18 March 2014 – with up to 30,000 rubles, and/or up to four years imprisonment .
 Andriyevskaya's article on Crimean Tatar volunteers prompted Russia's Federal Security Services to bring charges against her under Article 280.1 . She had already relocated to Kyiv.
 The oﬀending text contains only the assertion that Russia’s occupation of Crimea should end .
 The article landed Semena on Russia’s ‘List of Terrorists and Extremists’ and resulted in his bank accounts being frozen .
 Crimea has suffered grave deterioration under Russian occupation . Clampdown on peaceful assembly, freedom of the press, freedoms to peaceably gather, demonstrate, and protest in Crimea have also suﬀered grave deterioration .
 Crimean Tatars amassed on the newly-imposed checkpoint between Crimea and Ukraine to receive 40 H COYNASH and a CHARRON their political leader . Mustafa Dzhemilev was attempting to enter Crimea in deﬁance of a recently-issued 5-year ban
 Crimean Tatar leader and Ukrainian MP returned to Kyiv . The crowd was confronted and intimidated by police, riot squads, and paramilitary groups .
 The Crimean Tatars have commemorated each year since Ukraine's independence with a large gathering of remembrance on Simferopol’s central Lenin Square . This incident was soon followed by an outright ban on all public demonstrations in Crimea .
 Crimean Tatars have taken to voicing their grievances through solitary demonstrations . They are still met consistently with intimidation and prosecution . To circumvent draconian restrictions on assembly, many Tatars take to the streets .
 Server Karametov was detained and held for several hours without access to a lawyer for holding a solitary picket in commemoration of the Deportation .
 He was again detained and held on August 8 for his one-man demonstration in support of jailed Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz . His trial was then underway in Crimea .
Russian authorities have harassed and persecuted Crimean Tatars and others for overt displays of loyalty to Ukraine . Russian authorities have further harassed and harassed Crimean Tatar and others .
 The Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian organizers were detained for holding Ukrainian ﬂags and ribbons . Taras Shevchenko's 201st birthday was celebrated in March 2015 .
 Crimean Tatars or others sympathetic to Ukraine are likely to be detained for holding unsanctioned demonstrations . While bans or restrictions on peaceful assembly have mostly targeted Tatars .
Residents of the resort town of Alushta attempted to protest against the appearance of carnival attractions and commercial stands blocking access to the beach .
 The Kremlin and local authorities in Crimea have weaponized the law to legitimize their repressive policies . In other cases legal norms are simply ﬂouted altogether, with numerous examples of politically-motivated detentions .
 Russian authorities in Crimea have charged at least ten Ukrainians for unsubstantiated plans to commit acts of ‘sabotage’ Four men tried in August 2016 after oﬀering televised confessions to plotting attacks on Crimea’s infrastructure with the assistance of Ukrainian military intelligence
 Russian authorities in Crimea appear to have fabricated evidence of violent extremism as a pretext for silencing and persecuting those who openly oppose the annexation or display loyalty to Ukraine .
 Balukh was arrested on criminal charges in December 2016 after another search of his home dubiously uncovered ammunition and explosive devices . No such items had been found during previous searches and BalukH had no history of violence .
 Oleg Sentsov was arrested along with three other young men in May 2014 for allegedly plotting to commit ‘terrorist acts’ against Crimea’s infrastructure and monuments .
 Chyrniy and Afanasyev’s testimonies were used to convict all four men of terrorism . Afanasasyev was released in June 2016 as part of a prisoner exchange .
 Sentsov was sentenced to 20 years in prison while the fourth man, Oleksandr Kolchenko, received 10 years in the same trial . Chyrniy and Afanasyev each received a reduced sentence of 7 years for having “cooperated’s
 Sentsov's trial was meant to bolster the Kremlin's narrative of dutifully protecting Crimeans against the threats of Ukrainian extremism . Sentsov was involved in the Euromaidan Revolution and eﬀorts to support captive Ukrainian military personnel shortly after the Russian invasion of Crimea .
 At least two other Ukrainian political prisoners held by Russian authorities were similarly tortured and imprisoned . Oleksandr Kostenko and Andriy Kolomiyets were also imprisoned over their involvement in the Euromaidan in Kyiv .
 Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz was similarly charged by a Russian court for crimes alleged to have occurred under Ukrainian jurisdiction .
 Chiygoz, the Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis, was arrested in January 2015 for helping organize a “mass riot’ in front of the Crimean Supreme Council building in Simferopol . The day before unmarked Russian troops ﬁrst appeared in Crimea,
 The ‘riot’ in question was a widely-televised standoﬀ between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian demonstrators . The latter was composed primarily of Crimean Tatars .
 Chiygoz was sentenced to eight years imprisonment in September 2017 . He was unexpectedly released and returned to Ukrainian territory one month later in a prisoner exchange .
 The Muslim Crimean Tatars have fared the worst by far in occupied Crimea . There are examples of persecution against other ethnic and religious minorities .
 Crimean Tatars had never held an allegiance to Kyiv prior to their post-Deportation return to Crimea . They had been transferred to the Ukrainian SSR in their absence .
 Crimean Tatars command the largest and most legitimate front of resistance against the annexation of Crimea . They are the most frequent targets of Russian measures aimed at silencing, suppressing, and intimidating the opposition .
 Crimean Tatars accused of extremism and terrorism under the rubric of Crimea’s state of exception . But measures taken against the Tatars have proven far more devastating and indeed, lethal .
 The Kremlin and its proxies in Crimea have crippled the Crimean Tatar leadership, beginning at the very top with the Mejlis and its members . The Kremlin has crippled the Crimea leadership.
 Russian courts in Crimea directly charged and sentenced Mejlis members Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov on highly dubious grounds . Others, including Mejli chairperson Refat Chubarov, have been banned from Crimea altogether .
 The Mejlis came under immediate threat after the annexation of its headquarters in Simferopol in September 2014 .
 Crimea’s Russian-installed Prosecutor General declared the Mejlis an “extremist organization” in April 2016 . In September of that year, the Russian Supreme Court dissolving it under Russian law and banning its operations .
 Russia has denied the Crimean Tatars their right to representation and political organization through cynical invocations of a nebulous “extremist’ threat. In deﬁance of international condemnation – including an injunction from the International Court of Justice – Russia has thus denied them their
Russian authorities have persecuted and intimidated individual Crimean Tatars through frequent armed raids of homes, mosques, religious centers, and other establishments . Russian authorities have also targeted and intimidated individuals through frequent Armed raids .
 The primary targets of this campaign are alleged members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir, a conservative pan-Islamist organization with no history of terrorism . The group was labelled a “terrorist organization’s” and outlawed in Russia in 2003 .
 Raids carried out against Crimean Tatar under the pretext of combating “extremism’ have had deadly consequences in at least one case . Raids have had fatal consequences in one case, according to reports .
 Crimea’s state of exception has had far more lethal and, frankly, sinister consequences for the Crimean Tatar community . Kashka's death is indeed tragic.
 The circumstances surrounding one particularly gruesome murder suggest agents of the Russian state may be directly involved . These murders, abductions, and disappearances remain unsolved and eﬀectively uninvestigated .
 Reshat Ametov held a solitary protest against the occupation on Simferopol’s Lenin Square . On 3 March 2014 – just days after the arrival of Russian troops in 46 H COYNASH and a CHARRON Crimea, the referendum was held .
 In broad daylight, three unidentiﬁed men abducted Ametov in the middle of the square and shoved him into a car . He was never again heard from or seen alive .
 No thorough investigation into Ametov's death has been made despite footage of his abduction . Local authorities were likely involved in perpetrating or covering up this egregious act of murder .
 Russian authorities in occupied Crimea have since implemented both legislative and extra-legal tactics to impose oppressive restrictions on speech, press, and peaceful assembly . This warning was indeed prescient, as Russian authorities have since implement both legislative, extra- legal tactics .
 Crimea’s occupiers have thus far taken dozens of political prisoners and remain complicit in the abduction, disappearance, or murder of many more .
 Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhemilev personally suffered for over ﬁfteen years in Soviet prisons and labor camps for his activism . The level of fear, distrust, and lawlessness in occupied Crimea far graver than during Soviet era .
 The Russian occupation of Crimea must be understood in the context of the state of exception, writes Peter Bergen . A sovereign power acts upon an implicit prerogative to declare when extenuating circumstances – typically framed as a state of emergency – necessitate circumventing its own normative legal restrictions
 Kremlin pointed to the specter of violent Ukrainian nationalism as a rhetorical pretext for illegally seizing and annexing Crimea . Russian authorities have continually invoked this and the invented threat of Islamic extremism to justify the violent and draconian suppression of their pro-Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar critics.
 The Kremlin’s actions in Crimea clearly parallel those of many Western states operating under the logic of their own EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY and ECONOMICS . 47 declared state of exception in the War on Terror, and furthermore follow Russia's own patterns of exceptional force
 The Kremlin has exploited this quirk of sovereignty in Crimea to evade legal restrictions . It is still claiming to act within its own self-ascribed legal parameters .
 China has interned roughly one million of its Muslim citizens and lauded their “reeducation” as part of its contribution to the War on Terror . China has recently taken similar yet far more extreme measures .
 As Elden argues, the state of exception is nothing new or novel, yet neither is it an all-pervasive paradigm of modernity as Agamben has characterized it .
 It is imperative to recognize that the state of exception is inherently geographical, productive of spaces and topographies of exception that ebb and ﬂow with time .
 Crimea has been transformed into a space of exceptional exception, where the Kremlin has upended the juridical order to harshly and lethally suppress its opponents .
 Voter turnout was 83.1% in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and 89.5% in Sevastopol’s Crimea . 96.77% and 95.6% voting to join Russia .
 The assassinations of Russian journalist Anna Politovskaya in 2006 and political opposition leader Boris Nemtsov in 2015 serve as potent examples of how non-combatants have also been targeted during these conﬂicts .
 Stepan Bandera was an early 20th century Ukrainian nationalist political and military ﬁgure . He had allied with Nazi Germany in 1939–1941 against the Soviet Union .
 Council of the President of the Russian Federation on the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights, April 22 .
14.14. 14.14 is the latest in a series of articles published by the Russian media . It is the first of two Russian media outlets to report on Russia's most important news stories .
Politika priznaniia korennykh narodov v mezhdunarodnom prave i v zakodatelstve Rossiiskoi Federatsii . Politika prizaniiakorennyk narodom. Prave is a Russian