 Ukrainians as a nation are almost absent from Austrian informational space, cultural and public life . The materials in mass media dedicated to the dramatic events in Ukraine are either very superficial or demonstrate the unpleasant mark of the Kremlin propaganda .
 The author is convinced that answers to these questions will help Ukraine develop the strategy of relations with the West . He says answers will help the country develop its relations with West .
 Vienna is the capital of a small European country with an impressive imperial history . After World War II, Vienna became the headquarters for many international organizations . It became the centre for making major geopolitical decision and territory for absolutely all European intelligence services .
 Today, it may be literally called the outpost of diplomatic and informational war for the independence of Ukraine .
 Another round-table discussion on cooperation between Ukraine, Russia, and the EU was held in Vienna on January 20 .
 The future of this cooperation was discussed by former Czech President Vaclav Klaus, former President of Ukraine Viktor Yushchenko, and Othmar Karas .
 Claus’ recommendation to the EU to refrain from interfering in the ‘internal conflict’ in Ukraine caused loud applause .
 The same day, Die Presse published his interview, in which he declared that it was the EU that was responsible for escalating the conflict .
Ukrainian Foreign Ministry declared in early December that we were not losing the world informational war . The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry declares that despite the scepticism of our fellow citizens, we are not lost the world information war .
 The public opinion in the EU countries is experiencing most severe pressure of Russian propaganda . It is largely shaped under the influence of anti-Ukrainian messages, says the EU .
 Ministry of Informational Policy is evidence to the fact that the leaders of our country finally came to grips with the problem of the neighbouring country .
 I would like to see job descriptions and qualification requirements put forward to new figures . I would also want to see new figures put forward for job descriptions .
Broad masses have demand for a simplified world image, in which, relatively speaking, everything is either white, or black .
 Orthodox believers with Russian-speaking people, Orthodox believers, pro-Russian citizens, etc. Hence, for example, identification of ethnic Russians with Russians.
 Authors of the informational materials appeal to public opinion leaders – well-known and respected "experts" The materials are designed to promote the necessary ideas .
 repeated messages explaining economic and political events and social phenomena are usually called narrative . Such repeated messages are often referred to as narrative .
 Broad masses are not particularly eager to verify misinformation fed to them – they swallow the finished product .
 The changing political and economic situation leads to the fact that the Kremlin propagandists gradually change the narrative, the Kremlin says . The change is due to the changing political, economic situation .
 The last statement has altogether become the favourite slogan of the top management of the country . It is mentioned in all their interviews .
 The general tendency for the Austrian society is to insist on non-interference in the "Ukrainian crisis" Generally, these ideas can be called neither consistent nor logical .
 Conductors of these ideas are different "experts" and other opinion leaders . Conductors are different ""experts"" and "other opinion leaders," says one .
 The experts mainly include representatives of academic circles involved in research in the field of political science and sociology .
 Economic issues mainly commented by representatives of Austrian business and industry . Economic issues are mainly commented.
 Politicians and diplomats are another group of regular participants of various public debates . Politicians, diplomats are also regular participants in public debates.
 Scientists are most resistant to the temptation to be ""in trend" regarding interpretation of the situation in Ukraine . Scientists are the group that is most resistant.
 They try to explain events objectively, owing to their academic affiliation they do not juggle with facts . They do not manipulate with figures, they try to give rational rather than emotional arguments .
 Russia is waging war against Ukraine, they are aware of the Maidan values, multiculturalism, multi-ethnicity, tolerance and bilingualism of Ukrainian society . They understand that Russia's war is waged against Ukraine .
 The criticism expressed by them is well supported and justified, according to the authors .
 Austrian society is to insist on non-interference in the "Ukrainian crisis" on recognizing ineffectiveness of sanctions and their lifting . The general trend is to emphasize the advantages of preserving good relations with Russia .
This trend is followed by the representatives of business and politics . This trend is also followed by representatives ofbusiness and politics.
 Politicians must say what their average voter wants to hear, driven by stereotypes and prejudices towards Ukraine and Ukrainians . Politicians should say what they want to hear.
 These are real public debate with decent audience capable of civilized discussion . However, these are not real public debates .
 Virtual communication in social networks alarms with its aggressive and openly Ukrainophobic sentiments . Virtual communication is often seen as a way to communicate with people in Ukraine .
Anti-Ukrainian hysteria is unfolding against the background of anti-American hysteria . Anti-Ukranian hysteria has been dubbed anti-Ukraine hysteria .
 Scepticism and criticism against the EU and its policy can be added to the EU's policy .
 The interest to the Internet community has not arisen out of idle curiosity . The interest is not out of curiosity, it is just a curiosity .
 It is well known that the governments of developed countries allocate large budgets for analysing users’ behaviour on the Web .
 Research has proved that social networks are a powerful tool for shaping public opinion . Social networks are powerful tool to shape public opinion, research shows .
 Christian Wehrschütz is the correspondent of ORF in Ukraine . He is also the editor of the "Journalist of the Year"
 The virtual identity of Mr Wehrschütz is somewhat different from his television image . He is sometimes characterized by biased coverage of Ukrainian events .
 It is very amusing when he publishes a fake from "Russia Today" on his page without any comments .
 His virtual commentators spread it all across the German-language Internet and curse the inhuman junta .
 There are "experts" in this community of amateurs, too – those who frequently come to Ukraine and are "eyewitnesses" of the events due to personal or professional reasons .
 "Merkel sponsors neo-Nazis in Ukraine," according to his statements . The government's refusal to pay pensions in the occupied territories is "a classic theft"
 Mr Pridnig emphasizes that he has been living in Kiev for many years, so he knows exactly what is going on there and has every right to educate his countrymen .
 Mr Pridnig did not even know who to claim the money from, and even gave an interview out of rage . The new agency has not fulfilled the predecessors’ promise, which enraged Mr Pridsnig .
 State Cinema management should give Klaus money, maybe, he will tell the truth, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is against the backdrop of misinformation from different sources – not just Russian, as we can see – that the spiral of lies and delusions unwinds .
Austrian print media is weak in covering our events with only a few exceptions . Austrian print media has a poor record of covering events .
 The quality of journalism in Ukraine is moderate, according to the Ukrainian media . They do not have their own correspondents .
 Wehrschütz has complete monopoly on reporting information, including that from places of military actions . He has complete control of reporting information from the military .
I personally doubt his desire to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, given his personal acquaintance with the terrorists Zakharchenko and Khodakovsky . I personally doubt him.
 These are Die Presse, Kurier, Profil, who have professional, experienced and knowledgeable political analysts . They are also known for their political analysis .
 In this propagandist war, we are supported either by Austrian citizens who know and truly love Ukraine, or by Ukrainian activists .
 The Ukrainian Embassy in Austria is still extremely passive in the information war . Unfortunately, the Ukrainian Embassy is still very passive .
 Nobody has worked with the public opinion in terms of coverage or interpretation of events . Nobody has been able to work with public opinion.
 The human resources of the embassy are so weak that it was mentioned even by the most loyal observers . The embassy's human resources are very weak, says one observer .
 There is no ambassador, but there is officially appointed acting ambassador . No ambassador has been appointed .
 There are employees who must deal with public relations according to their official duties .
 diplomats themselves claim that this system exists to employ relatives and develop indifference and irresponsibility in people .
Even Ukrainian journalists working in Vienna speak about it with disappointment . Even Ukrainian journalists work in Vienna .
 The Russian Federation has carried out information blitzkrieg against us since February . The time lost cannot be recalled .
 Ukraine has been mainly present in the informational space as a subject of discussions for all these months . Ukraine is the subject of discussion for all the months .
 The Russian ambassador, Austrian top managers of Russian companies and other Putin-Versteher were honoured in almost all TV programs and debates .
 There was neither reaction to these statements or debates on the part of the embassy . There was no reaction to the statements .
 Ukraine's new Ambassador of Ukraine has finally arrived in Vienna in December . He declared his readiness to actively work in the media and other public venues .
 It was possible to draw public attention to the blatant violation of human rights and freedoms in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . It is thanks to the efforts of Azarov and Yanukovych, the government of Ukraine .
 Events organized by public organizations were primarily aimed at the Ukrainians . Events were mostly aimed at Ukrainians .
 Austrian society was not interesting for the younger and more active part of Austrian society .
 Austrian-Ukrainian society seems to be inanimate . The oldest and most respected organization – Austrian- Ukrainian Society – seems to have been inanimate.
 Diplomats must mobilize themselves and consolidate efforts of active citizens, to organize the work to promote Ukrainian culture, and to lobby Ukrainian ideas and Ukrainian business . Diplomats need to mobilize themselves, consolidate efforts to promote the Ukrainian culture .
 We need to convince EU partners that Ukraine has great potential for Europe, we need to persuade them .
 Ukraine's embassy and non-governmental organizations will help Ukraine to integrate in the common European space . Their efforts united under the auspices of the embassy or non- governmental organizations .
 Ukraine needs the support of the free world from financial aid to the supply of arms . Ukraine needs financial aid, arms supplies, and financial aid from the world .
 We just have to win the "cold war" on the Western Front, the war of ideas and information, says the author .
 We will win to the accompaniment of the sounds of the beautiful Viennese waltz .