 This article has been accepted for inclusion in International Journal of Nuclear Security by an authorized editor . This article is accepted forclusion in the Journal of nuclear Security by a authorized editor.
 Vladimir Putin cut cooperative efforts to safeguard nuclear materials, experts say . Experts say he endangered the future of all international efforts to promote global nuclear security .
 Putin’s decision not only detrimentally erodes the third pillar of nuclear security, but Russia's recent actions in Ukraine also bring to bear more threatening ramifications .
 Russia's aggression in Ukraine and the international community’s lack of willingness to exert sufficient pressure on Russia to honor the promises made to Ukraine (in exchange for giving up nuclear weapons in the 1990s) work against nonproliferation objectives .
 In addition, they may disrupt both further nuclear disarmament and stimulate proliferation of nuclear weapons . They may also disrupt both nuclear weapons and stimulate nuclear proliferation .
 The inaction and/or inability of the international community to resist or reverse Russia’s illegal actions must alarm the government of any country who acts on their trust in the international agreements .
 If binding diplomatic agreements are seen to only bind one party, the weaker party will hesitate to entrust any diplomatic document short of a binding treaty with clear and required enforcement mechanisms . If binding agreements only bind a party, it will be difficult to enforce such agreements .
 This is especially true when a country’s national security and ultimately its sovereignty is at stake . This is particularly true when it is a country's national security .
 The world community has diligently strived to implement national and international agreements, protocols, treaties, and cooperative programs that support each of the three pillars of global nuclear security .
 According to experts, in 1992 about 50 countries had in their possession weapons-usable nuclear materials . About 50 countries were in possession of nuclear materials in 1992 .
 Due to successful international cooperation, by 2015 that number was cut in half . By 2015, the number of international cooperation was cut by half .
 Australia, South Korea, and Taiwan had all pursued nuclear weapons programs in the past . They abandoned the nuclear path in exchange for international agreements guaranteeing their security .
 Today, these three countries are signatories of the Non Proliferation Treaty as non-nuclear weapons states .
South Africa was the first state to join the NPT after voluntarily abandoning its nuclear weapons program in 1991 . South Africa was first state in the world to join NPT.
 This was a crucial first step in setting a clear course in realizing global nuclear threat reduction . This was the first step to set a clear path in realizing the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, newly independent countries found themselves in possession of a large portion of the former nuclear arsenal, materials, and infrastructure .
 Almost overnight three new nuclear weapons states were born possessing thousands of nuclear weapons . Almost overnight, three new countries were born with thousands of weapons .
 The global community found itself in need of repeating the South African success story, but it was challenged by a much less stable geopolitical environment . South Africa's success story has been challenged by the lack of stable geopolitical environments .
An intense multinational diplomatic effort produced what was later considered a hallmark in cooperative global nuclear threat reduction . It was in this difficult environment that an intense multinational diplomacy produced what is later considered the hallmark of cooperative nuclear reduction .
 Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan agreed to give up their nuclear arsenals in exchange for explicit security assurances and economic assistance measures . The three countries also agreed to provide economic assistance and security assurances .
 The example set by these countries, who chose not to pursue their national security with nuclear arsenal, was inspirational . These countries chose to rely on international law for their ultimate security .
 The proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world has been curbed by such international agreements and by the underlying trust that countries place in international law and collective security through cooperation .
Experts on nuclear security say Vladimir Putin's actions and policies are placing in peril . The actions of Russian president Vladimir Putin are placing the future of global nuclear security in danger .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine have threatened the third pillar of nuclear security, says U.S. State Department .
 Putin's actions in the escalating conflict with Ukraine are placed in jeopardy by Putin’s actions in Ukraine . Both further nuclear disarmament and prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world are in jeopardy .
 The ramifications from this crisis may disrupt each key pillar of global nuclear security . The ramifications of this crisis could disrupt each of the key pillars of nuclear security.
 In reaching this conclusion, we review the history of the denuclearizing of Ukraine . We also examine the ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflict and the issues of nuclear weapons that have been brought to life during the conflict .
 The consequences of nonproliferation objectives reach far beyond the geographic boundaries of the current conflict . "The consequences of these factors are detrimental to nonpro liferation objectives," says the author .
 The newly independent country of Ukraine found itself in possession of the third largest nuclear weapons arsenal in the world . In late 1991 when the Soviet Union collapsed, the country had the third biggest nuclear arsenal .
 Ukrainian leadership made a historic decision to denuclearize in exchange for security assurances, economic assistance, and technical assistance through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program .
 Ukraine's actions were not without significant commitments, however, by the other three signatories . Ukraine's action was not withoutsignificant commitments, but by the others, however .
 Russia, who has a history of bad relations with Ukraine, does not move to reconquer it . That means ensuring that Russia, which has a record of bad ties with Ukraine. That means that Russia doesn't move to re-evaluate it .
 Ukraine cannot defend itself against nuclear-armed Russia with conventional weapons, and no state, including the US, is going to extend to it a meaningful security guarantee . Ukraine can't defend its own country against the Russian nuclear weapons .
 The skeptical voices were overpowered by the advocates of denuclearization within the Ukrainian government and abroad . However, the skeptical voices are overpowered by advocates ofdenuclearization .
 During a two-year operation, all 1900 warheads were removed from Ukrainian territory . All 1900 warheads are removed from Ukraine .
 The Budapest Agreement and removal of the nuclear arsenal from the territory of Ukraine was widely considered a major success . Ukraine's self-interest was also a key part of the effort to strengthen global nuclear security .
 Ukraine At The Fulcrum in 2014, this evaluation was called into question . In 2014, Ukraine at The FulCrum was considered the best country in the world .
 Russia’s aggression toward her sovereign neighbor, eventual annexation of the territory of Crimea, and subsequent indirect and direct destabilization that led to armed conflict in Eastern Ukraine, belied the value of the memorandum . The broader confidence in diplomatic security assurances and the guarantees of international law.
Ukrainian population hoped for stronger ties with the West . This unexpected decision led to protests by a large part of Ukrainian population .
 West-leaning politician Petro Poroshenko was elected president in May 2014 .
 The new government of Ukraine was formed after presidential and parliamentary elections . It has been repeatedly called “illegitimate’ by the Russian authorities .
 The Crimean crisis that led to the annexation of the Crimean peninsula by the Russian Federation took place in the aftermath of the revolution .
 The referendum was not recognized by the majority of the international community . The United States and the EU countries did not recognize the referendum .
 Putin has been proclaiming Russia’s right to protect its interests as well as protecting rights of the Russian-speaking population of Eastern Ukraine .
 From February 2014, major anti-government and pro-Russian protests took place across Eastern Ukraine bordering with Russia .
 Protests in Donetsk and Luhansk regions turned into an armed separatist insurgence calling for separation from Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government responded with a military counter-offensive against the insurgents . The government responded to the insurgents.
 The U.S. and German intelligence services claim that the plane was shot down by mistake by the pro-Russian separatists .
 The clashes between the separatists and the Ukrainian military turned into an ongoing armed conflict in the eastern region of Donbass .
 A temporary ceasefire, signed in Minsk, Belarus in September 2014, was repeatedly violated and eventually collapsed in early 2015 with an escalation of fighting . The temporary ceasefire was signed in September 2013 .
 Another ceasefire was agreed on in February 2015 with assistance from Germany, France, and Belarus . Another ceasefire agreed on February 2015.
Fighting continues in Eastern Ukraine. Despite the agreement calling for unconditional ceasefire, fighting continues in eastern Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation played a direct or indirect role in the conflict, says the U.S. State Department . Russia's involvement in the crisis is key to understanding the full contextual landscape of the crises .
 The Ukrainian military reports intensive movement of troops and equipment from Russia to aid the separatists . The separatists have been fighting in Ukraine for months .
 Lt. U.S. Army's top commander in Europe is in Ukraine . Lt. Army commander in Ukraine is in charge of the United States Army.
 The armed conflict between the Ukrainian Army and the pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine continues . Heavy civilian and military casualties have been reported .
 The use of such rhetoric might indicate Russia’s groundwork to justify future involvement of Russian troops in Ukraine . The possibility of open fighting between the Russian troops and Ukrainian forces is possible .
 Some Ukrainian political circles look beyond an immediate call for western help and toward a more proactive means of guaranteeing their national security .
 Ukrainian MP Pavlo Rizanenko has expressed similar ideas in an interview with USA Today .
 In the future, no matter how the situation is resolved in Crimea, we need a much stronger Ukraine, says the author .
 A bill calling for the termination of the membership in the NPT and for the restoration of the nuclear weapons program was introduced in the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014 .
 Experts argue that the chances of Ukraine making a decision to regain its nuclear weapons status are very doubtful . They say the economic price of acquiring nuclear weapons would be too great a financial burden for Ukraine to bear .
 Ukraine may withdraw from the NPT and reacquire a nuclear arsenal . Of primary concern, however, is not whether or not Ukraine may withdrawal from theNPT .
 The primary concern is what may be the ramifications of the violation of the Budapest Agreement . The West’s inability to keep its stated commitments on future nuclear negotiations is the primary concern .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine were heavily criticized by the international community . The conflict began in February 2014 .
Despite strong international condemnations, sanctions, and repeated public statements of disapproval, Russia's territorial gains remain intact . There have been few indications that Western opposition has impacted Putin’s policy regarding Ukraine .
 President Obama condemned Russia’s actions in Crimea on March 17 . President Obama warned that further provocations will achieve nothing except to further isolate Russia .
 The vast majority of the international community has not recognized Crimea as part of Russia . The majority of international community does not recognize Crimea as parts of Russia.
 Only 7 member states of the UN have made public statements recognizing it . Only 7 have been recognized by the UN .
 Russia, Syria, Venezuela, North Korea, Cuba, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua are among the countries listed .
 Various world leaders have publically called the Russian annexation of Crimea illegal .
 The first round of sanctions against Russia was introduced by the US, EU, and Canada in March 2014, and included travel bans and an asset freeze .
 Japan, Australia, Australia and several other countries have proclaimed similar sanctions . The sanctions are similar to those in Japan and Australia .
 The most impactful third round of sanctions was a response to the escalation of fighting between the Ukrainian military and the Russian backed separatists in July 2014 . In July 2014, Ukraine's military and separatists fought in Ukraine's east and west .
 The EU and the US jointly expanded the sanctions, targeting vital sectors of the Russian economy including finance, energy, and defense .
 A number of countries soon followed the lead of the U.S. and EU and joined the expanded sanctions .
 Vladimir Putin has publicly discounted claims that Russia breached the Budapest Agreement . Vladimir Putin, however, has publicly denied the claims .
 Russian officials have repeatedly called the new Ukrainian government “illegitimate’s’ new government ‘illeg legitimate’ The Russian government has also called the Ukrainian government a ‘legitimate,’
 The current crisis in Ukraine has revealed a serious problem with international security agreements . Russia has broken its obligations under the Budapest Agreement, according to reports .
 Doug Lamborn is the assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs . Nuland was briefing members of Congress in March 2014 . Lamborn's argument was reinforced by the assistant secretary of state for Europe .
 The future actions of any nation can't be predicted with certainty, says David Cameron . "A plethora of variables would certainly shape the calculation of whether or not one chose the path of nuclearization," he says .
 The fact that doubts now cloud the assurances that have been effective in containing proliferation to date is reason enough to cautiously consider the possibilities . The fact, however, that doubts are now clouded the assurances which have been successful in containing proliferating to date.
 The first primary pillar of nuclear security is the diplomatic push toward disarmament . The diplomatic push to disarmament is a difficult diplomatic push .
 Ukraine's voluntary disarmament along with that of Kazakhstan and Belarus were hallmarks of this endeavor . Until the events in Crimea, Ukraine’s voluntary disarmaments were hallmarked of this effort .
 Belarus relinquished its nuclear weapons arsenal in the mid-1990s . Alexander Lukashenko, president of Belarus, was president of the former Soviet Union country .
All will remain independent states within those boundaries that existed at that time. And that we all (I emphasize) will remainIndependent states .
 A recent public opinion poll conducted by an independent pollster in Belarus demonstrated public support for this attitude .
 Belarus has been heavily affected by the Chernobyl disaster and was known for strong anti-nuclear attitudes . A third of its population today supports acquiring nuclear weapons .
 36% is not a convincing majority, in a country scarred by the legacy of history’s most devastating nuclear accident .
 Between 2003 and 2009, six party talks took place aimed at finding a way to move North Korea away from its pursuit of nuclear weapons .
 North Korea has also expanded its centrifuge program and restarted its previously shut down plutonium reactor at its Yonbygon site .
 North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has indicated his intention of increasing the country's nuclear deterrence . He has even added its nuclear status to that country’s constitution .
 The United States has indicated cautious willingness to return to the six party talks . The U.S. has been in talks with the United States for six years .
 Japan, South Korea, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia have chosen to not pursue a nuclear course because of the security guarantees afforded them under international agreements such as the NPT and bilateral security agreements .
 Iran is being asked to rely on the assurances and guarantees of the world community . Iran must view through the prism of broken and ignored assurances made to Ukraine . The U.S., Russia, Russia, China, Britain, France, and Germany are meeting in Iran .
 If Iran chooses to proceed on the nuclear path, other countries will be obliged to either trust security agreements from the international community or pursue a weapons program of their own .
 Ukraine has been found impotent in the case of Ukraine . The key element to this choice is the degree of confidence they have in, again, the government says .
 A nuclear umbrella is not beyond the scope of reason to expect, according to a number of governments . It is not enough for national self-preservation, says David Cameron .
 The delicate nuclear equilibrium that defines global nuclear security today would be a status of the past . If any one of these nations moved toward nuclear status, the atomic dominos would begin to tumble .
 The risk of increased state-sponsored nuclear programs leads to increased opportunity for non-state acquisition of nuclear material . In addition, the risk of increasing state- sponsored nuclear programs is also increasing .
 Further proliferation of nuclear weapons among nation-states will raise the threat of non-state nuclear terrorism, nuclear smuggling, and other related issues to a level that will seriously threaten the security of the United States and its allies .
 No international effort to reverse the annexation of Crimea or to stop Russia’s continued destabilization of the broader Easter Ukraine region has been successful . Conclusions: No international efforts to reverse Crimea annexation or stop Russia's continued destabilizing of the region have been successful.
 The EU will refrain from imposing additional sanctions on Russia . Despite Russia’s refusal to withdraw from the illegally acquired Crimea region, it was decided .
 The basis of this decision is that the recently signed Minsk ceasefire agreement has resulted in a slowing of fatalities . The decision is based on the recent ceasefire agreement .
 To the government of any country who has resisted the push toward nuclearization based on international agreements, the inactions and/or inability of the international community to resist or reverse Russia's illegal actions must cause great concern .
 If binding diplomatic agreements are seen to only bind one party, the weaker party will be very hesitant to place full faith in any diplomatic document short of a binding treaty that has clear and required enforcement mechanisms . If binding agreements are see to onlybind one party.
 This is especially true when the stakes are a country’s national security and, ultimately, its sovereignty . This is particularly true when it is a country's national security .
 Today, non-nuclear weapons states see an international community wherein aggression is contained not by international law and agreements, but only by the restraint that the possession of nuclear weapons demand . The U.S. is one of the world's most aggressive nations .
 The U.S. sees this logic played out through Russia’s actions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . These states read the logic suggested by Putin.
 The possibility of nuclearization should be considered as part of the broad global nonproliferation dialogue . Many factors may dictate that these states remain non-nuclear .
 Some experts may say that this possibility is too remote to be considered a factor when discussing future endeavors and/or strategies supporting nonproliferation .
 If realized would lead to the erosion of nuclear global equilibrium, if realized, it could lead to nuclear equilibrium . The issue should be carefully examined and monitored, says author .
 The international community is working to see that this possible eventuality does not rise into reality . For this reason, it is incumbent on the international community to diligently and pro-actively work to see this potential eventuality do not rise.
 As more and more nations develop nuclear power programs, the challenge of effectively safeguarding against weapons proliferation becomes even more difficult than the current regime . In order to achieve this, the international community should consider the development of a systematic three-level monitoring endeavor .
 The IAEA is responsible for monitoring civilian programs in NPT signatory states through their safeguards agreements . The tools the inspectors can bring to bear are limited and have weaknesses in detecting the diversion of materials .
 All enrichment has transitioned to gas centrifuge enrichment plants which are smaller, more difficult to detect, and easier to reconfigure for proliferation . This is especially important in the uranium enrichment industry .
 One of the key challenges for the international community is early detection of proliferation activities .
 The IAEA will likely never have the resources or authority to conduct the sort of information gathering necessary to fully meet that mission . While it would be ideal if the I AEA could be the agent of those discoveries, the reality is that it will probably never have that
 Intelligence organs of nation-states will continue to play an important role in detecting possible proliferant activities as well as potential transfers to sub-state actors .
 IAEA member states may or may not choose to share some of that information with the Agency . The Agency also requires better technical capabilities both in terms of assessing the information provided .
 There exists a need to more systematically track policy discussions and public discourse relating to nuclear policy and security threats . The need for enhanced technical monitoring is also a need, says the author .
 The rise in discourse among non-nuclear weapon states centering on ‘humanitarian consequences’ does not negate the possibility of a shift in debate toward self-preservation .
 Increased monitoring and analysis of related public policy dialogue would aid in recognizing such shifts at their onset . Increased monitoring would help in recognizing these shifts at the onset .
 Benchmarking current opinions of policy makers and elected officials from the NNWS would further clarify any future trends that differ from the status quo .
 This monitoring would include statements by elected officials and policy makers as well as news coverage of nuclear proliferation and security issues in countries of interest . Such discussion must be analyzed as either being meant for purely internal rhetorical consumption or meant for actual policy implementation .
 Research on state behavior has demonstrated that there are external and internal pressures that compel governments to make choices in foreign policy and on national security issues .
 Domestic public opinion is creating boundaries within which national governments operate . It restrains political options for decision makers, it restrain political options .
 At the same time, governments can manipulate public opinion, in order to generate support for policies and to boost popular support, they can influence public opinion .
 Pakistani nuclear program has demonstrated popular support for certain policy choices that the government presents to domestic publics under the auspices of enhancing national security . Pakistan's nuclear program can overrun external pressures that run counter to these policy choices.
Global security equilibrium based on current international agreements depends on domestic public opinion in key countries . It depends on attitudes about national security and outside threats .
 Monitoring international public opinion in countries that have the capability to alter the global nuclear security equilibrium will allow for better understanding of the public opinion climate in selected countries . It will give an opportunity to predict situations where the governments of those states can choose an option of going nuclear .
 The success of global nuclear security rests on the strengths of three primary pillars, says the author .
 The decision by a single, currently non-nuclear state to start a nuclear weapons program could trigger a domino effect in which other nations seek security assurance via nuclear weapons .
 The resulting furthering proliferation of nuclear weapons would greatly increase the risk of eventual nuclear conflict . The threat of non-state nuclear terrorism, nuclear smuggling, and other related issues will seriously threaten the security of the US and its allies .
 The actions and inactions of that community in relation to the trustworthiness of its international agreements can serve to weaken those primary pillars thereby jeopardizing global security . The U.S. should recognize that the actions can also harm global security, he says .
 It is the hope of the authors that the three levels of monitoring would serve as harbingers, if regrettably, of a sliding away from the stable and secure path of nuclear nonproliferation that is essential to our future global security .
 The U.S. and Russia must repair their partnership on nuclear security . The United States and Russia need to repair their nuclear security partnership .
 Putin says he reserves right to protect Russians in Ukraine . K Lally, W Englund, says he has no obligation to protect Russian citizens .
 B Bennett, United States officials believe attack against Malaysian plane was mistake . U.S. officials believe Malaysian plane attack was a mistake .
 G Baczynska, A Vasovic, Pushing locals aside, take top rebel posts in east Ukraine . Russians take top post in eastern Ukraine .
 Crimean Tatar leader tells Putin secession would break post-Soviet pact . S Gutterman, Crimean Tatari leader, says secession would be a step forward .
 If Ukraine does not get help, it is necessary to produce nuclear weapons Ogrizko . If Ukraine doesn't get help it is needed to produce the weapons, it's necessary to get help .
 United States levels new sanctions against Russian officials . U.S. level new sanctions on Russian officials.
 Her research interests are in global security and public policy . She has special focus on nuclear security, mass media, and public opinion .
 He is an adjunct faculty member at the UT College of Communication and Information . He is also an adjunct professor at the University of Communications and Information.
 He has spent the past 20 years moving among federal legislative positions, political consulting, and teaching . He has been teaching for more than 20 years .
 Rice focused on issues relating to energy, science and technology, and national defense . Rice is a legislative aide for both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives .
 His research interests include global security and democratic development and sustainability in transitional societies, including post-Soviet countries and Middle East .
 He is a member of the national advisory board for the Syrian Emergency Task Force . He is an alumnus of the American Council of Young Political Leaders .
 In 2013, Rice received the Society of Universal Dialogue’s Atlantic Institute Peace Award in recognition of his efforts in intercultural engagement and dialogue . Rice also received the society's Atlantic Institute peace Award in 2013 .
 He is appointed as the UT and Oak Ridge National Laboratory Governor’s Chair Professor of Nuclear Security . He serves on the faculty of both the Department of Nuclear Engineering and the Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education .
 Hall is also a Senior Fellow in Global Security Policy at the Howard H Baker Jr. Hall is a senior Fellow in the Global Security policy department . He is a former Senior Fellow of the Howard B Baker Jr., a senior fellow in the Security Policy department .
 He directs the Baker Center’s Global Security Programs . He is also a director of the Center for Public Policy .