Senior Russian parliamentarians have floated the idea of Moscow seeking compensations from Ukraine for ‘damages’ it caused to Crimea . EU lambasted Russia’s leadership on the fifth year since the annexation of the Black Sea peninsula under President Putin .
 EU's High Representative on foreign policy Federica Mogherini published a scathing statement declaring the Union would keep the non-recognition of Russia's annexation of the Ukraine's peninsula . The statement was published as Moscow was preparing to celebrate the anniversary of the “reunification’
 The Speaker of the Russian State Duma said Moscow might decide to make Ukraine offset the losses Crimea “suffered” as part of Ukraine . In the run-up to the fifth anniversary, Vyacheslav Volodin said that Moscow might make Ukraine offsets the losses .
 Volodin did not specify what “European parliamentary bodies’ he was referring to, and how exactly they would help Russia secure compensations .
 Crimea had been conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783, and remained part of it and later its successor, the Soviet Union . Crimea was part of the Soviet Soviet Union, which was later part of its successor .
 In 1954, it was transferred from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic to the Ukraine . After the Soviet Union was formally dissolved in 1991, it remained part of the newly independent Ukraine .
 Russia’s President Vladimir Putin sent troops to occupy the Crimean Peninsula, and then annexed it on March 18, 2014 . The Euromaidan Revolution ousted pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in 2013-2014 .
 Ukraine and Russia remain involved in a “cold’ conflict ever since. This has been followed by a pro-Russian insurgency possibly aided by Moscow in the Donbass region .
 The EU has introduced sanctions against Russia because of Crimea’s annexation and the war in Eastern Ukraine . The United States, Canada, and other Western nations have also introduced sanctions .
 The economy of Crimea and Sevastopol was destroyed, the Russian parliament Speaker said . "This practically amounted to an annexation," he said . The parliament Speaker instructed a deputy to come up with compensation figures for Ukraine .
 Leonid Slutsky reiterated Volodin’s idea for Ukraine to compensate Russia for “economic damage’ It supposedly caused to Crimea, he said . Crimea's Prime Minister Sergey Aksyonov said the assessment of the “damage” would begin over the
 Vladimir Putin’s spokesman Dmitry Peskov said it had not been discussed inside the Kremlin . He said Volodin's ‘compensation’ idea was not discussed by Putin's spokesman .