 Ukraine's new government called Russian president Vladimir Putin a threat to the whole world after he added Crimea to the map of Russia on Tuesday . Russia's new president added Crimea on Tuesday to its map of the world .
 Ukraine's interim president Oleksandr Turchynov compared Putin to 20th Century fascists . Ukraine's Interim president compared Putin with 20th century fascists .
 Prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk then said that Russian soldiers are turning a political conflict into a military one .
 Putin said Crimea has always been an integral part of Russia . In an emotional 40-minute speech televised live from the Kremlin, he said Crimea had always been part of the country .
 Crimean residents overwhelmingly backed breaking off from Ukraine and joining Russia . He dismissed Western criticism of Sunday's Crimean referendum as a manifestation of West's double standards .
 Russian leader has insisted his nation has no intention to invade other regions of Ukraine . But he has insisted he does not intend to invade any other regions .
 World War 2 started with the annexation of the territory of other countries by fascist Germany .
 Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine are likely to carry out further attacks on Ukrainian troops, a military spokesman says . Ukrainian military spokesman Colonel Andriy Lysenko said on Friday .
 Russia-backed separatists carried out heavy shelling in Avdeevka . The rebel-stronghold of Donetsk is 20 kilometres north of the rebel-held Donetsk .
 Ukraine's military acknowledged Thursday that Russia-backed separatists had overrun the town of Vuhlehirsk in their onslaught against government troops in the east of the country .
 The town, also known as Uglegorsk, is a strategically valuable railway hub . It lies 15 kilometres west of Debaltseve and around 60 kilometres northeast of Donetsk itself .
 Debaltseve is a railway hub that sits between the two main rebel-held cities of Donetsk and Luhansk . The loss of the town would make it even more difficult for the government to hold on the town .
 Debaltseve has been the scene of some of the fiercest fighting since the rebel offensive began this month . The rebel offensive started this month after weeks of relative quiet .
 German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier underlined the importance of EU efforts to tackle the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 EU's foreign ministers showed a united front at the announcement of new sanctions and a six-month extension of existing sanctions against Russian and pro-Russia separatist officials .
 The EU imposed the first visa bans and asset freezes against officials linked to Russia's annexation of southern Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula last March .
 The measures had been due to expire in March, before the extension was announced . The measures were due to end in March .
 Since Russia's annexation of Crimea, the EU has steadily increased restrictive measures . The EU has been steadily increasing restrictive measures since the Crimea annexation .
 "" is not under rebel control, the fight is still going on, counter-artillery fights. Terrorists are making reconnaissance to find Ukrainian positions and carry out further artillery attacks .
 Scuffles broke out in the Ukrainian parliament on Thursday as violence intensified on the streets of the capital .
 Once order had been restored, opposition leaders Vitali Klitschko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk addressed the parliament and debated ways to end the conflict . Once order was restored, the opposition leaders addressed the Parliament .
 Video footage on Ukrainian television appeared to show protesters being cut down by gunfire . Protesters were lying on pavement as comrades rushed to their aid .
 Teams of protesters carried bodies away on sheets of plastic or on planks of wood .
 Protesters were seen on Thursday leading police officers with their hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev .
 opposition lawmaker says they are being held in Kiev's occupied city hall . An opposition lawmaker said they were being held by protesters .
 Secretary of State John Kerry is urging Russia to commit to a diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Kerry wants Russia to halt its military aid for the separatists and back a negotiated peace .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko warmly welcomed U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry to Kiev . Calling it a "very critical moment in our history," Poroshenko calls it "a very critical moment"
 The leaders of France and Germany announced Thursday they were heading to Kiev and Moscow with a proposal to end the fighting . The leaders announced Thursday that they were headed to Kiev with the proposal .
 The surprise move appeared designed to head off U.S. considerations of giving Ukraine heavy weapons . Europeans oppose such a move out of fears of sparking an arms race .
 President Vladimir Putin's aide welcomed the new European initiative . He said the Kremlin was ready for a constructive discussion .
 NATO foreign ministers prepared to boost the military alliance's forces Thursday in response to the fighting and Russia's increased military forcefulness . NATO foreign minister: "We are ready to boost our forces"
 At least three people were killed in overnight shelling in the rebel stronghold of Donetsk, local officials say .
 Ukrainian military spokesman said five servicemen died and 29 others were wounded in fighting in the east in the last 24 hours .
 Fighting between Russia-backed separatists and Ukrainian government forces surged in January . The fighting began in January.
 The U.N. has sharply criticized both sides for indiscriminate shelling . Over 5,300 people have been killed since April .
 We want a diplomatic resolution, but we cannot close our eyes to tanks that are crossing the border from Russia and coming in to Ukraine . We want to resolve the issue, but can't close our eye to tanks coming in.
 A report released by the United Nations' human rights arm strongly criticised both sides in Ukraine's fighting for the killing of civilians in indiscriminate shelling .
Up to 2,000 civilians have died in the two-year conflict in eastern Ukraine . Nearly 90 percent of them are in shelling of residential areas .
 A senior UN official told the Associated Press that the report was varied, and reiterated that it condemned actions on both sides of the conflict .
 The report noted that no arrests had been made in the shooting deaths of 13 policemen in the capital Kiev . Ukraine's Russia-friendly president Viktor Yanukovych fled after the massive street protests .
 The human rights office also said it was concerned that authorities hadn't conducted an effective investigation into the deaths of 48 people in the city of Odessa on a day of clashes in 2014 .
 Many believe the blaze was started by firebombs thrown into the building . The building was where anti-government demonstrators had taken shelter .
 smoke rising from shelling in the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk that saw heavy bombardment in the struggle between pro-government forces and pro-Russia separatists .
 The conflict-wracked eastern Ukraine city of Luhansk held its city day on Sunday . It marked with a special outdoor church service . Russian aid was doled out to queues of local people .
 Signs of life are gradually returning to the city, which suffered extensive damage in a weeks-long government shelling campaign .
 A cease-fire agreement signed earlier this month has largely halted the unrest in eastern Ukraine . There were still exchanges of rocket fire in some areas, such as the suburbs of the main rebel city of Donetsk .
 priests led hundreds of residents in an open-air prayer service in commemoration of those killed during the violence . Luhansk city day opened on a sombre note .
 separatist leader Igor Plotnitsky mourned the dead at the Mother of Sorrows Church . He called for forgiveness for those responsible for the deaths .
 Around much of Luhansk, smashed windows, burned-out buildings and craters in the road are testimony to the shelling campaign .
 Damage to basic infrastructure has left much of the city without power and running water since early August . The city has been without running water and power since August .
 A Russian aid convoy arrived in Luhansk on Saturday . Men in camouflage handed out chocolate, drinking water, soap, toilet paper, nappies and other basic items to a large crowd .
 A rebel official, a Muscovite who gave his name only as the nom de guerre Makhra, told the AP the aid was from Russia .
 Lilya Miroschenkovo, 73, said that she had not received her pension since May . She said she was waiting in line for her pension .
"I borrow money to live because it has already been three months," she said . "I borrowed money for three months" she said.
People in Luhansk have been starving for almost two months . They have decided to make a celebration dedicated to the Day of LuHansk .
 Shakhtar Donetsk has been displaced from its home in Donetsk . The Ukrainian football team finished at the top of the country's Premier League last year .
 The Donbass Arena has been built six years ago and host to some of Europe's biggest football matches . The squad hasn't played there since May 2 .
 Donetsk is too dangerous to hold matches, and the stadium itself has come under attack . The stadium itself is under attack from fans .
 CCTV footage captured by the club's CCTV cameras last October showed the moment when a girl almost got crushed by a falling glass panel from the stadium . shock waves from a nearby explosion rocked the building .
 There are no crowds and no players, just the eerie sound of explosions in the background as the conflict goes on .
 It sits in the middle of the city of Donetsk, a war zone controlled by pro-Russian separatists battling Ukrainian troops .
 Shakhtar team captain Darijo Srna said the bloodshed in the east both saddens and inspires the players .
 Srna has spent the last 12 years with Shakhtar and considers Donetsk to be his home . Srna is from Croatia, but is not from Croatia and is from the country .
 20 tons of fruit to be delivered to children in Donetsk via the team owner's charitable foundation . The fruit is part of efforts to ease the humanitarian crisis brought on by the fighting .
 Ivan Ordets and other team members originally packed light for what they thought would be a short trip away from home . The 22-year-old player now lives in the Ukrainian capital Kiev and lives in Lviv .
 The players have rented apartments in Kiev and are starting to build new lives there . Nearly 5,800 people have been killed in the conflict since it began .
Ordets is one of the few native Ukrainians in Shakhtar Donetsk, a team that includes 13 Brazilians . More than half of the team's members are Brazilians, more than half are native Ukrainians .
 He comes from Volnovakha, a small town near Donetsk, but on the Ukrainian government side of the lines . He is also from the small town of VolNovakha.
 Last month, a passenger bus in Volnovakha was hit by a shell, killing 13 people . A passenger bus was also hit by the shell .
 The Ukrainian government accused the Russia-backed separatists, who denied responsibility . The separatists deny responsibility .
 His mother has moved with him to Kiev, but other relatives remain behind .
 The team takes its name, "Shakhtar," from the coal miners who work in the Donbass or Donetsk Basin of eastern Ukraine .
 Most of the residents in the east speak Russian and want closer ties to Moscow . Most of them are concerned with the government in Kiev with suspicion .
 By contrast, western Ukraine tilts more towards Europe, and the city of Lviv is a stronghold of Ukrainian nationalism .
 Shakhtar Donetsk is owned by billionaire Rinat Akhmetov, an industrialist who is Ukraine's richest man . The Donetsk-based industrialist is the richest man in Ukraine .
 His companies employ thousands in the Donetsk area, he built Donbass Arena . He has publicly opposed the separatists in Donetsk .
 Shakhtar held Bayern Munich to a scoreless draw in Lviv last week . Shakhtar's stadium decked out in a show of Ukrainian unity .
 Fans from eastern Ukraine travelled more than a day by bus to support their team . The team's nickname is the ""Pitmen"" after their coal-mining roots .
 Karpaty Lviv is temporarily using the stadium in the city of Lviv . There have been some tensions between fans and those of the richer, more talented squad from the east .
 Shakhtar fans wore Shakhtar colours at the Bayern Munich match . There was no sign of ill will at the match, with many local fans wearing Shakhtar colors .
 What the future holds for Shakhtar is as uncertain as the outcome of the conflict is .
 For now, the team and its fans are focused on letting the game give them some respite from the bloodshed .
 Pavel Borschev, a Shakhtar fan from Slovyansk, in the Donetsk region, says he is a fan of Shakhtar .
 Hundreds of miners marched in eastern Ukraine on Wednesday calling for both sides of the civil unrest to come to an agreement .
 The miners marched through Donetsk and held a rally in the city centre . They demanded that the government meet with the Donetsk People's Republic and find a peaceful solution .
"We want them to sit down and make an agreement," said Sergei, a miner from Donetsk . "We wanted them to sitting down and making an agreement"
 Ukraine's President said Wednesday that government forces will unilaterally cease fire to allow pro-Russian separatists in the east of the country a chance to lay down weapons or leave the country . A potentially major development to bring peace to the country.
 Petro Poroshenko's plan, announced following conversations with Russian and German leaders, aims to end two months of fighting in eastern provinces that form nation's industrial heartland .
 This is a peaceful protest, we do not want war, we don't support either side in the conflict, says CNN's John Sutter . "We don't want war," he says .
 Ukraine's parliamentary elections on Sunday promise to usher in a fresh class of politicians . But for millions of Ukrainians change is no promise of improvement .
 dreams of many who fought for a better future have been blunted by war and near economic collapse . Since the revolution this year that toppled a despised president, dreams have been broken .
 Election apathy is pervasive in the east, where the military conflict between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian troops has been concentrated over the past few months .
 At the northern entrance to Mariupol a smog-plagued port city only a few miles away from rebel lines soldiers at checkpoints express no great interest in the elections .
Campaign posters have to be replaced frequently as they are often pelted with paint . Campaign posters are often covered in paint .
 The election indifference is a symptom of a deeper lack of interest in who ultimately wins the war raging nearby . The election is a sign of a deep lack ofinterest in who eventually wins.
 Some argue that the conflict and the threat of Russian aggression have drawn attention away from a much-needed reform agenda . Some argue the conflict has drawn attention to the need for reform .
Self-appointed authorities no longer accept they are part of Ukraine . In areas under separatist control, where hundreds of thousands live, no voting will take place .
 They plan their own elections on 2 November which they hope will lend them authority they have so far only managed to establish through force . Instead, they plan to hold their own election in November .
 Alexander Zakharchenko has put himself forward to become an elected head of his would-be state . He has no contenders for the highest post .
 Many Donetsk residents believe the Donbass region will remain under pro-Russian separatists's control . Many residents, like Lena Alexandrova, believe the region will be under the separatists' control .
 Others are frustrated about the money being spent on campaigning, rather than aiding cash-strapped residents of warn-torn areas . Others also believe the elections will not achieve or change anything .
 The upcoming elections for local legislators and heads of the DPR as well as the LPR will not be recognised by Kiev or any other country . The elections will be held in Kiev and other countries .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Friday that self-proclaimed republics should be allowed to hold their own elections as planned . Putin said Friday that the self- proclaimed republics must hold their elections .
 All this political commotion, this jostling for positions when people are dying, I don't even know what to call it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he doesn't even understand what to say about the situation .
 Those who are making PR for themselves, who run around and worry about the elections, are talking total nonsense . Because those who are make PR for their own, who worry about elections are talkingtotal nonsense .
 In any case I don't think we will come back to Ukraine again after what happened. In any cases, I do not think we'll come back again after the incident .
 The money that they spent on the elections would be better given to people for pensions and social payments for mothers . The money would be given to those who spent it on the election .
 The elections will not happen in the United States. They can imagine everything they want, but their elections won't happen here .
 Kiev elections are held in Kiev, Poland, and the Polish border . We can do our elections in Kiev all the way to the border .
 Russia plans to eliminate Ukraine as an independent state and could spark a new offensive in the east to achieve that aim . Ukraine's prime minister told The Associated Press .
 Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk claimed Russia was uninterested in de-escalating Ukraine's conflict with separatist forces . Russia has pledged to maintain a peace deal made in February .
 Ukraine and the West accuse Russia of being directly involved in the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine . The conflict has left over 6,000 dead in the last year .
 The ceasefire agreement reached in February requires both Ukraine government and rebel forces to pull back their heavy weapons . The agreement requires both the government and rebels to pull their weapons back .
 It envisions Ukraine granting its rebellious eastern territories some measure of self-rule . It also envisions giving Ukraine its rebellious east territories some measures of self rule .
 Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin will launch a new offensive operation in the East of Ukraine . He will then be followed by unrest and riots in the country .
 The front line between the warring sides has become all but a de-facto border, cutting off a generation of first-time voters from Sunday's presidential election . Five years after a deadly separatist conflict broke out in eastern Ukraine.
 Only peers who left their homes to live in areas under government control will be able to cast their ballots for Ukraine's new president .
 A separatist war in Ukraine's industrial heartland of Donetsk and Luhansk has killed more than 13,000 people . Many are seeking the relative stability of government-controlled areas .
Residents of Donetsk and Luhansk were able to vote in May 2014 when Petro Poroshenko was elected president . Last time residents of the Donetsk andLuhansk could vote was May 2014 .
 Election officials and voters were intimidated by the separatists who shut down some of the polling stations . Many stayed open but many stayed open .
 Ukrainian government has no presence in Ukraine this year . Anyone wanting to vote would have to cross the front line to do so . This year, the Ukrainian government is not there .
 No credible statistics on how many people have left separatist-held areas . There is no credible statistics.
 Both the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were home to more than 6. million before the war . The statistical agencies in the separatist-held areas earlier this year put their current population at 3. million .
 Hostilities here died down after peace accords in 2015 but never fully stopped . Thousands of people like him have to man the front line positions .
After annexing Ukraine's Crimean peninsula, Russia threw its weight behind separatists in eastern Ukraine . But Russia stopped short of annexing it, stopping short of taking it.
 Donetsk and Luhansk are too economically depressed and are nowhere near predominantly Russian-speaking as Crimea . There has been no indication that the Kremlin may want to annex the two cities .
 Ivan asked his last name to be withdrawn for fear of repercussions for his relatives in Luhansk . Ivan is convinced that an individual choice can make a difference in the upcoming election .
 Many eastern Ukraine natives left feeling that it would be too dangerous for them to come back even for a visit because of their pro-Western views . Kateryna Savchenko works on the radio in Kiev and plays in a theatre collective mostly made up of internally displaced people .
 Savchenko, who left her native Horlivka in 2014, is optimistic about her future in Ukraine .
 Some think that we have no prospects on own or as part of Russia, only as parts of Ukraine . Some think we have nothing to do with Russia or Russia .
 Everyone knows who will become next president so people do not have reasons to vote . We stand out from countries where everything is predicted for next 10 years .
 Russia is providing direct military aid, equipment, ammunition, intelligence, and some of the equipment that is being provided also requires technical assistance, Hodges says . Hodges said there was evidence of Russia's hand in the conflict .
 Hodges commended the European Union stance on sanctions against Russia for its perceived role in the conflict raging in eastern Ukraine . Hodges said Russia's perceived role was to blame for the conflict .
 Russian, Ukrainian, French and German diplomats converging on Berlin for talks on recent escalation of fighting between Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed separatists . Russia is providing direct military aid, equipment, ammunition, intelligence and some of the equipment that is being provided also requires technical assistance
 A vigil was held in Kiev on Friday to commemorate those who lost their lives in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 Dozens gathered at a makeshift memorial in Independence Square to lay flowers and light up candles for victims .
 More than 5,300 people have been killed in the conflict, according to a United Nations count . The conflict has killed more than 4,000 people in the past year .
 The vigil was taking place as the leaders of France, Germany and Russia were holding talks in Moscow on a new proposal to try to bring an end to the deaths of people in the region .
 A ceasefire deal was reached in September, but both sides violated it . The fighting has risen sharply in the past two weeks .
 Ukraine's leader said on Thursday that he hoped his suggested major political and economic reforms would make the country ready for membership in the European Union by 2020 . Ukraine's prime minister said he hopes his suggested reforms will make his country ready to join the EU .
 Poroshenko outlined a six-year plan for Ukraine . The plan includes reforming all major government agencies in the country .
Fighting between government and rebel forces has killed at least 3,500 people since mid-April . The conflict is in the east of the country .
 The entire southeast of the country would dissipate. They thought they could just push us, and the entire southeast would dissipated .
 In the beginning, the cease-fire, which was called three weeks ago, was repeatedly violated . In the first three weeks, it was called a truce .
 Donetsk, the largest rebel stronghold in the region, said artillery fire and other explosions could be heard throughout the city during the day . In recent days, reports of violations have decreased notably, although on Thursday the city council of Donetsk said that artillery fire was heard .
I'm confident that we leave in the past times when we were disunited with issues such as NATO, language, west and east . I'm confident we leave the past time when we are disunited. I'm also confident we left in the previous times. I
 US Secretary of State John Kerry urged Russia to show its commitment to a peaceful, diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Kerry stood with Ukraine's president after their talks in Kiev .
 Kerry called on Russia to demonstrate its commitment by ceasing military support for separatists . Kerry called for Russia to show its commitment to the separatists and bring them to the negotiation table .
"We cannot close our eyes to Russian fighters in unmarked uniforms crossing the border," he said .
 Kerry made no mention during his comments of the possibility of the United States providing Ukraine lethal military aid .
 Several European nations oppose giving Ukraine heavy weapons . Germany and France are heading to Kiev and Moscow with a proposal to end fighting .
 We are not seeking a conflict with Russia, no one is, not President Poroshenko, not the U.S. not the European Community, not Russia . We're not seeking conflict with Russian, not president Poroshenko. We aren't seeking conflict, not U.
 We are very hopeful that Russia will take advantage of our broad-based, uniform acceptance of the notion that there is a diplomatic solution that is staring everybody in the face . We are also hopeful of Russia taking advantage of its broad- based, uniform accept of the idea of
 Two Ukrainian troops have been killed in the country's industrial east, Ukraine's government says . Both government forces and rebels reported shelling on their positions overnight .
 Intensified fighting in the country's industrial heartland has entered its fifth day . The fighting has now lasted five days .
Emergency services of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic carried out the evacuation of civilians who live in the areas caught up in shelling .
A few hundred residents were accommodated in a dormitory in another district of Donetsk . A few hundred people were housed in the dormitory.
 Oleksandr Turchynov visited the most active position of the Ukrainian Armed Forces in the Avdiivka industrial area . The Ukrainian Security and Defence Council Chairman visited the area Wednesday .
 Both pro-Russia separatist rebels and the Ukrainian government in 2015 committed to cease fire and withdraw heavy weaponry including Grads .
 At least 10 people have been killed in eastern Ukraine since Monday and dozens wounded including civilians on both sides of the front line . At least 40 people were wounded on Monday, including dozens wounded on both side of the line .