 September and October saw a fresh wave of house searches, arrests, arrests and oppression of regime critics on the Russian-occupied Crimean peninsula .
 Two Crimean Tatar political prisoners, Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov, were freed and extradited to Turkey . Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan brokered a deal with Russia’s President Vladimir Putin for their release .
 Ukrainian activists say they were taken from Simferopol in different cars and did not see each other until they boarded a plane bound for the Russian city of Anapa .
 Chiygoz says he initially thought he was being sent to Siberia . He says he was picked up from Simferopol's pre-trial detention center without any explanation .
 Erdoğan met with both Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Putin over the past month . Erdoğan also met with the Ukrainian President.
 A great deal of legal, diplomatic, and political negotiations took place for their release, says Chiygoz and Umerov’s lawyer, Nikolai Polozov . The release was finally accomplished by Turkey's President Erdoğan .
 Chiygoz is the deputy chair of the Mejlis, the representative body of the Crimean Tatars . He is a former member of the Crimea's National Council of the Tatars.
 He was detained in January 2015 for allegedly organizing a mass rally of thousands of Crimean Tatars in front of the Crimean parliament . The rally was to prevent the extraordinary session that was about to decide Crimea's future .
 Since Chubarov was declared persona non-grata in Crimea, he had to leave for mainland Ukraine . He had to go to mainland Ukraine.
 Chiygoz on the other hand, still lived in Crimea and became the Russian court's scapegoat .
 On September 27, 2017, the Simferopol District Court found him guilty of promoting separatism . Umerov's words violated the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, the court said .
 Putin and Erdoğan have been normalizing relations between their countries in the past year . In November 2015, Turkish forces downed a Russian jet that had strayed into Turkish airspace from Syria .
 The Turkish Stream natural gas pipeline along the bottom of the Black Sea and the first Turkish nuclear power plant, in Akkuyu, are among the projects . They are about to implement two large-scale projects.
 Ankara has reportedly already paid out the first installment for the S-400 . The first installment has been paid out.
 Erdoğan is a key player in regional security, including in Syria . He met with Putin five times and held ten phone conversations in 2017, he says .
 Crimean Tatars all over the world rejoiced collectively at the release of their two jailed leaders . The two leaders were sentenced to life in prison for their crimes .
 The Turkish-Russian rapprochement that allowed Umerov and Chiygoz’s emancipation is posing a real challenge to the unity of the broader Euro-Atlantic community .