 Ukraine's incumbent is lagging behind in polls, but he still has time to manipulate political events to his advantage . Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for years .
 Poroshenko can hardly be described as someone who bears the torch of the 2014 Maidan revolution . Accused by Ukraine's progressives of corruption and hampering reforms, Poroshenko is not described as a hero .
 Zelenskiy is rumoured to be backed by oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi . Former Defence Minister Anatoly Hrytsenko is a proponent of enlightened authoritarianism . Yury Boyko formally represents the Russia-friendly anti-Maidan opposition .
 The March vote invites parallels with Boris Yeltsin's desperate effort to retain office at the backdrop of the disastrous Chechen war in 1996 . With this line-up of candidates, the March vote will be held in Russia .
 He eventually succeeded, but only at the cost of undermining democratic procedure . He ultimately succeeded, though he eventually succeeded .
 In Ukraine, incumbents can manipulate the political agenda to boost their ratings and improve their chances of getting re-elected . In the rest of the former USSR, like in the other countries, such as Ukraine, it is possible to manipulate political agenda .
 In the post-Soviet era, no one has excelled more in such political manipulation than Russia's Vladimir Putin .
 Russian president sent his ratings soaring to 89 percent by annexing Crimea in the aftermath of Ukraine's revolution . In 2014, he launched a war in the Donbas region and unleashing an unprecedented wave of chauvinism in the country .
 Poroshenko is taking a page out of Putin's playbook, but he's applying it on a modest scale and within the constraints of democratic procedures .
Right-wing populism currently dominating politics in Hungary and Poland . His aim is to rally nationalist-leaning voters in the Ukrainian-speaking regions of central and western Ukraine .
 Large billboards with his campaign motto were lining almost every avenue in the country for most of 2018 . He officially announced his decision to run for re-election in 2018 .
 Russian-speaking regions of Ukraine were free to proclaim it as the second official language in their territory . Millions of Ukrainians use Russian as their first language .
 The nationalist wave that swept through Ukraine in the aftermath of Russia's 2014 military aggression brought the question of national language to the fore . The far right started rallying for curbing language rights of the Russian-speaking population .
 In 2017, the Ukrainian president oversaw the adoption of a law that promotes the Ukrainian language . The law effectively phasing out secondary education in Russian .
 Hungarian-language schools affected in the same way as Russian schools . That didn't give the desired boost to his ratings but instead led to a diplomatic spat with neighbouring Hungary .
 Russia has made Ukraine bleed drop by drop something that inevitably affects the current president, who was elected in 2014 on the promise to end the war soon .
 Poroshenko needed to be seen as proactive as possible, even though Ukraine is not capable of overcoming Russia's war machine militarily .
 Ukrainian forces have been advancing into the buffer zone which divides the warring sides as per the Minsk agreements of 2015 . In the last couple of years, Ukrainian forces are advancing into a buffer zone .
 Ukrainian border patrol seized a Russian fishing boat, threatening to do so with each vessel that leaves or enters ports in Crimea . Another front was opened at sea, when in March 2018 the Ukrainian border Patrol seized a fishing boat .
 Russia responded by beefing up its presence in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov . Ukraine and its Western allies have talked about a renewed Russian aggression .
 Ukraine sent small naval vessels under the newly built bridge over the Strait of Kerch . Ukraine continued testing Putin's patience by sending small vessels under bridge .
 Moscow's paranoia was further inflamed by an article in Washington Examiner, an obscure United States newspaper, suggesting Ukraine should blow up the bridge .
 Ukrainian president pushed through a month-long martial law period, which lasted till the end of December . Claiming that a large-scale Russian invasion was imminent, the president went to parliament .
 It remains unclear what that measure, which theoretically gave the president sweeping powers, entailed beyond fomenting patriotic fervour among Ukrainians .
 The restrictions had no visible effect except for the severe restrictions on Russian nationals visiting the country .
 Poroshenko set off on a tour of central and western Ukraine, where the bulk of his electorate is based . Bartholomew's edict, known as Tomos, is to large gatherings in cathedrals and churches .
 Ukraine's largest number of parishes remains under Moscow patriarchate's control . He successfully touted this achievement as Ukraine's great victory over Russia, even though it remains incomplete .
 Poroshenko's spin doctors will need to devise more drama to secure his election victory . There are still almost two months left till the election .
 A freshly adopted law requires all parishes aligned with the Moscow Patriarchate to reregister a measure designed to coerce church communities into switching to the newly created Ukrainian Church .
 If successful, Poroshenko would surely use it to boost his popularity on the campaign trail . If this measure is successful, it would surely be a boost to his popularity .
 Ukraine is preparing to send more naval ships to exercise its right to free passage through the Strait of Kerch .
 New dramatic standoff at sea may give Poroshenko a decisive edge over the rivals .