 Kyiv cannot afford to focus just on the Russian threat; it has to solve both challenges . In order to succeed, Kyiv must focus on both sides of the line .
 As Mr Yanukovych fled Kyiv, “little green men’s” troops in uniforms without identifying insignia were moved to occupy Crimea .
 Russian intelligence and military services provided leadership, funding, ammunition, heavy weapons and, in some cases, regular units of the Russian army to launch and sustain a separatist conflict in Donbas .
 An estimated 1. million internally displaced persons have left to reside elsewhere in Ukraine . As many as 700,000 have gone to Russia, as many as 1 million have left Ukraine .
 The Kremlin appears content to sustain a simmering conflict in Donbas . The Kremlin, however, appears to be content with the conflict .
 Kyiv's government is impeding efforts to bring the country closer to the European Union . That provides a means to pressure and undermine the government in Kyiv .
 Moscow's denials of involvement have little credibility, given the identification of Russian military hardware and senior Russian officers on the ground in Donbas . Moscow’s denials are little credibility.
 The "Normandy Four" channel was established in June 2014 among the Ukrainian, Russian, German, and French leaders . The U.S. government has taken a more active role in settling the conflict in the past nine months .
 Secretary of State Rex Tillerson appointed Kurt Volker as special envoy to help find an end to the conflict in support of the Minsk agreements . Russia's aggression against Ukraine is the biggest obstacle to improving the bilateral U.S.-Russia relationship .
 The Kremlin might consider an international peacekeeping force to facilitate a settlement . The potential development of the past six months is a potentially promising development .
 It could help provide conditions for implementing political measures agreed in Minsk . It could provide the conditions for implementation of political measures in the country .
 peacekeeping force would have to deploy rapidly throughout all of occupied Donbas, including on the Ukraine-Russia border .
A force that got stuck on the line of contact would merely turn a simmering conflict into a frozen one . A force that gets stuck on a line of Contact would merely be a frozen conflict .
 Whether the Kremlin and Putin would agree to such a peacekeeping force remains an open question . The Kremlin and President Vladimir Putin are yet to agree on a deal .
 The Russian presidential election will not become clear until later in the spring . With attention in Moscow now on the March 18 presidential election, the Russian view will become clear .
 In May 2014, Mr Poroshenko was elected president, securing more than 55 percent of the vote . He was elected in May 2014 .
 Ukrainian presidential election did not require a second ballot . That obviated the need for a run-off, the first time since 1991 when a presidential election was held .
 Mr Poroshenko and his first government, composed largely of technocrats led by Arseniy Yatseniuk, implemented some impressive reforms .
 The reforms included stabilizing government finances, consolidating the banking sector, enacting transparent procedures for government procurement, and raising energy tariffs to cover the cost of providing the energy .
 Kyiv secured a program with the International Monetary Fund worth $17. billion in low interest credits over four years . Such reforms helped Kyiv in 2015 to secure a program worth $18.5 billion .
 Ukraine has failed to deliver on measures such as land privatization and harmonization of gas prices . IMF's program has disbursed no money for 10 months, IMF says .
 IMF officials now seem especially concerned about the need for more effective steps to combat corruption . The corruption continues to plague many areas of Ukrainian life .
 They have focused in particular on establishing a special court to try corruption cases . They have also focused on setting up special court for corruption cases.
 The Ukrainian government was able to borrow on the Eurobond market last autumn, albeit at higher interest rates than from the IMF . It may see less need for IMF funds and less need to implement reforms that it agreed to .
 Many worry that Mr Poroshenko will put off further reform steps . The presidential and parliamentary elections are scheduled for 2019 .
 Opinion polls reflect growing public dissatisfaction with the lack of action on corruption and failure to curb the political power of the oligarchs .
 A newly released survey showed Mr Poroshenko in second place, polling 9. percent . A dramatic decline from the 55 percent he won in 2014 .
 The slowed pace of reform has also caused frustration among Ukraine’s Western partners . The slow pace of reforms is also causing frustration among the West .
 The European Union has followed the IMF and withheld assistance due to Kyiv’s failure to perform . The IMF has also withheld assistance from the European Union due to the failure of Kyiv .
 He has to continue to hold the line against Russian aggression while also delivering on further reforms . He has been criticised for his actions in the past by Russia .
 Ukrainian leaders have demonstrated the ability to muddle through, not put the country on a path to success . Over the 26 years since the country regained independence, they have demonstrated that they can muddle.
 The people of Ukraine deserve more if they are to realize the potential of the Maidan, Ukraine . The Maidan people deserve more than they deserve.