 Putin’s restraint and long-game patience. When I read about the black, sabotage operations against Russia, I really have to admire Mr Putin.
How he can put up with these sorts of attacks all over the world and not want to retaliate is beyond me. How he can do this is beyond him, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Their patience is generated in part by their practice of the Maharishi Transcendental Meditation technique .
 I challenge anybody to find this information in the depth it is presented, anywhere else on the planet except in an intelligence file . I challenge anyone to find the information, in thedepth it is present, anywhere other on the planets except in a file .
 It is a living thing as it brings people and economies together on a higher level than would be attained simply by the movement of cargo and electricity .
 Song written by driver and amateur song writer from Ivanovo, Russia, together with his children .
 They wrote and performed the song at their traditional wooden country dacha . The song was performed at the traditional wooden dacha.
 The winning song 'Krimsky Most' was presented at the New Wave Music Festival . Oleg Gazmanov was also a judge of the Crimean Bridge Song competition .
Out of curiosity I googled ‘US media on Russian Crimean Bridge’ and got 2,690,000 links .
 The sour grapes juvenile shock on display. I know it’s probably low vibration & low calibration on my part, but I got to say I thoroughly enjoyed it .
 One might think the MSM would at least update their narrative from Russia “annexed’s Crimea to Russia ‘attached’ Crimea .
 The majority of humans, esp, in the West, are so screwed up, they listen to such drivel day and night, says author .
 They actually stopped doing their own reporting and research — too lazy . They actually stop doing their research and reporting .
Hundreds of millions of citizens. Then, they flush down all that excrement onto millions of their citizens .
 It wouldn't surprise me if millions of Ukrainians start settling into Crimea in the near future. It wouldn’t surprise me. It would be a surprise if millions start settling in Crimea in near future .
 The bridge will be only for supplies and turism in Crimea, but for Russian imports and exports of goods as well . I don’t think, this bridge will only be for supplies in Crimea .
 Russia is building new ports to replace those of baltic states and they will use Crimean ports . They will replace transportation through Ukraine as well as Novorossiysk port is not enough big in Black Sea .
 Northern Italian regions Veneto, Lombardia and Toscany already recognize Crimean referendum . They quietly cooperate with Crimea and they quietly cooperate.
 Italian Merchant ships will take a nice share of transportation of goods between EU and Russian ports in Crimea .