 State Duma deputy Konstantin Zatulin spoke and admitted that Russia had made a military invasion on Donbass in 2014 . State Department official said Russia made an invasion in 2014.
 Japan has refused Putin's proposal to sign a peace agreement with Russia . Japan has rejected Putin's request for a peace deal with Russia.
 Russia has taken a wait-and-see position and will not make new attempts to peacefully settle the situation on the Donbas . Russia has not made a new attempt to peacefully resolve the situation .
 U.S. Special Representative Volker declared illegitimacy of the ""elections"" announced on Donbas .
 Ukraine blocked the speech of Russian representatives from the annexed Crimea at the OSCE meeting . The meeting was held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation recognized the legal sentence for 12 years imprisonment for political prisoner Sushchenko . The sentence was recognized by the Russian Supreme Court .
 The court continued arrest of Ruban suspected of treason and terrorism by the end of October . The court continues to arrest Ruban.
 UN-led mission mandate in Donbas should be robust enough to actually control security there, says U.S. Envoy Volker .
 Russia tries to use the situation with the Crimean Titanium to promote this issue Klimkin . Russia is trying to promote the issue with the Crimea Titanium .
 Russian military expert Paul Felgengauer is convinced that Russian President Vladimir Putin is ready to deploy a full-scale military operation in the Donbas . The North Stream 2 is successfully launched, he says .
 The front has always been combined with the so-called proxy wars in Asia, Africa and Latin America . The Cold War on the Central European has always be combined.
 proxy wars are taking place in Syria and the Donbass, and much will depend on the launch of the North Stream 2 .
 Ukraine will shut off gas through Ukraine and fight on its territory . Then it will turn out to completely shut off energy through Ukraine . It will fight on Ukraine's territory .
 "They will shut up Europe gas, they will shout," he says . "It's time to carry out only limited operations," he adds .
 East-2018 is preparing for a large-scale military operation on the part of Russia . According to him, "East-2018" is preparing to take place in Russia .
 " mass preparations for a high-probable war," expert says . "They want to check the ability of the troops to mobilize, move and so on," he says .
 His words have been published in the Twitter account of Phosphorus Gorlovka . His words were published in his Twitter account .
 Russia recently sends alcoholic and drug addicts to the occupied Donbas . The DPR fighters stop recruiting mercenaries from the Russian Federation .
 Donbas is threatened by a dangerous scenario: the estimated dates are already known . The estimated dates of Donbas are not known .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said that the Russian Federation should diversify the currency of settlement in international trade and stop solely relying on the United States dollar .
 Putin said this during a press conference on September 12, reports Reuters .
 Russian central bank has already begun to significantly reduce its reserves in U.S. dollars .
There is an increase in reserves in gold and in Chinese yuan . At the same time, there is an increased in reserves.
 The RF could soon switch to settlements in the Chinese currency during the import and export, as the Chinese yuan was listed in the three main reserve currencies of the world .
 Russian authorities to abandon the U.S. dollar as a means of settling in international trade . The move could be seen as a way to stay away from potential United States sanctions against the Russian Federation .
 Russia is trying to minimize the potential financial damage from the introduction of tougher U.S. sanctions . Russian dollar settlements with the Russian Federation may relate to Russia's dollar settlements . Russia is increasing its reserves in gold .
 The Central Bank of the Russian Federation massively sells U.S. debt bonds because of fears that they could be confiscated through United States sanctions . We remind that in July it was reported that the central bank of the Russia massively sells United States debt bonds .
 Over the past few months, Russia has sold about 80% of all U.S. government debt held by it .
 Senators proposed to impose sanctions on Russia's government debt securities operations for her involvement in armed conflicts in Ukraine and Syria . Earlier it was reported that U.S. Senators proposed the sanctions for Russia's involvement in the conflict .
 The draft of his new sanctions against Russia would be "hellish punishment" of Russia . Earlier, he reported that the draft of the new sanctions would be ""hellish"
 The restrictions on transactions with public debt in Russia can significantly affect the economy of the Russian Federation . About a third of all government debt securities of Russia belong to foreigners .
 Republican Senator John Barrasso registered a bill on the imposition of sanctions against North Stream-2 on July 19 . Barrasso announced that he had registered the bill .
 Montenegro, Albania, Norway, Georgia and Ukraine joined the Council of the European Union on July 18 to extend the period of sanctions by June 23, 2019 through the annexation of the Crimea .
 On July 5, the European Union for six months extended economic sanctions against Russia they will operate until January 31, 2019 . The European Union will extend the economic sanctions until January 2019 .
 Japan did not agree to a peace agreement with the Russian Federation "without any preconditions" The agreement was proposed by the Russian President Vladimir Putin on September 12 . Japan has not agreed to an agreement with Russia .
 Putin spoke during a meeting with Japan's prime minister Sinzo Abe at the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok . The proposal to conclude a peace agreement by the end of 2018 in order to resolve the dispute over the Kuril Islands was made by Putin .
 Japan has no intention to conclude a peace agreement with Russia to resolve the territorial dispute over the Kuril Islands . At the same time, Secretary of the Cabinet of Ministers of Japan Yasuhiro Cahn told the journalists.
 Southern Kuriles became part of the USSR after the end of World War II . Japan considers its territory four islands from the Kuril group Iturup, Kunashir, Shikotan and Habomay .
 Japan expressed a protest by Russia and China through Moscow's plans to pave the way for a link to the Kuril Islands with the help of a Chinese company .
 Japan has expressed Russia's protest because of the names of the Kuril Islands . As reported, Japan has also expressed its protest .
 Russia has placed the newest rockets on controversial Japan Kuriles . Earlier, Russia had placed the latest rockets on the controversial Japanese rockets .
 Special Representative of the United States Department of State to Ukraine Kurt Volcker doubts that in the near future progress will be made in negotiations on the settlement of the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 As informs censor.NET, he said this in an interview with Deutsche Welle .
 Germany, France, Ukraine and Russia have come to a standstill. They have hardly done anything in the last few years to try to bring peace and security .
"We do not see anything new, except for constant accusations against others and leaving negotiations," says Volker .
 The decision to hold elections in self-proclaimed "Luhansk People's Republic" is illegitimate, says U.S. State Department of State for Affairs representative .
 The announcement of the November 11 elections in the occupied territories was a violation of the Minsk treaties . Volker stressed that the announcement was a violated of the treaties . The announcement was the first time the elections were announced in occupied territories .
 The conduct of the elections in itself, is illegitimate, given the security conditions, but also because they are not the ones that should exist. Therefore, the conduct is illegitimate .
 "When there will be security then and there should be elections, he said . When there is security then, there should have been elections, "he said .
 The elections of the "head of the republic" were scheduled for November 11, 2018 . After the assassination of Zakharchenko in the so-called DNR, the elections were scheduled to be held .
 Denis Pushilin is the temporary executor of the duties of the leader of the "republic" He was chosen by DenisPushilin .
 The EU stated that holding ""elections"" in the ""DPR"" and ""LNR"" is a violation of the Minsk agreements . The EU said that holding elections in the DPR and LNR is a violation.
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine called on international partners to intensify sanctions against Russia because of the election of militants . The government also called on the international partners.
 Alexander Zakharchenko died on August 31, after the explosion in the restaurant "Separ" He was the leader of the ""DNR" militants .
 12 people were injured and the guard Zakharchenko died . As a result of an assassination attempt on the leader of the so-called ""DNR"" by Alexander ZakhARChenko, 12 were injured .
 In the "republic" they complained and abolished classes in schools . In the "republic", too, they complained about schools in schools.
 Russian President Putin called the assassination of Zakharchenko destabilizing . He appealed to the residents of the Donbas .
 The Ukrainian ombudsman was informed that in Donetsk they were released from confessions of 4 detainees for the murder of Zakharchenko . The office of the Ukrainian Ombudsman was told that the confessions were made in Donetsk .
 The government agreed with the proposal of the Ministry of Defense and instructed to carry out all further steps to obtain boats . The government agrees with the government's proposal and will take further steps .
 The main obstacles that prevented Ukraine from obtaining military boats from the U.S. were their transportation and payment of accompanying expenses .
 Iceland Island spoke in 2014 about the possibility of transferring to Iceland Island after Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 At the end of August this year, the Ministry of Defense paid a 100% advance payment of related expenses related to the delivery of two patrol boats of the class of Iceland to the United States in the framework of military assistance to Ukraine .
 The summer of 2019 in Baltimore is also planned to train Ukrainian crews . The State Border Guard Service of Ukraine warned that Russia resorted to stopping and inspecting ships that are heading to Ukraine .
 On May 4, it became known about the arrest of Russian border guards of the Ukrainian fishing vessel YAMK-0041 with 5 Ukrainians aboard . It became known that the Russian FSB detained 7 merchant ships in the Sea of ​​Azov .
 UK insists Russian secret services were behind nerve agent attack in Salisbury . UK insists Russia was behind attack inisbury .
 Britain's attempts to get an explanation from Russia over the poisoning of a former Russian spy in Salisbury have always been met with obfuscation and lies . Theresa May’s spokesman says that hasn’t changed .
 The government has exposed the role of the GRU, its operatives and its methods, a spokesman says . "This position is supported by our international allies," he says .
 Russia adamantly denies involvement in the poisoning, which had added to severe strains in ties between Russia and the West . Russia adamant denies involvement.
 Putin's declaration comes seven days after British authorities announced they had charged two Russian men with poisioning on March 4 . The men were identified as Aleksandr Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov .
 Sergei Skripal settled after being sent to the West in a Cold War-style spy swap in 2010 . The former GRU officer settled in the English city of Salisbury .
 Sergei Skripal, 67, and Yulia, 34, in critical condition after attack . Both have recovered after weeks in the hospital .
 A European arrest warrant has been issued for the two Russians, who they suspect were using aliases . British authorities have said that they have issued a European arrest Warrant for the Russians .
"We have found them," Putin said at an economic forum in the Far Eastern city of Vladivostok on Sept. 25 .
 Putin gave no indication that Russia would help Britain pursue the suspects . Putin's poker-faced remarks appeared to indicate that it would not .
 British Home Secretary Sajid Javid said on September 9 that Britain will catch the two men and bring them to prosecution if they step out of Russia .
 The poisoning led Britain, the United States, the European Union, and others to carry out a series of diplomatic expulsions and financial sanctions against Moscow . Russia has been accused of poisoning a number of Russian citizens .
 It has further damaged already strained relations between Russia and the West . It has been a cause for solidarity at a time when Western officials accuse Moscow of seeking to cause rifts in relations .
 Two delegates of Russia from annexed Crimea were not allowed to speak at a meeting on media freedom at the annual OSCE summit .
 The delegate from Ukraine indicated that they were speaking of non-existent organizations . The delegate said that they had been speaking ofnon-existent groups .
 Crimean Tatar channel Millet to be represented as representatives of annexed Crimea . Members of the so-called public chamber of the Crimean republic and representative of the Crimea Tatar Channel Millet.
 Ukrainian delegate Andrew Chesnokov drew attention to the violation of the rules of the meeting . He pointed to the inadmissibility of the speeches of representatives of the RF from Crimea .
According to international law, the peninsula is a territory of Ukraine . Chesnokov explained that these persons are acting from non-existent organizations, which is a violation of the OSCE standards .
 The moderator of the session agreed with the arguments and banned the speech of Russian representatives from the annexed Crimea . The Russian delegation's protest was met by the moderator .
 A two-weekly meeting of the OSCE began in Warsaw, in which human rights and freedoms would be discussed . It should be noted that in Warsaw.
 About 1,500 officials and civil society representatives from OSCE and partner countries take part in the event . The event takes place in the U.S.
 On September 11, the U.S. at the OSCE conference called on Russia to dismiss Sentsov . The United States called for the dismissal of Sentsov.
Public activists supported Ukrainian director Oleg Sentsov at a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . Sentsov is a political prisoner .
 The Supreme Court of Russia recognized the legal decision of the Moscow City Court for 12 years imprisonment for a Ukrainian political prisoner . Roman Sushchenko was sentenced to 12 years in prison for political prisoner, journalist Roman SUSHchenko .
 Such a decision was announced by a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, UNIAN reports .
 Sushchenko stressed that he did not agree with the court's decision and would continue the struggle for his release . He said he would continue his struggle for the release of him .
 He noted that he would lodge a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights . He said he would be filing a complaint.
 Moscow court denied ombudsman Lyudmila Denisova at a meeting with Sushchenko . In June, the court denied the Ukrainian ombudsman.
 Roman Sushchenko was detained in Moscow in September 2016, when he arrived in Russia to visit his relatives . He was a correspondent of Ukrainian news agency "Ukrinform" in France .
 The FSB of Russia put Sushchenko on an official allegations of espionage in October of that year . In October of the year, the FSB put him on a list of allegations.
 The court in Moscow found guilty of "espionage" and sentenced to 12 years of a colony of a strict regime of Ukrainian journalist Roman Sushchenko .
 Convicted Sushchenko in the last word did not admit guilty and asked for release .
 Feigin, who defended Roman Sushchenko in court, reported that he was deprived of the status of a lawyer .
 The case of journalist Sushchenko will be led by another lawyer, he said . He told that the case of the journalist will be handled by a new lawyer .
 Feigin has been in the case of Sushchenko as a public defender since then . Since then, he's been in a case of the public defender .
 Kirill Vyshynsky was detained on suspicion of treason . He also did not exclude that Sushchenko could exchange for the leader of the "RIA Novosti Ukraina"
 President Petro Poroshenko said in February 2018 that Ukraine is ready to exchange Russian soldiers caught on Donbas hosted by Russian hostages in Russia .
 Kyiv Court of Appeal arrested the shares of Ukrainian "daughters" of Russian banks, VTB, Prominvestbank and Sberbank . The Kyiv court of Appeal arrests the shares. It is a lawsuit against the former head of PrivatBank .
 The arrest was imposed on shares of Ukrainian subsidiaries owned by Russian state-owned banks operating in Ukraine .
 The Hague Court of Arbitration ordered the Russian Federation to compensate a number of Ukrainian companies for damages for the annexation of Crimea .
 Vladimir Putin signed a decree on the annexation of the Crimea in March 2014 . Russia was found responsible for the violation of the rights of Ukrainian investors .
 The lawsuit was filed by 18 Ukrainian companies, as well as by one individual . The lawsuit against Russia was filed in Ukraine by 18 companies .
 Ukrenergo launched an investment dispute with Russia on the property and profits of the company lost due to the annexation of the Crimea .
 Volodymyr Ruban, an ex-head of the Center for the release of captives, continued the custody measure until the end of October . Ruban is suspected of attempting terrorist attacks in Kiev .
 Valentin Rybin is known for his pro-Russian views and sympathy for Donetsk terrorists . His lawyer says he has sympathy for the Donetsk terrorists.
 The next meeting of the suspect in preparation for the terrorist attack was held on August 30 .
 The Standing Committee unanimously voted and recommended the Verkhovna Rada to support the submission of the Prosecutor General . The standing committee also voted to back the prosecutor General's submission .
 The same day the Council revoked the immunity, as well as granted the detention and arrest detention of Nadiia Savchenko .
Human Rights Commissioner for Human Rights Lyudmila Denisova exercises personal control over the observance of constitutional rights of Hope Savchenko . Denisova has been in charge of human rights since 2007 .
 On July 14, Savchenko again declared an eternal hunger strike through an arrest . On July 13, he declared an indefinite hunger strike .
 Savchenko was a member of Volodymyr Ruban, who was detained on March 8 at the KPVV "Mayorskoye" during an attempt to transport large quantities of weapons from the territory of the Donetsk region .
 Ruban is suspected of illicit handling of weapons and preparation of terrorist acts . He is also suspected of armed attacks on state officials and political leaders, including President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko .
 The United Nations peacekeepers should be able to gradually control security throughout the entire Ukraine's Donbas region . The U.N. peacekeepers would have to control security across the entire region .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker told DW ahead of his visit to Kyiv . Volker will visit Kyiv on Sept. 25 .
 A possible U.N.-led peacekeeping mission in the Donbas needs to be robust enough to actually control security throughout the contested area . A diplomat says the mandate of a possible U.-led mission needs to have a robust enough.
"I don't have a number to throw at you, but it would have to be robust enough to handle that," Volker said . "It would have been robust enough," he said .
 "We've done all of this together as a trans-Atlantic community," he stressed . "We have increased sanctions, we have increased our support to Ukraine," he said .
 Russian President Putin said deployment of U.N. peacekeepers in the Donbas was appropriate for solving the conflict in the region . But only along the line of contact, he said .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko stressed the need to deploy peacekeepers in the occupied area of the Donbas .
 Ukraine's representative in Humanitarian subgroup of the Tripartite contact group in Minsk talks . Iryna Herashchenko commented on Putin's statement and said the Kremlin scenarios will fail . peacekeepers must be introduced across all Russia-occupied territories .
 Washington and Moscow remain far from striking a deal on a possible UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas . On Jan. 2018, Volker said Russia had shown more "openness" to the United States .
 Russia tries to manipulate the situation with the non-supply of water by Ukraine to the peninsula . The head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine emphasized that in connection with the release of poisonous substances at the Crimean Titan plant.
 Foreign Minister of Ukraine Pavlo Klimkin stresses that Ukraine will never sign a contract for the supply of water to the occupied Crimea . It will indicate the membership of the peninsula of Russia .
 In the occupied territory, the water under the contract will never be delivered, the minister said .
In late August there was information that the chemical plant began to evaporate through harmful substances through the heat . In late August, the plant was reported to have evaporated through heat .
 Border guards of Kherson detachment found excess of chemical substances in the air .
 Crimean Titan plant will be stopped for two weeks. Crimean occupation authorities have announced that the Titan plant is to be stopped .
Children of preschool and school age are exported massively from the city . Children of preschool, school age and children of preschool are exported to the city.
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko invited children from Armenian to improve themselves in Kherson region .
 The European Parliament has called on the EU Council to oppose a Member State in order to prevent a systemic threat to the fundamental values of the Union . This is the first time that the European parliament has called for the Council to opposes a member state .
 The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights includes respect for democracy, equality, the rule of law and human rights . These values are enshrined in Art. of the EU Treaty .
 The European Parliament also recalled that the accession of Hungary to the EU was a voluntary act based on a sovereign decision with broad consensus in the political spectrum . Any Hungarian government is obliged to eliminate the risk of serious violation of EU values .
 Further proposals on the Council's decision will be directed to member states . The Council will also decide on proposals for member states.
 Hungary will determine existence of a risk of violation of EU values in Hungary . They will determine the existence of the risk of violating EU values ​​in Hungary .
 The European Parliament will have to give its consent to Hungarian authorities . The council will first have to listen to the Hungarian authorities, the European Parliament .
 The EU member states can also make recommendations to Hungary on countering risks . The European Union can make recommendations on countering risk.
 At a later stage, the European Council can determine the existence of Hungary of a grave and persistent violation of democracy and fundamental rights .
Deputies of the European Parliament discussed the possible violation of Hungary's fundamental principles of the EU . This may eventually lead to suspension of voting rights in the Council .