 This has been the policy of the Kremlin ever since they seized Crimea, to claim that it’s local business inside Ukraine and they have nothing to do with it .
 This is a new form of warfare that the Russians, to date, have waged very successfully . The Russians have waged a new type of warfare. This is the first time they have waged this kind of warfare, says the author .
 There is now so much circumstantial evidence that nobody can be in any doubt any more that the regular army is inside Ukraine, and probably in quite large numbers .
Body bags are coming home from the Russian army, according to Russian media . There is realisation that the army is fighting in there .
 The Kremlin says it's important to keep a lid on it, and keep denying it. So that makes it all more important for the Kremlin to keep it all the more important .
 There is little support for a full-scale war between Russia and Ukraine. There’s support for what Putin has done so far, but there is no support for the war .
 The division is an important division, and they will not admit that they are in there . So that’s an important Division, and will not admitting that they're in there, they say .
Ukrainian army is fighting rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk and surrounding areas . Ukrainian army wants to stop the Ukrainian army being successful in rooting out the insurgency .
 Novoazovsk and Mariupol are now completely breaking the back-bone of the Ukrainian army . The Ukrainian army has opened up a third front in the south .
 Ukrainian soldiers are being offered free passage to Russia if they give up their weapons . You have large pockets of Ukrainian soldiers that are being surrounded .
 If rebels, with Russian support, decide to expand and move west and north, then we are looking at a real invasion . If the rebels decide to move west or north, we will be looking at an invasion .
 Russia and Ukraine will have a real war between them if they push on, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine needs to declare martial law, and to call a national conscription, to defeat the Russian invasion . Ukraine must also call for a complete mobilisation of all of Ukraine to defeat Russia's invasion .
 West and Nato will be forced to provide at least logistical and intelligence support, perhaps a little bit more, which Russians will view as direct intervention . Then the West, Nato and the West will have to provide logistical and Intelligence support .
 There will be more talk and more empty threats of red lines, and maybe some more sanctions that will not deter the Russians .
 Ukrainian army is in complete rout, and the government in Kiev is refusing to declare martial law and national mobilisation .
 The eastern part of Ukraine will become like a Republika Srpska, the Serbian part of Bosnia that is now technically part of the Bosnian Federation but is controlled by Belgrade and Serbia . It is the same part of Serbia that is part of Bosnian
 Republika Srpska in Donbas region is controlled by Moscow but technically part of new Ukrainian Federation . The region is part of a new Ukraine Federation .
 The alternative is full-scale war between Russia and Ukraine where the West gets involved . It sounds horrible to say, but perhaps that is the best solution we can hope for today .
 Russians call a ‘deep federalisation’ of Ukraine may be the preferable thing .
 Nato released photographs on August 28 showing that as many as 1,000 Russian soldiers are now in eastern Ukraine .
 On August 27, 2014, Russian troops and equipment crossed the Russia-Ukraine border at Novoazovsk, in the far south . It is seen as an attempt to open a new front .
 control of the area would give Russia a direct land corridor between Russia and the Crimean peninsula . Control of the region would allow Russia to take control of a land corridor .
 Ukraine’s security services released videos of Russian soldiers captured in eastern Ukraine on August 25, 2014 .
 Mr Poroshenko met Russian President Vladimir Putin for the first time since June 2014 . He met Putin in the margins of a summit in Minsk on August 26 .
 Ukraine will be on the agenda of the Nato summit in Wales, UK, on September 4 and 5 .
 More than 2,200 people have been killed since April 2014 in the conflict between pro-Moscow rebels and the Ukrainian military . The Ukrainian military has been fighting pro-Russian rebels in the past year .