 The EU's response up until the summer of 2014 could be characterised as slow and reactive . The EU’s response up to the summer 2015 could be slow and reactive.
 Many dignitaries visited the Maidan before the events took a violent turn . The Maidan is a city of Maidan.
 Moscow's view that the protests were Western-sponsored. These visits did not contribute to a political solution, but instead confirmed Moscow’s view .
 Europe had no adequate response when Russia took Crimea and ignited a rebellion in much of eastern Ukraine . Russia's regular army and firepower helped establish a rebel stronghold in parts of the Donbas .
 Perhaps Europe should have mediated for peace between protestors and Yanukovych earlier . Perhaps Europe could have mediated between the protesters and Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych lacked leadership and faced heavy Russian pressure, leaving him without a strategy . While protestors were determined, they lacked leadership, while Yanukovych lacked determination .
 The peace deal negotiated by the Weimar ministers on 21 February was useful, in the end . It provided a framework for the transfer of power after Yanukovych fled the country a day later .
 A rapid deployment of a strong observer mission in eastern Ukraine might not have changed the course of events there . The EU or member states at least in theory could have attempted to do so .
 The EU might have been in a better position to influence events if its own earlier Russia policies had been different .
 During much of the last decade, economic interest gained the upper hand over a more principled approach . But during much of last decade the interest gained an upper hand .
 Moscow faced no consequences after its 2008 war with Georgia, which may have led Vladimir Putin to expect similar passivity about Ukraine . Moscow facedno consequences after the 2008 war, which led to no consequences for Russia .
 Sanctioning individuals – regardless of whether they were foot soldiers or belonged to Putin’s assumed ‘inner circle’ – unlikely to reverse policy in Moscow .
 The so-called sectoral sanctions adopted in July were more serious and their effects were felt in Russia . But the impact was felt in the country .
 The sanctions have drastically damaged Russia’s economic outlook, which is likely to be affecting the leadership's calculations . Combined with falling oil prices, the sanctions have significantly damaged Russia's economy .
 Moscow is alsostarting to realise the depth of policy change in Europe . Moscow is also trying to find a way to find out how much policy change is needed .
 Germany has emerged as the driving force behind the sanctions and the leader of the EU's Russia policy .
 The European Commission played an important role in devising common ground for sanctions . The Commission played a key role in developing common ground.
 France has delayed sale of Mistral warships, but may cancel it altogether . France has, for now, delayed the sale of the warships . It would constitute a significant sacrifice .
 Slovakia and Hungary were among the most stubborn opponents of sanctions . In the end, they too subscribed to the common approach, says the EU .
 For the first time, there is also a greater common line on energy policy towards Russia . For the second time, Russia has a greater apprehension of dependence on Russian gas .
 Poland's initiative for an Energy Union high on the agenda. This has given new momentum to diversification efforts, propelling Poland’s initiative for energy union high on agenda .
 The South Stream pipeline, which would have brought gas to Europe through the Black Sea, was cancelled . The pipeline would have been used to bring gas to the continent . The project would have taken gas from the South Stream to Europe .
 No progress made on protracted conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh or South Ossetia . Europe absorbed by new conflict in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 The sanctions policy eliminated whatever leverage Europe might have had to affect domestic policy in Russia . Other issues such as human rights and political freedom in Russia also took a backseat .
 The challenge will be to manage and balance the multiple and sometimes contradictory aims in the EU’s new agenda with Russia .
 The Donbas settlement is aimed at averting the destabilisation of the rest of Ukraine . It is also aimed at protecting neighbouring countries’ freedom of choice and anticipating Russia’s actions .
 This task is complicated by Moscow's deluded worldview and the brittlenature of Putin’s regime . This task has been complicated by Russia's deluding worldview and its brittled regime .
 Many in Moscow believe that the West harbours aggressive designs against Russia, which could lead to dangerous misinterpretations . The West has been accused of being aggressive against Russia .
 Russia's regime change has not been the aim of the EU's policies, nor should it be, according to Moscow .
 The collapse of Putin’s regime due to economic hardship and domestic oppressiveness remains unlikely, but it is no longer unthinkable. However, while the collapse of the Putin's regime is unlikely, it is still unlikely .
 Moscow will continue to foment anti-Western sentiment to bolster the regime at home . Moscow will see the West as the agitator behind its problems .
 The instability with Russia will continue to create risks for the neighbourhood . Russia's instability with the country is creating risks for its neighbours .
 The battle of influence between Russia and the EU is quietly going on in Moldova, in Georgia, and in the Balkans . In Ukraine, it erupted into violence, but it erupted in Ukraine, but the battle has gone on in Georgia .
 The EU has entered a dangerous and demanding period in its relations with Russia . The EU is entering a dangerous period in their relations with the Russia .