 Russian President Vladimir Putin enters a hall to attend a meeting with members of the Presidential Council for Civil Society and Human Rights at the Kremlin .
 Russian liberals and Kremlin analysts are to the majority view on President Vladimir Putin's military intervention in Syria . One of the most remarkable developments is how diametrically opposed the views of most American media, policymakers and candidates for office .
 Four Republican presidential candidates are on record supporting a U.S. no-fly zone over Syria to protect anti-Assad rebels . Russia's air campaign in support of Assad's government, Hezbollah and Iran is supported by Iran and Hezbollah .
 Former Secretary of State and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton favors one for humanitarian reasons . This view is shared by Hillary Clinton, who favors one of the two .
 Most of the print and electronic media in the U.S. agree with America's presidential candidates and leading politicians regarding the framework for the Kremlin's involvement in Syria . Some of the major outlets in Western Europe agree with the presidential candidates .
 The framework basically holds that Putin has never been stronger and is on the march to replace the United States and its allies as the wider Middle East's power broker . In the words of Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina, an "Unholy Alliance" of Shia powers from Tehran to Beirut.
 Putin is playing a purely tactical game with support of Assad being an end in itself, says Putin . In other words, Putin's support for Assad is an end to itself .
 Putin's highest ambition is to avenge and reverse Russia's humiliating loss of superpower status .
 Macfarland's, Charles Krauthammer's, William Kristol's and Jennifer Rubin's counterparts in the former Soviet Union did during the Cold War . Macfarlands' counterparts were Charles Krautammer and WilliamKristol's counterparts .
Every move made by the Kremlin is seen through the lens of punch/counter-punch . Putin is acting from a position of strength triggered by a failure of America and its allies to lead in the Middle East .
 The U.S. is eager to protect an assortment of Al-Qaeda linked Islamists, neo-Islamists and secular rebels from Assad's tanks, Russian marines, Hezbollah irregulars and Russian fighter-bombers . This explains the eagerness to protect the U.
 U.S. policymakers' operating assumptions regarding Putin, his motives in Syria and his recent foreign policy are flawed, writes David Frum . Frum: This article seeks to show that American policymakers' assumptions about Putin are flawed .
 The assessment is based on the views of many of Russia's leading Kremlinologists and political analysts who make it their business to monitor Putin's designs .
 This spills over into the hawkish proposals regarding the response in Syria to Russia's intervention . This spill over into a hawkish proposal regarding the Russia's response to Syria's intervention.
 Piontkovsky noted how the terms "Russian world" and "Novorossiya" have disappeared from view since the Maidan Uprising in Ukraine .
 Putin has begun to comply with the general parameters of the Minsk Agreement concluded last February . The Minsk agreement concluded last year .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin, Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko and Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel pose for a family photo .
 Putin's aim of cementing a tumor in Ukraine designed to derail the country's long-term western realignment has failed . Germany and France compelled him to accept a comprehensive amnesty of separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine .
 The West has not recognized either of the breakaway republics or Russia's annexation of Crimea . Russia's assets remain in place and Ukraine continues to move closer to Europe .
 Russia is left holding the bag to feed, pay and arm the separatists and their followers whose cause is going nowhere . In short, for all the public relations gains and mass hysteria across Russia for defeating western-backed "fascists"
 Russian media and political establishment have changed gears in an effort to get Ukraine out of the headlines as fast as possible . The consensus in the U.S. and much of the American media appears to be that Putin is the clear victor of the Ukrainian tussle .
 Moscow kiosks set up to collect money for besieged Donbas have been refurbished to aid Syrians fighting radical Islamists .
 Television talking heads have become instant experts on the Middle East . Before they spoke all day, every day about Ukraine, they spoke about Ukraine all day .
 separatist leaders have threatened to turn eastern Ukraine into Gaza . They have also postponed local elections originally set for this month and withdrawn small arms .
 Piontkovsky on shift away from Ukraine and recognition of Putin's defeat are other leading Kremlinologists and recognized political analysts .
 All have appeared on Russian media and/or published articles in recent weeks . Putin and his inner circle are angered and concerned about Russia's diplomatic isolation, the effects of economic sanctions .
 Svanidze went so far as to argue that Putin has shunned his more hawkish advisers . Several months ago were urging an offensive as far as Russia's tanks could drive .
 Novorossiya has been under the control of the separatist republics for a year . Radzihovsky has noted how expectations have been lowered by the Russian media over the year .
 Putin's intervention in Syria aims to swap Ukraine for Syria for Syria as far as domestic relations is concerned . In his view, Putin wants to make the West forget about eastern Ukraine .
 Putin's loss of face before the Russian public from the physical destruction of the separatist republics would be massive and a price the Kremlin is not eager to pay . The Kremlin has not been willing to pay the price .
 The Syrian adventure must persuade the West to look the other way while the republics wither on the vine and gradually disappear into Kiev's bosom .
 Belkovsky claims Putin is actually indifferent toward Ukraine . Belkovski says Putin is indifferent to Ukraine .
 His main aim is to force Angela Merkel and Barack Obama to negotiate with him or risk further instability across the post-Soviet sphere as a whole .
 Putin has achieved no tangible gains from his involvement in Ukraine. In short, save for the annexation of Crimea — the euphoria over which has steadily declined .
 Russia is diplomatically isolated, suffering from sanctions and faces the prospect of subsidizing territories it can ill-afford to feed . Russia is also suffering from the prospect to subsidize territories it cannot afford to feed.
 The plan is to move on, ingratiate Russia again into the West's embrace and hope everyone forgets Ukraine ever happened . The plan now is tomove on, and hope the West forgets it ever happened.
 Republican presidential candidate Lindsey Graham and U.S. Senator John McCain have repeatedly stated or implied that American weakness resulted in Russia's Ukrainian gains .
 The U.S. 6th fleet off the coast of Syria, position the United States. This naturally connects to the clamor to impose a no-fly zone in Syria . The United States is taking other steps toward open confrontation with Russia .
 The U.S. and Russia are "barreling toward a second Cold War," Rubio says . Putin is winning, Rubio says, and the United States is winning .
 Putin appears to be worried about Putin's influence in western capitals . The Russian leader is seen to be in a state of concern .
 The Kremlin is tired of being ignored and annoyed at the toll of existing Western sanctions . In other words, the Kremlin is really tired.
 Russia has been jettisoned from the G-8, its cooperation with NATO has been curtailed . Putin was not even invited to commemorate the liberation of the Auschwitz concentration camp .
 Putin's goal going into Syria is to have western leaders speak with him again . This quasi-pariah status has gotten under his skin, says satirist and Kremlin critic Victor Shenderovich .
 Putin's meeting with Obama on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly shortly before Russia began its first official airstrikes in Syria . Russia ordered other countries to clear Syrian airspace .
 Russian media greeted the meeting with a collective shrug . Russian outlets painted it as a great Russo-American duel and pondered endlessly about the two leaders.
 Putin has worked to reassure Russians that their country is not on the cusp of a new recession or larger economic crisis . For Putin, the public relations gambit from meeting Obama and posing as the new leader of western civilization did not come too soon .
 Putin made his Syria pitch and began to implement his plan to change the facts on the ground in Syria in favor of Assad and his allies . Putin's Syria pitch: "Change the facts in Syria"
 A large deployment of ground forces is likely not to be seriously considered by the Kremlin . It could very well be auxiliaries or special forces as a complement to Hezbollah, Iran and the Syrian army .
 Russian public is not at all in favor of sacrificing Russian troops to save Damascus . The overwhelming majority of the Russian public, while fine with diplomatically supporting Assad against ISIS, is not in favor.
 Russian analysts believe Putin has a weak hand . If Syria is to be partitioned between Assad, the opposition and the Islamists, Russian analysts say .
 Handing over Assad without massive concessions from the West would be a tremendous blow to Russian prestige and upend its makeshift alliance system in the wider Middle East .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad met in Moscow's Kremlin December 19, 2006 .
Every day of airstrikes heightens the risk of casualties for Russia's deployed personnel and is costing the Kremlin a small fortune .
 There is every indication that Putin wants the operation over and for negotiations with the West to begin as soon as possible .
 Russia joins Shiite coalition to protect a Shia Alawite dictator against a mostly Sunni opposition . Russia's almost 17 million Muslims are Sunni, including those in Chechnya, Ingushetia and Dagestan .
 Putin wants to make permanent enemies of Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Jordan and Egypt . It's doubtful that Putin, despite Carly Fiorina's certainties, wants to stay in this alliance for long .
 ISIS recruitment in Chechnya and the rest of Russia is the last thing the Kremlin needs is a new terror wave . The Kremlin needs to connect the dots between the Syrian war and those attacks, says Putin .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Saudi Defence Minister Mohammed bin Salman met in Sochi, Russia, October 11, 2015 .
 Putin's intervention in Syria may well turn into a quagmire and undermine Putin's leadership, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: This obvious geopolitical problem as well as the material costs of Russia's operations form the basis of the White House's contention .
 There is not much enthusiasm for making Syria as protracted a contest as Ukraine and none of the euphoria of Crimea .
 U.S. and its allies should meet Putin's grand bluff with crossed arms, Kerry says . With Kerry's warning in mind, Russia's strategic problems in view and its real aims in Syria largely apparent, he says .
 existing sanctions on Russia should not be lifted and the current position on Ukraine shouldn't be changed. Specifically, existing sanctions should be lifted .
 The U.S. should work with Germany and France to strengthen the current Minsk Agreement . No rapprochement with Russia can occur without a guarantee that the separatist republics in the East will cease to exist after local elections are held .
 Crimea can become a new Taiwan with the West sticking to a "one Ukraine" policy and not recognizing Russia's annexation while looking other way in practice .
 For Crimeans dealing with collapsing tourism and other challenges associated with Russia's bureaucracy and economic woes, this will not necessarily come out as a victory . For crimeans, this is not necessarily a victory.
 Donetsk People's Republic army collect parts of a destroyed Ukrainian army tank in the town of Vuhlehirsk, about 6 miles from Debaltseve .
 Kennedy concluded that a wall was better than nuclear war as concerned West Berlin . Poroshenko likely understands that no one is interested in a nuclear or a protracted conventional war over Crimea .
 Putin will find himself holding the bag in Syria and owning whatever outcome emerges from the current chaos . Putin will be left with nothing and, like in Ukraine right now, he will have nothing .
 The approach of not taking Putin's bait appears to be the position of the White House and Republican Presidential Candidate Donald Trump, in contrast to Hillary Clinton and Republican hawks who have advocated open confrontation .
 U.S. and Russian aviators or air assets may be involved in a direct clash in Syria, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Russia's establishment politicians and Kremlin-supportive media will have a field day . Putin will have the grounds to either foment conflicts in other post-Soviet states or engage in nuclear blackmail .
 Putin will have a much easier time spinning his way out of any of these scenarios than a protracted military conflict . Putin will be able to avoid any of this scenarios, says the Russian president .
 American voters should tune out Rubin, Fiorina, Rubio, and Clinton, recognize what Putin is really after . They should oppose attempts to get the United States involved in an unnecessary war or confrontation over Syria .