 Ukraine Revolutionary protests in Ukraine in winter 2014 resulted in the annexation of Crimea by Russia . An anti-terrorist operation launched by Kiev in eastern Ukraine.
 What was a totally internal manifestation of displeasure with governmental policy transformed into an international security crisis. What was an internal manifestation was a completely internal manifestation.
 Kiev considers it a Russian-Ukrainian conﬂict, Moscow perceives it as a Russian–West confrontation . Moscow claims the crisis was provoked by NATO's desire to enlarge into the region where Russia’s vital interests lie .
 The article analyses the sources of the current Ukrainian-Russian conﬂict . It looks into Russia’s place in post-crisis Ukraine .
History has shown that even those states which used to ﬁght each other for centuries managed to establish constructive relationships .
 There are fewer and fewer options for compromise. Still, with the shift from material to ideological confrontation, there are fewer options to compromise .
 The context of the Ukrainian crisis is the current Ukrainian crisis as an exaggerated reaction to the Euromaidan protests in Kiev and the Ukrainian government’s decision not to sign the Association Agreement with the European Union, indicates short-sightedness .
 Kiev Rus, the role of language and ‘great Russian culture’ in Ukrainian society have attracted less attention . However, issues such as perception of the common history of Russian and Ukrainian peoples have attracted more attention .
 Using the term ‘Ukrainian crisis’ to refer to the whole course of events since November 2013 is not actually appropriate . The use of the term 'Ukraine crisis' is not really appropriate .
 Russia is more about Russia's fear of a Maidan of its own, about exercising control in its ‘spheres of interests and inﬂuence’ and about contradictions between the East and the West .
 The perception that the Euromaidan had been initiated by the United States is still overshadowing the decision-making logic in Moscow . NATO’s main concern is the deployment of its forces in the Crimea, says CNN .
 Ukrainians see the current crisis as a issue of democratic development, for Russia it is framed in geopolitical logic of world affairs .
 Russia will seek to stabilize some revised status quo, says D’Anieri . Russia's geopolitical explanation would lead us to expect Russia to seek to change status quo .
 The domestic explanation leads us to believe that Russia will seek to prevent any level of stability that enables Ukraine to proceed with domestic reform and closer ties with Europe .
 The conﬂict in eastern Ukraine is not over yet but the discourse about Russia losing Ukraine has been going on since the beginning of the crisis .
 Ukrainian and Russian analysts have been attempting to predict the outcome of the crisis and what will follow after . Still much will depend on how the crisis will end.
 This article looks into the sources of the current situation and if there is a place for Russia in post-crisis Ukraine . Acknowledging the limitations of forecasting while the conﬂict is still developing, this article looks at the sources and if Russia is
 Russian politicians have been sending signals that NATO is ‘taboo’ and perceived as an aggressive military bloc . The enlargement of the European Union to the East was not posing problems .
 In reality, for many in Russia, it was difﬁcult to see Ukraine as a separate sovereign entity with more developed democratic political culture .
 Ukrainian civil society and politicians after the Orange Revolution behaved in a different way, not accepting power monopoly and authoritarian manners . Despite serious corruption and numerous political crises, Ukraine's civil society has behaved in different way .
 The pro-European Union choice of many Ukrainians expressed the desire to bring fundamental changes to the overall development model of the country . In terms of democracy, human rights, economic development and corruption, the choice was chosen .
 The choice of European integration was not a choice against Russia, according to the Russian government .
 Political competition among different Ukrainian parties did not allow for monopolization of public discourse on foreign policy . Political competition between different parties and the diverse views within the parties on issues such as the EU and NATO integration didn't allow for a monopoly of discourse .
 Sherr mentions those who opposed integration with NATO dared not oppose the ‘European course’ while those who warned that Ukraine cannot be ‘turned against’ Russia dared not allow the Russian vector to become the determinant vector of their policy .
 The issue has not been on the agenda since the 2008 Bucharest Summit, when the Alliance rejected Membership Action Plans for Ukraine and Georgia, due to the active lobbying of Moscow against such a decision .
 The issue of NATO-Ukraine cooperation has been almost absent both in the academic and political discourse of the country . Since then, the issue has been nearly absent from the political discourse .
 The new Ukrainian Government mostly agreed that membership was not on the agenda . The immediate application to join NATO was untimely .
 The annexation of Crimea in 2014 and the continuing ﬁghting in Eastern Ukraine has changed Ukrainians’ attitude towards NATO . In parallel by intensifying cooperation with the Alliance, it raised Russian suspicions to new level .
 Russian fears about the possible deployment of NATO military bases in Ukraine are not justiﬁed as there has been no consideration of such an option either in Kiev or Brussels .
 Kiev had opted for NATO membership in 2008. There were not any discussions on the deployment of additional NATO bases in Ukraine . The Russian ﬂeet should withdraw before the end of its term as it had been agreed upon in 1997 .
By 2014, nobody challenged the disputable prolongation of the Russian Black Sea Fleet deployment in Crimea until 2042 . It had caused serious political disputes in Ukraine, perceived by opposition parties.
 By 2013, Moscow no longer represented simply a Russian state with more or less calculable interests, says Snyder . Snyder .
 This Eurasian project has not been articulated purely in economic terms, but ideas of joint cultural, religious and historical unity among Eurasian partners have been employed extensively .
 There has been marginalization of the role of Ukraine in the joint history of Ukraine . Many in Moscow insist on its non-existing as a state and even artiﬁciality of Ukrainian language and culture .
 The use of terms such as ‘Small Russia’ in reference to Ukraine has been extensive in Russian TV channels .
 There have been systematic efforts in building the concept of a so-called 'Russian world' The myth of the necessity to protect the use of the Russian language has been created .
Russian Empire glory and power of the Soviet Union will not be possible without the ancient past of Kiev Rus, or Ukrainians' contribution to Soviet development .
 This is demonstrated in the arguments used by Moscow in favour of the Crimea annexation . This is shown in the argument used by the Moscow government to support the annexation .
 Russian military expert says new world war could happen by 2025 . Pavel Felgengauer, Russia, is preparing for a new war, he says .
 This is expected to be a war for resources where the U.S. would be the main enemy . The United States would be a main enemy in the war .
 Ukraine is exactly part of such a perimeter, says author . There is a necessity for Moscow to establish a defence perimeter, he says . Russia needs to establish such a border, he adds .
 controlling Ukraine is seen by Moscow as a vital interest, for which any means is justiﬁed .
 The Head of the Russian General Staff said Russia can use military and other means in case Ukraine and Georgia join NATO to secure its interests on the borders .
 The detailed description of military forces and of strategic and tactical plans to be deployed led many experts to believe this article had been elaborated at the ofﬁces of the Russian General Staff rather than being the product of journalistic work .
 Ukrainian society has separated its perception of Russian citizens and of the Kremlin’s policy . The current situation for a long time has separated the two sides .
 Russian society has changed the perception of Ukrainian citizens dramatically . active involvement of Russian combatants and support of such involvement by Russian society have changed the view of Ukraine's citizens dramatically.
Slogans of the Euromaidan were not anti-Russian, but pro-European, perceived by most Ukrainians as not antagonistic to each other . Slogans were not pro-Russian but complementary.
 Ukrainian President's and government's opinion on the signing of the Association Agreement is perceived as the result of Moscow’s pressure . Protesters use expressions such as ‘Putin if you love us, let us go’
 Crimea's annexation and Russian citizens’ total support of this action gradually spoiled relations between the two peoples, Ukrainians and Russians .
 D’Anieri says Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was to prevent the transnational spread of revolution from Ukraine to Russia .
 If postrevolution Ukraine were to succeed as a stable, prosperous, liberal democracy tied to Europe, this would undermine Russia's claim that Russia cannot succeed as liberal democracy . If post revolution Ukraine would succeed, it would fundamentally undermine the claim, says Peter Bergen .
 None of these scenarios came true, as the world was faced with a third scenario; that of direct annexation of Crimea . The world faced with the third scenario, that of a direct annexation.
 The Ukrainian Parliament adopted a decision recognizing the Russian Federation as a state-aggressor only in January 2015 . Despite having a legal right to name Russian actions as aggressive already by March 2014, the decision was made by the Ukrainian Parliament .
 Ukrainian navy in Donuzlav Bay in March 2014 by sinking ﬁve Russian navy ships already could be considered as an aggressive act .
 Kiev took a slow path in reacting, and it is true that Crimean annexation could easily happen . Ukrainian military were not able to respond appropriately due to the inability to comprehend that the enemy is Russia .
 The Crimean case was more about territorial claims based on historical memories of past Russian glory . But the Donbas region is a totally different case .
 support of the Russian-speaking population is only an excuse, as nobody violated their rights, and even more, the rural areas of Donbass are more Ukrainian-speaking . It has never been associated historically with Russia .
 Moscow aims at destabilization of this industrially developed region which would serve two goals . Moscow also wants to destabilize the region .
 The region is the motherland of the former Ukrainian President V Yanukovych . Second, it could destabilize Ukraine politically, as this region is a former president's region .
 Evidence to the ‘non-necessity’ of the land bear is the total devastation of the critical infrastructure and industry that bring revenue to the local economy .
 Crimean annexation has become a success story only in Russian domestic politics . However, Crimean annexation remains a failure internationally and of course inside Ukraine .
 Respondents to a sociological survey made in the Odessa region in November 2014 noted a decline in pro-Russian sentiments due to the situation in Crimea .
 Ukraine has virtually ignored some regions, including Crimea, for 23 years of independence . However, respondents expressed the view that the cause of secession of Crimea is a result that for 23 Years of independence, Ukraine has almost ignored some areas .
There is a concern about possible social discontent there, as in Crimea . There is also a concern that there is a potential social discontent.
 Russia was the main market for agricultural products, which is now losing out to the Russian market . This is mostly explained by economic reasons, as Russia is now the biggest market for agriculture .
 It was during the period of the Russian Empire that the allocation of land to the people of the region took place . During the period, serfdom was spread in other territories .
 The Soviet Union was a period of economic prosperity of ‘Prydunavya’ During the last 20 years, it has transformed into a depressed region . ports were closed and signiﬁcant deterioration of socio-economic situation .
 Kharkiv and Odessa perceived as next in a row of Russian aggression aspiration . The cities would demonstrate the most pro-Russian and anti-Ukrainian position .
 Military actions in Donbas calmed such pro-Russian sentiments, which were based more on cultural elements than politics . Military actions were based on culture rather than politics.
 The attempts to destabilize two cities through socio-economic means, propaganda and often terrorist acts have not been successful .
 Russian army aiming to unite all regions from Donbas to Transnistria via Crimea . Odessa could be invaded by a Russian army .
 The Russian invasion has changed the internal discourse in Ukraine dramatically . The invasion of Ukraine has changed Ukraine's internal discourse dramatically .
 The terms Russian, Russian-speaking and Pro-Russian are referred to as three different notions . The terms bring the value of citizenship above ethnic background .
 The issue of the rights of the Russian-speaking population had been actively manipulated before . Since 2014, the general approach has been one of 'we need nobody’s protection'
 Ukrainian language is ceasing to be a part of their self-identiﬁcation and close connection with the Russian Federation . Russian language is more and more perceived as Kremlin and the concept of ‘Russian world’ than Russian culture and common history .
 Pro-Russian sentiments are another way of expressing pro-Russian feelings . They oppose the European aspirations of Ukrainians . In some way, pro-Russia sentiments are similar to those of the Soviet Union .
 The Euromaidan revolution had been initiated by the West, just like the anti-terrorist operation, according to Russian media .
The current crisis violates all basic principles and norms of international law and practices . The current crisis is the current crisis of the world's most serious human rights violations .
 The two superpowers tried to keep their policies within certain agreed-upon frameworks . Even during the Cold War period, predictability in interstate affairs was higher .
 Diplomatic efforts have been undermined by the supply of strategic missiles to irregular military groups, cases of journalists carrying weapons, reports on humanitarian aid convoys .
As a result, parties to conﬂict and mediators speak different languages . As a result of this, the parties are able to communicate with each other .
 There are two main issues in the future prospects of the crisis and Ukrainian relations . The future of the Ukraine crisis and Russian relations are key issues .
 The second issue relates explicitly to the role Russia will be able to play in Ukraine after the crisis . One issue is possible scenarios for conﬂict resolution .
Most of the current literature ‘made in Russia’ is not about the future of Ukrainian–Russian relations, but about Russia–West relations . It demonstrates both the non-acceptance of Ukraine as a subject of international politics and ultimately the root of the con�
 In Ukrainian discourse, the issues mostly raised are about the future development of the state itself . The crisis is not settled, as well as the future of Russian–Ukrainian relations both on state and society levels after the conﬂict .
 When the questions are set differently, it becomes more difﬁcult to ﬁnd common ground .
 Russia is not seen any more in Ukraine as a reliable partner or counterpart at the negotiation table . With regular violations of the ceaseﬁre, an inextinguishable supply of weapons, the still-open Russian–Ukrainian border and Moscow’s denial of any responsibility
 Ukrainian attempts to attract and secure the presence of international actors in the conﬂict resolution process are motivated by two reasons . Ukraine is trying to attract international actors to the country .
 The ﬁrst is to have a witness, a guarantor or a deterrent for more aggressive Russian behaviour .
 The West still prefers viewing the crisis as a purely Russian–Ukrainian conﬂict, while Russia sees it as Russian–West one .
 Most Black Sea countries remained neutral. In this situation, the European Union at least took a mediation role .
 The low proﬁle of Turkish involvement despite the violation of the rights of Crimean Tatars raised questions in Ukrainian society .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan could be expected due to the Nagorno-Karabakh conﬂict, human rights concerns and complicated relations with Russia . Georgia’s ambiguous position also raised questions, as Tbilisi on the one hand condemned Crimean annexation, but on the other hand
 Romania in the past was perceived as a counterpart to Ukraine . There were concerns of possible Romanian territorial claims in Ukraine . Only Black Sea state on whose support Ukraine can still rely is Romania .
 Russia does not necessarily need to seize more territory, but its aim seems to be preventing Ukraine from stabilizing . Russia has not yet seized more territory in Ukraine .
 Destabilization is attempted in several spheres – economic, energy, security, security and social . Destabilisation is also attempted in economic and energy, energy and social spheres .
 A renewed wave of active ﬁghting is possible, but probably will be conﬁned to the administrative borders of Donetsk and Lugansk .
 Crimea annexation has taught a lesson to Kiev and has obliged it to respond to aggression and remain on the defensive . The annexation of Crimea has taught the Kiev government a lesson .
 Kiev's concern is that unless military resistance is put against Russian aggression, another incursion will happen . Kiev’s concerns are that if military resistance isn’t put against Russia, it will happen.
 Ukraine had been at the centre of what Stalin called ‘internal colonization’ , a policy still followed by Russia .
 Such an approach makes negotiations difﬁcult as it shifts the material conﬂict to an ideological basis . Such a approach makes talks between the two sides of the debate dif ﬁ Cult .
 It is not about Russia's economic losses from the Association Agreement any more. It is about taking back what once belonged to Moscow even if with disputable rights .
 This misperception demonstrates an inability to comprehend that competition along political lines and ideologies in Ukraine may lead to political crisis . But it does not mean the disintegration of the country, it does.
Long history of Ukraine has produced high levels of tolerance and generated admissibility of diversity . Ukraine's long history of its parts were separated and incorporated in different Empires and states .
 The Russian Federation will follow the basic principles of international law – territorial integrity of the states – only in case this state and others will agree to change its internal organization .
 ‘freezing’ the conﬂict is considered by Russian experts a good option that allows it to control the situation without spending much money in support of the separatists’ regions . ‘Freezing” is considered a good choice that allows
 At the same time for Ukraine ‘freezing’ the conﬂict is the worst scenario for Ukraine . Ukraine has been accused of 'freezing' the country . Ukraine's president has said the country will not be allowed to leave Ukraine .
 The examples of protracted conﬂicts in Transnistria and Georgian regions are quite vivid and indicative of the negative implications . greater Russian political involvement in the breakaway regions and their further detachment from the central, legal government .
 More and more parallels appear in the discourse on the future of the separatists’ regions in Ukraine, comparing them with Transnistria and Abkhazia .
 There is a common perception that maintaining the conﬂicts unresolved would give Russia leverage on Ukraine and its future, especially with regard to its foreign policy orientation .
 Both Georgia and Moldova signed Association Agreements with the European Union . Both countries strive for future EU membership and strive forfuture EU membership .
 In the case of Moldova, the visa-free regime has been introduced despite the uncertainty of borders with Transnistria .
 Ukraine's current crisis will not stop Ukraine's aspirations for closer cooperation with the European Union . So, it should not be expected that the crisis will stop Ukraine’s aspirations.
 When discussing Russia’s role or its place in Ukraine, the question should be divided into parts .
 Economic links between the two sides may be restored but it can't be business as usual .
 The re-orientation of Ukrainian business towards the EU market, as a result of the current crisis and the implementation of the Association Agreements will be inevitable .
 Russian market will be interesting for Ukraine, as well as cooperation in energy, transport and rocketbuilding . Still, the Russian market is still interesting for the Ukraine .
 cooperation in the military and security spheres will deﬁnitely be limited . At the same time, cooperation will be limited in military, security spheres .
 Such cooperation can be expected only in ﬁghting terrorism and organized crime, such as selling military equipment such as missiles and spare parts .
 All other spheres, including intelligence and joint training, might be restricted . All others may be limited to intelligence, joint training .
 The arguments of Russian experts that Ukraine should become neutral again and reject NATO membership plans are under criticism . The arguments are beneath criticism of both sides .
 Poland was not asked to remain ‘neutral’ and become a buffer zone in the early 1990s . Ukraine, the biggest European state, would have to submit to the will of a neighbouring state .
 Germany and France have fought for centuries, but also have a constructive relationship . Germany, France and Germany have been involved in many of the most successful wars .
 The creation of the European Union was deﬁnitely one of the factors for such success . The European Union's creation was one of its key factors for its success .
 There is always a chance for normalization of Russian-Ukrainian relations, says the author . Despite all contradictions and contradictions, there is always an chance fornormalization, he says .
 Both states are not ready to sacriﬁce their fundamental principles . The right to freely devise national policy versus securing spheres of inﬂuence will not be a quick solution .
 Disclosure statement. No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author .
 Hanna Shelest is a senior researcher at the National Institute for Strategic Studies, Odessa Branch, where she has been working since 2004 .
 She has a PhD in International Relations from the Institute of World Economy and International Relations of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences . She is also a graduate of the University of Ukraine's International Relations Institute .
 Dr Shelest served as a visiting research fellow at the NATO Defence College in Rome . In 2014, he was a visiting researcher at the college .
 Her main research interests are conﬂicts resolution, security and cooperation, especially in the Wider Black Sea Region and the Middle East, foreign policy of Ukraine .