 Czech Republic Prof. Josef Dolista, CEVRO EVRO Institut College in Prague, Czech Republic, is a professor at the Czech Republic University .
 The sources of Ukrainian statehood date back to Kievan Rus, Kingdom of GaliciaVolhynia, Cossak Republic, Zaporizhian Host, West Ukrainian People’s Republic .
 Declaration of Independence of Ukraine on 24 August 1991 was an act of justice that they had fought and died for . For some citizens, it was a act of Justice that they'd fought for .
 For others it was a political ‘gift’ which they did not know how to treat . For others, it was an political “gift, which they didn't know how.
 The Constitution of Ukraine declares it a democratic and law-based state . But social practices show a totally different reality, says the author .
 During two decades of independence, Ukrainian sociopolitical discourse was made on the issue of democratic transit and its institutional basis modernization .
Every cycle is characterized by a conflict escalation between the state and society by similar criteria . Every cycle is defined by the same criteria as a conflict .
 The first cycle of Ukraine’s independence development finished with the Orange revolution and victory of the opposition at the Presidential elections .
 The second cycle finished with the Maydan and early Presidential elections . The first cycle was held in Maydan, the second cycle in early presidential elections .
 They were formed to fit the exact political persons and were aimed at executing President’s will at the parliament and locally . They were designed to fit exactly political persons .
 Kuchma’s main opponents were destroyed, was a period of bifurcation of democracy building . The country's main opponents are destroyed .
 Euromaydan started in Western regions and then all over Ukraine . This resulted in the start of Euromaysdan first in Western region and then in Ukraine .
Financial and political growth inside the country was the achievement of the two cycles of independence . Financial and political growing inside the nation was the success of the independence cycles .
Ukrainian tycoon-clan political regime in Ukraine allows tycoons to get deputy immunity . This encouraged the formation of the Ukrainian regime, which has been in power for years .
 Presidential and local government elections 2010 boosted strengthening of “the Donetsk top-down operation in the capital and locally’s capital .
 At the beginning of 2011 the notion of “the family’ appears in vocabulary of Ukrainians’, along with an anecdote in which the phrase ‘I come from Donetsk’ sounds like a threat and asserting serious claims .
 Ukraine has already been transformed into a pyramid with a single managing center . “loyalty to the party leader’ and “party expediency’ was the main criteria for joining the team of the new president .
Migration of “the Donetsk’s’ to Kyiv along with democracy indicators in 2011 deprived Donetsk of the status of a multimillion city . Migration of ‘the Donetsk to Kyv’ became another reason for misunderstanding between Western and Eastern Ukraine .
 The level of trust for the courts, police, governors and mayors varied from 2 to 7%. The President’s legitimacy and the level ofTrust for the court, police and governors varied from two to seven%.
 The fact of non-transparency of political decision-making processes becomes obvious. Within the above mentioned mechanisms of power institutes formation and functioning the fact ofNon-trans Transparency of political decisions becomes obvious .
 During the first cycle of independence transparency of political decisions was provided by mutual understanding between the power and big businesses . The first election process was formalized democratic election procedure .
 The history of Ukrainian people knows many examples of despair when people rebelled to protect their families and their childrens’ future .
 Prime minister Azarov’s announcement of the suspension of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement on 21 November 2013 and intension to consult the EU commissioners and RF representatives as to the foreign policy line of Ukraine enlarged Euromaydan . People took to streets to defend independence and transparency of
 Euromaydan is the history of Ukrainian dignity at the cost of “Heavenly Hundred’s” death and loss of territorial integrity of Ukraine . The crackdown by the riot police ‘Berkut’ on 30 November 2013 launched the history
This was the Test in Humaneness and in subjectivity of the Society which does not have to be taken into account now . This was the test in humaneness. This is the Test of Humaneness .
 This edition includes alternative opinions of experts who live in Ukraine and those from outside who are interested in Ukraine's development . This edition also includes alternative views of experts from outside of Ukraine and Ukraine .
 We believe that it is our professional and moral duty to tell the world about how was it. We believe it is a professional andmoral duty to do so .
 The cooperation plan between Russian and Ukrainian Ministers of foreign affairs was signed in January 2013 .
 An effort to dismiss The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine was made .
 Personnel replacements in the Security Service of Ukraine Initiated by the President took place in May .
 The draft translation of European Union-Ukraine Association Agreement was aired on June 20. June 2013 .
 The meeting concerned the clash of opinions as to Euroinegration initiatives . The meeting was held in London, London, on Tuesday .
 The government of Ukraine pronounced suspension of Ukraine-EU Association Agreement .
 The president of Ukraine refused to sign the Ukraine-EU Association Agreement . The Ukrainian president has not signed the agreement .
Administrative buildings in Kyiv were seized in December .
 D Bulatov, Automaydan’s leader, disappeared in February 2014 . He is believed to have been in charge of the Russian government .
 Tyagnybok in the presence of EU and Russian representatives signed the agreement about overcoming the crisis . The agreement was signed by EU and Russia representatives .
Oligarchic-clan model of the political regime was created instead of democracy in Ukraine . However, oligarchic model was created rather than democracy in the Ukraine .
This hybrid model is characterized by close coalescence of politics and economics . This hybrid model has been described as a "hysterical model"
 The oligarchic-clan model formed gradually, acquiring specific features . In the time of all the four presidents of independent Ukraine, the model formed .
 The reason for the first Maydan Orange Revolution of 2004 was the falsification of the presidential elections in Ukraine . The first MayDan Orange Revolution was the faking of the Ukrainian presidential elections .
 The main cause of the second area EuroMaydan was the refusal of the signing the "Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU" by the current Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The main cause of the second Maydan was the same as the reason for the first Maydan categorical rejection of political double standards . In general, the main cause was the reason.
 Ukraine, Orange revolution, Ukrainian political system Methodology is used in the article . A wide variety of methods are used in this article .
 Problem-chronological method provided an opportunity to describe the structure of the research . The research was conducted using a problem-chronology method .
 The retrospective method was used for evolution’s monitoring of the constitutional process in Ukraine . It was also used to monitor the Ukrainian constitution .
 The comparative analysis of two Maydans in Ukraine (Orange Revolution and EuroMaydan) was made by dint of the comparative method .
 Institutional method gave an opportunity to find out the efficiency of the political institution in Ukraine during the period between two Maydans .
 Historic-situational method was claimed in analysis of the Ukrainian mentality .
 Ukraine became an independent sovereign state in 1991 due to the decay of the USSR . The country has a long history of state processes .
 Ukraine has declared its aspiration to strengthen democracy after the decay of the Soviet Union .
 During two decades the primary emphasis was focused on the issue of democratic transit in Ukrainian social and political discourse .
 At the same time, the gap between political theory and political practice is impressed with 10 its scale in Ukraine . The gap between politics and politics is 10 its size in Ukraine.
For a long time transit logical concepts executed strictly instrumental role . For a long-time transit logical Concepts executed strictly instrument role .
 They were used only in order to simulate the process of democratization in front of the European Community .
 Facade of democracy was emphasized by functioning political institutions in Ukraine . The country's political institutions were also emphasized by political institutions .
Behind the scenes of its action there is actually hidden opacity of power, corruption schemes, law ignoring, neglecting of basic human rights, etc. Behind the scenes there is also hidden opacity.
 In Ukraine, oligarchic-clan model of the political regime was created instead of democracy . The Ukrainian government is allegedly embarked on democratic reforms .
 The first President of Ukraine Leonid Kravchuk demonstrated some non-conformism in politics . He was the first president of Ukraine .
 Ukraine was considered to be a corrupt and oligarchic state in the world’s sight . Even during the presidency of Leonid Kuchma, it was considered a corrupt state .
 During the presidency of Viktor Yushchenko through its activity and inactivity state’s corruption and oligarchization acquired completed forms .
 During the presidency of Yanukovych democracy performed as camouflage netting of regent oligarchic-clan regime, that obtained new specific features again .
In the formation of clan-oligarchic political regime, there was a close coalescence of two domains politics and economics . That was during the presidency of Leonid Kuchma and Yushchenko .
 During the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych the criminalization became a significant element, which changed the substance of the oligarchic-clan regime . The criminalization of the Yanukovych regime became a major element .
 The perspective of transformation towards democratic standards existed in oligarchic-clan regime . The perspective was the view of the regime's transformation towards democracy .
 There are several oligarchic clans, which constantly have competition for some resources in Ukraine . There are also several oligarchs in Ukraine.
 The existence of multiple influence centers on the authorities can promote democratic development, but only with their willingness, says the author .
In general, this situation is positive for society, as far as it contains the potential of democracy . In general, the situation is good for society.
 At the same time, during the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych, the coalescence of three elements transformed clanoligarchic regime in a criminal-oligarchy regime .
 The criminalization of regime crossed out all Ukrainians hopes for changes to the democratic reforms inside the oligarchic clans .
 The model of democratic transit existed only in theory but in practice there was neglect of fundamental democratic principles . That is, in theory, the model of democracy was only in Theory .
 The first Maydan Orange Revolution of 2004 was the falsification of the presidential elections in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government announced the winner of the race pro-government candidate Viktor Yanukovych .
 The wave of nation’s indignation was proved in rejection of screaming fraud from government side in mass consciousness .
 The authorities decided to make certain concessions by appointing an additional tour of Ukraine's presidential election . The authorities also made certain concessions to the Ukraine's president .
 Orange Revolution Ukrainians have already used to live in a country with double-standard’s policy . But in fact, it has used radically different principles practically .
 Orange Revolution proved that a strong request for clear and fair game rules revealed in Ukraine . The Orange Revolution is the latest in a long line of Ukrainian footballers to ask for fair and clear rules .
 The main cause of the second Maydan EuroMaydan (Fall-Winter 20132014) was the refusal of the signing the "Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU" by the current Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The Ukrainian president has declared propensity to European integration course of Ukraine . He has also declared propensity for integration in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's course towards the EU (in the mass consciousness of the average Ukrainian) meant the actual developing democratic institutions and the dismantling of clan-oligarchic model of political relations .
 The EU is clearly associated with the rule of law, respect to the personality, and transpire rules of the political system .
 Ukrainians expected for a peaceful way of building democracy in their country . This means that Ukrainians expected to get involved into the family of European nations .
 Ukrainians closed their eye on the power’s corruption, oppression of free speech, lack of clear rules in all areas of public life . That is why Ukrainians closed the eye on power's corruption.
 Ukrainians anticipated that the European integration course will approximate the country to democratic standards . Ukrainians anticipated it would approximate that the EU integration course was declared by authorities .
EuroMaydan united people regardless of their places of residence, ages, social status, ethnicity, religious preferences and ideological views . EuroMaydan was created by a group of people from around the world .
 The request for politicians, who are sincere in their actions, to be honest and decent emerged in Ukraine .
EuroMaydan outlined the prospects of forming a new network-corporate identity . EuroMaydan outlines the prospect of forming an international network.
 Everyone, who has been there once, noted the presence of unity, kindness, sincerity, and high self-organization .
 Each individual could produce their own interesting ideas fitting into in the general structure of diverse projects . Maydan’s projects were organized by the participants .
This synthesis of multilevel networkcorporate relations contributed to the emergence of plethora of self-initiatives . This synthesis of multi-million dollar networkcor corporate relations contributed.
 The government periodically tried to suppress nation’s protests, which led to bloodshed and death of many people . The government repeatedly tried to stop the protests .
 The wave of popular indignation reformatted the power in Ukraine. Finally, the wave of public indignation reformated the power.
EuroMaydan as the Orange Revolution proved that strong request for clear and fair rules has already formed in Ukraine . EuroMaydan is the new leader of Ukraine's Orange Revolution .
 The main cause of the second Maydan was the same as the reason for the first Maydan categorical rejection of political double standards .
 In the days of the Cossack republic ‘Nation’s Veche’ was gathered occasionally . It established the elements of democracy in the Ukrainian people's mentality .
 After the Orange Revolution there was a noticeable electoral structuring society in Ukraine . The Orange Revolution was the biggest political upheaval in Ukraine since the revolution .
 Both the "orange" and "blue-white" camps had their own values – not ideological priorities . Both the ""orange"" and "" blue-white"" camps had its own values - not ideology .
 In public consciousness such priorities can be identified even at superficial observation of the supporters with various values .
 A typical "orange" does not understand the reason for European value’s deprecation . A typical ""orange" doesn't understand why European value's deprecations .
 In fact these principles mean creating the conditions for ensuring freedom of every person, the establishment of self-worth and individual uniqueness .
 Ukraine gets into Russian yoke, in corruption and power secrecy, in neglect of national interests, he says . Instead, he believes that with the advent of the "white-blue" Ukraine is getting into Russia's yoke .
 If every official begins express its own view on the nature of political and economic processes in Ukraine, it will only lead to the power imbalance . They believed, if every official began expressing their own view, it would lead to an imbalance .
 Political decisions have to be made by the highest authorities and executed unquestioningly . Political decisions are made by highest authorities .
 The only right decisions were made somewhere in the mysterious power corridors by wise and grave person . Such reasonings, of course, are reflection of the Soviet past, when the only right decision was made .
 Political actions and processes were defined by the ""orange"" as democratization and openness . The "white-blue" called populism, chaos and instability, and vice versa .
 If you advance interior into the problem of value conflict, we will make out in front of us ancient differences between Latin and Byzantine values .
 Byzantine values most typically associated with paternalism and secretive solving problems . Byzantine values are most typically linked to paternalism .
 Byzantine human believes the state should take care of it . Latin values mean the person’s reliance in its own forces in solving different problems .
 The coexistence of two cultural traditions the ""western"" and "" eastern"" is observed in Ukraine nowadays . The co-existence of the "western" and " eastern" traditions is observed nowadays .
 The eastern cultural tradition extended mainly on spiritual level of Ukrainian culture . It is necessary to emphasize on the fact, that "the eastern" cultural tradition extends mainly onspiritual level .
 The rejection of Byzantine traditions was often observed in the Byzantine state .
 This was about rejection of the idea of the limitation of 13 individual freedom . In particular, this was about rejecting the idea.
In general, Ukrainian mentality is characterized by individualism, freedom, rejection of authoritarian principles . In general, Ukrainians are more likely to reject authoritarian principles than individualism .
 There is some correlation with the principles of conservatism and conservatism .
 2004 became symbolic for the political system of Ukraine after the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution led to the adoption of so-called political reform, which amended the Constitution of Ukraine .
 The adoption of political reforms have not only changed the state’s form of governance from the presidential-parliamentary to parliamentary-presidential, but led to the imbalance of power in certain way .
 The problem of political instability that befell Ukraine in “postpomaranchevyy’s period was primarily determined by constitutional amendments .
 This problem consisted from the imbalance of power institutions, which reflected in vague powers and functional uncertainties, which political institutions of the executive branch had .
 Many people in Ukraine believe that the Orange Revolution led to chaos in the government . The Orange Revolution is the result of the revolution in Ukraine .
 Many Western experts in Western countries seem equally paradoxical. On the other hand, point of view of many experts in western countries seems equally contradictory .
 The President and Prime Minister of Ukraine seemed to be very confrontational . They believe that main problem, which led to political instability in “postpomaranchevyy’s period, was only personal relationships between them .
 Some facts are dropped out of sight due to such a simple explanation of political instability . However, some facts are drop out of view due to the political instability.
 The Law ""About the amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine " was adopted December 8, 2004 . The Orange Revolution caused the power imbalance .
 The law was adopted by the Parliament of Ukraine in the package along with the decision of the third presidential election round in 2004 .
 Adepts of Yushchenko the candidate for the President of Ukraine were forced to agree to adoption of the Law in exchange for a second vote due to peaceful settlement of the revolutionary situation .
 The Orange Revolution and Constitutional Reform are connected only by a common date of resolving its destinies . This means that these two events are linked only by the common date. This means the two events were not connected by the same date .
 The Orange Revolution could not cause the chaos in power system. Consequently, the Orange Revolution did not cause chaos in the system .
 A similar situation was in the times, when Viktor Yushchenko was the President and Viktor Yanukovych was the Prime Minister . The situation is similar to that of Viktor Yanukovych when he was President .
 There were reasons for personal animosity between Viktor Yushchenko and Viktor Yanukovych . It is necessary to note that there were reasons.
 The mine of institutional action 14 that was laid by amendments to the Constitution were laid by the Constitution . It was the first time the two leaders had to touch up at identifying the deeper reasons of conflicts .
 The 1996 Constitution is based on liberal principles. Regarding the 1996 Constitution it is necessary to note that it is not based onliberal principles .
 The existence of fundamental liberal principles did not secure the Constitution of Ukraine against substantial defects . However, there were substantial defects in the Constitution, according to the Ukrainian constitution .
 It appeared that the executive branch of government has become 'double-headed' through the excessive powers provided to the institution of the presidency .
 Despite the fact that Art. prescribed existence of three branches, it seemed that the Basic Law foundered the existence of four branches .
 The contradiction, , was founded in the Constitution exactly in that time . The contradiction was founded exactly in the constitution .
 The problem has been actively discussed with the filing of the President by the end of the second term of Leonid Kuchma presidency .
 At the time, Leonid Kuchma understood that he has no right to be president thrice . It was beneficial to curtail presidential powers and transform Ukraine into a parliamentary republic .
 L Kuchma probably hoped to occupy the post of Prime Minister of Ukraine with the help of such constitutional changes .
 The Orange Revolution Leonid Kuchma was unable to use the results of the reform . However, due to the reform, the results were not used .
 This constitutional reform was used by surrounding of presidential candidate Viktor Yanukovych in order to limit the president's powers . The Yushchenko presidency was inevitable, according to the law .
 The Law about the amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine was adopted on 8 December 2004 . The law was adopted in 2004 .
 The law was dubbed "Four Deuces" because of its specific serial number 2222 . It was dubbed 'Four Deuce' because of the serial number .
 The Parliament was empowered to determine the structure of the Cabinet of Ministers, as defined in Art . Basic changes that made this law were made in Art.
 The prerogative of introduction candidates on prime minister position belonged to president in the 1996 Constitution . President in 1996 Constitution was president in 1996 .
 It seemed that curtailed presidential powers would automatically lead to a harmonious balance between power institutions . It was thought curtailed powers would lead to harmonious power systems .
 The principle of checks and balances did not lead to the result. However, the principle of checking and balances was not the result .
 The law "Four Deuces" contributed even more chaos and instability at the level of political institutions in Ukraine .
 This was caused, on the one hand, by the rush of adopting the Law "Four Deuces" in the turbulent period of the Orange Revolution .
 The Parliament played the role of first violin in the power system . The Parliament failed to adopt a legal framework aimed at defect’s elimination .
The revived Constitution transformed Ukraine from the parliamentary-presidential to a presidential-parliamentary republic again . The revived Constitution was the first time the country has been transformed into a presidential republic .
 The powers of parliament were truncated, while the powers of president were generously endowed . The power of parliament was also generously endowed, according to reports .
 Viktor Yanukovych started to build unified power vertical in 2010 . Yanukovych received the long-awaited presidency of Ukraine in 2010.
Reentering the 1996 Constitution was one of the elements of the concentration power 15 in the president hands . Reentered the 1996 constitution was a part of the president's concentration power .
 The processes of clotting democracy were activated after becoming Viktor Yanukovych the president . The processes were activated when Yanukovych became president .
 The transformation of constitutional rules of the game became one of the essential government steps after the overthrow of the regime of Yanukovych .
 Parliament of Ukraine adopted the Resolution 02/22/2014 about the returning to constitutional reform of 2004 . It was adopted to a parliamentary-presidential model of government .
 All citizens of Ukraine understood that making history is happening before their eyes . Today after EuroMaydan all citizens ofUkraine understood that history was happening before they saw it .
 Postcommunist Ukraine always declared its aspirations of democracy building. Postcommunists always declared their aspirations.
 The main cause of the second area EuroMaydan was the refusing of the signing the "Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU" by current Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 In general, the main cause of the second Maydan was the same as the first Maydan (the Orange Revolution) The Orange Revolution was a categorical rejection of political double standards . The main cause was the reason for the first.
 Ukrainians both in the East and in the West are deeply individualistic . However, the mentality of the Ukrainians in the east and West is deeply personalistic .
 The Ukrainian mentality is the basic installation of the Ukrainian mentality, says the author .
 Author outlines mains stages of its foundations and development as well as institutional characteristics . The author outlines main stages of the country's development .
 Challenges of in the-ethnic tensions and conflict has been regarded and some principal conclusion drawn up .
Chernivtsi oblast (Ukrainian Bukovyna), where the tradition of tolerance went back to the Austrian time . The author considers a case of the one from the calmest region of Ukraine .
 Some suggestions and proposals of making inter-ethnic relations in Ukraine more stable and positive are put forward . Finally, some suggestions of making Inter- ethnic relations more stable are putforward .
 Ukraine’s ethno-politics, regional separatism, inter-ethnic relations, challenges of stability. Introduction Geopolitical crisis in Europe provoked by the unexpected annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 Among the most important factors determining the cohesion of Ukrainian society is inter-ethnic relations in the country and ethno-political dimensions of the State policy . The State policy is based on inter- ethnic relations in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is a multiethnic country with a relatively brief history of its Statehood . The country has a relatively short history of the country's statehood .
 Many of its citizens remain in the stage of unfinished search for their identity, moving apart from evaporating Soviet model of identity . Many of their citizens are still in the process of finding their identity .
 The country has avoided major interethnic conflict and open confrontation . Despite some obvious regional, confessional and ethnic diversity the country has been safely passing through the first two decades of its Independence .
 Ukraine has faced no challenges of interethnic relations and state ethnopolitics at whole . This positive and inspiring fact does not mean that Ukraine is facing no challenges at all .
 They need to be taken into careful consideration as the subject of comprehensive analyses by academic society and policy-makers . They should be taken to careful consideration.
 The article reflects the author's personal vision and reveals some critical issues of ethnopolitical evolution of Ukraine’s society since 1991 .
 Chernivtsi region peculiarities as a sample. First of all, they are analyzed from the all-national point of view, and later, from the regional standpoint .
 The paper approaches some general conclusions and suggestions evaluating the positive and negative aspects of Ukrainian state’s ethnopolicy and its ability of constructing stable and sufficient inter-ethnic balance in the country .
 It is divided by many political factions and regional components . Some of them are not very much loyal towards Ukrainian statehood and its citizenship .
 Ukraine has been facing with pressing challenge of its ethnic stability and growing demand to maintain interethnic relations in a proper civilized order . Beside diverse political preferences, opposing geopolitical orientations, confessional domains of sometimes competing .
 Ukraine has a lot of reasons to be preoccupied with its territorial integrity and social peace . Ukraine has many centrifugal forces and pressure from outside Ukrainian border .
 Ukraine has possessed some paradoxical features with regard to its ethnopolicy and interethnic relations. Taking into consideration this general situation, I have to stress that Ukraine has a paradoxical feature .
 Ukrainians compose there a solid majority of countries inhabitants . On the one hand, nobody else but Ukrainians compose the majority of Ukrainians .
 Ukrainians are drastically different and still not consolidated as the leading and overwhelming ethnic community . But, on the other hand, Ukrainians themselves are significantly different and not consolidated .
 First and foremost, they are not united by the system of common values, shared historical memory and integrated vision on the state and society future .
Ukrainian ethnic community's linguistic preferences only lie in their linguistic preferences. Superficially a key problem inside the Ukrainian ethnic community laid in their language preferences only .
 First of all, major part of Ukrainians who leave in Western and Central regions are Ukrainian-speakers . Eastern and Southern regions of the country are dominated with Russo-phones .
 The only region of Ukraine where ethnic Ukrainians are in minority is Crimea. It is worth reminding hereby that the only region where ethnic Ukrainian are in minorities is Crimea .
 Russians are the majority for a long period of contemporary history, namely after WWII . It happened as a direct result of the ethnic cleansing organized by the order of Joseph Stalin against Crimean Tatars and other ethnic groups .
 Ukrainians are not limited with the ethno-cultural diversity only and leads to several open and hidden political and social consequences . This most clear difference amidst Ukrainians is not limited. Nonetheless, this mostclear difference is notlimited with the Ethno- cultural diversity only .
 The latter were masterly used by some domestic and foreign actors since the very dubious Presidential campaign of 2004 in order to mobilize and confront voters in different regions of Ukraine .
 Ukrainians in the recent years gradually lost their presumably dominant position even in political and public sphere, while they did not get a leading role in the national economy for the entire period of the State independence .
 It makes them grow uncertain, frustrated and uncomfortable in the native state of the state . The native state is known as the state of New Jersey .
 The Russian ethnic community is well-represented into Ukraine's political and business elite . Russia has been supported by the much bigger neighboring country, namely Russia .
 Some politicians are eager to speculate about ethnic discrimination of Russians in Ukraine . They are looking for the best remedy in official recognition of Russian language as the second official one of Ukraine .
 Russian officials started to openly support this claim last year, using their agents of influence in Ukraine in order to promote this claim . The goal of Ukraine’s federalization is to get Ukraine's federalization .
 The pressure did not reach 18 momentum of Kremlin orchestrated campaign . After V Janukovych escape from Ukraine the Kremlin has decided to use the weakness of new Ukraine’s government at full fledge .
 The official reason of such unprecedented aggression has been invented as the defense of Russian-speaking population in Ukraine . The official reasons of such aggression have been invented by the Ukrainian government .
 No real arguments in favor of that accusation have been proposed till now . No real argument in favor for that accusation.
 The next and corresponding to this abovementioned issue is a paradox that it is Russian language not Ukrainian dominates in fact upon the most part of Ukraine, not to mention all-national and even regional media .
Pro-Russian and anti-Ukrainian slogans have not been successful in all parts of Ukraine . The creation of Russian Block and the creation of Crimean Autonomy has failed there, anywhere but Crimea, however .
Pro-Russian party led by Serhey Aksenov won only 4% of voters support in Crimea . In Crimea, for instance, the pro- Russian party won just 4% support .
 His appointment does not prevent his appointment to the Prime-minister of secessionist Crimea in time of recent Russian operation .
 Ukraine's demographic crisis seems to be one of the rapidly diminishing communities . It is important to state that alongside with all-national demographic crisis Russians in Ukraine seemed to be a rapidly diminishing community .
There are a lot of arguments about comparison of 1989 and 2001 census results with regards to numbers of Russians in Ukraine . There are many arguments about the comparison of the census results .
 Russians are dying in absolute and relative figures. One of the key reasons of this considerable demise of Russians are the following .
 Many of them were born in mixed families under the Soviet regime . Many chose Russian nationality as the best option .
 Ukraine has started making the opposite choice, now in favor of identifying themselves as Ukrainians . When Ukraine got Independence this part of citizens have started making their own choice .
 The new census has been twice postponed by the Mykola Azarov government with no acceptable excuse .
 As a result of those mixed and controversial trends, a very important fact could be stated. Therefore, as a result, the fact that some of these trends could be said .
 Ukraine is placed under growing pressure from two representatives of opposing visions of what is the major threat of the ethno-political instability as far as the country's perspective is concerned .
 Ukrainians are feeling deprived of the recently attributed status of so-called titular nation . The first vision, comes from uncertainty and frustration of many of them .
 The dubious Law has been signed by the President Viktor Janukovych and made new concessions to the legal status of Russian language entrenchment first of all .
 Russians of Ukraine's against the so-called forceful Ukrainianization process taking place in the country . The second one is provoked with persistent claims on behalf of the most numerous minority .
 Some ethnicities have got their peculiar vision what went wrong with national ethnopolitics and ethnopolicy too . Some other ethnicities, such as Crimean Tatars, Hungarians in Transcarpathia and Romanians in Chernivtsi and Odessa regions, have a peculiar
 The voting of Verkhovna Rada against Kolesnichenko and Kivalov Law after V Janukovych run away from Kyiv provoked speculations about nationalistic trends in Ukrainian Parliament and paved a way to Kremlin propaganda about Russian-speaking population discrimination .
Anti-Ukrainian propaganda did not stop when the abandoning of the Law did come into force because of acting the veto of the President of Ukraine Olexander Turchinov . However, the anti-Ukraine propaganda didn't stop when it did .
 Most dynamic and troublesome situation with interethnic relations in Ukraine was persistent in Crimea even prior to 2014 annexation . Most troublesome situation was in Crimea before Crimea was annexed .
 Russians living there 19 regard themselves as a dominant community with no reservations and concessions made to other ethnic groups' claims and demands .
 Some of the peninsula belonged to Tsarist and later on to Soviet Empire . Some of them are totally oriented towards “historic Russia’s’ history .
In fact, that statement is highly debatable if to regard the history of the peninsula more carefully and in the wide retrospect . In fact, the statement is very debatable .
Their identity and demand confronts with two other communities expectations and vital needs . Their identity and demands confront with other communities' expectations and needs .
 Crimean Tatars are in the final stage of their return towards historic motherland process . Primarily, with the growing dissatisfaction of Crimean Tatar, they are unhappy with their return to motherland .
 This community grows up demographically faster than any other ethnic group on the peninsula . It also lacks adequate material resources and access to power distribution there .
 It provokes tensions and dissatisfaction of Crimean Tatars . It leads towards growth of unfriendly attitudes and deeds among them and other locals .
 Ukrainians feel themselves pretty affected with their minor role on the peninsula’s society itself, in comparison with local Russians .
 They are threatened with some perpetuated separatists tendencies of them. And, furthermore, they are threatened by some of them .
 Crimean Tatars in their turn consider the territory of the peninsula as their only homeland . The territory should be recognized as the National Autonomy of local Tatars .
 The whole picture of ethnic relations on the peninsula seems to be very complicated . After Russia intrusion could be undermined rapidly by that action or the consequences of them .
 Another region with a distinct ethnopolitical situation in Ukraine is Transcarpathia . The region is also known for its unique ethnicities .
Several ethnic communities live and have peacefully coexisted for ages. Here several ethnic communities have peacefully lived for ages . There are many ethnic communities in the United States .
 All-national and regional ethnopolitics now pose two key problems there . There are certain problems for all-national, regional and national ethnop politics .
 One of them is status and aspirations of Hungarian ethnic community, split among two principal orientations and cultural societies there . One of the two is status, aspirations of Hungary's ethnic community .
 Hungary supported local Hungarians in their clams to Ukrainian authorities for bigger autonomy and greater political influence . Hungary also supported local Hungarian Hungarians to Ukraine authorities for larger autonomy .
Local Hungarians are not balanced with the inclusive behavior of local Hungarians who do not invest energy and time into more adaptive actions with regard to Ukrainian language and culture .
 Some features of self-isolation of local Hungarians must not be omitted in the region . So, some features of Self-Isolation must be omitted .
 The second regional problem concerns the so-called Ruthenian’s identity question . And the second regional issue concerns the Ruthenians' identity question.
 This relic identity has possessed some political meaning and connotations because of the active interference of some foreign sponsors who invest into the Ruthenian's project and movement .
 For the last decades this movement does not change the general ethnic situation in Transcarpathia . But it remains hot topic for some academic and public discussion .
 Both issues are making certain negative influence on the ethnic stability and interethnic relations in the given region . Both issues make certain negative impact on the region's ethnic stability .
 Regional stability does not make regional stability threatened or undermined . Still, they do not make the regional stability threats or undermined, they say .
 If to touch upon an ethnopolitical situation in Eastern and Southern Ukraine’s regions, they have some flavor of poly-ethnicity too .
 The Russian community is known to be proRussian, but it is also known to have proRussian trends . But the major problem of their ethnic relations is the stance of the Russian community there, they say .
 Being mainly Russian-speaking territories they should not be attributed as anti-Ukrainian ones, which is no way true . Being mainly Russia-speaking territory they shouldn't be attributed to being anti-Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Crimea and Crimea seem to be unlike the Crimea and the dominant part of regional elite and society do not consider the future of themselves outside of Ukraine . But these territories appear to be like the Crimea.
 Ukraine is still far away from being a sample of success-story with regard to building up the political nation of all Ukraine’s citizens . To a very extend the country is still a very far away of being a success story .
 negative remarks would deserve civic society as well. If the authority lacked even the appropriate understanding of the very concept and importance of the targeted policy towards new polity building, some negative remarks should be made .
 Ukrainian society institutes had to try their best in order to compensate this fault .
 Ukrainian NGO nation-wide. Unfortunately, it has hardly been a priority of Ukrainian NGO nations-wide .
 A major question of Ukrainian society and statehood remains open and it's the same one as far as the latest period of the county's history .
 Any kind of proposed replay to these questions is far away of no ambiguity, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Chernivtsi oblast of Ukraine (former North-western part of Bukovina) praised to be a kind of ethic tolerance paradise .
 To a certain extend this regional brand corresponds with the local traditions and culture of interethnic relations . The regional brand is a regional brand that corresponds with local traditions .
 If to combine them with the local Moldavians, they are around 20% of the regional population . And if to combine the Moldavian population with the locals, they're around 20%.
 Latest research and sociological pools prove the stable positive attitudes of the ethnic groups in Chernivtsi and the region .
 These conclusions are well-grounded in the past experience of the region, says author .
 That period contributed a lot in the making Bukovynians tolerant towards others . That period has contributed a a lot to the making them tolerant towards other people .
 No ethnic or religious community posses a position and status of the dominant majority . This phenomenon is due because of the very composition of then-time ethnic structure of Bukovina .
 They were not in position of claiming legitimate a superior position upon the historic region itself . They were in position to claim a superior place upon the region itself.
 That happened because of regional elite values and patterns of political conduct, composed of different ethnic groups . That happened also because of Regional elite values, and because of political patterns .
Political behavior to co-nationals expectations and needs of the regional community in general. They had gradually elaborated the adaptive model of political behavior .
 Bukovynian ethnic tolerance may be explained because of the central government's role in Vienna policy and ethno-policy in particular .
 A well-balanced combination of the different ethnic groups and 21 denominations kept this regional equilibrium out of dangerous conflict scenarios and threats towards regional stability .
 Vienna has been taking into its account the strategic position of Bukovyna on the Eastern forefront of the Danube Empire vis-a-vis Russian Empire . Vienna has taken into its position on the eastern side of the Russian Empire.
Being both sophisticated and crumbled, this system of the regional ethnopolitics is obviously marked with the process of the Austrian-styled regional model of inter-ethnic relations checks and balances .
 Two World Wars, different ruling regimes ethno-policies, starting from the Kingdom of Romania and concluding with the USSR negative attitude towards regional peculiarities of Bukovina undermined and exhausted the main resources of local tolerant culture to an extend .
 Nowadays not only political and geographical composition of the given region has been passed through radical and profound changes . Nowadays it is not just political and geographic composition but it is more than political .
 Demography shows that the previous historically constructed ethnic balance was left far away in the past . The previous historical balance was based on the absence of dominant group regional equilibrium .
 Authorities and ethnic communities have to deal with sharply distinctive realities in the region . Now authorities and ethnic community have to dealt with sharply different realities in region .
 The landscape of Bukovina since WWI is changing up to day . In a first place it is active migratory process, which starts to reshape the landscape .
 Systematic social and political changes have contributed to the new dynamic and composition of some positive and negative aspects of interethnic relations in the region .
 There is a domination of reactive policy of Kyiv and Chernivtsi public bodies with regard to inter-ethnic issues and problems there . Opposing to Habsburg rule, there is a dominance of reactive policies of public bodies .
 Regional ethnopolicy is marked with lobbyism of active minorities rather then is grounded on elaborated academic approaches and effective managerial mechanism of its realization .
 I would like to address towards two facts in order to sustain these statements . I would want to address to two facts to sustain this statement .
 Ukraine is the only regional Program aimed at support to ethnic cultural societies and Ukrainian Diaspora . Ukraine has a lack of elaborated regional ethnopolicy as well as all around Ukraine .
 The program combines two different aspects of the regional authority activity . The program is based on the region's regional activity .
 The first one is addressed to satisfying urgent needs and some expectations of the ethnic communities . The second is aimed at Ukrainians who leave outside the country, namely in Romania and Moldova regions alongside the state border with Ukraine .
 This strange combination of distant political goals is counterproductive, tending to disperse limited financial resources to quite different targets . This strange mixture of political goals and financial resources is counterproductive .
 Ukraine has an inner defect also of converting ethnic minorities needs satisfaction in Ukraine . Ukraine is indirectly linked with the status and prospect of Ukrainians in neighboring countries .
 Despite scarce recourses envisaged for the Program, it produces affect of placing ethno-cultural society in line of queuing for them and even competing for the authorities support . Finally, despite scarce recourse envisaged, it produced affect of putting ethno culture in line for them .
 criteria and indicators of these support distribution are not outlined unequivocally neither in the Program itself or in any other related official document .
 The document does not imply any kind of programming set of priorities and mechanisms of the regional ethnopolicy as such, it says .
 This principal omission might be compensated by the regional mechanism of ethnic societies . Regional authorities’ consultation and cooperation may be compensated .
 Regional Council in charge of ethnopolitical issues. This mechanism exists for several years represented by the Regional Council .
 This is a body of the Regional State administration . composed of ethnic cultural society’s leaders and some local experts in the field of 22 ethnopolitics .
 Council opened the floor for all parties concerned to address with their proposals and complaints towards each other . It is a positive step of making such a Council established in the region .
 The Council for the last three years was called to seat together only two times with a very limited agenda . But the rest of the story looks less happy as far as this Council is called to sit together .
 I am not sure that this fact about result and effect of Council activity deserves making going in-depth comments . I'm not sure. This fact about results and effect on Council activity deserve making in- depth comments .
In the region as well as in the country the whole process of setting up and elaboration of state ethno-policy and functions of the institutions is undervalued .
 It makes this part of domestic policy irregular, reactive and finally ineffective one . It makes it part of the domestic policy irregularities, and it makes it more ineffective .
 Civic society institutes are partly involved into the practice of making the interethnic policy . But they lack a mechanism of steady cooperation and regularity of consultation with governing bodies .
 The direction of the domestic policy is not financially supported well and this has a negative effect on them. Of course, this direction is not financial supported well .
After a review of the interethnic relation and ethnopolitics completed, it’s time to go to some generalization and concluding remarks . Conclusions: It's time to give some generalizations and conclude .
 The new Independent State overcomes major threats of the domestic conflict, which have been enflamed by interethnic tensions in the constituent period of State-building .
 It happens because principal but predominantly informal concessions made by the Ukrainian majority and political elite towards other ethnic groups . It happens as principal but mostly informal concessions are made by Ukrainian majority .
 A contribution of more or less cautious ethnic policy should be admitted either . A contribution to more or more cautious governmental ethnic policy is needed .
 Ukraine has worked out successfully a set of the legislation on the ethnic monitories . The legislation has to be regarded as compatible with European standards as well as expectations of the Ukrainian citizens of different ethnic origin .
 All of these facts are the positive part of Ukrainian domestic interethnic balance and they should be appreciated .
 Stating them with certain satisfaction, I have to add some more criticism . Stated them with some satisfaction, but also with some more criticisms . Stating a certain satisfaction is a good thing, I say .
 What has been made earlier is not enough and goes to be unsatisfactory as for now .
 Beside open Russian aggression since 1 March, 2014 and fueling interethnic tensions in Ukraine, mainly in Southern and Eastern parts of the country . There are some more worrying signals of some growing demands and disappointments of certain ethnic groups towards Ukraine State .
 Ukrainians are getting more and more nervous about their formal and informal, language and culture protection under current trends in both domestic and foreign policy . Ukrainians themselves are getting less nervous about the formal, informal and language and language protection .
Ukrainian scholars and civic activists have contributed to the resolution of the interethnic relations problems . They say they are helping make these encounters safer .
 Recently their voices and concerns aren’t attained by states’ authorities respectfully .
Both National and Regional authorities have to be ready to face these challenges well prepared . Both National and regional authorities have been prepared to face the challenges .
 Even the most tolerant regions like Chernivtsi oblast itself requires a lot of investments into re-constructing and constructing again on the new and different ground .
 New and balanced interethnic stability is both not-so-easy 23 attainable and in the same time of vital importance for the sake of Ukraine safety, stability and further prospect .
 It requires stable, trustworthy and integrated by common values and beliefs of leading ethnic communities, national and regional political elite and all the governing institutes together .
 It’s extremely important to get friendlier political environment around Ukraine, which the country lacks now dramatically .
 A sign is an associative category that makes a connection between a subject and its image in a person’s perception . A sign makes a link between a person's image and a subject's image .
 A sign always has an interpretant – its direct meaning and a variety of additional – connotative – interpretants . interpretants that in every single case are defined by a reader's perception .
 As the reality is constructed from signs, it can be denotative and connotative . The reality can be constructed from the signs.
 Facts no longer exist, one connotative reality beats the other, and some interpetants beat the other ones . Some interpetants beat the others .
 During the development of Maydan’s political text different realities were designed . The political text was designed to reflect different realities .
 The real war of realities started and resulted in the split of the country and the intervention of the Russian Federation to the territory of Ukraine .
 The Agreement about the regulation of the crisis in Ukraine was signed between the President of Ukraine V.Yanukovich and opposition leaders V.Klichko, A.Yatsenyuk and O.Tyagnybok .
 The authors have developed the research methodology of realities construction in a common political text . They rely on their concept of the text and category .
 Reality models are constructed owing to the text that is a combination of all signs, stereotypes, myths, and attitudes typical for a certain society in the chosen period of time .
 The goal of this research is to find out differences of realities and factors that preconditioned these differences as a consequence of signing the Agreement about regulation of the crisis in Ukraine .
 The research subject is a process of constructing connotative realities of the Agreement by the President of Ukraine V.Yanukovich . The research subjects include the leaders of the opposition V.Klichko, A.Yatsenyuk, O.Tyagnybok .
 The most actual reality of 21 February 2014 was the fact of signing of the Agreement about resolution of the crisis in Ukraine . The agreement was signed by the President of Ukraine Victor Yanukovich .
Both parties, the power and the opposition, were the authors of the reality . Both parties, both parties, were responsible for the reality.
 Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Miniter of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland Radoslaw Sikorski acted as guarantors of the Agreement . Eric Fournier acted as the guarantor of the agreement .
 The text of the Agreement was not accorded with the participants of the protests on Maydan Nezalezhnosti . This was the President's and the opposition leaders’ reality only .
 The text of the Agreement presented a plan of actions from the power and the opposition, most metaphors in it were related to violence . Most metaphors in the Agreement were related.
 Power promised not to impose state of emergency, to use forces of law and order for physical protection of public offices only .
 There are a few uniting signs in the text of the Agreement. It is important to note that there are a couple of uniting signings .
 There is a video on the Internet that shows how people had been shot . Hundreds of people were injured as a result of the confrontation .
 Opposition leaders unable to control protesters. Information about people who were burnt alive in the house of Trade Unions . Opposition leaders cannot control protesters .
Public leaders of Maydan, in particular Dmytro Yarosh, are low authority among the participants of the protests . None of public persons participated in signing of the Agreement .
 Participants learnt the text of the Agreement from news from news .
 The opposition leaders did not accept the signed Agreement between the opposition leaders and the President of Ukraine V Yanukovich .
 Maydan became a synonym of protests all over the country . Protests participants in Kyiv did not consider them as the protest in the capital only .
 The protest participants came to get the things they had been deprived of .
 It's noteworthy that it was about advocacy of decent life as well as physical defense of people . People were killed during those days, as we know .
 Two most important values were life that was taken, and the family that was deprived of a member .
Metaphors of revolution (“revolution”, “barricades” and “assault’s” ‘Ukraine has rebelled’, ‘struggle against the regime’ (‘fight’), “fight�
 These metaphors from the group of violence were mostly presented during the protests . These metaphors were mostly present during the demonstrations .
 All speeches started and ended with these signs, they became special greeting of protesters . The signs became special greetings for protesters .
 Gaddafi was also described as a “bad egg’s destiny was predicted to him . He was also called a ‘bad egg,’ and the destiny of Gaddafi was predicted.
 The Agreement became a betrayal for protesters, and the leaders of the opposition – betrayers . The agreement became a betrayer for protesters .
Several rounds of negotiations were carried out but the power did not want to make concessions . Distrust to any negotiations as protests have been lasting for the third month .
 The main metaphor that the protesters used for description of signing the Agreement was a betrayal . The protesters used to describe the signing of the Agreement is a betrayal.
 The disappointment was expressed by the sign ‘typical Ukrainian politicians’ The sign basically proved people’s distrust to politicians .
 The protesters’ reality the signed Agreement was a betrayal of the opposition leaders, says the opposition leader . The protesters' reality is that the signed agreement was a betraying the opposition.
 Yatsenyuk, V Klichko or O Tyagnybok as their leaders, nor the Agreement . The Agreement is not the Agreement.
 The Agreement was supposed to guarantee that during the protests people would not die any more . That is why the Agreement was meant to guarantee the people wouldn't be killed any more.
 Opposition leaders tried to convince participants that this returning would have positive results . Opposition leaders kept trying to convince them that this return would have good results .
2004 deprives the President of Ukraine of significant powers . The Constitution deprives President of major powers .
 The reality of the oppositionists was that they did not believe in their own power, and they let V.Yanukovich’s determine the results .
 The Agreement served the interests of the opposition leaders, but they should have convinced the protesters that they had disputed a victory . The agreement should have started actions to phase down the protests .
 For the analysis of A.Yatsenyuk’s speech on the briefing after signing the Agreement, V.Klichko's speeches were chosen . The video was chosen by O.Tyagnybok for the analysis .
 During speeches on Maydan one of the main factors that shaped the Agreement’s future and change of denotative reality was victims’ funeral .
 The opposition tried to convince people in their victory, but they actually meant to convince that V.Yanukovich would remain on the presidential post until the end of the year when coffins were brought to Maydan .
 For protesters a victory meant the resignation of V.Yanukovich, for the oppositionists it meant the stop of bloodshed .
 The leaders of the oppositions tried to call on the metaphor of victory . The leaders tried to use the term of victory as a metaphor .
 He tried to avoid specifics when exactly the presidential elections would be carried out and whether V.Yanukovich would remain on his post . He also said he would not comment on whether he would stay on the post .
 The main goal of the protesters was the immediate dismissal of V.Yanukovich . It was the first conflict of realities as the main goal for the protesters.
 Klichko's and O.Tyagnybok's words reshaped the speech according to people’s mood, according to the mood .
 The sign of death of confrontation realities was Instytutska street where most people were shot . Most people were killed in the street.
 The protesters distanced themselves from the politicians and called them betrayers . They called them betrayeders .
 The politicians talked about the future of Ukraine more in the abstract while the protesters emphasized that they came to defend their rights . It’s noteworthy that the politicians talked more about Ukraine more than the protesters .
Politicians have tried to avoid mentioning V.Yanukovich .
 It was supposedly done in order not to touch upon the painful topic of reelection . It was supposed to be done in a bid to not touch upon a painful topic.
 Maydan Nezalezhnosti tried to make people accept the reality of the Agreement . The leaders of the opposition tried to made people accept it .
 They noted that they had already achieved a victory – stopped bloodshed . They noted the victory had already been achieved by the group .
 Yanukovich left for Kharkiv to participate in congress of deputies of all levels in south-eastern oblasts and Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 V.Yanukovich did not visit Lugansk as he first tried to cross the Russian Federation border by helicopter . He had to return to Donetsk from where he left for Crimea by car .
 V.Yanukovich was on the territory of Russia and was going to give a press conference in Rostov-on-Don . In a few days after these events there was information in mass media that he was in Russia .
 The last bill draft provided scheduling the pre-term election of the President of Ukraine on 25 April 2014 . The last draft draft provided the president's pre- term election on 25April 2014 .
 V.Yanukovich’s reality lied in non recognition of the decisions made by the parliament regarding his dismissal from the post of the President of Ukraine . He insisted that he was the only legitimate President .
 V.Yanukovich’s perception of the Agreement signed with the representatives of the opposition was controversial and changed depending on the chronology of his public statements . V. Yanukovich's view of the agreement was controversial.
 V.Yanukovich did not take responsibility for any of the events in Ukraine during February 2014 . But he was not responsible for any events in the country .
 V.Yanukovich’s rhetoric in the first by date interview to journalists were different and marked by embarrassment of their author .
 The change of key signs of opinions about the international mediators after V.Yanukovich came to the territory of RF most likely prove the fact that he adopted the opinion of the President of RF V.Putin .
Yanukovich insisted that the Agreement signed between him and the opposition was not fulfilled . The main way out of the situation was to recognize him as the legitimate President of Ukraine .
 According to him, it would be a legal process of settlement of the political crisis in Ukraine . He says it would also be a 'legal process' of settling the crisis .
 V.Yanukovich had somewhat controversial attitude to the authorities set up in Kyiv . V. Yanukovich's attitude to authorities was controversial .
 Ukraine V.Yanukovich used the metaphor of overturn intensified by the metaphors of violence and fear .
 The mentioned above metaphors of violence and fear/intimidation ran through all speeches and statements of V.Yanukovich . V. Yanukovich's words were used in all speeches, statements.
 Key signs were used to intensify other metaphors . They were used as widely as possible, and their key signs were often used as well as possible .
 The metaphor of violence generated the metaphor of fear/intimidation that was used in two directions . The metaphor was used as a metaphor for fear and intimidation .
 Yanukovich was intimidating himself and his family. On the other hand, it was intimidating Yanukovich himself and family .
 The metaphors of fear showed up in spite of V.Yanukovich’s numerous denials of being scared .
 V.Yanukovich clearly described his key enemies who, in his opinion, were guilty in “chaos’, “terror’ and “bloodshed’ in Ukraine .
 V.Yanukovich saw his own role in these events differently depending on the course of events . V. Yanukovich: "I'm not a man who doesn't know what to do"
 In his further statements the defender role transformed into a peacemaker role . But in his later statements the role turned into a peacemaker role .
 V.Yanukovich's rhetoric varies in different by dates statements as for tasks that he set for himself and the main ways of solving . Also his rhetoric somewhat varies by dates.
 The first public speech on 22 February 2014 proved that he did not realize how exactly to act in the public field in the nearest time for solving these tasks .
Yanukovich announced his specific perspective of the way out of the crisis in Ukraine . It was fulfillment of the provisions of the Agreement signed with the representatives of the opposition .
 V.Yanukovich's metaphor of apologizing was peculiar to V. Yanukovich . It is interesting that the metaphor was also peculiar to him .
 He first apologized for not being able to keep the stability in the country and allowed illegality establish after the events on 21 of February 2014 . He first of all apologized for being unable to keep stability in country .
 V.Yanukovich demanded the return to fulfilling the provisions of the 35 Agreement signed with the opposition . He considered the situation in the country as chaos and illegality that was caused by radicals', nationalists’, bandits’ actions through applying violence, intimidation
 Signing of the Agreement about regulation of the crisis in Ukraine was not only the basis for construction of different realities, it was also a basis for building different realities .
 V.Yanukovich’s reality and the realities of protests participants disagree completely .
 The protesters did not acknowledge the Agreement . The leaders of the opposition signed the Agreement without having agreed with Maydan . The key goal – dismissal of V.Yanukovich – was not achieved .
 Leaders of the oppositions tried to avoid the signing of the Agreement . Later on the leaders of the opposition tried to avoided the signing.
 For V.Yanukovich the Agreement became the sign around which he constructed the reality of the coup d’etat which signs in many things reflected the protesters’ reality .
 V.Yanukovich called them bandits, blamed for blood scenario and claimed for fulfillment of the valid Agreement . Now V. Yanukovich calls them bandits .
 The President of RF Volodymyr Putin took the Agreement as a basis of his reality as well as his reality . The Agreement is based on the Agreement.
 V.Yanukovich's authorities remained the President of Ukraine . Appealing to it he constructed the reality of putsch in Ukraine, nonrecognition of new government, legitimacy of V. Yanukovich’s authorities .
 Political decisions taken on basis of these constructed realities resulted in annexation of the AR Crimea, a possibility of annexation of eastern oblasts of Ukraine . In both realities there are their readers who strongly believe their authors .
 The center of single Ukrainian text structure where signs close and clear all over the territory of Ukraine would be included . Substitution of realities when connotation displaces denotation became possible .
 Ukraine is already split by the result of the latest confrontation . Ukraine's political crisis has already left the country split . Ukraine has a history of violent violence .
 It is necessary to fill in the text with the signs uniting people to Ukraine. It is needed to fill the text.
Love is a part of history of our country; it is a country of people who you love; of peace ; of justice . These might be metaphors of family and land ; of unity and possession . of wealth and variety (we can speak more languages)
 A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art / Oxford: Blackwell, 1980, 305, 305 .
 Video of Viktor Yanukovich's interview to journalists in Kharkov dd. Video of Yanukovich`s interview to the journalists inKharkovdd.
 The reality of signing the Agreement about regulation of the crisis in Ukraine on 21 February 2014 is revealed .
 Basing on the sociological monitoring data of the Institute of Sociology of the National Academy of Science of Ukraine ‘Ukrainian society 1992-2012’ and European Social Survey 2005-2011 .
 The authors concluded that the level of confidence in political leaders and state-political institutions is one of the crucial indicators of legitimacy . The authors also concluded that confidence in the political leaders is a crucial indicator of legitimacy.
 Legitimacy of power was one of the burning issues faced by Ukraine after the declaration of independence and its way to democratic reform .
 Moving from one type of regime to another could destabilize social life in situation when old institutions do not work and new institutions are weak. Moving from a regime to a new regime could destabilise social life.
 We define legitimacy as a widespread public belief that the society's governing institutions and political authorities are worthy of support . We define the legitimacy as the widespread public view that the government is worthy of supporting .
 In times of communism, all the legitimacy talk lacked productivity, because people were not sovereign, says the author .
 The Ukrainian parliament declared independence on 24 August 1991 . It was overwhelmingly approved by the referendum and recognized internationally .
 Independent Ukraine needed to form new political institutions, introduce economic reforms and a new format of relations between people in the society . Independent Ukraine needs to form a new political institution, introduces economic reforms .
In situation of profound transformation of society the biggest change possible is a shift in the political or social order . It is evident that in situation of significant transformation of the society the most significant change is a change in the social order.
 This is not only a threat to the legitimacy of power, but also to the stability of the new state . This is a threat of power to a new state, says the author of the book .
 The state does not need the legitimacy to function or even to survive, but it does need it when faced with a serious political failure or challenge . The state doesn't need it to function, but the state needs it to survive .
 This article sets out to show that the trajectories of support for a new regime and state-political institutions, political leaders have been varied .
 He analyzed trust as a social phenomenon of great importance under the conditions of growing unexpectedness and risk of modern society .
 interpersonal trust is an indispensable prerequisite for stable democracy, says R. R.Inglehart .
 In the 90's the problem of trust gets its further theoretical substantiation in publications by B.Misztal, A.Seligman and F.Fukuyama .
There are different definitions of trust in the literature, and agreement on an exact definition is seldom found . Most authors agree that positive expectations and willingness to become too vulnerable are critical elements to define trust .
 Ukraine addressed the phenomenon only at the end of the 80's and beginning of the 90's . Since during the Soviet era the analysis of it did not have any sense due to well-known reasons .
 Trust study is still in its initial stage, says the author . But even at present we have to state the fact that trust study is in its first stage .
Trust distrust has become one of the most frequently used so far in publications on political science and sociology . It has been monitored on a constant basis since 1991 .
 sociologists stated the basic character of this category for understanding the processes of modernization in current Ukraine .
 Data from the Institute of Sociology of the NAS of Ukraine “Ukrainian society 1992-2012’s ‘Ukrainia’ will help us to analyze popular attitudes toward politicians and state-political institutions .
 The similar situation was with political parties when approximately 2/3 of fellow countrymen expressed their absolute or relative distrust in them in the presence of not more than 3,5% of those who showed at least any trust at all . The same situation was in the case with
 elections somewhat increase positive hopes for existence of such parties and movements which could be entrusted in power . But a big share of population does not know about them .
 Such situation reflects indicators of trust in all political institutions, such as the U.S. State Department .
 By June 2000 fewer than 3% of citizens had resorted to Verhovna Rada or the government .
 independence did not add to their confidence in the fact that power serves their needs and interests and therefore it can be trusted . Since the years of independence, independence has not added to the confidence of independence .
President enjoyed the greater degree of trust from population, according to the president . If compared with trust in parliament and government, president enjoyed greater trust.
We can track a reduction of distrust and increase of trust in the next year after elections . Here, we can track an interesting regularity the reduction of trust and increase.
 It looks like the tendency when people given credit to President but he lost it very quickly .
 Ukraine's history of its historical past makes it easier to understand the situation, says the author . Ukraine's current situation is a quasi-democracy and quasi-market, he says .
 It is probably not worth looking for the origin of authoritarian moods inside the society only . It is not worthlooking for the origins of authoritarian attitudes in society .
 The transition to democracy is impossible without creating an adequate system of values and standards . More significantly, the declared transition todemocracy is impossible.
 The process of creating this system takes place in different time and space regimes . The process is apprehended differently by different layers of society .
 Elite have a greater tendency for being a standard component of this process and bear responsibility for its renewal and initialization in the interests of an individual and society . Elite have the greater tendency to be a standard part of the process and be responsible for its renewing and initialization .
 Ukraine's power elite, closed on its own interests and standing apart from society, is building a normative basis for the active life of this society . But power elite in Ukraine is building the basis for an uncoordinated, poorly and unqualified manner .
 This activity leads to the lack of specificity of rules of access to restricted public resources . Such rules can be missing at all, or they can be interpreted in favor of power .
 The greatest concern in society is 41 caused by a steady decrease of living standards and well-being, sharp polarization and deep stratification .
 The biggest threat is considered to be presented by the corruption of power and related to it elite .
 This threat means substitution of nation-wide policy goals by clan interests, deformation of political and economic elite forming mechanisms, reduction of political competition . This threat is a threat to national policy goals, according to experts .
 According to Ye.Golovakha, the power has created a specific model of development using totalitarian experience of governing society under new conditions .
 Negative evaluation is a dominant reason for growing distrust in the state headed by elite and its executives and agencies .
 Only 17,1% of the polled were satisfied with their life in 2000 . The number of pessimists was 60,9% and 21, 9% were not able to give an unambiguous answer .
 Only 3,8% of respondents hoped for a substantial improvement of their own well being in June 2000 . 12,9% predicted its worsening, while 12,7% predicted a worsening .
 population consider Mafia and criminal elements the most influential social group in current state building .
 The prevalent majority of Ukrainians probably want neither the restoration of Soviet reality and freedom of speech in particular, nor consolidation of Ukrainian pseudo democracy .
 Immorality of specific actions of executives and power agencies, says John Sutter .
 The people’s refusal to understand the meaning and direction of reforms in a society looks very logical when compared with the social price they pay .
 Political expectations about political future became more positive . Ukrainians professed they were optimistic about the country’s moving towards democracy .
 Immorality of specific actions of executives and power agencies have intensified processes of dissatisfaction . Immority of specific action of executives, disagreement as to the goal and means of its achievement, has intensified processes.
 President Victor Yuschenko was pinned the biggest hope on by the society during the years of independence . Yuschenko lost public support very quickly .
 A tendency of growing distrust was the result of defeated hopes for the 2004 Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was the first Orange Revolution in France .
 We accept M.Dogan’s approach according to which the erosion of trust to institutions in developed democracies is stable, international, structural and rational . But polling data does not give any ground to allege that legitimacy of democracy is doubted .
In the crisis of trust we should rather see the collective longing for greater democracy than the loss of belief into its basic value . It means that in the crisis we should instead see the desire for more democracy, rather than loss of trust .
 The erosion of trust is above all the sign of political maturity of society, says the author .
 democracy can be interpreted as a political system which institutionalizes distrust by establishing a sophisticated system of checks and balances . But for a transforming society profound level of distrust can be seen as a potentially dangerous tendency that might block the way of progressive reforms .
 In the new EU member state economic and political reforms have been faster and more effective . New EU member states have been more effective and faster than previously thought .
 Europeans Social Survey 2005-2011 provides data we need to investigate popular support for new political system and compare it with Poland .
 The adequate indicators in Poland are much better and demonstrate trajectory of support for democratic system of government . Poland is one of the most populous countries in Poland .
 The difference between the degree of trust in power structures and other state institutes was very distinctive among Poles and Ukrainians .
 Please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out . It means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust . It also means you don't trust an institutions at all .
 It should say that Ukraine has the worst score in the region as a whole. It should also say that the country is the worst region in the world . It should be the worst.
 Studies made in 2012 showed that indicators of trust in Ukrainian parliament, government, president, court, police, army and parties were even less than in 2010 when Viktor Yanukovych was elected as President .
 Pessimistic motives strengthened due to dissatisfaction with existing situation and dissatisfaction with the current situation . The majority of population is concerned about the future of the country .
 Protesters across the country became upset over corruption in Ukraine, the lack of democratic rights and the country's ailing economy .
 For the last three months, tens of thousands of Ukrainians have been singing the Ukrainian national anthem on Kiev's central square, Maidan .
 New government questioned society and political elite if they are able to learn from mistakes made after Orange Revolution . New political situation with new government questioned the society.
 In our opinion, the first step for legitimacy of power is trustworthiness of government, we say . In our Opinion, we believe that the government should be trusted .
 People use normative, value-driven criteria when forming evaluative attitudes towards institutions . People usually use normative and value- driven criteria when forming evaluations .
 Those normative criteria concern the goodness of institutional functioning from the perspective of some kind of general interest, or common good . The criteria include "general interest" and "common good"
 administrative competence is the condition of citizen trust in state institutions, as well as in the tax authority, police or the courts . Also, administrative competence in the police and courts is a key part of the citizen trust .
 Scholars have determined mass distrust of people in power as a main political threat for future implementation of the strategy for society transformation .
 The dominant tendency of distrust in power and its leaders was not overcome during the first decade of independence . The dominant tendencies of distrust were not overcome.
 Support for the regime increased as a consequence of the Orange Revolution in 2004 . Support for regime increased in 2004 as a result of Orange Revolution .
 Political expectation about political future became more positive . Ukrainians professed themselves to be optimistic about the country’s moving towards democracy .
 Ukrainian leaders failed to adopt lessons from the previous period . But they have made no movements towards real democracy .
 Europeans Social Survey 2005-2011 shows low scores of trust toward state and political institutions in the region as a whole .
 As a result of a deep crisis of legitimacy, Ukrainians came to Maidan and changed the political situation . As the result of the crisis, Ukraine's political situation has changed .
 The Orange Revolution and events on Maidan have emphasized that valuebased legitimacy is still important for transforming Ukrainian society . Level of confidence in political leaders and institutions is one of crucial indicators of legitimacy, says Orange Revolution .
Results of the national monitoring surveys of 1992-2012, in Vorona, V., V. V., Shulga, M., Ukraine .
 The survey measures the attitudes, beliefs and behaviour patterns of diverse populations in more than 30 nations . The survey is based on attitudes and beliefs of more than thirty nations .
 Elity w procesie transformacji na Ukrainie, in Transformacja w Polsce i na Ukraini, in transformacja .
 Marcus, M., Overt and Covert Model of Legitimation in East European Society, in Rigby, T.H., Feher, F., Political Legitimated in Communist States, St. H.H. Marcus . Marcus is the author of the "
In Jornal of democracy, Vol., no.:111-125 20. The author's book is published in the UK .
 Shulga, M., Osoblyvosti protsesu zminy pravlyachyh elit v period systemnoyi transformatsiyi suspilstva .
 The author puts the main emphasis at the necessity and urgency of saving the moral social capital of Revolution . The Revolution is going to become the source of the future moral “recovering of society, human rights protection and democratic development .
 Key words moral default, protest movement, trust credibility, moral “recovering of the society’s society, “titushki” and “banderivtsi” “Banderivsi’, �
 Using axiological and historical methods is one of the options to define the role of moral default as a catalyst for formation of a political nation in Ukraine .
 Moral default, which appeared and took place in 2013 in Ukraine, struck with its unexpected depth and unpredictable consequences .
 In a short period of time the page of newest Ukrainian history turned into real scene . Almost each Ukrainian citizen became, in a particular role, a subject of political and historical process .
 The cause of the protest actions of Ukrainian citizens was governmental suspension of the signing EU-Ukraine Association Agreement in November 2013 .
 Euromaidan in Kiev reflected demands and was the reminder from the citizens to the power to sign the Agreement . It was a logical step in the continuation of the previous decisions towards the European external choice of Ukraine .
 A social explosion spread all over Ukraine and acquired revolutionary political content aimed at the removal of current Ukrainian government led by President V Yanukovych . Only after the brutal violation of the rights of civil protesters, inadequate governmental response to peaceful actions of citizens.
 The reason of this social explosion became the lack of trust and credibility to compromised authorities or the moral default . The social explosion is the reason of the social explosion, says the author .
 The author says the term “moral default’s” is a justified terminological structure that characterizes irresponsible, “bankrupt” government . Since by credit in this sense stands axiological category ‘trust’ The author: “
 A huge part of the citizens realize the danger of spreading immoral relations in the society . The danger of injustice, 47 dishonesty, cynicism, human rights violations, bribery and corruption become common and normal .
 A lot of people believe in moral values, consciousness, justice and trust . The European Union is a concentrated European system of common moral values .
 People perceived this external policy as a kind of medicine from the ""bankruptcy"" of moral life . People perceived it as an instrument that was able to save our society .
Supporters of Antymaidan have not passed the exam for morality, for whom dishonesty, breach of laws, corruption, unfair power has become the norm and tradition of daily life .
 These fellow citizens living in the Southeastern regions mostly migrated from Russia during the latest years and years of Ukrainian independence .
 They have marginal culture, preserved by Soviet stereotypes and compensatory after exposure of the totalitarian regime illusion of prosperity . They are preserved bySoviet stereotypes and compensated after exposure.
 Annexation of the Crimea by the Russian Federation was made possible by the treacherous position of such Ukrainian citizens .
 Annexation became cynical and arrogant towards Ukraine as well as towards the international community . Annexation was cynical and arrogance towards Ukraine .
 The occupation of Ukrainian territory by Russian troops undermined the credibility of the brotherly neighboring Slavic people . The occupation was a manifestation of moral default .
 Since then disrupted system of international security at the international level began to lose confidence in the guarantees of international Security .
 The local governmental councils during their regional sessions provided evaluations of the protest movements and separatism . The local government councils provided evaluations.
 Overall, the results were subjected on support or non-support of Maidan .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia, continuing the criticism in the media about all the changes taking place in Ukrainian society .
 Unfortunately, significant number of patriotic Ukrainian people consciously or unconsciously, actively or passively promoted destabilization and the spread the radical separatist spirits in society .
 Each mistake, made by the new government and Maidan activists had serious consequences . Each mistake had serious destructive consequences .
 Verkhovna Rada's decision on language issues caused primarily negative reaction among Russian speaking Ukrainian citizens . Russian aggressors used language issues for “protection’ of these people’s people, Rada said .
 Evaluation of protest actions, understanding the essence of social explosion and forecasting of upcoming events by Ukrainians and members of international community was quite controversial .
 It's clear that the objective analysis of the epicenter of events is complicated by some subjective impressions and dynamism of the situation in general . It is clear that some of the subjective impressions of events are complicated .
 The actual information war in the media had a huge influence on the subjective evaluation of those events . It should be also noted that the usage of manipulation technologies in theMedia in favor of various interested groups had a big influence on those events.
Antymaidan supporters, security forces, and the minority of Ukrainian citizens supported corrupted authorities, says the U.S. State Department . Antymaida supporters and security forces used to solve all their problems without putting any effort into productive work, quality education, and law .
 The driving force of the protest movement was in an incredibly high and powerful life potential of Maidan participants . The movement was directed on moral “recovering of the Ukrainian society, returning the failed trust credibility (moral default) in different expressions .
 The new political leaders tried to build trust and justice between each other . They gave the trust to the new leaders, to the national and international laws .
 People from the Maidan didn’t give up during a very cold weather, despite using water cannons, sniper bullets and other weapons .
 The quantity of riot police “Berkut’s representatives and “titushek” was much larger than the average number of people on Maidan .
 In contrast, using of the military force against peaceful protesters has led to a dramatic increase in their quantity . The military force has been used to fight peaceful protesters .
 Hundreds of thousands of protesters have been protesting in Ukraine since the start of the year . The protests have spread throughout Ukraine .
 The victims of the wrath of protesters were monuments to Lenin (who personified the totalitarian Soviet regime) in Ukraine .
 Vanguard of the revolutionary struggle included mostly young people, whose level of patriotism and national consciousness had increased .
 The main peculiarity of the protest movement was the institutionalization of direct democracy . The main feature of the protests was the institutionalization of direct democracy.
 The main center of the protests was Maidan in Kiev, where representatives of different regions of Ukraine arranged encampment .
 By means of self-organization they created a strict and disciplined system of civil organization . The civil organization was formed by the group's members of the public .
 The Council of the Maidan was functioning there as well as in peaceful periods of time during the periods of assaults on security forces . There was also a system of technical support of communication, platform for protesters .
 People of all ages, mostly middle-aged and young people were among participants . Participants were among people of all age and ages .
 There were primarily workers and people with higher and secondary education . There were also people with more than a degree of education .
 They managed to take vacation from their regular job and replace each other on duty to provide volunteer work in almost all possible areas of Maidan functioning .
 People sent warm clothes, medicines, food and money to protesters in all regions and cities . People took to the streets with posters and political slogans, demonstrating solidarity and support .
 Leaders of the opposition parties cooperated with Maidan, but definitely did not lead it . The opposition parties did not cooperate with the government .
 Members of Parliament from the opposition parties spoke to Maidan activists . They cooperated with activists concerning various issues of Maidan functioning .
 The result of the revolutionary stage of November 22, 2013 and before March 21, 2014 was the victory of the Ukrainian citizens against the morally bankrupt government and accumulation of huge moral capital of the revolution .
 At the same time the biggest result was the formation of Ukrainian political nation . The Ukrainian government was formed at the time .
 Yanukovich’s withdrawal from the presidential duties is a rather long list of the results of Ukrainian citizens’ four months struggle for their rights to lead a safe and prosperous life in the independent country .
There are very high social expectations and critical evaluation to the newly appointed Ukrainian government . That’s why there are veryhigh social expectations for the government .
 This conversion of moral and ethical social capital of the Revolution into gradual moral improvement, says the author .
 The legitimacy gained by the people of Ukraine in late 2013 and early 2014 years and victory over the corrupted and morally bankrupt authority was possible because of the active role of the deputies from the opposition parties of the Verkhovna Rada .
 All this helped to introduce and support by voting the democratic reforms, determined to the peaceful development of the country .
 Communistic fraction except for its leader P Simonenko still participate in the work of Verkhovna Rada .
 The former President of Ukraine V Yanukovych was withdrawn from the duties of the President . He has left the territory of Ukraine . The Supreme Council has refused to recognize them as legitimate .
 His appeal to the Russian President V Putin with a request to protect the Russian-speaking population of Ukraine was the pretext for the Crimea occupation and implementation of Putin's administration their aggressive plans .
 V Yanukovych was declared wanted by the results of the allegations made by him in relation to the massacre of peaceful demonstrators . No more has the influence on current events in Ukraine, he says .
 Crimea's annexation of Crimea to Russia has shown complete disregard of national and international laws . The annexation was another manifestation of the moral default, according to Russian authorities .
International arbitration institutions play an important role in determining the legitimacy of current political changes in Ukraine . It should also be mentioned that international arbitration institutions are key to determining legitimacy .
 The recognition of international organizations the UN, PACE, OSCE and Venice Commission confirmed the pattern of democratic development of Ukrainian society . Ukrainian authorities accepted political decisions of current Ukrainian authorities .
 The political events of late 2013 early 2014 can be roughly defined as the revolutionary national liberation .
Ukrainian government's victory of this time should be too high social price of victory, says author . Citizens' awareness of their own role in consolidating gains through self-organization, he says .
 The Orange Revolution of 2004 did not have a revolutionary character within the meaning of the future evolution of social system . It is important to recall that the Orange Revolution was not a revolution .
Members of Orange Maidan have a great trust in democratic change . V Yushchenko has been given a temporary victory .
 This led to the return of the same model of political power in the person of V Yanukovych . V Yanukovych is a former oligarchic political elite who has been in power for years .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has not proved his loyalty to voters . Putin's victory in Ukraine is also a manifestation of moral default, he says .
Ukrainian political nation in fight for constitutional rights and freedoms as well as territorial integrity . Ukrainian political nation building because there was a rapid formation of Ukrainian political country .
 Outside threat to Ukraine from Russian government was a powerful factor in consolidating solidarity and unity of the Ukrainian nation .
 The original dream of Ukrainians to have their own state was tested by periodic loss and recovery due to the liberation struggle of the independent state .
 State is an institutionally implemented condition of people living together based on common law, morality and traditions . State is a state of state based on morality and tradition .
 The requirement of political justice (internal national distribution of power) is the prerequisite for social progress . The most democratic political regime follows the most democratic regime .
 The most important role in developing guidelines, rules, procedures and rituals of separation of powers is precisely taken by the political nation .
 As a historical phenomenon nation is a socio-cultural, economic, political, political and communicative unity of the people . The nation provides them civilized life within the global community .
Nation creates a viable society and the state, guaranteeing its security and vital interests . Nation creates a credible society and state, guarantees its security, vital interests, says the author .
 In modern world the nation serves as a carrier of the main objective of society development in general . The nation is the country's main objective in general.
 A nation does not become a geopolitical reality, as long as it does not form a nation-state as the legitimacy of its right to selfdetermination and the organization of society . A nation is subject and object of international relations and law, says the author .
 It is advisable to analyze some historical stages of Ukrainian political nation development . To determine the role of moral default as a catalyst for the political nation formation in Ukraine during the revolutionary events of 2013-2014, it is advisable .
 It is also a critical step of the past "processing" that is "historization’s" of past as a tool to modernize present . It's also a key step of "processing” that is ‘historizing’ of the
 The term “historization” comes from French scientist P Bourdieu . It means “to historize’ as to put in historical perspective .
 This is requirement to apply critical method for the awareness and understanding of the past . In fact, this is requirement for a critical method .
For example, the interpretation of the forced collectivization to hide the political repressions or the usage of Bandera image to justify separatism and destabilize society. For example, for example, this is a case of forced collectiveization . The interpretation
 The structure of some medical symptom can sign here the structure of a medical symptom . It's not clear why perceptions of the past can be seen .
 The success of political nation in modern Ukraine depends on the citizenship of the individual, the individualization of civil society . Maidan is a city of Maidan.
 According to the degree of manifestation defined criteria in each personality, the level of civic self-defining can be high, medium and low . The level of self- Defining is high,Medium and low.
Psychology and pedagogical were researched by M Boryshevskyy, O Sukhomlinsky, I Tysyachnik, K Chorna, M Ivanov and others .
 The past becomes a place of society self-designing and the focus of the past updates the future . The future is the future of society, and the future will be the future.
 Modern information and communication capabilities of controlling the past . enhance its imagery, and hence the social value of images .
 We, unfortunately, are not the best examples of the usage of such technologies during the election campaigns, particularly in the 2004 elections and the revolutionary events of 2013-2014 years .
 Oblivion can be an evidence of the lack of memory and inability of society to remember . The disappearance of the past can be a sign of the inability to understand their selves .
 Category "burdensome past" can become the object of political exploitation and become the weapon of political struggle .
 Skip to critical records involves removal of taboos, prohibitions of traumatic past, public debates and intensification of political education . Skip to the critical records involve removal oftaboos, prohibition of traumatic Past, public debate and intensifying of political Education .
 Germany has shown an example of the changing role of memory in legitimizing the political system . The inclusion of a normative foundation of the collective identity of dark past has been shown .
 Ukrainian political culture is characterized by a pronounced functional imbalance that leads to systemic imbalance . The current political culture of Ukrainian society is characterized as a functional imbalance .
 Ukrainians had the ability to develop private farming even at the cost of their life . This is despite the fact that it is common Ukrainians always had been a good land lords .
Ukrainians have their own farm, own property, to dispose of his good, to be conscious, independent were and now are the archetypal features of the Ukrainian mentality .
 Mankovets Moisey Arhipovich, 38, ordered to put her to the cellar, from which she tried to escape . The Head of the Tarasivka village council ordered her to be put in the cellar .
 Mankovets order Didyk was dressed iron horse ""pastern"" which usually goes awry horses . Then by Mankovests order didyk was dressed up as an iron horse .
 Didyk escaped and was arrested for the second time in 4 days in the collective farm corn . After some time, the dispossessed Didyk was arrested.
 Mankovets Moisey Arhipovich was prosecuted for violation of revolutionary legality . The Head of the Tarasivka village council was prosecuted .
 Manifestations of genocide can be proved by almost every page of these historical documents . It can be proven by almost all of these documents .
 Such evidences of subject-object state / individual relations, which were based on the ""revolutionary legitimacy" and focused on repression by state not only bread but also dignity from its citizens .
 The only sources of evidence were memories of grandparents, then their children . The only source of evidence was memories of their parents .
It is not difficult to agree that they passed on to their children and grandchildren alienation of the state almost genetically . It is not easy to agree to pass on to children who are alienated by the state .
 Radio listeners in the Mykolayiv region, mostly the elderly, started to call to the studio after notification about declassified documents .
Someone tried to blame Stalin's disease as the cause of his actions . In particular, someone couldn't find the difference between the Holodomor events of 1921-1922, 1932-1933 and 1947 .
Family fund offered documents from the family fund . There were also those who offered to provide documents from family fund.
Political culture has traumatic tags in the perception of the image of the state . This can explain the features of political culture with traumatic tags on the image.
 Flawed and inconsistent laws, human rights violations unfortunately let smart traders use such illegal means as "mole burrows" for taking of another's property . Flawed laws, inconsistent laws and human rights violation unfortunately let traders use illegal means .
After nearly a century the urgency of properly functioning research as an important element of interaction between economic and political systems is very high . The lack of effective model of organizational and regulatory framework of social and economic relations in modern Ukraine.
 Pre-election promises of almost all politicians in Ukraine since independence were turned into declarations . They became the obstacles on the way of strengthening the middle class and caused deepening stratification .
Confirmation of specific facts that struck its cynicism became possible after winning of 2013-2014 years Revolution . Confirmation of certain facts became possible.
 Threatening spread of criminal cases acquired sharing land assets of former collective and state farms . New owners of land lease agreements for vested shares .
 The facts appeared concerning the covert purchase of land taken under the guise of registration under long-term lease on an irreversible transfer of ownership . At the same time, along with the traditional pattern of unlawful distribution and redistribution of land resources.
Ukrainian authorities have ordered 54 amount of agricultural land by natural and legal persons in Ukraine . The orders of foreigners are among the most dangerous orders in Ukraine.
 The proliferation of these facts has caused hidden social protest in society, reducing public trust in government, a moral crisis . The outflow of the working population abroad became part of the united social cause of explosion .
 If we compare the old with the modern developments, in the opinion of the author, hidden and not analyzed facts, have a negative projection on the present of our society as obstacles to democratic transformation .
 The formation of the Ukrainian political nation requires the formation of a common civic culture . morality is an integral component of the stability of the political system, a significant indicator of a society and its political consciousness .
 The set of expressions of moral default loss of trust to politicians, to the state, to national and international laws, to fraternal Russian people, traitors to the nation . All this played the role of catalyst of the Ukrainian political nation forming .
 In Ukraine the criminal power and the threat from external aggression proved to be a powerful catalyst for the consolidation of society .
 The remnants of post-totalitarian attitudes of consciousness rapidly vanished from former Soviet subjects . Former Soviet subjects rapidly transformed into citizens of a democratic European country .
 Ukrainian reaction to moral default led to such results in accelerating the formation of political conscious nation, which in peaceful time would have taken years .
 The State is required to provide the high level of political stability, open wide prospects for successful modernization . At the same time, to implement state-national identity of Ukraine, the State is needed to provide state- national identity of the Ukraine .
 Issledovaniya polytycheskoy culturi: Sovremennoe sostoyanie: Sat.nauch.tr. Tr.tr., Sovremenoe sstoyanie : Sat. nauch . Tr.uch.
 The official choice of the European vector of Ukraine development implies a row of system changes in the political, economic, legal, legal and humanitarian systems .
European standards require the support of the state's population . Changes of many life spheres of state according to the European standards require support of its population .
Ukrainian government needs to make actions of government clearer and pursue an effective informative policy . Ukraine is in the confluence of Ukraine in European space is needed .
 Ukraine's policy of European integration in Ukraine is fully and clearly, says Ukraine's chief minister . Ukraine's EU policy is expected to be fully and clear, says the minister .
 Success of Euro integration policy realization of Ukraine depends directly on citizens’ awareness, their self-identification and the amount of knowledge they have . Eurointegration policy, information policy, political communications Methodology and political communications methodology.
 The latest events are the evidence of the particular failure of European integration’ policy, says the European Union .
 Having a certain industrial, economic, scientific potential it lost its traditional communications that caused the emergence of new problems .
 The government of Ukraine has defined a strategic vector of further development of the country directed on the European integration .
 In 2010 Eurointegration process was fixed in the Law of Ukraine . In 2010 the law was set up as an official vector of foreign policy of the country .
 The European legal, political, economic and humanitarian space began in Ukraine exactly in 2010 . It is worth highlighting that an active phase of occurrence of Ukraine in the European legal and political, political and economic space began.
 In March 2013 the President of Ukraine issued the Decree "About Urgent Measures of the European Integration of Ukraine" The Decree accelerated the process formally .
 Agreement on association had to be signed. This document had to provide further development of strategic partnership of Ukraine and EU .
 The signing of Association was broken by the Government of Ukraine in November of the same year .
 Euro-integration processes are estimated ambiguously within certain territories . Despite the support of a certain part of the population, Euro- integration processes are believed to be ambiguous within certain areas .
 Ukraine's political system is possible to assume that regional policy directly depends on national features, taking into account local features .
 The author aims to define the reasons of low support of the European integration in the Donetsk region in a context of the state information policy .
 In order for any actions of authorities to have the maximum effect, system for informing citizens is necessary . In order to have a maximum effect on authorities, the system is necessary.
This activity is intended to provide communication, to imbue it with meanings, to focus on providing and achieving strategic goals . This activity is meant to provide communications to provide and achieve strategic political goals .
 It has to define the algorithm of formation and distribution of adequate knowledge across the state, to be a "road map" Both in the country and beyond its borders.
 Several attempts to organize and realize national information strategy on formation of objective knowledge of Euro integration were made during the last 10 years in Ukraine .
 In 2003 the State program of public informing concerning the European integration of Ukraine for 2004-2007 was approved . In 2007 the state program ofpublic informing concerning European integration was approved.
 The 58 Program was to ensure a broad public support for a state policy in the sphere of the European integration . The mission of the 58 Program is to ensure the public support of state policy .
 In 2008 the government of Ukraine approved the State target program of informing of the public concerning the European integration of Ukraine for 2008-2011 . In 2008, the government approved the state target program.
 The purpose to continue the increase of the level of public awareness as to the European integration of Ukraine and to create a stable pro-European majority was set .
 The Program of 2008 gave preference to using the integrated mechanisms and the tools focused on the consumer of information . By contrast the program of 2008 was focused on consumer information .
 Organization of information and educational campaigns in regions, inter-level interaction and consultations with the public were planned . The increase of transparency level of authorities’ activity, interaction with civil society and independent massmedia were planned.
 If earlier the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine was in charge of all coordination and realization of information policy in 2008 this responsibility was conferred on a specific government body .
 One of the features of the program was declared forecast and financing sources . Also one of the featured features was publicly declared forecast, financing sources. The program was also declared forecast.
 The lack of clear resource support testified to a formalistic approach to its realization and minor value that negatively influenced the achievement of political goals, says the author .
 The acceptance of the law of Ukraine became the next significant moment in 2010 . "About the principles of domestic and foreign policy" became the first significant moment.
 11 of the law provides of integration of Ukraine in the European political, economic, legal space for the purpose of obtaining a membership in the EU . 11 of this law, according to the Art.
 President of Ukraine says forced informing of the population had to provide support for the politicians .
 A short time, a political situation and a lack of any means the success of this campaign is questioned . Considering a short time and a political situations, a short-time, the campaign's success should be questioned .
 Artificial planting of ideas of Euro-integration using of 'administrative resource' and promotion through under control of mass media .
 The pro-European forces in Ukraine are more active in Ukraine . The Ukraine-based pro-EU forces are also more active .
 As a result, "violent" Euro-integration and a failure of signing of Association with EU disappointed supporters of the European course, but also the electorate of ruling party .
47,2% of respondents showed a low level of knowledge of Ukrainian citizens about EU . On average – 36,9%, 7,3% had no information at all and only 4,3%, answered that they are rather informed .
 The Razumkov Center's research also show low level of knowledge of the population concerning the European integration of Ukraine .
 At national level 43,5% of respondents (working selection 60 people) answered that they had not enough information . 38,6% the average level, 9,5%, knew nothing and only 5,3% had high level of knowledge .
 Similar results were show in 2013 at the request of Embassy of Great Britain in Ukraine by the Key Communications company . Similar results showed in 2013.
 Such "uncertainty" testifies that the work with the population was not conducted . Such "uncertainty" testsifies that work with population is not conducted.
 Author: In poor philosophy and misunderstanding of strategic transformations by political, economic, public, cultural, etc. elite . The causes of inefficient information policy are noting its technical realization or a lack of means .
Self-identification of persons in power and their dependence on political elite of neighboring states can also be considered as an important cause . Self-identifying of people in power is also considered as a cause .
 Such opposition influences the process of the European integration, says the Ukrainian government . Such opposition serves as an anchor of further transformations and disagreements in the Ukrainian society .
 The advance of ideas of the European integration is characterized by a low level of understanding of processes and expected results at regional level . The advance is also characterized by the low levels of understanding.
Western areas, owing to the historical features, more aspire to Europe, than eastern areas . Europe's historical features are a key part of Europe's history .
 Author says selfidentification of the population of Eastern Ukraine is connected to self-identification . The author says it is connected with the region's future vision .
 The results of researches estimating level of knowledge of Ukraine’s population and Eastern areas are very similar .
 In 2008, 49% of respondents in the east had low level of knowledge of Euro-integration processes . 8,3% had no information, only 3,3%, told that they are rather informed .
 European integration is not enough for the policy of the European integration to be unconditionally supported by the population . However, it's not enough to support the policy.
 Eastern Ukraine’s population, including Donetsk region, has a high level of knowledge and self-identification . Eastern Ukraine's population has a low level of awareness and knowledge of European integration .
 It should be noted that realization of information policy in Donetsk region has situational character .
 According to standard and legal base, responsibility for realization of a state policy in regions lies on public authorities, on regional public administrations .
 To characterize their activity in Donetsk region, it is possible to tell that it is limited to scanty information on a site and in mass media .
 Donetsk regional public administration there was no profile management which would be engaged in systematic realization of a state policy of the European integration in the region . For many years in Donetsk regional administration there were no profile managers .
 Superiority in this direction can be given to non-governmental organizations, representatives of scientific community and independent mass-media .
 Considering technical, organizational and financial capabilities, they cover only insignificant part of the population of Donetsk region . The Donetsk region is in the Donetsk region.
 The representation of a subject of Euro-integration in mass-media of the region is indicative . The representation is indicative of the European Union's role in the region .
 TitanInfo monitored the Internet of mass media carried out by the TitanInfo company in July-August, 2013 . Results of selective monitoring of the Internet show low level of interest to the designated subject .
 For the studied period according to the chosen media card 11337 materials were processed . For the study period, 11337 material were processed for the chosen time .
 The European integration was mentioned in 33 of them which amounts 0,3% of total number of the processed materials . The European Integration was mentioned on the list of 33 which amounts to 1% of all processed materials.
 Internet editions of Donbass wrote about the European integration process having political character . The Internet editions wrote about European integration mainly as the process has political character.
 The majority of materials were reprints of the central mass media and news agencies . It should be noted that the majority of material was reprinted by the media .
 Analytical materials were insufficient, generally, they concerned the economic part of the European integration . They were aimed for a narrow readership, they said .
 It is possible to consider such significant events as visits of the top officials of the state to EU countries, visits of official delegations to Ukraine and regions .
 The picture changed dramatically after a suspension and failure of signing the Association in October and November 2013, and after the beginning of protest moods in Ukraine and regions .
 materials testified to imbalance of covering of public protests. According to monitoring results of Donetsk mass media (November 2013) materials testified.
 The Ukrainian educational center of reforms 2013 is under control to the power, according to regional media .
 The policy of European integration is directly connected with information policy of authorities, both on national, and regional levels . Failures in realization of the policy of the European integration are directly connected to information policy.
 The critical amount of knowledge about the European integration which would allow citizens to make a rational choice of the European vector of the country’s development was not given .
 The population is extremely careful and does not trust the European integration . It is expected results and personal benefits in the east of Ukraine .
 Also a major factor is self-identification of the population of the Donetsk region .
Russian and pro-Russian mass media in the region blocks the formation of new identity . Existence of "phantom Soviet roots" supported by the Russian and Russian mass media .
 It is possible to consider a formalistic approach, low level of professionalism of responsible persons, a lack of knowledge and motivation . Local elite, including the heads of the area focused on the Euroasian vector of integration, are responsible for the failure of information policy, as the reasons of
 It is necessary to recognize that the international institutes responsible for advance of policy of the European integration in Ukraine weren't ready to work with regions . It's necessary torecognize that the International institutes were not ready to help Ukraine .
 All information policy was aimed at national level and limited in most cases to Kiev and partially large cities . All information was aimed for national level.
 For the situation to improve, it is necessary to reconsider completely the principles of formation and realization of information policy, says the author . The author says it is needed to reconsider the principles.
 It is necessary to divide it into national and regional level which will consider features of each region separately . It is needed to satisfy a query of target audiences .
 Independent mass media and information projects will give an opportunity to create alternative information space . The greatest possible support of independent mass media will give a chance to gain additional knowledge and to make a conscious choice towards one of the policies .
Strengthening of information maintenance of the projects will also allow to inform more widely various target groups and to form a pool of the loyal population .
 A brand of the country and its certain regions as European and democratic. Not only support and choice of the European vector of development depends on efficiency of information policy, but also formation of an external image .
 Pochepcov G.G., Chukut S.A., 2008, Informacijna polityka, Kyev. – book. The book is based on the book "Informacijn Polityka," published in 2008 .
 A metaphor of a door to Europe open for Ukraine was transformed into a metonymical sign according to the laws of mythology . Specifics of mythologization by means of media channels are shown .
 Semantic dynamics of a metaphor and creation of the new semantic field are the indicators of transformation of the political European discourse of Ukraine . The Ukrainian political discourse is being transformed by Ukraine's political discourse .
 The media discourse of the period of the Euromaidan of November 2013 – February, 2014 is emphasized in the article . The article includes the media discourse.
 The Euromaidan, a political discourse, is a metaphor, a metonymy Methodology . The main feature of the modern information processes is their mass character and publicity . This fact actualizes the creation of myths, used as technology .
 Actualization occurs at a subconscious level of perception of the audience and in a conscious manipulation by the media . Realization occurs in a subconsciouslevel of perception and in the conscious manipulation of the media.
 Many functions and signs of mass communication as a process coincide with the logic and structure of the archaic myth .
 Such characteristics of mass consciousness as noncriticality, high controllability, affectivity, intolerance and intolerance are the basis for the creation of myths, says the author .
 Mass media define today’s norms and priorities, impose estimates and labels, create a new mythological system of ritual worship . Ritual worship is regulated by rite behavior of the member of society .
 The basis of research of a mythologization of political space by media channels are the polydisciplinary scientific and applied developments . The methodological basis of the mythologized political space is the basis of scientific research .
 The declared object of research is studied by experts in the field of social communications, political sciences, applied linguistics, the international diplomacy, etc.
 Sergey Neklyudov believes that consequences of communication revolution facilitated a manipulation of mass consciousness by the media . The Russian scientist believes that the media manipulated mass consciousness .
 It seems that the level of mythologization of public life for the last decade extremely increased . We from a kingdom of science and rationalism stepped into a certain ""mythological"" era .
 The modeling of reality, creation of the parallel mythologized reality in media, occurs first of all with the help of the language means .
Metonymies are actively used for metaphors, according to mythological logic . For this purpose, metaphors are transformed to metonymies .
 The process of interconversion of a metaphor and metonymy in real language practice was studied by Roman Jacobson, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Roland Barthes, Edmund Ronald Lynch . The process was studied, in particular, by the likes of Roland Bart
 Roman Jacobson's idea that the message represents not a typewritten string is supplemented in the mythological researches by Claude Lévi-Strauss .
 For the French ethnologist the idea that the meaning depends on transformations from one system to another was important . For the theory of the French ethnicologist the meaning of the word was important.
 The model of mythological structure is described by LéviStrauss as linear sequence of signs which turns into a set of metaphors . They are again understood as a metonymy.
 Edmund Ronald Lynch describes an essence of similar transformation on the example of mythological and religious discourses . Lynch describes the essence of a similar transformation.
Mythological and religious formulas are considered as absolutely true, says scientist . According to the scientist, metaphoricalness is denied .
 In the classical myth the image is interpreted as a sign, an index of direct action . The image is considered a sign by classical myth .
 It is supported by absolute belief of participants of ritual in the effectiveness of this image . The image was created by a group of men and women.
 In a remythologization situation the metaphor is used for facilitation of understanding and remembering . The metaphor is also used forfacilitation of remembering, association brightness .
 The successful metaphor is repeated in media, consolidating the gained effect . The success of the metaphor is similar to the success of media .
 George Lall believes that repeatability is an essential feature of modern culture which forms its redundancy . He believes repeatability can be a key to modern culture .
 Claude Lévi-Strauss also described similar redundancy, accenting on its transforming character . The character's character was also accented on its transformation .
 The myth creates a system of the self-description of the world with a redundant potential . According to the scientist, the myth is true .
Whenever concept of the myth loses its object, concrete meaning, is symbolized . According to theory of Roland Barthes, whenever concept of a myth lost its object is symbolised .
 The myth turns into devastating form for the poor contents. Thus former signifier becomes signified, the myth turns to devastating form .
 In the myth the secondary semiotics system is the essence of creation in the myth of the secondary Semiotics system .
 The myth naturalizes the concept, makes it so alive, convincing, real, natural that the addressee even doesn't notice its unnaturalness, persuasive artificiality .
 The System "empty signs" which exorcises the addressee aggressively interferes in media . These signs calm theAddressee with the images of virtual stability and wellbeing .
 The poor metonymical sign creates productivity illusion for the addressee. Danger of such process is that the poor sign creates an illusion of productivity .
 Having being fixed in repetition, such image tries to work as a mythological spell, convinces the addressee of media communication that it is solved by designation .
 The similar concept is actively used in practice of neurolinguistic programming . The concept is being used to develop programming in the future .
 This concept of a reframing means the transformation of a person’s point of view on a situation by changing her purposes or intentions in this situation .
Reframing means process of revaluation of the meaning of the event without changing the context in which it is placed . Reframing is a form of re-evaluation of meaning of a event .
 Many frames are used by media not as a content, and as mythems, stereotypes, signs without meaning . Ukraine has a complicated communication between the authorities and society .
 Informing is substituted for frame construction, in fact for the mythologization which is powerfully influencing mass consciousness . Informed is replaced by frame construction .
 In our opinion, such process can be observed in the using of metaphor "a door to Europe open for Ukraine" in a modern European political and media discourse . In our Opinion, such processes can be seen in the use of metaphor.
 Ukraine is a country with the image of open doors to the European Union . Ukraine is the first country to join the EU in the EU . Ukraine has a history of trying to open doors .
 Europe is an image of Europe as a house. We will remark here natural for a metaphor of open 69 doors .
 The image is bright and constructed on expected paradigmatic associations . We will easily present such an image, it is bright, and it's bright . We'll easily present the image.
 The metaphor extends to other contexts close to an image of the European house . As a visual association this metaphor extends. As the visual association extends to others close to a European house, this metaphor is a metaphor .
 Such diffusion of meaning leads to loss of symbolism of the European house without which the image of doors loses the concreteness and a semantic significance .
The use of verbs is an important peculiarity, says the author . The use of the verbs is a mixture of times and modalities in the language .
 Doors to Europe seem to be already open or that can be open in the future or have to be opened . But may be closed without observance of certain conditions .
From our point of view, just the mixture of semantic layers leads to metaphor transformation in a metonymical sign . From our view, the mixture, imposing of semantic layer leads to a metaphor transformation .
 The image of the door opened to Europe unfastens from the initial meanings and presents the solution of an important public problem by itself . The door opens to Europe.
 As the addressee illusion is created through continuous repetition, so, the familiar and clear image in itself designates presence of Ukraine in Europe, fulfillment of all conditions and escape from difficult and conflict situations .
 The mythological self-presentation of open doors to Europe becomes obvious in situations when by means of this image problems of alternative, a choice in confrontation is described .
 The Customs union is supported in an image of a step from doors . For example, in the heading quoting the deputy of the Bundestag, "Doors of Europe are open for Ukraine, but the Customs union – a step back from them"
In the statement, an identification of other direction of movement 70 with action and similar aspects, make a metaphor indistinct, secondary, used for creation of a new semantic field .
 The metonymical sign gains aggression and is free from variability of a metaphor . The sign is a sign of aggression that is free of variability of the metaphor .
Timoshenko's Release will open to Ukraine doors to Europe. In the headings, we also have a metaphor of open doors in obviously poor meaning deprived of concreteness .
 The addressee gets the impression that release of the most known Ukrainian political prisoner will automatically solve all the problems of eurointegration of Ukraine .
 A concrete description of this process is unclear and even unnecessary, says the author .
 Thereby the manipulation with the addressees is carried out – they are cheated, given illusion of easy, automatic solution of problems by the very use of an image of the opened doors .
 The situation which has developed since November, 2013 in Ukraine has changed also changed also requirements to the media . The situation has changed since November 2013 .
Obvious danger for the eurointegration processes in Ukraine made participants of a political and media discourse express more concrete views, not to hide the political position .
 The Euromaidan is a metaphor of open doors to Europe . The use of an open door to Europe returns to initial metaphoricalness of meaning .
 Ukrainian media for 2007-2012 almost disappeared. Those two tendencies, which we emphasized in metaphor functioning in Ukrainian media, almost disappeared .
 The concept of "Europe" becomes more certain and connects in mass consciousness . It becomes connected with the association signing with the EU and realization of policy of the East European cooperation .
 European Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy Štefan Füle says the metaphor of open doors is returning to a concrete meaning .
 In the process of changing of a situation in Ukraine in November 2013 – February, 2014, in the statements of a politician, this image achieves the increasing definiteness, and therefore, and 71 efficiency . In November 2013, the politician's statements were published in the
In this context, empty speaking, pronouncing meaningless words and promises is representative. In this statement, the attention of the politician for a negative role of the so-called rhetoric is representative .
 The European policy which doors are open for Ukraine is now open to Ukraine . Füle replaces concept of Europe with more concrete concept of the European policy .
 Ukraine's government is accused of changing the foreign policy vector of development of the country . Ukraine is responsible for problems of social and economic character and stay of cultural dialogue between Europe and Ukraine .
 Victor Yanukovych and Mykola Azarov's numerous addresses to the Ukrainian people were often mentioned . We will remind that in Victor Yanukovych's many addresses to Ukrainian people and comments for media concerning eurointegration of Ukraine open doors to Europe were also often mentioned.
Politicians in Ukraine refuse to sign EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . They say they do not close a door to Europe .
 In this meaning, this metaphor became an absolutely devastated sign, in fact, suitable to any even opposite in meaning context . In this way, the metaphor becomes an absolutely devastating sign .
 That empty and false rhetoric about which danger the European politicians warned was conducted was conducted, says the author .
Ukrainian authorities used this emptiness of a metaphor in the comments about the absence of dialogue between the authorities and society . The comments were used in a context of readiness of Europe to support the civil initiatives in Ukraine .
 The media discourse of Ukraine during November 2013 – February, 2014 represents complicated stratification of inconsistent information streams, mediacrats including both external, and internal players .
 The metaphor of open doors again "comes to life" tries to become efficient and effective . The metaphor is a metaphor of "open doors again"
 It is used by all authors of a discourse, and therefore it gets opposite connotations, losing initial meaning . It is also used by the authors of the discourse, so it gets different connotations .
 Euromaidan supporters use the threatening connotations of cheating by Europe, refusal of the EU from Ukraine are used .
 The People's Deputy Petro Poroshenko warns that the EU can forever close doors for Ukraine . He calls for active work on legislative base of process of eurointegration of Ukraine .
 During the active period of the Euromaidan the metaphor of open doors for Ukraine is used in the specified "European open door policy" meaning . During the period the metaphor is used as a metaphor for Ukraine .
 This image is specified by logical arguments that remove a mythological context and obviously promote returning to rational conversation . This image was chosen by logical argument that removes mythologicalcontext .
 outdated metaphor becomes a steady term and starts being filled with more concrete meaning . In fact, the outdated metaphor is the steady term .
 This term is extremely often used in Ukrainian media discourse in January – February, 2014 in quoting of European politicians Catherine Ashton, José Manuel Barroso, Štefan Füle, Aleksander Kwaśniewski, Pat Cox and others .
 All European politicians in the period of the Euromaidan say about inadmissibility of bloodshed in Ukraine is an indispensable condition of continuation of an open door policy . All European leaders in the time of the period say about the bloodshed in the Ukraine is a condition of
 Ukrainian audience perceived dissatisfaction with concrete measures of the real help to Ukraine from the European states and public institutions .
 pro-Russian media channels actively quote statements of Russian politicians about Europe which betrayed the Ukrainian people and about the European doors which actually slammed for Ukraine .
Supporters of the Euromaidan also showed feeling of the deceived expectations by means of open doors . The Euromsaidan is a member of the European Union .
 Ukraine is a metaphor of open doors for Ukraine to Europe, says the author . He says the danger of mythologization of public consciousness is to be seen as a myth .
 Filled with semantic richness of associations, this metaphor adequately reflects important public processes and, thereby, helps with their solution . Filled in semantic richness, it adequately reflects key public processes, says the metaphor .
 Many times and thoughtlessly repeated, it is impoverished to the empty sign darkening sense . Many times it is thoughtless and thoughtless repeated .
Mythological illusion of realization of eurointegration only due to constant repetition and self-presentation of a metonymical sign is created in this way . Mythological illusion is created by constant repetition of the sign .
 With the audience’s rejection of this image, its disapproval, its understanding as false results is false results, says CNN's John Sutter . The audience's rejection of the image is the reason for this image.
 The metaphor of open doors today, undoubtedly, needs such rehabilitation . The metaphor is a metaphor of an open door today, and needs such rehab .
 Europe's obligation to the Ukrainians who died in February, 2014 for the European values. It was confirmed in José Manuel Barroso's statement on March 9 about the obligation .
 Ukraine to Europe will rehabilitate a metaphor of doors open for Ukraine to European countries . This obligation is certainly also expressed symbolically, but filled with deep associative sense .
 The new Ukrainian government with representatives of the European Union became more active in March, 2014 . We hope interaction of the new government with European Union will become a real basis for a new vector of eurointegration of Ukraine .
My knowledge of English, Russian and Ukrainian languages was widely used for this purpose . My knowledge of Russian, Ukrainian languages is widely used.
 The analysis may contribute to the muchneeded understanding of the conflicting points of views concerning the events of Ukrainian revolution . Such the analysis may help to understand the conflicting views of the Ukraine revolution .
 The aim of this article is possibly the shortest and most succinct exposition of the Russian-Ukrainian relations development during the period from November 2013 to March 2014 . The aim is to highlight the Russian and Ukrainian relations development in both countries .
 The choice of this time span is motivated, firstly, by the particular dynamism of political developments in Ukraine during this period . Secondly, the intensity of disputes surrounding these events, conducted in media.
 The quoted articles and speeches, appearing in Russian, Ukrainian and Polish sources appear in authors’ translation .
 At least three quite far-reaching simplifications were made for the purpose of this work due to the extensity of both the events of Ukrainian Revolution 2013-14 and Russian-Ukrainian information war .
 The mentioned resolutions were related to the signing of an association agreement with the European Union . The resolutions are related to an agreement between the EU and the EU .
 The mass protests emerged in Kiev immediately “after the government had announced that work had been suspended on this agreement just before the Vilnius Summit of November 28– 29, 2013 .
 Omitted in this article are certain difficult Russian-Ukrainian relationship issues that certainly paved the way to these events .
 Yanukovych’s presidency and period of governance by the Cabinet of Mykola Azarov in their entirety were also dropped .
 This does not mean that these issues are irrelevant in the context of the events described, but rather too large and extensive for a short article1.1 .
 Russian-Ukrainian relations would suffer a lot from the lack of understanding of the mechanisms of information warfare used in the Cold War period .
 Modern Russia remains largely the heir of the Soviet Union, but more often uses the hard means and more often various economic and informational tools .
 Russia's propaganda activities deserve special attention, because it is an old war waged by new methods, which Russia itself admits . Russia itself itself admits.
Russian pro-government media and Ukrainian media associated with the opposition. Thirdly, this article is limited to a description of the clash between the worldviews presented in Russian pro- government media .
 The political frictions inside the opposition, such as conflicts between the oppositionist politicians, or between NGOs and politicians, are skipped .
 In the described informational war opposition politicians and activists of NGOs had to rely on journalists and to some extent speak with their voice . The conflicts were shifted to the background .
There is a large number of media recourses in Russia that are critical of Putin’s regime and Ukrainian state media in times of Yanukovych's reign . The Euromaidan represented roughly the same position as the Russian pro-government media .
 The presented points of view can be called Russian and Ukrainian only with a big reservation, as they can be regarded only as partially representative to Russian and Ukraine society respectively .
 Pro-European protests in Ukraine were widely supported by the progressive and pro-European media since their very beginning .
 well-known Ukrainian journalist Mustafa Nayem was one of the leading organizers of the Euromaidan protest . Also, the journalist environment played a significant role in the events, which can be justified by the fact that well- known journalist Nayem is one of
 Nayem is one of the most recognized and valued journalists among the young Ukrainians . Nayem has been a journalist for more than two years .
 Former TVi station correspondent now works for newspaper Ukrainskaya Pravda and HromadskeTV . The latter is the non-profit Internet television that emerged parallel to Euromaidan .
 He is also notably active in social media due to his openness, mass scale and simplicity of use . He is known for his ability to engage lots of people into every kind of mass event .
 Thousands of people gathered in Kiev after information about changing the course of government has been given to the public .
 All who have the opportunity to come during the day are asked to do so . Our guys need your support, our guys need you support .
 This terse and media-friendly term containing in the same time the guiding principle of the demonstrations immediately gained the favour of the people demonstrating on the Independence Square .
 Nayem's popularity as the media face of Euromaidan were his independence from all kind of political parties . He was often in the very hot spot of the events and the openness of his criticism towards Yanukovych's regime .
 During the first week of the protests Russian Federation observed them in nearly complete silence . The protests took place in the city of Moscow in the early hours of the week .
 Ukrainian authorities decided to use special police force Berkut against unarmed people gathered on the streets in November 2013 . This only changed on November 30th 2013.
 The official pretext of the use of force that fateful day was the need to carry out the preparations of the square for Christmas, says the official pretext .
Local militia’s spokesperson says municipal services responsible for the preparations were concerned about the situation and turned to militia .
 The version given by the Russian media does not differ much from the version reported by the Ukrainian government forces . The version is similar to that of the Ukrainian forces .
 Zaharchenko claims that all the peaceful demonstrators (e.g. students) left the Independence Square voluntarily long before Berkut came in and the force was applied only against radical nationalists and hooligans .
 Ukrainian media presented these events in a different light . However, the Ukrainian media said these events were not the same thing .
 Ukrainian Truth, HromadskeTV and UNIAN also reported on the beating of two Ukrainian journalists . Dmytro Hnap and Yakov Lubich were beaten by unidentified individuals .
 The assault was undoubtedly commissioned by the government forces, according to the journalists .
 It was then that the responses of Russia on one hand, and the West have become more forceful . The antagonisms were doomed to continuously grow ever since .
 Radical reactions of the government caused some radicalization of both demands and methods on the protesters’ side .
 Demonstrators in Kiev no longer strived for the adjustments in the 77 political course of the authorities . But for no less than removal of authorities, the authorities have been removed .
 The situation aggravated day by day and Kiev’s streets turned into battlefield where regular wars between demonstrators and militia went on .
As things were becoming more dramatic, the symbols and mottos of revolution were evolving into a more radical and nationalistic direction . Also, as things were being more dramatic.
 Black and red flags – symbols of Ukrainian Insurgent Army and portraits of Stepan Bandera2 emerged on the streets . It was the grist to the mill for the Russian propaganda .
 In times of war the structures of power take the efforts to gain maximal control over the information .
 In the decisive moments of history the way of presenting information becomes more vivid and emotionally coloured so that it may easily affect the emotions of the public .
 Dmitry Kiselov was appointed by Putin to head Rossiya Segodnya – a large government owned international news agency . He was appointed on December 9th 2013 .
 Kiselov was already renowned for his uncompromising anti-Western position . West did not remain indebted to him, as his homophobic and anti-Semitic replicas were designed to discredit the opponents of Putin’s policy .
 Kiselov was by that time a recognizable figure in Russia as well . His “conspirational, almost coquettish grin and over enthusiastic hand gestures have made him a recognizable staple of Russian television .
 It seems that to those who are behind these protests human blood is not the paint on canvas . It seems to be to those behind the protests that the paint is on canvas.
 2Ukrainian Insurgence Army was the military wing of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists . They fought against Soviets and Poles as their main opponents during the World War II . They cooperated with German forces in hope of creating an independent Ukrainian state .
 Kiselov was also being reproachful towards Vitaliy Klitshko – one of the leaders of the opposition for his close contacts with the West and his part in the photo shoot for German magazine for gay men .
 Those responsible for the beatings of people operate on behalf of Russian special services or even are Russians themselves . The latter declared a suspicion that those responsible are Russians .
 Accusations have become more direct when the demonstrators started being killed . The demonstrators have been accused of being killed by police .
 There were just few separate incidents of death on Euromaidan . Until February 20th 2014 the number of killed people went beyond a hundred .
 The distinctive pronunciation reveals the inhabitants of the vicinities of Moscow . Only one of them may be Ukrainian .
 The tapes should be commissioned by the experts and all legal measures against these people should be taken .
 The most renowned case was the beating of Tetyana Chornovol, Ukrainian Truth correspondent on December 24th which resulted in serious health complications . The most famous case was that of Ukrainian truth correspondent Tetyan ChORNovol .
Previously, she criticized Medvedchuk3, Kluyev4, Azarov, Lyovochkin5 and the Yanukovich family . Previously, she criticized Medvedchenko3.
 Vyacheslav Veremiy must be considered the biggest victim among the journalist community . But it is Vyachedlav Vémiy's biggest victim.
 On January 20th his sight was heavily damaged as a result of beating and he was hospitalized for almost a month . He was hospitalized in hospital for nearly a month.
 Veremiy left hospital on February 18th, the very day he was shot in the chest by the unknown assailants . He died the day after .
 European societies watched the escalation of violence in Ukraine with great concern . Ukraine has seen a rise in violence in recent months .
 In many cities, especially in Poland the actions of solidarity with Ukrainian opposition took place . By the end of February the actions have taken a mass scale .
 They are expressing their solidarity with Euromaidan in every possible way . They are expressed their solidarity in every way .
 In Kielce, Ukrainian national flags are now decorating the main streets and town square . The main streets are now decorated with the national flags .
 Traditional mass media such as television and radio are losing relevance in modern information campaigns . Younger generation sticks with the Internet and opponents of Russian Federation are often well acquainted with the latest technologies required to conduct an active web-campaign .
 Russian information arsenal constantly evolves, improves, improves and enriches with new technologies . But also the Russian information arsenals constantly evolve, improve and improve .
 Cyber attacks were carried out against revolutionary forces in Ukraine and all the supporters in the West . Just like in Estonia in 2008, cyber attacks were also carried out by revolutionary forces .
 It’s a standard trick of hackers and cyber-terrorists who don’t want to be located . It's a standard Trick of hackers.
 Large Russian media companies also have a considerable stake in the Western media market . Large RussianMedia companies have a significant stake in Western media markets .
 Russia Today is a multilingual Russia-based television network . Most prominent and popular of them is Russia Today – the multilingual Russian TV network .
 There used to be a time when the U.S. media wrote the global narrative, the Boston Globe informed .
 Russia Today mainly focus on presenting the point of view of the Russian political elite . It became particularly evident in the case of a political crisis in Ukraine, especially after Yanukovych's escape to Russia .
 Russia Today presents Yanukovich as legally valid president . Russia's actions as a protection of abused minorities, Russian army invading Ukraine as self-defence troops and seizure of power by the opposition as a violation of the Ukrainian Constitution .
 At least two cases have been documented of journalists openly criticizing the Crimean Invasion on Russia Today .
 Liz Wahl left on air expressing a statement that she can no longer be a part of a network that is supportive of Vladimir Putin’s aggressive policy . Abby Martin expressed her discontent with the Crimean Invasion, but did not leave Russia Today .
 The authorities of the U.S. and many European politicians were strongly involved in the supporting of the opposition . German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Polish Minister of Foreign Affairs Radoslaw Sikorski were also involved .
 The postulates of protesters received an overall support of a number of Western democratic states . The postulate of protesters got an overallSupport of a variety of Western countries .
 Radoslaw Sikorski was one of EU visitors witnessing the signing of the Agreement on the Settlement of the Crisis in Ukraine from February 21st 2014 . He is also a staunch supporter of extensive penalties for Russia for its military intervention on the territory of Ukraine .
 Some Western publicists indicate an overwhelming role of farright forces in the protests . Some of the Western publicist say far right forces are behind the protests.
 Svoboda flags and banners have been featured in the demonstrations at Kiev's Independence Square .
 One Svoboda MP, Igor Myroshnychenko, allegedly helped to topple the statue of Vladimir Lenin outside a government building . The statue was followed by its occupation by protesters .
 Some of the parties of the extreme right are also critical towards Euromaidan . But some of the political parties are critical towards the country .
The attitudes towards Euromaidan are not less varied within the Ukrainian society itself . The attitudes towards the Ukrainian government are not more varied than in the country itself .
 In 2014, the forces of antagonism in the country are stronger than ever before . It seems that now in 2014, it seems that in 2014 the forces in 2014 are stronger.
 Not every Pole is supportive for the actions of Polish state's authorities regarding Ukrainian political crisis .
 We pray for peace and we pray for wisdom for the authorities of Ukraine, says Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin .
 Ukrainians must decide for themselves what future they want for their country . It is however necessary for Ukrainians to decide their future for themselves .
 Ukraine's self-determination seems to be the primary goal for Ukraine, according to the U.S. government .
 The traces of long-term dependence from Russia are still very noticeable, especially in the East of Ukraine, which is largely russified .
 There are huge numbers of people in Ukraine that tend to be pro-Russian and don't consider integration with Europe to be a proper choice for Ukraine .
 The pro-Russianness of these people is of the most conscious nature . They actively contributed to the Soviet regime’s longevity and later formed a strong and active reactionary wing within independent Ukraine .
 These well educated people were co-creators of Russian propaganda and contributed a lot to Yanukovych’s rise to power with their effective political technologies .
 Professor Dmytro Tabachnyk is a former Ukraine's Minister of Education . He is the figure whose contribution to Yanukovych’s regime was especially significant .
 Statements like the one above obviously serve the purpose of creating certain vision of Western Ukrainians as separatist and nationalistic . In the same time, paradoxically, too strongly linked to the Western cultural core because of long-drawn political dependence on Rzeczpospospolita and Austro
 Dmytro Tabachnyk's political career started in Soviet times and came to an end because of the events of Euromaidan . He made every possible effort to reinforce the existing antagonisms between people living in different regions of the country .
 The group of socially deprived people who have suffered from the political and economic transformation is also quite numerous . The group is a group of social deprived people.
 Both Russianand Ukrainianspeaking are mostly nonqualified workers with only basic education . Both Russian and Ukrainianspeaked .
 In today's rapidly changing world they yearn for relatively stable and secure life that the Soviet regime offered to their kind of people .
 Russians have little to do with their own national identity . It can be concluded, that their seemingly pro-Russian position is in fact the nostalgia for Soviet Union .
 Russian social technologists are intending to strengthen this nostalgia and enliven the symbols of the fallen empire . Russian Federation may appear as heir to USSR and defender of the old values .
 There is also the issue of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine who in fact constitute a large minority of population . The majority of population in Autonomous Republic of Crimea whose legal status is currently being disputed .
 Russian people living in Ukraine and Baltic states have been gradually loosing their former position as ex-Soviet republics . They tend to be even more loyal towards Vladimir Putin’s and Dmitiriy Medvedev’'s policy .
 Many ethnic Russians fully respect the sovereignty of Ukrainian state, unlike many of the ethnic Ukrainians .
 The division into Western, Ukrainian-speaking Ukrainians and Eastern, Russian- speaking Ukrainians appears to be a largely simplified, inaccurate and artificial division . The division appears to have been largely simplified and inaccurate .
 There is a language barrier to some extent, as a large part of the East does not speak in any language other than Russian . It is highly exposed to the influence of Russophone mainstream media .
 The number of schools in which Ukrainian language is taught is almost negligible in the eastern 82 circuits of Ukraine . In Kiev Russian language continuously looses popularity in Kiev .
 language itself can be a barrier to communication, especially for younger people . However chances are small that language itself is a barrier .
 Ukrainian Truth or TVi conduct their programs in both Ukrainian and Russian . The percentage of people speaking English increases .
 The future of Ukraine depends on what the future of the country's future depends on. It is up to every individual Ukrainian in which version of the same events he wants to believe, says the Ukrainian government .
 The revolution of Euromaidan is unprecedented in the modern Ukraine’s history. Regardless of how the further events in Ukraine will go, it is needed to say that the revolution is unprecedented .
 The use of brute force resulted in a powerful mobilization of dormant energy levels within society, says the author . The use. of brute Force resulted in the use of force to mobilize energy levels in society .
 Many political experts view Euromaidan as the first geopolitical revolution of the 21st century . Among the protesters were representatives of various social groups, their average age were 35 years .
 The aim of Euromaidan creators and activists was not just the political impact, but the transformation of awareness of people who are now waking up from the Soviet Union .
 The memory of the Orange Revolution 2004 gives some serious doubts as to how long-lasting the changes initiated by Euromaidan will be .
In this context, the role of media will be constantly increasing and determining the future political course, says John Sutter .
 Popieramy prezydenta W Janukowycza w walce z syjonistycznym bandytyzmem USA, UE, Izraela. Popierami prezdenta W. Janukowsycznym w wal
 Lavrov obratil vnimaniye na ushchemleniye yazykovykh prav russkikh na Ukraine .
 U.S. tsentri Kyyeva ‘titushky’ is a y militsioneriv, a y Militsioned zhurnalistiv .
 Yanukovych znayshov triokh vynnykh u rozhoni Yevromaydanu 30 lystopada . Yanukovych is president of Ukraine .
 Ukraine and the Russian Federation both involved in building up their cases using many available channels and instruments . The judges on those selected states and international organizations have already taken positions concerning the legality/illegality of actions and omissions of the parties .
 The paper contends that this case is a legal case concerning many questions of international law and the existence of facts constituting violations of international obligations attributable to the parties .
 The final section offers some tentative, concluding remarks about the future of this case . The prospect of its referral to an independent international court or tribunal is not clear .
 Ukraine is on the brink of what could be an ethnically motivated and externally inspired internal conflict or, indeed, a civil war .
 The main purpose of this short contribution is to offer a series of preliminary reflections on the international legal dimension of the situation in Ukraine . It is to focus on a range of issues that could build up a legal case, if only virtual, between Ukraine and Russia .
 The case may never reach the stage of being submitted to an international court, such as the International Court of Justice . The case could be a contentious case, as the case may not reach the international court .
 There are strong indications that a legal case between Ukraine and the Russian Federation is actually brewing . This will set out a conceptual framework of analysis, the form and structure of this paper .
 The rhetoric of international law has, somehow, dominated the discourse used by both parties, and to some extent by other interested actors .
International law rhetoric does not stem from the fact that international law was actually respected. Unfortunately, international law rhetoric doesn't stem from fact that law was respected .
 Professor Henkin’s famous and commonly quoted observation that ‘it is probably the case that almost all nations observe almost all principles of international law and almost all of their obligations nearly all of the time’
 The Ukraine Russian Federation case building involves a number of highly contentious points of law and fact, conflicting legal views and interests between the two parties . The law is rarely uncontroversial, hence, hence.
Both parties have been actively involved in building up their cases using many available channels and instruments . Both parties have used many channels, instruments and channels to build up cases .
 Both parties use the U.N. bodies, the Security Council and the General Assembly as convenient tools for gaining foreign policy objectives and mobilizing support among other states .
 It will provide a number of observations on the case building processes and tactics employed by both sides . It will also provide a few observations on case building process and tactics used by both parties .
 The following section will focus on ‘the judges’ – on those selected states and international organizations who have already taken positions concerning the legality/illegality of actions and omissions of the parties . The next section will be focused on the judges.
 The final section will offer some tentative remarks concerning the Ukraine Russian Federation case for international law at large . The final part will offer a tentative, concluding remarks about the case .
 One case has already been lodged by Ukraine against the Russian Federation . The case is submitted to the European Court of Human Rights on March 13, 2014 .
 The case is based on Article 33 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms . It alleges the responsibility of the Russian Federation for violations of individuals' rights guaranteed by the Convention .
 Ukraine requested the Court to issue interim measures that would oblige the Russian Federation to refrain from taking measures threatening the life and health of the civilian population on the territory of Ukraine .
 The case is to be submitted to the International Court of Justice in the Hague . Ukraine is working on a case of particular importance that Ukraine is currently working on .
 Ukrainian Minister of Justice Mr Pavlo Petrenko initiated works on a complaint concerning Russia’s encroachment upon Ukrainian territory .
 complaint could also include the issue of real estates and deposits that Russia allegedly did not transfer to Ukraine after the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 The prospect of the Ukraine Russian Federation case being successfully brought before the International Court of Justice seems to be rather slim .
 It would require consent to be given by both parties for the jurisdiction of the Court . It would be a formal way provided by its Statute .
 Russia still does not accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice . The current government of Ukraine which Russia does not recognize, seems very unlikely to accept .
 The Russian Federation was brought before the International Court of Justice by Georgia in 2008 . Georgia was in breach of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination .
 There is no guarantee that both sides will ever find themselves before an international court or tribunal or yet 88 another international judicial body who determines it has jurisdiction to deal with the case .
 Ukraine and Russian Federation may or may not be able to present their arguments based on international law to independent international judges . Ukraine and the Russian Federation could not present their argument based on law to international judges.
 Both Ukraine and Russia spare no effort in building up their cases before available fora. Still, both countries still need to build up cases before they can be found out .
 The UN Security Council is one of the most important. The parties regularly accuse each other of misbehavior .
Records of Security Council meetings offer valuable source of information . In an attempt to illustrate the legal controversies between the parties, and to construct their positions.
 Russia illegally occupied and annexed Crimea, using its military forces and brutally violating international law . Russia illegally annexed Crimea and illegally occupied Crimea .
 It is responsible for aggression against Ukraine and annexation of a part of its territory . It is also responsible for annexation of part of Ukraine's territory .
 Ukraine accuses Russian Federation of violations of international law . Ukraine accuses Russia of violating international law. This, in short, is the crux of the Ukrainian position .
 Ukrainian representatives repeatedly appealed to all Security Council and U.N. members to find the means and measures to stop the aggressor, the Russian Federation .
 Andrii Deshchystia, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, told members of the UN General Assembly on March 27, 2014, that over the past month, we have witnessed the most flagrant violations of international law .
 Russia's Federation Council unanimously approved President Vladimir Putin's request to use Russian military forces in Ukraine . Ukraine will certainly explore the fact that Russia’s Federation Council approved the request .
 On March 1, 2014, the upper house of the Russian parliament voted in favor of sending troops to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea to ensure peace and order in the region .
 There is no case which could offer a direct indication of how such an argument could be put forward .
 The second argument Ukraine would undoubtedly raise, is the Russian illegal intervention into domestic affairs of Ukraine .
 Ukraine accuses Russia of supporting illegal militant groups operating in the eastern region of Ukraine . Russia accused of creating an atmosphere of terror and violence .
 Ukraine is strongly of the opinion that the actions of armed ‘separatists’ operating in the Slavyansk and Donetsk regions of Ukraine are in fact directly attributable to Russia .
 The case Ukraine is building in this point closely resembles that brought to the International Court of Justice by Nicaragua against the United States of America . The case is similar to that of Nicaragua against U.S.
 Using military force against Nicaragua and intervening in Nicaragua's internal affairs, in violation of Nicaragua's sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence, according to the U.S.
 The ‘separatists’ responsible for acts of provocation against Ukraine are described as Russian saboteurs and mercenaries, or terrorists sponsored by Russia .
 Ukrainian side says they are heavily armed, professionally trained and led by Russian military officers . They say they kill Ukrainian police officers and take hostages and operate like terrorists and must be treated accordingly .
 Ukraine attaches considerable importance to the Geneva ‘agreement’ and considers the document as a source of commitment, also for Russia . Ukraine attaches significant importance to Geneva 'agreement'
 The third argument likely to complement the first and the second is concerned with violations of Ukrainian citizens’ rights . The third is concerned about violations of Ukrainians' rights .
 The Russian leadership has done nothing to publicly dissociate itself from the armed separatists and provocateurs or to urge them to immediately lay down their arms and release captured administrative buildings .
 The position of the Russian Federation is likely to be not only that of denial but also of counterclaims and counter accusations of Ukraine violating international law .
 Russia will refuse to accept jurisdiction of any international court or tribunal, or raise preliminary objections, as it successfully did in the Georgia Russian Federation case before 90 the International Court of Justice in 2008 . Ukraine initiates the process if Ukraine begins the process .
 Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovych was ousted in an illegal coup which ended Ukraine's constitutional authority . Today, one reason for such attitude is the Russian assertion that the Ukrainian President was ousted .
 Russia a priori considers the Ukrainian presidential elections planned for May 25, illegitimate . Russia also considers the presidential elections in Ukraine illegitimate .
 Russia denies violating international law by annexing Crimea . As far as the substantial arguments are concerned, Russia denies violation of international law .
 Russia swiftly recognized Crimea as an independent, sovereign state and accepted its request to join the Russian Federation .
 Russia contends that holding the referendum was in line with international law and the UN Charter . The referendum itself, Russia contends, was in lines with the precedent set by Kosovo .
 President Putin gave a determined defence of his country's right to absorb Crimea . He claimed that the situation in Crimea was akin to Kosovo's breakaway from Serbia in 2008 .
 The reference to Kosovo in the Russian narrative seems to be greatly misplaced . The reference is greatly misplaced, according to Russian media .
 Russia is likely to refer to the right of external self-determination of the people of Crimea, the majority of whom are Russian . The need to protect own nationals abroad or the fact it was invited to intervene in Crimea.
 The overall weight of the Russian ‘defences’ may not be very strong given that they are based on highly disputable facts .
 Each argument has to be carefully considered by the court . In any case, each argument is carefully considered .
 The Russian Federation is also likely to register a number of counter claims and allegations of Ukraine violating international law . Russia is likely to also register counter claims.
 The UN Security Council is holding an emergency session called by Russia on May 2 . They have already been presented to the Security Council during its emergency session .
 Russia accused “the Kyiv regime’ and its ‘Western sponsors’ of destabilizing Ukraine . Russia accused the Ukraine regime of destabilising Ukraine .
 The list of arguments which have been mentioned as likely to be raised by the parties, Ukraine and the Russian Federation, is by all means, tentative and does not aspire to be exhaustive .
 The situation on the ground too, may lead to the formulation of new allegations of international law being violated . The situation may also lead to new allegations.
 The Judges Before the real judges are given an opportunity to look into the Ukraine Russian Federation case . A number of virtual ‘judges’, states and international organizations, have offered their views and judgments .
For practical reasons, references must be reduced to a number of key players . For practical reasons and the size of this short contribution, references should be reduced . The size of the short contribution should be cut to a few players .
 Other international organizations, such as NATO, OSCE, the European Union, the Council of Europe, G-7, and very many states, within or outside the UN forum, have spoken .
 The United Nations has offered many states an opportunity to voice, individually or collectively, their opinions . The U.N. has offered some states a chance to voice their views .
 It has, through a number of special reports, offered its own voice and opinion as well . It has also offered own voice.
 The Security Council and the General Assembly debates on Ukraine attracted much attention and allowed many participating states to articulate their judgments . The debates on the Ukraine drew much attention .
 Security Council was called more than ten times this year to debate the situation in Ukraine . The Security Council has been called over ten times to debate Ukraine's situation .
 The Russian Federation found practically no allies among its members . None of the ‘traditional’ supporters of the Russian Federations are currently non-permanent members of the Security Council .
 The Security Council meeting on March 15 must be given special emphasis . The meeting will be held in London, London, on March 14 .
 The Crimean referendum has no legal validity and will have no legal effect on the status of Crimea . A draft resolution sponsored by a group of forty-two states, including members of the European Union, noted, inter alia .
 China abstained from voting and the Russian Federation voted against, casting its veto right . At the end of the day, 13 members of the Security Council voted in favour of this resolution .
 The Security Council resolution on Ukraine was vetoed, and the resolution adopted by the General Assembly is not legally binding . The role of the UN as a forum for aggregation and articulation of UN member states’ views on the Ukraine Russian Federation case must be appreciated .
 The view of the UN General Assembly has already been taken into consideration by a number of other international organizations . The view is visibly reflected in the documents of the United Nations .
 Last but not least, one must of course consider the position of the European Union .
 The case of Ukraine against the Russian Federation features prominently on the Union's agenda . The Union's position is a topic in its own right .
 European Council's conclusions adopted at its March 20/21 session . It can be best summarized with a reference to the European Council’s conclusions adopted .
 The European Union remains committed to uphold the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 The European Council does not recognise the illegal referendum in Crimea . The referendum is in clear violation of the Ukrainian Constitution .
 It strongly condemns the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol to the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation will not recognise it .
 The European Council asks the Commission to evaluate the legal consequences of Crimea's annexation . The Commission will propose economic, trade and financial restrictions regarding Crimea for rapid implementation .
 Montenegro, Iceland, Albania, Albania and Norway aligned themselves with the Council’s decisions . It is important to note that many third states, such as Montenegro and Iceland, aligned themselves.
 The situation in Ukraine is reflected in the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton’s, statements and comments .
 An independent international court must not interfere with the judgment of an independent court . For obvious reasons, views taken by different states and international organizations must not interference with the decision .
 The court must be engaged in the resolution of a dispute in an unbiased, dispassionate manner .
 The judges are expected to exercise their powers impartially and conscientiously . The judges will be able to exercise the powers of the judges.
 The views presented above must not be ignored, or lightly dismissed, when serious allegations of violating fundamental principles of international law are made and substantiated .
 The virtual case filed by Ukraine against the Russian Federation may find its way to the docket of an independent international court or tribunal .
 Ukraine may fail to convince the judiciary that it has the jurisdiction to deal with the case at hand . Alternatively, the Russian Federation may convince the Judiciary that it does not have the jurisdiction .
 Most likely scenario seems to be that of no Russian consent for the jurisdiction of an international court . However, the most likely scenario would be that the Russian government did not agree to the jurisdiction .
 The case, nevertheless, is a legal case concerning many questions of international law and the existence of facts which, if established, would constitute a breach of international obligations .
 Ukraine contends, inter alia, that the Russian Federation has violated international law by annexing Crimea, annexing the territory of Ukraine . Ukraine also contends that Russia has used force against Ukraine, training, arming, equipping, financing and supplying separatist forces .
 The Russian Federation contends that Ukraine violated the rights of the Russian population of Crimea and used punitive military operations against their own people in south-eastern Ukraine . On the other hand, the Russian Federation says Ukraine violated rights of Crimea .
 Most of the actors, states, states and international bodies referred to in the previous section have already concluded that the Russian Federation has acted against its obligations under international law . The Russian Federation is not directly or through actions of armed separatist attributable to Russian Federation .
 The future of this case depends in large part on the willingness of the parties to find a solution, with or without reference to adjudication .
 violations of international law may sometimes be ‘incidental and not the cause of disorder’ but not in this case . More importantly, violations of International law may be “incidental’s” and not “inappropriate’
 In this case, the very foundations of international law seem to be severely tested . In defence of the rule of law, its settlement is surely indispensable .
 Archer C , International Organizations, 3rd edition, London, Routledge. Archer C . Archer C, International Organizations.
 Human Rights in a Nutshell, 4th edition, is published in St. Buergenthal T., Shelton D. and Steward D.P.
Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua . Case Concerning military andParamilitary activities in and against Nicaragua .
 NATO Chief describes 'outrageous' Russia as threat to Europe, “Euobserver’s” Russia .