 A roundtable discussion commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Chornobyl nuclear disaster was held at the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation .
 The May Day parade in Kyiv went on as planned with thousands of people exposed to Chornobyl's radioactive cloud . McConnell recalled the Soviet information blackout and how only a week after the explosion .
 The Chornobyl disaster pertain not to the issue of nuclear safety, but to how a totalitarian state deals with a catastrophe versus the response of an open society .
 She drew a stark comparison between the Soviet cover up of the nuclear accident at Chornobyl and the quick and comprehensive Japanese and international response to the Fukushima power plant crisis .
 McConnell also noted that pledging conferences that have been convened to assist the victims of Chornobyl have never met their goals . McConnell also said pledging conferences to assist victims of Russia's war against Ukraine have never been met .
For Ambassador Valeriy Chaly the Chornobyl disaster had a deep personal dimension . Chaly was an ambassador for the Ukraine-born Ukrainian government .
 His father was a Chornobyl "liquidator" who was involved in the rescue, containment and clean-up operations . He was also involved in establishing a museum devoted to the nuclear power plant .
 Ambassador Chaly said that Chornobyl is a symbol of the old Soviet style of governance . He said it is an important reminder of the failed Soviet culture of security lapses and suppression of information .
 Ominously, there are concerns that Russia may deploy nuclear weapons in the Crimean peninsula . Russia annexed the peninsula from Ukraine in 2014 .
 Ukraine still relies on nuclear power for generating a large portion of its electricity . It needs additional international support for completing the Chornobyl containment structure .
 Mykola Riabchuk reminded the audience that "liquidators" were being sent to quell the disaster without any gear .
 The Soviet system did not care about human lives. They were being sent to their deaths as the Soviet system didn't care about humans .
 A closed society is dangerous for its own citizens, for their own people, for its its own people . It's dangerous for the public to live in a closed society .
 Mykola Riabchuk recalls how he learned about the Chornobyl catastrophe from his father . His father was living in Lviv when the disaster occurred .
 Polish government's rapid response to Chornobyl on Polish radio and more and more Ukrainians soon came to learn about the seriousness of the situation . The Polish government is trying to mitigate the impact of the radiation.
 Those living in Ukraine all suffered from the policies of Moscow -all were in the same boat and this consolidated people .
 He went on to say that it also contributed to the emergence of non-governmental organizations, the environmental movement, and many other important changes in people's mentality .
 He concludes that people realized that the system and imperial rule were a disaster for all and something should be changed . He concluded that people realize that people are not happy with the system .
 The Embassy of Ukraine in Washington commemorates the anniversary of the Chornobyl disaster with an event on April 27th . The embassy of Ukraine is in Washington.
 Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Rose Gottemoeller and Representative Marcy Kaptur spoke at the gathering .
 Congresswoman Kaptur underlined that "the effects of the disaster linger socially, economically, and culturally and culturally" Chornobyl's legacy remains a heavy burden for people of Ukraine .
 She reaffirmed the strong support by the U.S. for Ukraine and its democratic aspirations . She also reaffirmed her support for Ukraine .
 Olena Honcharova, founder of the Kharkiv Station NGO which assists internally displaced persons in Ukraine, spoke at a U.S.-Ukraine Foundation roundtable on April 25, 2016 .
 She was in Washington to receive the Refugees InternationalRichard Holbrooke Award . The award was given to an outstanding national NGO working with the displaced .
 Olena Honcharova emphasized that there continues to be a great need for clothing, medicine, hygienic products and housing .
 Honcharova expressed concern that Ukrainians are getting tired of the conflict . Private donations of assistance for the IDPs are in decline, she said .
 She was critical of what she views as unsympathetic characterizations of IDPs by some Ukrainian government officials . She was also critical of some government officials' characterizations.
 Honcharova criticized the withholding or delay of social payments from residents of the occupied territories . Residents cross the line of contact and come to Ukrainian government-controlled areas to obtain payments .
 As citizens of Ukraine, they are legally entitled to their pensions, she said . She stressed that as citizens of the country, they were legally entitled.
 Many are not getting the help from the government that they need, she said . Many aren't getting the assistance they need .
 Kharkiv Station obtains support from numerous donors and volunteers and partners with other non-governmental organizations in the region .
 There have been families who planned to move to Russia but have stayed in Ukraine . There have even been families planning to move there .
 The role of public radio, playing an important role in strengthening democracy in Ukraine, was discussed by seven members of the Hromadske Radio team .
 The trip was sponsored by U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine and organized by Razom for Ukraine .
 Hromadske Radio is an NGO founded by a group of professional broadcasting journalists who came together to launch an independent public radio for the Ukrainian audience .
 The role of media in a democracy is often underestimated, says CNN.com .
It's difficult to have a system of governance built around the will of the majority without reliable sources of information . It's difficult for citizens to have reliable sources.
 freedom of the press is directly correlated with successful democratic rule . Today we can see that freedom of press is linked to success of democratic rule.
 The role of media in post-Maidan Ukraine is of utmost importance. That is why the role of the media in the country is of the utmost importance, says CNN .
 The ability to guarantee freedom of the press and information is one of the key components of Ukraine's democratization process . Ukraine's democracy process is a key part of the country's democratic process .
 Roundtable discussions were held at both the National Endowment for Democracy and the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation on Tuesday, April 12th .
 NED's roundtable focused on ownership of Ukraine's major media outlets . The roundtable was conducted in a "without attribution" format .
 Whoever owns the news has the ability to distort and reshape public perceptions of reality .
 Ukraine's national television networks remain under the control of a handful of oligarchs . A new Ukrainian law on transparency of media ownership has been officially revealed .
 The control of Ukrainian media by a select few extends to online news sources as well . Ukrainian media control of the country's media also extends to the internet .
 Internet has been considered by many to be a refuge for independent sources of information . This is a particularly disconcerting development as the Internet is considered to be an independent source of information.
 Topics ranged from U.S. election coverage to cultural differences between Ukrainians and Americans .
 U.S.-funded Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty were for decades the de facto, nearly exclusive Washington and foreign bureaus for Ukraine's media market . The situation is changing.
 Ukrainian, Washington-based correspondents are producing stories about American life . Now 1+1, Ukraina TV and ICTV are also airing stories about U.S. life .
 Ukraine's media situation is far from perfect, but we're beginning to see a steady improvement . Ukraine's situation is still not perfect, according to CNN.com .
 The use of social media and personal blogs as organizational tools during the early stages of the Maidan demonstrated the power of peer-sourced information . Social media was used as an organizational tool in the early days of Maidan .
 Lesia Vasylenko is the founder of Legal100 an NGO that provides support to Ukrainian soldiers and their families . The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation hosted a roundtable with the activist .
 Lesia talked about the creation of the organization and challenges her team faces daily at the Foundation on October 27th, 2015 .
 Legal100 is working on distributing legal information to those who are in urgent need of it . Legal100 has been working on distribution of legal information for years .
 Vasylenko says she is worried about ATO fighters who come home and don't know how to get legal support . She says she isn't sure how to help them get legal help .
 Vasylenko is concerned that, not knowing a better way to do it, they will turn to arms . Vasylko is concerned about not knowing how to use arms .
 Distributing information including phone consultations, educational videos on relevant legislation . printed materials for those in the regions without access to the Internet .
 Building a network of veterans bringing together to help each other and defend their civil rights . The group hopes to build a network to help veterans with civil rights issues .
 The number of calls Legal100 receives only grows as the soldiers come home . The situation in Eastern Ukraine looks less worrisome today .
 There is a hotline that receives up to 40 calls per day requesting information on the social rights of the soldiers . The hotline is called to ask about social rights for soldiers .
 Volunteers either provide necessary information via phone or refer the caller to one of the legal professionals registered in their database . Volunteers either give necessary information by phone or call the caller.
 Vasylenko also noted that the ultimate goal at this point is to draft legislative proposals . The ultimate goal is toDraft legislative proposals.
 She deals with many legal cases and sees many drawbacks in the outdated military law . She sees multiple drawbacks in military law.
 Vasylenko and her team have to deal with numerous cases of ATO soldiers . They have first-hand knowledge of the legal gaps of the current legislation .
 She emphasized the need for systematic change . She is dedicated to working on legislative proposals that would better correspond to the needs of new veterans .
We wish Lesia Vasylenko best of luck in her challenging work and hope for future cooperation with her . We also hope for her to be able to work with her family and friends .
 She is seeking a master's degree in international economics by May 2017 . She is also seeking a masters degree in global economics by 2017 .
 Patriarch Filaret, the Head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv and All Rus'-Ukraine, shared his views on the conflict in Ukraine . He explained why the Ukraine Freedom Support Act should be implemented .
 He started off by trying to explain why about 80% of Russians are ready to fight for Ukraine . He also tried to explain the reasons why about 70% of Russian are ready for Ukraine.
 Putin cannot imagine a strong Russia without Ukraine, it was stated . It was stated that, just like Gorbachov, Putin can't imagine aStrong Russia withoutUkraine .
 Representatives of the Russian political elite do not see Russia as any other country . They want to create a world's superpower, they say .
 The majority of Russian citizens seem to like that idea, but in order to achieve this status Russia needs to restore control over a few Eastern European countries .
 The Minsk Protocol was not something Russia was looking for, we can see . Russia was not looking for anything, it was just looking for .
 Putin's plan possibly includes occupation of Crimea and Donbass, but also occupation of Kyiv, Warsaw, Vilnius and other cities . Only way to stop him could be providing necessary aid to Ukraine .
 A lack of lethal weapons makes it hard for the Ukrainian soldiers to defend their land . His Holiness mentioned that while there is a lot of enthusiasm among the Ukrainian armed forces .
 Much of the weapons that are currently in possession of the Ukrainian military are outdated . The weapons are outdated, according to Ukrainian military officials .
Ukrainian armed forces have to use old Soviet-era equipment to battle Russian forces . Ukrainian armed forces must use old equipment to fight Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Putin could lead to more aggression and even World War III since it seems unlikely that Putin will stop after he seizes Donbass . It could be even more aggressive than ever before .
 Ukraine's Holiness hopes that knowing that Ukraine has real support from the West could cause Russia to rethink its actions and eventually bring peace to the region .
 He talked about the tension that exists between the Kyivan Patriarchate and the Moscow Patriarchate .
 The Moscow Patriarchate has had a great influence on some people in Ukraine, especially in the eastern parts of the country and Crimea . This led to the destruction of a base and a major misunderstanding between people living in different parts of Ukraine .
 At the moment there is no religious freedom in Donbass, and churches that belong to the Moscow Patriarchate are the only religious institutions that still function in that area .
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyivan Patriarchate, Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, the Roman Catholic Church in Ukraine and Protestant churches in Ukraine have all shown support for the Ukrainian armed forces .
 Patriarch Filaret said Russia is not the biggest enemy of Ukraine at the moment . His Holiness said Russia was not the largest enemy of the country .
 There are still members of Verkhovna Rada as well as representatives of local administration in different cities and towns in Ukraine . The old Ukrainian political system could be characterized by an extremely high level of corruption .
Rebuilding and reforming the system in just one year is impossible, which means that Ukraine still struggles with its biggest enemy . Rebuilding and reform in one year can't be done in just a year .
 Hopefully, Ukraine can defeat this enemy and transition to being a thriving democracy. Hopefully, the Ukraine can beat this enemy.
 A prayer for peace, a prayer for Ukraine, was the prayer for all of us . It was a prayer to pray for peace .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation is based in Ukraine . It is based on the work of the United States-Ukrainian Foundation . The Foundation's mission is in Ukraine to improve the country's economy .
 Patriarch Filaret came to Washington to attend the National Prayer Breakfast . He is the head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate .
 His Holiness paid a visit to the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation to meet with Friends of Ukraine . He also met with friends of Ukraine.
 The Patriarch's public appearances were at USUF and elsewhere in the Nation's Capital . The Patriarch is a former president of the United States .
An audience of political experts at the Atlantic Council listened to him intently for over an hour and gave him a round of applause in the end .
 Patriarch Filaret famously said, "The church must be out of politics. A year ago, during the Maidan protests, he famously said: "The Church must beOut of politics"
 Michael's Cathedral a temple of the Kyiv Patriarchate nearest to Maidan gave refuge to young protesters beaten by riot police .
 In those soulful conversations, he holistically connects questions of faith with citizen virtues . He also connects questions about faith with citizens .
 We must hate Putin's aggression, for it is an evil and sinful deed, explains the Patriarch . We can pray for Putin's soul asking God to forgive this sinner .
 We do not claim a role in politics, but we understand that people are driven by ideas, he said . He said that people want to distinguish between truth and lies .
 The Patriarch eagerly discussed political history as a source of moral lessons . The Patriarch said political history could be a moral lesson .
 Moscow's idea of Rusky Mir is an example of lies and falsehood, says Moscow . The idea of a new Russian empire is nice packaging for the idea of an empire, says Russia .
 The Patriarch also spoke at length comparing Hitler's course to World War II with Putin's course today .
 He emphasized that both Hitler and Putin used lies to cover their aggressive aspirations . He said Western powers must not make the same mistake again .
 He stressed that Ukraine, by confronting the Russian aggressor, was defending not only itself, but the rest of the world as well . He said Ukraine was defending itself, as well as other countries .
 He continuously reminded about security assurances given to Ukraine when it was dismantling its nuclear arsenals . He said Ukraine was given security assurances when its arsenals were dismantled .
 The Patriarch pointed out that helping Ukraine with defensive weapons now is the right moral choice for the U.S. But that choice must also be driven by concerns of international security, he said .
 In late Soviet days, he used his influence to gain an autonomous status for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church . But when he pressed for its full independence, this caused a bitter conflict with Moscow .
 Ukraine's post-Soviet history can be seen as a step of providence . Looking back at Ukraine's history, one can view that as a sign of providentity .
 For more than two decades, Ukraine's politics was plagued by "the creole syndrome" of uncertainty and ambiguity in relations with Moscow .
Filaret resolved that uncertainty for himself and his followers when breaking off from Moscow in 1992 . But Filaret resolved his own uncertainty when he left in 1992.
 Moscow broke up with Moscow in 2014. That act of great moral courage may be seen, in fact, as a precursor to Moscow's break up with Russia .
 In due time, history will fully appraise how much Filaret has done for his country .
 Since 2004, UOCMP became an openly "anti-Orange" political player in Ukraine . UOC MP has been an openly ""anti-orange" political party since 2004 .
 Filaret quoted statistics showing that over 50% of the Orthodox faithful attend the temples of the Kyiv Patriarchate . UOCMP has only a third of them .
 UOCMP wants to register a UOMCP charter in every village across the country . However, UOC MP has a bigger number of registered parishes .
People would like to switch from the Moscow Patriarchate to the Kyiv Patriarchate, says Filaret Filaret .
 There are temples of both denominations in cities where there are both denominations . They can do this easily in cities such as New York and Los Angeles .
 Conflicts and animosity arise only if there is but one temple in a village, and the community is divided . The community of the village is divided.
Ecumenical Patriarch officially recognizes the Kyiv Patriarchate as an autocephalous church . The situation would change as soon as the Ecumenical patriarchs officially recognize the church as anAutocephalous Church .
Big numbers of parishes would switch from Moscow to Kyiv, according to Filaret . In that case, many parishes, with their clergy and faithful, would switch.
 Once there is a united autocephalous Orthodox Church, it will easily surpass the Russian Orthodox Church in size and influence . The church will become more powerful and more influential .
 ROC has about 12 thousand parishes and 67 dioceses, while in Ukraine there are 15 thousand Orthodox parishes . In Ukraine, there are about 12,000 parishes, and 87 diOCeses .
 If the two Ukrainian churches unite, Russia will cease to be world's biggest nation of the Orthodox Christian faith .
 The Patriarch is convinced that the European choice of the Ukrainian people means an important role for the church in defining the nation's new European identity .
 He emphasizes that European values are deeply linked to traditional Christian values . He says European values have been linked to Christian values for centuries .
 Christian faith and Christian values must help in creating a united Europe, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: Christian faith, Christian values, must help create a united European Europe .
Peter Voitsekhovsky, Ph.D., Research Director at the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation, is the research director of the Ukraine Foundation .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation is based in Ukraine . The foundation is based on the foundation's research into the country's history .
 We have been following the crisis and war events in Ukraine for over a year now . We have all been following Ukraine for a year .
 Being far from the place where the events happen makes it hard to figure out what exactly is going on .
 Ukraine's history is shaping the country's history . We try to talk to someone who has recently visited Ukraine, or lives in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian journalist Mykola Vorobiov spent nearly two months reporting on the fighting in Eastern Ukraine . He spent the time reporting on Ukraine's conflict in Ukraine .
 In his presentation, Mykola provided an overview of what he saw in the field and described the current situation in Ukraine . He also described the Ukrainian situation in the Ukraine .
 Much of Mykola's presentation was devoted to information, including statistics, on both sides of the conflict . The presentation was focused on statistics, including numbers on both side of conflict .
 He informed us about Ukrainian volunteer battalions and their leaders, as well as his journalistic coverage on who is fighting on the pro-Russian side . He told us about the Ukrainian volunteer battalion and its leaders, and their leader . He also told us of the Ukrainian Volunteer Battalion
 Mykola also talked about some of the mistakes made during the fighting, including the Battle of Ilovaisk, which resulted in many casualties .
 Many of them were quite well informed about the situation in Ukraine, which resulted in a very interesting and beneficial discussion on the current events in Ukraine .
 A group of Ukraine's volunteer outfits attended a round-table discussion at the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation today .
 The heroes saved the country from a military defeat last summer in the face of Russia's invasion . They are known as the heroes who saved the nation.
 The celebrated guests met with a stellar panel of experts and civic leaders who comprise the Friends of Ukraine network in the Nation's Capital .
 The delegation was led by two legendary figures, Andriy Teteruk and Yury Bereza .
 They are a part of the "new political class" that is the embodiment of the country's hope for change . They are part of a new political class that hopes for change in the country .
 Popular Front was able to gain twice more votes than predicted and even win a plurality in party lists' competition last month .
 Ukraine's army was not prepared to fight back an invasion from Russia neither logistically, nor psychologically . At that time, Ukraine's military was not ready to fightback an invasion .
 patriotic volunteers organized their own ""battalions" and those formations spearheaded the resistance effort . But patriotic volunteersorganized their own "batt battalion"
 It is a misconception to see their fight as an "amateur" effort, however, to see it as an effort .
 Andriy Teteruk and Yury Bereza were career military officers who chose an early discharge from active duty . In reality, both were career soldiers who chose early discharge .
 The field commanders are in Washington to call for continued and expanded U.S. support to Ukraine .
 Russian side fights with newer and more advanced weapon systems, with more fire power and better targeting capabilities . At this time, the Russian side is fighting with more advanced weapons systems .
 Some U.S. experts were less savvy on issues of world politics that some experts were raising in the discussion . They were less aware of issues such as world politics .
World leaders met in Australia for the G20 summit . The same issues were discussed by the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation .
 Vladimir Putin received a strong signal there that should caution him from attempts to re-heat the military conflict in Ukraine . Ukrainian soldiers continue to die almost every day.
 Vice-President Joe Biden's visit to Ukraine is a possible outcome of his visit this week . The U.S. should supply some weapons systems to Ukraine which is a potential outcome of Biden's trip .
 Moderator Konstantin Avramov is seated in the middle of the audience .
 The 2+ hour meeting included such organizations as the Center for US-Ukrainian Relations, U.S.-Ukraine Business Council, Razom, The Washington Group, Ukrainian Congress Committee of America/UNIS Office, Ukrainian National Women's League of America .
 The meeting moderator was Mykola Hryckowian of the Center for US-Ukrainian Relations . The meeting was held in Kiev .
 Oles Zhuravchak, Deputy Minister of Culture for Ukraine, provided comments on the current situation in Ukraine .
 The Foundation's conference room was the meeting site for the presentation, "New Ukraine, New Naftogaz Ukraine's Gas Sector Reform"
 Lada Pastushak, Director of Operations and Development for USUBC, led the event . The event took place in the U.S.
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation is a member of the U.s.-Ukraine Business Council . The foundation is based in Kiev, Ukraine .
 USUF President Nadia McConnell speaks on Ukraine's election to Secure Freedom audience . McConnell also speaks on the USUF president's role in Ukraine's presidential election .
 U.S.-Ukraine Foundation’s Vice President Markian Bilynskyj attended the first Black Sea Youth Summit in Istanbul . The Turkish ARI Movement organized the event .
 USUF was responsible for identifying the Ukrainian participants on the basis of an essay competition . The contestants were asked to identify their priority concerns for the future development in the Black Sea region from a youth perspective .
 Ambassador of Ukraine Oleh Shamshur and US-Ukraine Foundation President Nadia McConnell sign agreement to promote tourism in Ukraine . The agreement was signed in October 2008 .
 Nadia McConnell meets with President Yushchenko at USUBC meeting. September 29, 2008.
 U.S. policy makers participated in this year's session. Sept 25-Sept 29 was the first session in Ukraine .
 CSDU met with Ruslana Lyzhychko, Member of Ukraine’s Parliament, to discuss the political, economic and social situation in Ukraine .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation has launched its Webcasting Series to commemorate the 15th anniversary of the Foundation .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation and its partners hosted the third working session in Washington, DC from September 25 – September 29.
 The U.S.-Ukraine Policy Dialogue is designed to supplement and deepen the official bilateral dialogue between Ukraine and the United States. Funded by the U. S. Department of State .
 More than 60 policy makers from the United States and Ukraine met to discuss U.S.-Ukraine relations . They discussed foreign policy and national security; politics and governance; media and information .
 Condoleezza Rice presides the ceremony that takes place at the U.S. Department of State . The ceremony takes place in Washington, D.C.
 The Jackson-Vanik Graduation Coalition meets to continue developing a strategy to encourage the United States Congress to graduate Ukraine from the Jackson- vanik Amendment trade restrictions .
 The list of Coalition Members has grown to over 30 national and regional Ukrainian-American and Jewish-American groups, businesses and NGOs .
 U.S.-Ukrainian Investment Symposium takes place at Harvard Club of Boston .
 Ukraine's inaugural celebration is enlisting government leaders, corporate executives, investment fund managers, and decorated scholars for an unprecedented look at the state and prospect of Ukraine's integration with the global economy . Ukraine's progress towards economic integration is being celebrated by government leaders.
 U.S.-Ukraine Foundation President, John Kun, Ulyana Panchishin, Juan Carlos Campos, Christina Redko, and Alana Malick are at the meeting .
 The Jackson-Vanik Graduation Coalition is working to achieve Ukraine’s graduation from the Jackson- vanik Amendment before the November 2005 Congressional recess .
 Coalition leadership will soon be meeting with key members of Congress and the White House .
 Congress is considering a total of six bills that would graduate Ukraine from Jackson-Vanik . The bills would extend permanent normal trade relations status to Ukraine .
 The Coalition's efforts are being supported by the U.S. House of Representatives .
Foundation staff host a meeting at the DC office with Alexei G Kozhenkin, Managing Director, IT Ukraine Association, who is visiting Washington DC and Fairfax Country .
 Jan E Mul, Manager, European Business Development, accompanies Kozhenkin for the meetings .
 The U.S.-Ukraine Foundation hosts the 2005 Ukrainian American Youth Association Youth Leadership Seminar . October 8-11 will be held in Ukraine . The Seminar is held in Kiev, Ukraine .
 John Kun, USUF Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, opens conference with welcoming remarks . Kun is USUF vice president and chief operating officer .
 Lida Mykytyn, former Organizational Director of the Ukrainian Am erican Youth Association, is key in organizing the seminar . The seminar will take place in Kiev, Ukraine, in the summer .
Nadia McConnell hosts a meeting at the DC office for twelve visiting press and mass media representatives from Ukraine .
 Alla Rogers, Co-Chair of the National Press Club's Task Force on Journalism in Emerging Democracies, accompanies Ukraine representatives from Ukraine on their five day work session .
 Michael Bleyzer, CEO, SigmaBleyzer is a guest speaker at the Ukraine United States Business Council event .
 Michael Bleyzer discusses SigmaBleyzer's experience investing in Ukraine . He discusses his experience in investing in the country .
 "The Role of Local Governments in Consolidation Democracy in Ukraine" at Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty in Washington, DC .
 The mayors and Vera Andrushkiw, CPP Director, meet with Dr. Dr. Andrushkw, the mayors and CPP director .
 Congressional Breakfast co-sponsored by Ukrainian Congressional Caucus and the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation is held at Rayburn House Office Building .
 Keynote address is by Dan Rosenblum, Deputy Coordinator, Department of State Office of the Coordinator for United States Assistance to Europe and Eurasia .
 The guests of honor at the conference are Mayor Oleksandr Popov, Komsomolsk and Mayor Volodymyr Udovychenko, Slavutych .
 Other participants include approximately 25 trainers from the CPP United States partner cities . Other participants are approximately 25 trainees from the U.S. partner cities.
 The delegation consists of 8 participants and 2 facilitators of emerging women leaders working with NGOs, CBOs, and government .
 Ukrainian participants consist of city officials and members of business and entrepeneur associations . The Ukrainian participants include city officials, business leaders and business leaders .
 Stanley Jackson, Washington, DC, Deputy Mayor on Planning and Economic Development. One highlight of the program is the meeting with Stanley Jackson .
 He is visiting Washington DC on a research project sponsored by the Kennan Institute . He is in Washington D.C. for a project on a project.
USUF President Nadia McConnell visits Chicago at the invitation of Anna Mostovych, President of The Chicago Business & Professional Group, to give a presentation .
 The Foundation's Election Project helped to ensure a more democratic presidential campaign and election in Ukraine . During her talk she describes the work done by the Foundation .
 Mr Kun had the chance to see and thank Julian Kulas, head of The Heritage Foundation of MB Financial Bank, and Bohdan Watral, President/CEO of the Selfreliance Ukrainian Federal Credit Union .
 Mr Kun also visits the Ukrainian Institute of Modern Art and the Ukrainian National Museum . He receives individualized tours by Marijka Kulczycky and Maria Klimchak .
 Klimchak, who also operates the Ukrainian Wave program on Radio WSBC 1240 AM in Chicago, conducts an interview with Mr Kun .
 ICEA, in cooperation with the Sister-Cities International partnership between Chicago and Kyiv, initiated a program that gave a group of Ukrainian journalists an opportunity to observe mass-media operations in the United States .
 A report and slide presentation entitled Elections in Ukraine 2004 as seen by local observers is given by Judge Bohdan Futey .
 Yaromyr Oryshkevych is at the Ukrainian Catholic National Shrine of the Holy Family . He is a member of the Ukraine's Ukrainian National Shrine.
Richard Green Lugar, United States Senator from Indiana, speaks on the topic of A Changing Ukraine at the Kennan Institute .
 The goal is to promote the concerns of the Ukrainian-American community, and to establish stronger ties with Members of Congress .
 The discussion takes place at the International Republican Institute . It focuses on how language serves particular political goals and influences certain social groups .
 Berezovenko examines the public relations techniques relevant for today’s Ukraine . He also looks at the use of public relations methods in Ukraine .
 President George W Bush today announced the designation of a Presidential Delegation to attend the Inauguration of his Excellency Viktor Yushchenko, President of Ukraine, in 2005 .
 The Honorable Colin L Powell, Secretary of State, will lead the delegation . He will be in charge of the delegation.
 The Honorable John E Herbst is the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine . Paula Dobriansky is the Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs .
 A New Wave of Reforms is launched at a breakfast meeting at Carnegie Endowment for International Peace .
Ambassador Steven Pifer, Orest Deychakiwsky, and Oleksandr Potekhin have a lunch meeting with USUF staff .
Art Exhibit of Nadiya Kyrpenko at the Woodrow Wilson Center is on January 3-10 .