 No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner without the express written consent of the publisher . The publisher is responsible for the publication of the book .
 Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at special discounts for sales promotion, corporate gifts, fund-raising, or educational purposes .
 Skyhorse® and Skyhorse Publishing® are registered trademarks of Sky Horse Publishing, Inc. A Delaware corporation . The company is a Delaware corporation.
 It seems that al-Qaeda, ISIS, North Koreans, Mexican “bad hombres,’ and various other bogeymen were insufficient to the task of Americans .
 The U.S. war machine has revived the tried and true Red Scare, says CNN's Brian Williams .
 The U.S. citizenry is bombarded with scare stories about the evil machinations of Vladimir Putin and his Kremlin henchmen .
How they stole our democracy and are scheming to conquer the entire NATO alliance. How they steal our democracy, they say . How they are plotting to conquer NATO alliance is how they steal the democracy .
 The U.S. military is building a military machine and nuclear arsenal that threaten to eclipse our own . It is also building a nuclear arsenal.
 Russia Today is subverting the global free press with its lowratings Russia Today network and army of hackers and trolls .
 How they are blocking peace in the Middle East with their machinations in Syria. How they're blocking peace? How do they do?
 This massive anti-Russian propaganda campaign is one of the biggest fake news operations in U.S. history . The anti-Russia campaign is the largest fake news operation in the United States history .
 Major General Smedley Darlington Butler was the most decorated marine of his day . Butler was a member of the U.S. Marine Corps .
Without the constant specter of a foreign enemy, there is no American prosperity . Without the constant threat of foreign enemies, there's no U.S. prosperity .
 President Donald Trump could burn through $93 million to hurl fifty-nine Tomahawk missiles at a Syrian airfield to send a message that he was no Putin puppet .
 Trump promised to ease growing East-West tensions by finding common ground with Moscow .
 The U.S. national security state and its media assets soon convinced him of the folly of peace . But the U.N. security state's media assets and its numerous media assets convinced him .
 Putin is doomed to become the baddest hombre in the Trump shooting gallery . The Russian president is a former Russian president .
 Independent journalists and dissident leaders are constantly at risk there, says CNN's John Sutter . Independent journalists are always at risk.
 The Kremlin casts a shadow over Russia’s own freedom and democracy . But its ability to project power and influence abroad is wildly overstated by the U.S. war lobby .
 Russia's economy has shrunk so much that its GDP is roughly that of Spain . Russia’s economy has grown so much its GDP has been roughly the same as Spain's .
 The United States military budget is bigger than that of the next seven countries combined . Russia spends less than Saudi Arabia on defense, while Saudi Arabia spends less .
 Russia’s intervention in the sovereign affairs of other nations pales in comparison to the massive intrusions of the United States security juggernaut .
 Over the past century, the U.S. military and the CIA have overthrown democratically elected governments in Guatemala, Iran, Congo, Chile, and Indonesia . The CIA has also hacked the phones of friendly leaders in Germany and Brazil .
 Washington puts boots on the ground, invading and occupying nations from Vietnam to Afghanistan . U.S. covert operations prove unable to impose our will on foreign affairs.
 Accusations of Russian interference from a country that routinely big-foots the rest of the world rank as some of the biggest displays of chutzpah in history .
 Despite its diminished stature in recent years, Russia is the only country capable of even marginally standing in the way of Washington’s vast imperial ventures .
 The U.S. security complex must be turned into a pariah state by the dependable media servants of the security complex .
 American people are sick and tired of endless war and foreign intrigue and yearn for a leader who will truly put their well-beings first .
Human rights lawyer Dan Kovalik does understand that peace and diplomacy are in the best interests of the U.S. and Russian peoples .
 His book is an urgently needed counterassault against the propaganda forces that are trying to push us over a precipice that is too terrifying to even contemplate . The author's book is a needed counter assault against propaganda forces.
 The hubbub relates to allegations that Vladimir Putin somehow attempted to influence the outcome of the 2016 elections . No one really thinks to great effect, though no one thinks togreat effect .
 The Manchurian Candidate, in which a man unwittingly becomes an assassin for the communists who have brain-washed him . This harkens back to the 1962 film.
 The current invocation of The Manchurian Candidate makes perfect sense given that we are now in the throes of a new, and I would argue equally dangerous, Cold War .
 The Manchurian Candidate starred none other than Frank Sinatra . A curious note about the film was that it starred none else than Sinatra.
 Abel was also persecuted during the McCarthy period . He adopted the two sons of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg after they were executed for alleged Soviet espionage .
 Ethel was prosecuted to put pressure on Julius to talk, and was put to death anyway . It is generally accepted that Ethel, maybe the most emblematic victim of the McCarthy period, was innocent .
 Ethel's two sons are still trying to pursue justice for Ethel to this day . Ethel is still seeking justice for her.
 Kennedy went on to aggressively campaign for John F Kennedy for president . His song, "High Hopes," became Kennedy's campaign anthem .
 Sinatra was resentful of how the Kennedys had turned their back on him over his ostensible ties to the Mafia .
 Sinatra would become an arch-conservative, as many from that era did, ultimately supporting Ronald Reagan for President .
 The McCarthy trials effectively diminished the influence that the left, both Communist and otherwise, had on our society, and that was of course their intent .
People are accused of being dupes for questioning the prevailing anti-Russian discourse, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: What is shaping up to be a new McCarthy period is different from the old one, but with essentially the same intention and effect . He says U.
 It is intended to distract Americans from the real crimes that its own country is committing . It is also intended to distraction Americans from real crimes .
 The greatest humanitarian crisis in the world today is happening in Yemen, the U.N. says .
 I doubt that you would know this from the mainstream media because they do not talk about it very much, and certainly not with the frequency with which it deserves .
 Yemen is being brought to the brink of famine by a one-sided war . Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries are waging against the largely Shia population there .
 The support for the Saudi war effort began under Obama and seems to be intensifying under Trump .
 There is near-silence about this conflict and the U.S. role in it from our mainstream press .
 Vladimir Putin may be up to in Ukraine, or in Syria or, allegedly, in Trump’s White House .
 Hillary Clinton approved a $29 billion shipment of fighters to Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia and the maker of the jets made donations to the Clinton Foundation .
Some argue that Russia and Vladimir Putin are truly threats to our democracy and freedom . I was accused by some of being a Russian “agent” or at least a “useful idiot” of the Kremlin . The latter slur is usually attributed to Joseph Stalin .
 I expect such attacks, and worse, after this book is published, after it is published . It is now quite fashionable to go around accusing people of working in the interests of Vladimir Putin and Moscow, says author .
 Ray McGovern served as an analyst for the CIA from 1963 to 1990 . He chaired National Intelligence Estimates in the 1980s and received the Intelligence Commendation Medal . McGovern also served as a CIA analyst from 1963-1990 .
 McGovern is now an outspoken critic of many of the CIA’s practices, including torture . He is very skeptical of the current claims about Russia hacking .
 CIA analyst thought he was on track with his message, and bothered telling him while he was half way around the world, gave him great encouragement .
 Others who left the CIA in disgust and became activists against the war machine have become activists . Ray has played probably the biggest role in helping me view the world as I do today .
 There was a veritable cottage industry of these guys writing and speaking at that time, and we couldn’t get enough .
 Our interest was sparked by what was a national movement to protest CIA recruitment on college campuses . The CIA did indeed recruit at our school every year .
 We thought this was particularly inappropriate at a Catholic school like ours . We thought it was especially inappropriate at our Catholic school .
 Agee was a devout Catholic who went to Catholic schools his whole life, eventually graduating from Notre Dame in 1956 . He was a student at Notre Dame and a member of the Catholic community .
 He actually overlapped with his dad, who also went to Notre Dame and graduated shortly after Agee . He actually went to the same school as his dad .
 A priest at Notre Dame would organize football players to go out and beat up Communists on campus . The priest's dad used to gleefully recount how a priest at the school would organize players to beat Communists .
 This was, after all, in the 1950s, when a Communist was seen lurking in every closet . This was during the McCarthy Period, during the 1950's .
 McCarthy was trying to wipe out President Roosevelt’s New Deal . Maybe, in fact, these “Communists’ were merely unionists or civil rights activists or Democrats .
 In any case, whomever these poor folks were, they got a good ass-whooping .
 He soon became disillusioned by the evils that he and his fellow agents perpetrated . He joined the Company out of a sincere belief that it was necessary to protect the United States from various evils .
 Agee became upset by his being a party to the torture of people in Uruguay . Some of the agents knew nothing and had done nothing, he said .
 The guinea pigs were taken off the street at random to try various torture techniques . Rather, they were simply guinea pig. They were simply taking them off the streets at random .
 As Agee would say later, these people couldn’t even say anything to stop the torture because they had no information to give to stop it .
My friend Jon and I listened over and over to a cassette tape which contained a speech by Stockwell . I don’t remember how we came into possession of it .
 Stockwell tells how he joined the CIA for all the right reasons and then became disillusioned by what he witnessed in Angola . Stockwell too tells how his experience in Angola was disillusioned .
 At that time, the United States and South Africa were supporting the UNITA counterrevolutionary forces against the revolutionary Angolan government .
 Stockwell explained how the CIA manipulated the news about the Angolan conflict . Stockwell said the news was based on the information from the CIA .
 He related that it was easy to do so because the press, both gullible and lazy, was willing to publish any story they put out, no matter how outlandish .
 CIA official says he and CIA team submitted fake stories about Cuban military unit . All the fake stories were published in the papers .
 The unit was attacked and wiped out by UNITA forces, only to then miraculously return from the dead to continue mayhem .
 He assured the listener that such CIA tales continue to be passed along as news by the media . He also assured the listeners that such stories continue to being passed along.
 He also explained how he ended up deciding that it was the Cubans who were the good guys in the Angolan conflict .
 Agee at that time was travelling under Cuban and Nicaraguan passports . His United States passport was stripped from him long before .
 Agee would go into self-exile in Cuba, where he would die at the age of 72 . He would peacefully die in Cuba .
 Ray McGovern’s email message about Russia meant so much to me, and also triggered long-held feelings about the evils of U.S. foreign policy, the lies told to make us go along with this policy . The CIA has in both the policy and the lies,
 All of this is quite relevant to the current discussion about alleged Russian hacking and the greater story being weaved about Vladimir Putin .
 Vladimir Putin is being thrust before us as a symbol or proxy for a revived Russia, he says . He says we are being encouraged to hate and fear again, just as we did during the first Cold War .
 The Democrats are desperately looking for anyone but themselves to blame for their seemingly impossible loss to Donald Trump in the 2016 elections . This process of fear-mongering has been going on for some time, but is now being even further exaggerated by the Democrats .
 NPR was transparently seizing on an event which happened almost a decade ago to fan the flames of anti-Russian sentiment . The story was about an anti-Russia event .
 Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, has been in power for more than a decade . Putin is known for his ability to take advantage of opportunities .
 The U.S. presidential election was last year’s presidential election . President Barack Obama has been accused of cybermeddling in last year's election . Obama's military has been sent into Syria, into Crimea, into Ukraine .
 South Ossetia sits right on Russia’s southern border . It takes us to the former Soviet Republic of Georgia .
 Georgia tried to put down South Ossetia’s drive for independence in 2008 . This Putin opportunity came in 2008 when Georgia tried.
 The way this story was framed was so obviously meant to keep the NPR listenership wariness about Putin at a fever pitch . At least to me, I think this is a good way to keep this story from being framed .
 Crimea is a disputed territory between Ukraine and Russia . Greene is obviously just trying to stack up as many of Putin's misdeeds as he can .
 Putin just isn't involved in that many conflicts beyond Russia's borders, certainly not when compared with the US . The problem for people like Greene, of course, is that as bad as Putin might be, he just isn’t involved .
Journalists like Greene paint such conflicts as the 2008 Russia-Georgia conflict with clear good guys and bad guys . This does not fairly take into account the reality that the countries and peoples of the former Soviet Union are still suffering the growing pains of the collapse of the USSR in 1991 .
 To lay this all of this on the feet of Vladimir Putin is overly simplistic, one-sided and simply bad journalism, again, if you could even call what people like David Greene do journalism . To lay all of these on the foot of Putin is over simplistic and one
 Putin was not President at the time that Russian troops were sent into South Ossetia, and he consequently did not order this invasion .
 Putin wasn't even behind this event, says Greene . Greene pulls out an event from nearly a decade ago to try to tarnish Putin with .
 National Public Radio plays jazz and classical music between news segments . Fox & Friends must be trustworthy, because they talk in a soft voice and play classical music .
 NPR cheerleading every U.S. intervention, threatened or ongoing. Still, their apparently liberal bona fides do not prevent the good folks at NPR from cheerleading .
 Our bombs just don’t hurt as much, apparently, because of the loving intentions behind them . The bombs don't hurt, according to the bomb makers .
 To analyze the current anti-Putin/Russia hysteria, we must do what the mainstream press will not, says Peter Bergen .
 First and foremost, we must honestly analyze our own role in the world . We must also analyze our role in our own world, we say .
 This is more difficult than it may seem at first blush, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The belief that the U.S. is a uniquely benign actor in the world, spreading peace and democracy wherever we go .
 Putin would certainly not excuse any meddling by Putin in our democratic process. Of course, that is true, as I believe, as he believes .
 The spreading of "fake news" has been much more effectively done by those in our own country, says John Sutter . The CIA is pushing the “Russia-gate’ issue so hard, and by the subservient press which is complicit in this.
 The "fake news" component of the Russia-bating is much more damning of us than the Russians . I would also say that the “fake news’s’ part of the Russian crisis is more damning than the Russian version .
 If the US democratic system is so fragile and brittle that it could be impacted by the machinations of “internet trolls,’s ‘internet trolls’ This says volumes about the poor state of our own democratic institutions .
 Russia is in a poor state, but this has many reasons, none of which can be blamed on Russia . It may make us feel better to do so.
 A final, related issue before we dive in is whether, by writing this book, I am somehow apologizing for the misdeeds of Vladimir Putin .
 Putin has been seen, many times quite reasonably, as hostile to Russia and its interests, and that has helped bring us to the point where our two countries now stand in relation to each other . In the end, others will have to, and I'm sure will, be the judge
 There is a strong tendency to focus on the failures of others rather than of ourselves, says John Sutter . Sutter: Human rights, human rights, or the rightness of military action are often raised in this bbok .
 We have much more control over our own country than we do over others, says John Sutter . Sutter says it is largely useless, because we have more control than others .
 It is the essence of morality to meditate on one's own wrongdoing, to try to find ways to make up for it and to be resolved not to repeat it .
 The Bible tells us to refrain from picking a speck from our brother's or sister's eye when we have a plank in our own . That is, as the Bible tells, we are called to refrain.
 The book focuses on the sizeable plank in our own eye with the hope that we can pull it out ourselves . In that spirit, this book focuses upon the plank.
 Such thoughts gave me a very warm feeling of comfort and moral superiority . Such thoughts give me a warm feel of comfort, moral superiority.
 Russia is now a free, democratic and free-market nation, like the U.S. Russia's former Soviet Union was once a Communist Soviet Union .
 If this conversion took place, I certainly believed, the world would find itself at peace, and free from the threat of a nuclear holocaust which I was otherwise certain was forthcoming .
 As I grew older, I came to find that life and geo-politics were much more complicated than originally thought .
 It began to gnaw at the U.S. that the United States was arming and training quite repressive military forces in El Salvador, Guatemala, Guatemala and Honduras . The United States is arming andTraining quite repressive forces, says author .
 My interest in Central America began in the fall of 1979, when two new students entered my small, and hitherto all-white middle school of St. George's School .
 Andrew’s in Milford, Ohio, is about a 30-minute drive to downtown Cincinnati .
 Juan and Carlos were huge kids, much taller and heavier than any other student at the school . They were much taller, heavier than anyone else at school .
 Juan ended up playing center for our middle school’s basketball team .
 The large size of these two boys was quite unusual for Nicaragua, especially back then . Back then, Nicaragua was so poor and undernourished .
 The leader toppled in Nicaragua was named Somoza. Now, even though he was named, he's been named anastasio Somoze .
 Juan and Carlos had taken on different, and quite common, names to hide their notorious identity .
 This seems to be far-fetched, and my research has not borne fruit on this topic . This is not the first time I've written about this topic, but it's not the only thing I've done .
 In any case, these ostensible Somocistas at my school triggered a life-long curiosity about Central America .
 At the age of 12, she was sitting alone in her parents' room with their tiny TV . She was watching one of her favorite shows, 60 Minutes .
 60 Minutes focused on the rape and murder of four Catholic Church women in El Salvador and on the subsequent murder of the Salvadoran Catholic Archbishop, Oscar Romero .
Rightwing forces, known as “death squads,’ aligned with the government and military which the U.S. was funding and arming . The United States was fighting the left-wing guerillas in El Salvador the United States is fighting .
 There must have been some sort of mistake or accident, I thought, as I squirmed at this revelation .
 This was quite troubling to me, though I tried to slough it off, excusing our possible excesses as an unfortunate and accidental consequence of our otherwise righteous fight against Communism . This wasquite troubling to him, though he tried to Slough off, though.
 When I studied the case of El Salvador further, my doubts only grew. And, when I studied it further, as I did at that time for a school paper, I thought it was a case .
 The U.S. appeared to be on the wrong side of every conflict in El Salvador dating back to 1932 . The poor were struggling for what seemed to be a fair share of the land and resources .
 The Genocidal Democracy, by Father Javier Giraldo, was hardly ever covered in the U.S. press .
 The hands arranged on top ‘as if each body was stroking its own head’ The assassins, from the Salvadoran National Guard, had found it hard to keep an 18-month-old baby in place .
 A large plastic bowl filled with blood stood in the center of the table . The blood bowl was filled in a plastic bowl with blood .
 The Salvadoran human rights group that continued to function despite the assassination of its founders and directors reported that 13 bodies had been found in the preceding two weeks . Two years earlier, the Salvadoran Human rights group reported 13 bodies were found, most showing signs of torture .
 Such macabre scenes rarely reach the mainstream in the U.S. are designed for intimidation, says author . "Such macabre Scenes" rarely reached the mainstream.
 Father Santiago writes that “People are not just killed by death squads in El Salvador. They are decapitated and then their heads are placed on pikes and used to dot the landscape .
 Men are not just disemboweled by Salvadoran Treasury Police; their severed genitalia are stuffed in their mouths . The men are not only disem Boweled by the police, they are stuffed into their mouths.
 Salvadoran women are not just raped by the national guard; their wombs are cut from the bodies and used to cover their faces . The women's wombs were cut from their bodies and covered with their faces.
When confronted with the fact that my own government was behind such horrors, my response was muddled . When confronted by the fact, his response was "muddled"
 The Communist menace was awakened in El Salvador as a direct consequence of the US’s prior bad policies . The United States had to stay the course against the greatest evil in the world .
 The author's final break with his once-held belief in the inherent goodness of American foreign policy came with the realities of the war in another Central American country .
 During freshman year of College, still under sway of anti-Communist ideology, I had mixed views about Nicaragua .
 The Contras were filled with ex-members of the brutal Somoza regime, says author . "They were gross human rights abusers," she says .
 At the same time, I was skeptical of the Sandinistas for what I was told was their strong ties to the Soviet Union and its “client state,’ Cuba,” Cuba .
 Nicaragua Network hosted regular delegations to Nicaragua . This was an ad placed by the Nicaragua Network which hosted delegations .
 I thought to myself that joining such a trip was what I needed to deal with my ambivalence over Nicaragua. I thought it was what he needed to do with his ambivalentence over the country .
Reading opposing narratives of the Nicaraguan experience was simply not helping to resolve the conflict, he says . The greater question of the real role of the U.S. in the world was the real question, he adds .
 Professor Pat Donnelly, Chair of the Sociology Department, gently warned me before his trip that the enthusiasm which was motivating his trip was also potentially dangerous .
 He strongly suggested that his enthusiasm bordered on gullibility, and cautioned him to be careful lest he fall under the sway of the Sandinistas too easily .
 The Velvet Underground only sold 25,000 albums in their career . Everyone who bought an album started their own band .
 A similar thing can be said of the relatively few who travelled to Nicaragua during the 1980s . They would carry the impression of Nicaragua and the revolution for the rest of their lives .
 For a guy whose only foreign trip was to the Canadian-side of Niagara Falls, Nicaragua was a jarring experience .
 The first night of a delegation of about 12 landed in Managua, there was a black-out in the part of town where they were staying .
This was a part of the daily rolling blackouts which were a consequence of the Contra war . This was a result of the day-to-day blackouts. This was part of a day-long series of blackouts in the wake of war .
 The Contras never controlled one centimeter in Nicaragua, and never gained anything but the most marginal support amongst the population . They wreaked havoc on the economy, completely undermining the economy and sewing seeds of fear among the population.
Early on into the war on Vietnam, the U.S. determined that it could not win the war by vanquishing the liberation forces . It instead adopted a program through which the United States would bomb Vietnam back to the Stone Age . The liberation forces would have to
 The United States determined that in Nicaragua, the only realistic option was that of terrorism . The U.S. determined in Nicaragua that only real option was terrorism .
 The Sandinistas were simply too popular and too organized to allow for that . The goal was not to overthrow the Sandinista, they were just too popular .
 The U.S. would try to turn Nicaragua into an economic and social basket case. Instead, the United States would attempt to turn the country into a social and economic basket case .
 Nicaragua Network representative based in Managua gave us an introduction to our journey .
We will be travelling by bus to Ocotal, a small town on the border with Honduras . She explained to us that we would be traveling by bus .
 The Sandinistas had things well in hand . They had things to do with the situation .
 She gave us a bit of background on the revolution and what the Sandinistas were trying to accomplish . She also gave us an insight into the Somoza years .
 The Sandinistas had made mistakes, she said . She explained how, in trying to accomplish these goals, they made mistakes .
Residents of the Mosquito Indian tribe in Nicaragua believed that they were unduly interfering with their region and culture . For example, they had tried to bring development to theMosquito coast of Nicaragua .
The Sandinistas reacted in a heavy-handed way, which ended up backfiring . The Sandinista reacted in the way they reacted to the situation .
 A number of those in the region ended up supporting the Contras in reaction . The Contras proved to be so violent and abusive that the support had, by then, dissipated .
 Tomas was infamous in the United States at that time . President Reagan portrayed him as a hard-line Marxist-Leninist who would usher Communist reign into Central America .
 Tomas served the same role as Putin today, though on a smaller scale, as Putin does today, as he did today .
 He was one of the founding members of the Sandinistas back in 1962 . In truth, he was a communist, but a Christian as well, and was also a Christian .
 Amnesty International says Tomas was "the most tortured man alive" Tomas was also, as I learned, “the most torture man alive” according to Amnesty International .
 During the Somoza years, Tomas had been caught and captured, along with his wife, by the notorious National Guard .
 National Guardsmen raped and killed Tomas’s wife in front of his eyes . As they were wont to do, the soldiers raped and murdered Tomas's wife .
 They then turned to physically torturing Tomas himself, castrating him in the end . They then turn to physical torturing him himself, castingrating him.
 Tomas, who vowed vengeance against these soldiers, died alive . However, they made the mistake of leaving Tomas, but he was still alive .
 Tomas went on to help topple the Somoza regime in 1979 . Tomas not only survived, he also helped topple the regime .
 Shortly after the “triumph over Somoza, Tomas learned that some of his torturers had been captured and were in prison .
 Tomas Borge’s Theology of Life: ‘The hour of my revenge has come: we will not do you even the slightest harm.’
 Borge had kept down for so many years to learn to read and write and prosper . Borge then approached the man and hugged him, telling him that for his punishment for torturing not only he and his family, he was to be free .
 Borge swung the gate of the cell open and ushered the man to walk out free into the streets .
 It was this act of forgiveness and humanity by Tomas Borge which characterized the Sandinista revolution . Borge was the “hardliner’s” ‘hardliner.’ It was the act of forgive and humanity.
 The Sandinistas had studied and learned from the lessons and mistakes of the Soviet, Chinese and Cuban revolutions . They were resolved to be different .
 The Sandinistas abolished the death penalty altogether . It was one of the first acts of the Sandinista .
 The U.S. would take advantage of the decency and benevolence of the Sandinistas to undermine them . The United States would be taking advantage of their decency, benevolity, to undermine theSandinistas .
 Then-President Jimmy Carter airlifted hundreds of National Guardsmen to Honduras after the fall of the Somoza dictatorship .
 These would later be organized by the CIA under Reagan as the Contras, a terrorist organization which would plague Nicaragua for years to come . These would then be organized as the terrorist organization .
 A young man in the town was ambushed and murdered by the Contras . A delegation was invited to the funeral .
 I stood by the father of the slain man near his grave, and as we put our arms around each other, I apologized for his son's death . "It was just as surely the fault of my country as anyone's," he says .
 I knew then that I would never think of the world quite in the same way again. I knew that I wouldn't be able to think about the world again again .
 The few Sandinsta soldiers I did see were armed with guitars as they serenated the community from a balcony .
 Reagan called the 'Cubanization' of Nicaragua "Cubanized" of Nicaragua . He asked a Nicaraguan in a community meeting: "Aren’t you afraid of the Cubans taking over Nicaragua"
This question was prompted by my encounter with the Cuban soldier . It was also what I had been taught by my dad and my government to fear in Nicaragua .
 They don’t try to influence our country; they just give us aid that we otherwise would not have. They don't try to try to Influence our country. They just give them aid that they would otherwise have, he says .
This made a huge impression on me, and I began to wonder if in fact I had been hoodwinked about the true nature of my country’s role in the world . This made a big impression on him, and he began to question if in
 Cuba continues to offer medical assistance to over 70 countries . The much-maligned Cuba has been criticized for its "brotherhood" throughout the world .
 The National Guard was created by the U.S. to keep the Somoza dictatorship in power . The force surrounded the hideout of top-level Sandinista insurgents .
 The barrel of Julio’s submachine gun at the balcony window, and the smoke of the gun bursts when he fired back . The gun was fired back.
 He was at the basement window, or at another window on the first floor or at the door of the second floor that opened onto the street . Then he was at a basement window or at a second floor window or another window .
 Julio wasn't seen, and the Guard wasn't moving, and nobody was firing . Then suddenly Julio wasn’t anywhere to be seen, but nobody was fired . The Guard didn't move.
 Our eyes practically popped out of our heads when the tank shattered the wall, exploding it to pieces .
 Nobody answered from inside, and when the Guardsmen got really close, Julio started shooting . The Guardsmen started shooting when they got close .
 The Guardsmen turned tail again, and the tank opened fire again . It was the same thing all over, and it was all over .
 Somoza was stupid enough to keep showing it for several days on television . People without a set saw it too, and people without a sets saw it.
 Guardsmen saw the Guardsmen shaking in their boots; they heard them screaming through megaphones for Julio to surrender . They saw the guardsmen shaking.
 It was such a heroic act, a true example of David versus Goliath, that helped galvanize the Nicaraguan people against the Somoza dictatorship . The U.S. had installed and supported even beyond the dictatorship’s end .
 The David/Goliath myth is maybe one of the most over-used and misused myths, especially by the U.S. The David-Goliath myths are often misused by Americans .
 The US, despite its many times claiming to be a David fighting in the face of Goliath, has never in fact been, or even supported, the David in biblical battles. I cannot emphasize too much how the US has.
 The U.S. has been the Goliath trying to crush David by sheer, overpowering violence, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Sometimes the United States is the Goliath wielding the club, and other times, it is supporting mini-Goliaths, like Somoza .
 In Nicaragua, David, in the form of everyday people, sometimes wielding only bricks and stones against National Guardsmen armed with machine guns and tanks and airplanes, was the victor .
 The U.S. simply could not tolerate such a result, says John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States simply couldn't tolerate such an act"
 The Soviet Union, which was supporting the liberation struggles, was on the right side. Of course, the strong implication was that the Soviet Union was supporting.
 A speech that I heard Hugo Chavez give at a meeting in Caracas in July 2010 comes to mind .
 The Cold War, at least from the vantage point of the US, had little to do with fighting “Communism,’s’ and more to do for corporate plunder .
 The U.S. would do so all in the name of fighting communism and protecting democracy, says the president .
 The United States was up to the very same type of Third World interventions even before Russia’s 1917 Revolution .
 Major Smedley Butler was the commander of a Marine unit landing in Nicaragua in 1909 and 1912 . Butler spent years being a high class muscle man for Wall Street and the bankers .
 I helped purify Nicaragua for the international banking house of Brown Brothers in 1902-1912 . I helped clean up Nicaragua for Brown Brothers .
 I brought light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar interests in 1916 . I bring light to Dominican Republic in 1916.
I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place for National City boys to collect revenue in. I helped make Haitians and Cuba better places for boys to pick up revenue in .
 I helped in the rape of a half a dozen Central American republics for the benefit of Wall Street, he says . He says. "I helped in a half-a-dozen Central American Republics"
 The struggle to make the world safe for American business pre-dated communism has continued well after it . The "enemies" justifying this struggle have shifted and changed, but the goal has always remained constant .
 John Perkins' new book Confessions of An Economic Hit Man is a modern recounting of his years working for the consulting firm of Chas T Main .
 He explains how he and other Economic Hit Men helped pave the way for corporate penetration of the Third World through financial manipulation, rigged elections, sexual extortion and even murder .
 Perkins: If such tactics failed, it was then up to the “jackals of the CIA to come in and actually forcibly overthrow the target government .
I began to seriously question which side I should be rooting for in the Cold War struggle . I began to serious question the side I was rooting for .
 I was impressed with the Soviet support of Nicaragua, for example its sending huge ships of humanitarian aid and then leaving the ships as well for the Nicaraguans .
 The Soviet support of Nicaragua would come at a huge price, for it would be just the justification the United States needed to support a counter-revolutionary war there .
 Fidel Castro had warned Daniel Ortega of just this problem shortly after the Sandinistas took power .
 Ortega says he has a very difficult experience, not to cozy up too close to the Soviets . He says he's learned from his own experience to not cozy up with the Soviets. He says it's not easy to get close to them .
 The U.S. began to destabilize Nicaragua before Nicaragua turned to the Soviets for help . Ortega tried at first, but it became impossible at some point, he says .
 The U.S. continued such destabilization efforts well after the Soviets cared anymore about such far-flung nations .
 The U.S. intervened on the side of the French, and then took over for the French to prevent Vietnamese independence . A classic case of this was Vietnam which, as I detail further below, would have gladly partnered with the United States .
Around 50,000 Nicaraguans were killed during the Contra war . In the end, the Contras managed to do much damage to the Nicaraguan people .
 I don't mean to abuse you with verbal violence, but you have to understand what your government and its agents are doing. I don’t mean to abused you with verbally violence, says the author . "You have to understanding what yourgovernment and its agent are doing"
Children forced to watch they castrate the father, they peel the skin off his face . They put a grenade in his mouth and pull the pin .
 Children forced to watch as they gang-rape the mother, and slash her breasts off . The children were forced to see the mother's breasts slashed .
 Congress pulled the plug on funding to the Contras through passage of the Boland Amendment in 1982, and then again in 1984 . Reagan was even willing to continue funding them illegally, despite concerns over human rights practices .
 His Administration hatched the brilliant plan of selling arms to Iran in return for cash which could then be used to fund the Contras . His administration hatched a brilliant plan to sell arms for cash .
 Reagan claimed Iran was a terrorist state and a threat to national security . This was a particularly cynical move given that Reagan claimed it was a terror state .
 Iran was at war with Iraq, under Saddam Hussein, whom we were also arming . During the period in which this exchange took place, Iran was also at war.
 The U.S. ended up arming both sides of a brutal armed conflict for the purpose of supplying arms for another brutal conflict in Central America .
 The USSR took the position that it had the prerogative to intervene militarily in any Communist bloc country in order to keep the government in power. Pursuant to this Doctrine, the USSR took a position to preserve the security of the Warsaw Pact countries as well as the Soviet Union
 This Doctrine was most famously put into action in 1968, when Brezhnev sent troops into Czechoslovakia to put down the reform government .
 Brezhnev feared that if this sentiment spread, the whole East Bloc might fall . He feared that the entire East BlOC might fall.
 In the end, the Soviet invasion of 1968 probably did more to quicken the end of the East Bloc than it did to prevent it .
 Slovak was born in 1968 . The events were always of great interest to me . I am Slovak .
 Poland, Hungary and East Germany peacefully left the Soviet orbit entirely by 1989 . Gorbachev made no move to keep them in .
 The Soviet Union would not even intervene to protect its interests in Eastern Europe . It was obvious that they would not do so in Central America either .
 The whole basis for the Contra War, fighting international Soviet aggression, was just a pretext for a cruel policy of keeping a poor country from pursuing its own path to liberation and development, says the author .
 I should note that my feelings about the Nicaraguan conflict have now been validated, as the Sandinistas whom we were fighting are now in power, and we get along with them just fine. I should say that my feeling about the Nicaragua conflict has now been validation .
 The US, believing that international law is only for the weak and not for great countries like itself, did not even deign to show up to defend itself .
 The ICJ found that the U.S. had engaged in an unlawful act of aggression against Nicaragua, without any valid claim to self-defense or other proper justification .
 The ICJ found the U.S. in violation of international law, including its bi-lateral treaty obligations with Nicaragua itself .
 The United States withdrew from the jurisdiction of the ICJ altogether . The U.S. would enforce its own version of justice throughout the world, and violently when it decided to do so .
 The Nicaraguan Contra War is very relevant to many aspects of the current discussion of the Russian hacking claims, which has now blossomed into a full-blown scandal .
 The CIA is one of the chief protagonists in the current “Russia-gate’s” saga . First of all, the Contra War demonstrated how much U.S. government officials are willing to lie and undermine the security and well-being of American citizens .
 In the case of the Contra War, this agenda was greatly motivated by the old Cold War . The current claims about Russian hacking are motivated by a new Cold War, says John Sutter .
 U.S. government was willing to illegally sell weapons to Iran, says John Sutter . Sutter says it was also willing to play a role in selling drugs to our fellow citizens, particularly poor and Black citizens .
 The Contra cocaine scandal was most famously brought to light by journalist Garry Webb in his 1996 series, Dark Alliance . Many will remember, and a recent Hollywood movie called Kill The Messenger.
 Greg Grandin says Webb was not the first person to reveal these allegations . He says Webb is not the only person to have made the allegations .
 John Kerry in 1988 released an “extensively documented committee report’s’ evidence of the truthfulness of these allegations . The allegations were then picked up by then-freshman Senator John Kerry .
 The Russian hacking story is being pushed hard, and nearly unanimously, by the mainstream press . This is a relevant part of the story as well, for the new Cold War, or Red Scare . The mainstream press is heavily invested in it.
 Vladimir Putin is a demon; Russia is a rising giant set out to dominate the globe . Hillary Clinton lost the election because of Putin; and the US is just doing its level best to spread freedom and democracy around the world .
Like the Contra cocaine story, the truth has been so submerged in lies that it is hard for it to see the light of day . But again, it's hard for the truth to see, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Russia is again assigned its typecast role as the bad guy in the Nicaraguan Contra story . Russia is the foil on whom we can feel free to blame.
 Government and media are tapping into deep-seated feelings that were hammered into us during the first Cold War . It is so easy to get people on board the latest Russia-baiting campaign.
 I came to the understanding at a pretty young age that the old Cold War fears and hatred allowed the U.S. to get away with the worst of crimes. I came out of the Cold War as a young age.
After WWII, the U.S. decided to partner with the most unsavory forces in the world . The United States would partner with dictatorships, terrorist groups, and even neo-Nazis .
 The U.S. continues to press forward with planning and building the capacity to launch a nuclear first strike against the USSR . The United States is still being able to “win the war’s war.’
 Reagan’s “Star Wars’ program was greatly feared as a means to have such first strike capability . The idea apparently came from the Death Star in the films .
 This program was developed by Edward Teller, the father of the hydrogen bomb . It was one of the inspirations for Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Stanley Kubrick's Dr. Kubrick .
 U.S. would still suffer great casualties if such a project worked, according to the author .
 A recent article on recently-declassified documents shows that U.S. officials were willing to take this risk . But, as a recent article shows, they were also willing to do it .
 The current demonization of Russia under Vladimir Putin is again putting the U.S. and the world at equally great risk, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's Putin has now broken out into a revived Cold War.
 The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists moved the “Doomsday Clock,’ the symbol created in 1947 to illustrate the danger of nuclear annihilation . The clock was moved ahead to two-and-a-half minutes to midnight .
 Given the high stakes implicated by the new Cold War, some rational thought on these issues is certainly in order . The Russian hacking story, which I at least hope to give here, is definitely in order.
 Russia is a much-weakened nation postSoviet collapse, and the US did much to help weaken it . The US, particularly under the Clinton Administration, helped weaken it, he says .
 Russia has a GDP still smaller than Portugal's and a military budget 8% of NATO's . Russia is no match for any of the larger NATO member States, Wood says .
 Russia has neither the resources nor will to re-create its former empire or to militarily challenge NATO member states . Dmitri Trenin explains in his must-read Should We Fear Russia .
 Russia's GDP is a small fraction of America's, whose share in global trade is a mere 1 percent, and even its defense budget is a tenth of the Pentagon’s . The U.S. should be overtly challenged by a party such as today’
 Trump proposes 80% of Russia’s annual military budget, compared to 80% in the US . As for the smallness of Russia's military budget compared to that of the US, I note that, as I write this book, the mere increase in the
 Noam Chomsky says ‘most of the world is collapsing in laughter’ at the notion that Russia could have effectively intervened in the US’s elections .
 Russia is correct in opposing the US’s attempt at a unipolar world, says Vladimir Putin . U.S. is able to run wild on all sorts of military adventures which are harmful to the US and the world at large .
 The U.S. is by far the greatest threat to world peace, according to a recent poll of 66,000 people in 65 countries . "Just under a quarter nam Uncle Sam" is the biggest threat to peace, the poll says .
 Keith Richards once take credit for helping bring down the Berlin Wall, but he was probably not too far off on that point .
 Russia simply has no analogous cultural influence in the West, though, some U.S. pundits have claimed .
 It’s a way of twisting a narrative or questioning a narrative that puts the U.S. at a disadvantage on an important issue. It's a way to twist a narrative and question a narrative.
 There is in fact nothing “subtle’ or “nuanced’ about this, and I truly doubt that RT has much real influence in the U.S. as a consequence .
 The U.S. is not funding the VOA anywhere near the level at which the Russians are financing RT . Lansing tried to claim that the United States is somehow being outgunned because it is not funded by the Russians .
 I recall an apt quote from an activist in the Polish Solidarity movement of the 1980s . I recall one time from someone from who had been an activist.
 He was asked, after Solidarity was successful in ousting the Communist government there, how they were able to hold together for so many years . The press had been so tightly controlled by the state, he said .
 His response was that this was precisely how they were able to succeed . He said this was exactly how they had succeeded .
 They did not believe what the press was saying BECAUSE it was state-run . They relied on communications between themselves to know what was happening .
Russia and China continue to stir up fear and distrust of countries like Russia and China . They also still stir up fears and distrust.
 We don’t need an official government voice or organ to do that when we have outlets like these that will do it for free, and do it much better because they pose as news outlets independent of the government .
 Russia, as the Soviet Union, did wield sizable political and ideological influence in the world for some time . Russia is no longer socialist and the memory of its role in WWII has subsided .
 The United States claimed to be fighting against the USSR during the first Cold War . However, it was the USSR’s socialist system .
 The U.S. has had to focus so much on the personality of Vladimir Putin . Putin has a level of power, reach and craziness that he just doesn't have .
 Hand-wringing continues over a perceived foe whose bite is certainly less than its bark .
 The U.S. is tapping into old Cold War fears to justify its permanent war footing . It seems more out of control and dangerous than any other in the world, according to the author .
 We would stop being taken in by another manufactured scare story designed to manipulate us, says author . We would actually have a chance of making much needed change in our own country, he says .
 He mocks the very idea, which certainly would be a poor tactic if he wanted to convince others to go along with a project of reconstruction .
 The current chaos reigning in the Ukraine would certainly preclude that, in any case . The Ukraine crisis would certainly not preclude that .
 The Russian Revolution is the Centennial year of the Russian Revolution . This is the first part of this quote, which I find more interesting, and more persuasive .
 I certainly endorse the view that the passing of the Soviet Union was a sad event . I certainly endorsed the view. I certainly endorsing the view .
 I was sad when it was clear, in August of 1991, that the Soviet Union was going away, and I grieve its passing still .
 Many of the Soviet-dominated East Bloc nations stretching from East Germany to the Russian frontier don't share our fear. First of all, we are currently being urged to fear a return of the Iron Curtain .
 A recent poll showed that a majority of Russians view the fall of the USSR negatively . An even stronger majority dream of its restoration, the poll says .
 The majority of the people pine for the good old days of communism . In Hungary, Bulgaria, the former Yugoslavia and even in the former East Germany, the majority of those who pine for communism .
 The demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed as a great victory for humanity . Two decades later, there's little to celebrate .
 The dismantling of socialism has, in a word, been a catastrophe, a great swindle that has not only delivered none of what it promised, but has wreaked irreparable harm, writes David Frum . Frum says the dismantling of socialist socialism has been a tragedy .
Countless millions have been plunged deep into poverty, imperialism has been given a free hand . West has bowed under pressure of intensified competition for jobs and industry .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union was the worst thing that ever happened to the U.S. The collapse was the most devastating thing to happen to the United States .
 The two main consequences of the Soviet collapse have been devastating . The Soviet collapse has been devastating, according to experts .
 The rise of the neoconservative hubris of the U.S. world hegemony has resulted in 14 years of wars that have cost $6 trillion .
 The truth is that many Western countries reacted to the Russian Revolution, and the gains that workers had in the Soviet Union in terms of social benefits . Many Western countries felt compelled to grant their own workers some of these concessions .
 Once the Soviet Union was gone, these governments no longer felt such pressure . Once the Soviets were gone, they no longer had to feel such pressure.
 Bill Clinton was elected just after the Soviet collapse. Clinton quickly destroyed ‘welfare as we know it’ Even though it was the Democrats who had created the modern welfare system which had helped lift millions out of poverty .
 Clinton ended the entitlement to cash benefits which the poor had been given by prior legislation and replaced it with legislation that put a 5-year lifetime limit on cash aid to the poor . The new legislation allowed states to set even shorter limits .
 Clinton’s “reforms’ have ended up knocking around 10 million people off the welfare rolls, many of them children . Many of the poor during economic crises such as the 2008 Great Recession have been particularly disastrous .
 Roberts: Clinton would take advantage of the disappearance of the Socialist Bloc to enter into horrible trade deals . He says Clinton would have taken advantage of NAFTA of 1994 and the PNTR agreement with China in 2000 .
 The process had the effect of depressing wages in the US, according to the U.S. This process had a 20% effect on 2/3 of displaced manufacturing workers .
 Mexico suffered greatly from the agricultural provisions of NAFTA, which allowed the U.S. to dump cheap food into Mexico . 2 million small farmers were forced to move to the cities and compete for low-paying, dangerous jobs .
Ciudad Juarez became famous for crime rates at war zone levels and rampant ‘femicide’ in which hundreds of women and young girls were raped and murdered .
 Hillary Clinton was not only associated with Bill Clinton’s policies by name and marriage, but also aggressively lobbied for NAFTA herself . She simply had no credible position.
 The former mining communities of Appalachia have suffered so much under neo-liberalism . This did not go down so well, especially in places like Appalachia, which have suffered from neo- liberalism .
 The welfare system was created in response to a book by socialist Michael Harrington that detailed the suffering of the Appalachian poor . The system was built in the Kennedy/Johnson years and was dismantled by Bill Clinton .
 The left, which at one time thought about issues of class and poverty, actually cared about these people once, but seemingly no more . The left.
 Trump, on the other hand, captured the desperate spirit of large swaths of de-industrialized America . Trump most likely won the key swing states of Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania as a consequence of this .
 Any autopsy of the Clinton loss has to take this reality into account, rather than point fingers at Vladimir Putin .
 The counterweight to U.S. foreign policy initiatives disappeared with the collapse of the USSR . This was not good in many ways, says Paul Craig Roberts .
 US supported and protected apartheid in South Africa for decades, including during some of the period of the US's own apartheid system . The USSR consistently opposed this system, both diplomatically and eventually militarily .
 The Soviet Union supported the efforts of the Cubans in Angola against counter-revolutionaries in that country . The Cubans eventually defeated the South African military in the legendary battle of Cuito Cuanavale .
 There were intangible benefits that “real existing socialism brought with it,’s been said . Finally, there are intangible benefits.
 The citizens of the USSR and former East Bloc felt a much closer kinship with one another . If you’ll forgive me, comradeship, than they do now.
 The Russian Revolution and the USSR fell short on many of the goals they had promised, and against great odds . In the end, the Russian Revolution was marked by periods of great repression which undermined the project .
 The West has helped force a rise in the standard of living of all working people, even in the West .
 The goals of the Russian Revolution were laudable, even if not fully realized . In any case, equality, worker control of the economy, universal health care and social security are laudable .
 USSR seemed to have given up on these goals, only to trade them in for magic beans that the capitalists offered them .
 The West continues to dance on the grave of the Soviet Union, and to emphasize the worst parts of that society . The world-wide economy worsens, and as the suffering of working people around the world deepens, they don't get any notions in their head to organize some new
 The United States seemed to realize its chief goal of the USSR’s demise, this was not enough . Even when the U.S. seemed to recognize the USSR's demise, it wasn't enough .
 Russia's transition to capitalism is much worse than it had to be, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's economic policies are being forced down the throats of Russia, he says . Russia is now encircle it with troops and military bases, he adds .
 Russian people make to stand on their feet again and to reclaim some of its former self-esteem . We angrily begrudge the Russian people every attempt their country makes.
We resent the Russians and Chinese for striving for security and say-so in the little slice of the world they live in . Now that we appear to own the whole world, we resent the Russian and Chinese .
 I suspect that a lot of anti-Russian sentiment in this country is motivated by such sentiments, and I simply cannot jump on that bandwagon . I suspect a lot. of the anti- Russian sentiment in the country ismotivated by such sentiment, he says .
 The truth is that “American Exceptionalism’ is a false religion, writes David Frum . Frum says the U.S. has been compared to Russia for the past half a century .
 President Trump dared to touch upon the fact that Putin is a killer, in response to the suggestion by Bill O’ Reilly on Fox News Sunday . “There are a lot of killers. There are a lots of killers," he said .
 The mainstream press could not believe that Trump would have the temerity to stray so far from the required script for U.S. presidents .
 Trump said in response to O’Reilly’s statement was undeniably true . However, what Trump said is undeniably true, he also said.
 Let’s start with the easier premise that the U.S. has its own killers .
 Barack Obama is the only President we have ever had . He is also apparently viewed as a saint by many, and that is Barack Obama .
 Obama deported 2. million people with barely a whisper of protest from anyone . Those who now believe in the holiness of Obama were not paying attention .
 Obama was also a killer, and an avowed one at that. In addition to being the Deporter-In-Chief, Obama was a killer .
 Obama was also the Bomber-In-Chief, greatly expanding the US’s heroic campaign of bombing poor villagers safely from above . I think it is fair to say that Obama was the bomber-in-Chief .
 During Obama's first weekend in office, he got busy killing people, ordering two drone strikes on two villages in Pakistan . Nearly 20 innocents, including women and children, were killed .
 Obama killed more people than Charles Manson before his first full week in office, a liberal lawyer friend said .
 Obama's wanton murder was harsh, but not harsh, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Obama's "harsh" statement was “harsh”
 This just illustrates how inured we have become to the horrible crimes of state, says John Sutter . Sutter: "We have become in this country to the terrible crimes of State"
 All told, Obama's bombing spree greatly exceeded that of George W Bush. All told.
Every day last year, the U.S. military blasted combatants or civilians overseas with 72 bombs . That’s three bombs every hour, 24 hours a day. This means that every day, the United States military blasts combatants and civilians overseas .
 U.S. bombs also rained down on people in Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan . Most of these air attacks were in Syria and Iraq .
 Trump's attempts to ban immigrants from six to seven Muslim nations are being protested by many .
 Obama even turned these bombings into a fun weekly ritual on Tuesdays . Obama would personally order drone attacks upon unsuspecting people .
 Obama did not only target militants, but indeed all males of a certain age in certain regions of the world . I say simply “people,’s people, because Obama targeted militants, because he targeted militants .
 This was a case of killing first and asking questions later, and this was a method that even George W Bush refused to embrace .
 Obama became well-known for his “signature strike” in which he would target areas for drone attack based upon “suspicious activity’s there without even knowing the identity of the individuals there .
 The attacks clearly violated the Geneva Conventions which requires warring states to take all necessary measures to protect civilian non-combatants . Such attacks made Obama a war criminal many times over, and certainly made him a warcriminal .
 Obama's policy of treating every male over a certain age in some areas as legitimate military targets may even have amounted to genocide . NATO's seventy-eight-day bombing of Serbia was used as a justification for NATO’s 70-day bombings of Serbia .
 One study showed that 90% of the victims of drone strikes in Afghanistan were not militants at all or even the intended target of the attack . This awful rate was probably even greater in Yemen and Somalia .
 No valid reason has ever been given for the second drone strike which killed a child . No valid reasons have been given to the second strike .
Whatever numbers the Administration gave for civilians killed were way too low. What we do know is that whatever numbers the administration gave was too low .
 Trump is also greatly increasing ground forces in Syria, from “a couple hundred to at least 1,000” at the time of this writing . Trump is greatly increasing forces in the country, from a couple hundred.
 Gessen: “The Russia card is not just bad politics, it is intellectual and moral bankruptcy. And I agree wholeheartedly with Gessen’s assertion that “the Russia card was not just good politics,’ it was bad politics .
 The Russia card is being played with more fury than ever, even during the height of the old Cold War . What’s more, the Russia card has been used more than ever .
 He explained that he himself, and other intellectuals like himself, have never been so maligned and marginalized for urging rationality about Russian discourse as he is now .
 Cohen argues forcefully for a peace with Russia which he believes, and I agree whole-heartedly, is long overdue .
 Eisenhower and Krushchev, two veterans of World War II, meet warmly with each other . "I mean we saw Eisenhower. Quite to the contrary, I mean we see them meeting warmly," he says .
 Cohen explained the vilification of Putin has “become an actual political institution in the U.S. Meanwhile, Cohen explained, that Putin's vilification has ‘become a political institution.’
 Cohen looks haggard and beaten down in an interview or debate . He is labeled some type of Russian (or, in a case of anachronism, a Soviet) agent .
 Putin is a killer, or at least more of a killer than any U.S. President, including Obama, according to a report .
Chicago Tribune columnist: "Putin is not a bloodthirsty, Stalin-like dictator" He says we must at least start from the premise that “Putin isn't a blood thirsty dictator.
 Putin takes this position against the death penalty on the grounds that there is no proof that death penalty is a deterrent of crime . As Putin explains, Putin says, there's no evidence that death penalties are a deterrent .
 Boris Nemtsov and Anna Politkosvskaya were killed in Russia in 2015 and 2016 . Ramzan Kadryrov says they were most likely killed upon the orders of “the violent dictator of Chechnya’s’.
 Anna Politkosvskaya wrote critically of both the Russian and Chechen governments in their prosecution of the Chechen war .
 Five men, including four from the same Chechen family, were convicted and sentenced for the shooting that killed her .
 Putin has some awareness of how killing an opposition journalist may not be in his or Russia’s best interest, and why, therefore, he might not be inclined to order such a killing .
 Five Chechens are also being tried for the killing of Nemstov, an opposition leader shot dead in Moscow . He was working on an expose of what he claimed to be Putin's involvement in the Ukrainian separatist movement .
 This is not the type of action that should cause Americans to lose one ounce of sleep for fear that the Russians are coming . The Russians are not the kind of action.
 Obama's approval of the murder of a former KGB agent who went into exile is worse than Obama ordering the drone killing of a 16 year-old boy whose only sin was having the wrong father, is beyond me .
Obama did aggressively pursue prosecution of Bradley Manning for blowing the whistle on horrible crimes like the murder of innocents in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The prosecution led to her being placed in such horrible prison conditions, which included solitary confinement, that she was driven to twice attempt suicide . She was driven by the prosecution to try and commit suicide .
 Manning is not set to be freed until May 2017, which leaves more than ample time for her to be tortured . Obama did commute Manning’s sentence as he was leaving office .
 Putin, at least with respect to allegedly being a “killer,’ is worse, or even as bad, as our beloved Barack Obama, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It is hard to see how Putin is worse than Barack Obama .
 The other significant allegation against Putin is that he has waged “aggressive wars,” specifically in Ukraine and Syria . Putin has been accused of ‘aggressive wars’ in Ukraine, Syria .
 The U.S. continues to wage wars of aggression in many more countries throughout the planet . But if we assume the very worst of Putin in regard to these wars, they pale in comparison to the wars that the United States has .
 The U.S. has been involved in major wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya . It has also been in major military efforts in Syria, Yemen and Somalia .
 The famous photo of the Russian soldier raising the Soviet flag over the Reichstag in Berlin is still popular .
 The last time I was in Paris, there was still a Metro Stop called “Stalingrad,” in honor of the heroic battle that took place there . All regard the battle as the positive turning point of the war .
 Truce is based on the memoirs of Primo Levi, who was, in fact, liberated and treated quite kindly by the Soviets . Turturro is a great movie on the Red Army liberation of Auschwitz .
 The U.S. has been more benign than Russia, at least in the past 50+ years, says David Frum . Frum: One cannot even truthfully say that the United States is more benign.
 The U.S. escalated its cruel foreign policies as Russia, beginning with Nikita Khrushchev’s soul-searching 1956 ‘Secret Speech’ about the crimes committed during Stalinism, was ending its worst forms of repression . The truth is
 The disparity is particularly great as between ourselves and the peoples of Asia . This disparity is especially great as it is between us and the people of Asia.
 In this situation, we cannot fail to be the object of envy and resentment. In this case, we can't be the objects of envy or resentment .
 In the face of this situation, we would be better off to cease to talk about vague, and for the Far East, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: We should stop talking about vague objectives such as human rights, the raising of living standards, and democratization .
 The day is not far off when we are going to have to deal in straight power concepts .
 The U.S. has needed the perceived threat of the USSR, or other like enemy, to justify this . However, the United States has needed this to justify the threat .
 Even when the Soviet Union existed, its threat had to be exaggerated in order to justify it . Even when it existed, the threat was exaggerated to justify the unjustifiable .
 The U.S. intentionally exaggerated both Soviet nuclear weapons capacity and desire to use it . The USSR was scaling back its military preparedness, deathly feared a nuclear war, and had no plans for a first strike .
 The Pentagon study begs serious questions about the current U.S. exaggeration of ‘threats’ emanating from Iran, North Korea, and Afghanistan . Goodman notes quite correctly in this piece from 2009, he says .
 The CIA's claims about Iraq’s non-existent WMDs come to mind . Its current crusade against Putin and Russia must be looked at with great skepticism .
 The U.S. has to continue to invent enemies in order to justify its bloated military . Now that the USSR is gone, the United States must justify its military .
 If Trump is truly the “Manchurian Candidate,’ he certainly doesn’t appear to be acting like one .
 The US's outsized military exists not only to ensure the US's unjust share of the world's riches, but also to ensure that those riches are not shared with the poor huddled masses in this country .
 A disproportionate amount of tax revenue is sucked back into the military-industrial complex, a form of welfare for the rich . The working class and poor are left on their own to suffer .
 One commentator correctly described this as “Redistributive Militarism’’ The process by which income is redistributed from bottom to top through the escalation of military spending .
 The need to vilify countries like Russia and leaders like Vladimir Putin is so critical to the social order which our leaders have so carefully constructed over decades, says Peter Bergen .
 The blindness of Americans, particularly of liberals who claim to care and to know better, to the evil of U.S. wars abroad may equal or exceed the irrationality of their hatred for Vladimir Putin and Russia .
 Vladimir Putin's hatred of Putin is a distraction from what they should be focusing on, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: Putin has tried to use his own military in ways that no other country has even attempted .
 The Cold War began in 1945 when the United States dropped two atomic bombs upon Japan . There are differing views as to when the Cold War actually began .
 William Blum, a former State Department employee, explains this well, as well as former anticommunist . He quotes General Dwight D Eisenhower in support of the proposition that Japan was defeated by the bombs .
World War II and a battlefield alliance with the Soviet Union did not bring about an ideological change in the anticommunists who owned and ran America. World War II didn't bring about a change of ideological change.
 Japan vaporized tens of thousands of innocent souls in Japan to send a message to Russia .
 The Korean war, or “police action, as it has been called, is the next shots of the Cold War, as sO many do .
 The U.S. conducted itself in an unforgivable way during the Korean war, according to a number of scholars . The US conducted its own genocide against Korean civilians .
 The paper challenges long-held beliefs in the United States that the Korean War was somehow a good and righteous war . The paper is published in the Journal of Genocide Research, and entitled, “Forgotten War, forgotten massacres’
 The U.S. air and ground forces shot at children, women and aged people who were easily distinguishable as unarmed civilians .
 North Korean authorities have long accused American troops of 'criminal acts' before and after the outbreak of the Korean War .
 The U.S. army killed more than a million civilians by bombing, shooting, and the use of napalm and chemical weapons, they say . The facts on the ground force us not to discount their veracity, they argue .
 Professor Kim concludes that the wholesale atrocities committed by the U.S. during the Korean War foreshadowed, and help us to understand, the US's countless atrocities in later wars .
 A History fully supports the conclusions of Professor Kim, and opines that the U.S. was engaged in a racist, genocidal campaign in Korea . A History, fully supports Professor Kim's conclusions .
 The U.S. carpet-bombed the North for three years with next to no concern for civilian casualties . As Cummings poignantly notes, "What hardly any Americans know or remember ... is that we carpet- bombed the North"
Foreigners visit North Korea for the first time to hear about the war . But when foreigners visit, this is the first thing they hear about North Korea .
 The air assaults ranged from the widespread and continual use of firebombing to threats to use nuclear and chemical weapons . North Korean dams were destroyed in the last stages of the war .
 North Korea was a small Third World country that lost control of the air to the United States within days of the war’s start .
 In light of this history, it is hard for me to feel anything but sorrow and sympathy for North Korea, says CNN correspondent .
 The Trump Administration seems to be considering bombing it off the map . While it is fashionable to mock that country, I cannot join in this chorus either .
 The wounds of this war, however, have been harder to forget than those of Korea . The wounds are still hard to forget .
 Veterans for Peace was made up mostly of Vietnam War veterans who regretted what they had done in Vietnam . They had become some of the best peace activists our country has ever seen .
 The Veterans for Peace organized the convoy to bring humanitarian aid to the Nicaraguan people, who were suffering from the US-backed Contra War at the time .
 monuments are very rarely erected in this country to peacemakers . Many vets ended up risking more for peace than they had in waging war .
It is not an exaggeration to say that I fell in love with those guys, and probably learned more on that trip from them than I learned in all of college . It is not a exaggeration that he fell inLove with those men, and likely learned more from them, he says .
 One veteran was dying of cancer from the war that, unbeknownst to him, was waged by the United States against them in the interest of testing out nuclear weapons . He and his fellow U.S. servicemen at the time were battling cancer .
 23 nuclear tests, 23 detonations, were done periodically over the period from 1946 to 1958 . The tests were conducted over the time of the period between 1946 and 1958 .
 S Brian Willson lost his legs lying down on train tracks to stop a shipment of arms bound for the U.S. war in Central America . Another Vietnam veteran I met on the trip was SBrian Willson, who was not of The Beach Boys .
 Willson wrote about the connection between the American war on Vietnam and the early days of the U.S. Republic .
 General Sullivan followed Washington’s orders faithfully, as did many U.S. military leaders .
 It is always more convenient, of course, to pull the speck from your brother's eye than the plank from your own .
 The slaughter of Native Americans was an integral part of the U.S. war in Vietnam . Willson and other vets knew all too well .
Before getting to the conduct of the war in Vietnam, it is important to consider the actual reasons the U.S. was there .
 The United States did not send tens of thousands of U.S. soldiers to kill and die in Vietnam in order to defend democracy and freedom, says John Sutter .
 The United States initially entered the fray in Vietnam in order to defend French colonialism there . After World War II, the United States had received significant help from Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh guerilla fighters to fight off Japan .
 The U.S. allied with recently-defeated Japan in helping to defeat the Vietnamese independence effort against the French .
Marciano notes that this aroused the very first anti-war protests against the American intervention in Vietham . This time by United States sailors who could not stomach the hypocrisy of what the United States was doing and whom they were doing it with .
 The Viet Minh triumphed against the French in the heroic battle of Diem Bien Phu on May 7, 1954 .
 Ho Chi Minh in fact did at one point that the US, in the Spirit of ’76, would welcome and support such an independence victory .
 The US has been consistent in its conviction that colonial independence is only for itself . Other peoples must be punished for seeking an independent path to development .
 The United States acted quickly and decisively to scuttle these elections and to support the Diem dictatorship it had installed in South Vietnam . Thousands of Vietnamese who sympathized with the Viet Minh were killed and imprisoned by the United States .
 U.S. effort to prevent democracy in Vietnam would be to prevent it by any and all means necessary, he says . In other words, far from supporting democracy, the United States effort at this point would be in the next 20 years .
 The American War in Vietnam had now begun in earnest, and it was not pretty . The U.S. war in Vietnam was now in earnest .
 Charlie Company met no armed adversaries that day, just women, children and the elderly . Indeed, Charlie Company.
 Americans “gunned down old men sitting in their homes and children as they ran for cover. And so, so, the Americans ‘guned down’ old men, the U.S. says .
Charles McDuff wrote to President Nixon in 1971, saying that My Lai was merely the tip of the iceberg . He cites a January 21, 1971 letter from a Vietnam veteran named Charles McDuff .
 Bob Kerrey, who would later become Democratic Governor and then Senator of Nebraska, would be awarded the Bronze Star .
 Kerrey's command had surveilled the night before, finding no Viet Minh combatants . Kerrey’s command had surveyed night before .
 The day of the action, the unit predictably encountered no resistance, and so decided to fire at the only living targets they could find . The unit found 20 civilians, including women and children .
 A drain pipe now forever remembered in a war museum in Vietnam. For good measure, it slit the throats of some of these civilians and even killed children .
 Kerrey would later be awarded the Medal of Honor for his exceptional service in Vietnam . Kerrey went on to have a stellar political career .
 Some believe Kerrey should be rotting in jail or even brought before a firing squad . This stirred a bit of controversy in Vietnam .
 Our war criminals are never held to account for their crimes, we say . But, as we all know, our war criminals aren't held to blame for our crimes .
 We obsess on everyone else’s misdeeds, real or imagined, to help us sleep better at night . We instead obsess on others' misdeed, real and imagined.
 The United States even bombed Catholic Churches throughout South Vietnam . The U.S. also bombed Catholic churches throughout Vietnam .
 The US, with its superior air and fire power, killed approximated 3. million Vietnamese (8% of its total population) and created over 14 million refugees . All told, according to Nick Turse, the US, killed over 3 million Vietnamese .
 Vietnam continues to feel the effects, in terms of environmental degradation and horrible birth defects . The U.S. dumped millions of pounds of chemical gases and napalm on Vietnam .
Babies in Iraq are being born with birth defects from the white phosphorous used by the U.S. during the Second Gulf War .
 Richard Nixon expanded the war in Vietnam to neighboring Laos . About a quarter of the population of about three million to refugees was reduced to about a third of a third .
 The war was also expanded to the then-very peaceful country of Cambodia, creating one million refugees . The U.S. would first oppose but then support when the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia, thus freeing the Cambodians from the viscious Khmer Rouge .
Being the United States means never having to say you're sorry, even when you've visited horrendous atrocities against a country that has never, and could never, attack you. Of course, as we well know, being the U.S. means never saying you’re sorry,
 The U.S. will find a way to paint ourselves as the victim of an injury. Then, to add insult to injury, we will find an insult to ourselves, says the author .
 Ho Chi Minh worked with the United States during WWII, and looked to the Declaration of Independence for his inspiration . He would have worked with US, allowed U.S. investment, and most likely would not have entered the Soviet orbit .
 US bombed Vietnam to the Stone Age after the French were driven out by a popular uprising . Vietnam was forced to seek help from the USSR until its collapse .
 The U.S. did everything it could, just short of nuking Vietnam off the map, to prevent it . Nixon and Kissinger had considered that too .
 The pretexts for preventing Soviet expansion and defending democracy were so weak, another lie was needed to justify the intensification of the war effort in Vietnam .
In 1964, the Johnson Administration claimed that American ships had been preemptively fired upon by Viet Minh forces in international waters in two separate incidents . This was an act of war and that the United States must therefore attack Vietnam accordingly .
Much of this story was fabricated, with the truth being that the U.S. ship had fired first, just warning shots, to scare off the Vietnamese boat . The second incident most likely did not occur at all .
 U.S. Congress had already authorized major military force against Vietnam based on this “fake news’ in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution .
 As we enter the new Cold War, it is important to judge the US’s assertions about rivals such as Russia, and judge the U.S. conduct abroad .
This disintegration was best symbolized by the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989 . This disintegration is best symbolizing the collapse of the Wall .
 The peace we had been promised upon Russia’s “conversion” and the end of the Cold War did not come . The monies were supposed to flow into education, medical care and other social programs once this war was won .
 Eric Hobsbawm: “Jince the fall of the Berlin Wall, we once again live in an era of genocide and compulsory mass population transfers, as in parts of Africa, southeastern Europe and Asia.
 It is estimated that at the end of 2003 there were perhaps thirty-eight million refugees inside and outside their country . That figure has of course grown since .
 20 million people in Africa are now facing starvation . The UN has announced that it is facing its worst crisis since WWII, with 20 million facing starvation.
 The U.S. is largely unchecked and unchallenged, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This disaster is being presided over by the only superpower in the world, which is being overseen by the United States .
 Those who believed that a unipolar world with the United States as one power would usher in a new world order were wrong . The United States may call into question things about the U.S. that few dare to contemplate .
 Events like these made me start to wonder why we were not also praying for the “conversion’s of the U.S. as well .
 It is claimed that Our Lady of Fatima visited three children in Portugal in 1917 . There seemed to be a glaring omission from what these “secrets” called upon us to do .
 The Rosary was told to stop Russia from “spreading her errors,’ the main “error’ Russia was spreading at the time was the liberation of Europe from the Nazis .
 The U.S. also invaded Iraq in the First Gulf War, which was ostensibly carried out in retaliation for Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait .
 Russia voted in favor of the Security Council Resolution authorizing force to expel Irag from Kuwait . This invasion was carried out with the reluctant assent of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev .
 The ability of the United States to carry out such an action in the Middle East would have been much more difficult during the days in which the USSR was stronger and more resolute . The USSR would have certainly vetoed the UN Security Council authorization of force in such an instance .
 In the case of Iraq, the U.S. had helped install and then backed Saddam Hussein even during his most brutal years .
 By the time of the first Gulf War, the U.S. had grown tired of Hussein, who had become less and less compliant .
 Bush shunned those opportunities, instead opting for what he believed would be a quick war to boost his polling numbers .
 This was a case of “fake news, if there ever was one,’ says John Sutter . Sutter: Nearly every war we wage depends upon ‘fake news’ to generate public approval . “Fake news,” he says
 In any case, the U.S. did invade Iraq, and did prevail easily with its far superior air power . Iraq did leave Kuwait .
 The prosecution of the war was brutal and unforgivable, though you wouldn’t know it by watching the evening news at that time .
 The U.S. violated the Geneva Conventions and the rules of war on a massive scale by targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure necessary to sustain human life . In short, the United States violated Geneva Convention and the Rules of War on a huge scale .
 Before the assault was over United States planes flew more than 109,000 sorties, raining 88,000 tons of bombs, the equivalent of seven Hiroshimas, and killing indiscriminately across the country .
 A nation with thousands of civilians dead; without water, hospitals, or health care; without electricity, communications, or public transportation . Without gasoline, road and bridge repair capacity, or parts for essential equipment; and with a growing food crisis .
 Iraq was being crippled from afar and left to a painful struggle for survival . Because of the nature of U.S. weapons, Iraq is being crippled by the weapons .
 The suffering inflicted upon the Iraqi people during the First Gulf War would continue to be exacerbated by President Clinton . President Clinton continued to bomb Iraq periodically .
 The result would be the death, according to the UN, of about 576,000 Iraqi children .
 Albright has a special place in hell reserved for her much more serious crimes . Of course, this led some to wonder if, quite possibly, she had a special spot in hell for her crimes .
 Russia under Vladimir Putin would not go along with this second war, and that appears to be one of Putin's unforgiveable sins . U.S. decided to attack Iraq again in 2003 based upon even more flimsy pretexts .
 The U.S. never wanted peace, nor did it really want prosperity, except for the very few on top . The end of the Cold War was supposed to usher in a new period of peace and prosperity for the US .
 Vladimir Putin has always needed a good alibi for his wars, and Vladimir Putin right now is a convenient one . However, it has always been needed for its wars .
 The West promised to Russia if it would only give up its silly notions of socialism did not come either . Bill Clinton and his cronies made sure of that .
Post-Soviet Russia suffered a major economic collapse, with investment in the economy falling by 80%, and 75% of the population falling into poverty .
 Yeltsin was a darling of the U.S. and the Clinton Administration which backed him to the hilt . He was a favorite of the United States and Clinton Administration .
 The course supported by the U.S. was “painful for the Russian people,’s spokesman said . The United States supported the course was ‘painful’ for the Russians, he said .
 Boris Yeltsin was the man to continue Russia’s pain and unraveling was Boris Yeltingin .
 Richard Dresner helped with Bill Clinton’s electoral victories for Arkansas Governor . Dresner was one of the chief consultants who aided Yeltsin .
 Dick Morris was then Clinton’s chief Presidential campaign advisor . Morris was also Clinton's chief presidential campaign advisor.
 Through the United States consultants’ help, Boris was in fact rescued .
 Yeltsin’s victory in the runoff election was assured by widespread bribery, voter fraud, intimidation, and ballot stuffing . The election was a runoff election .
 It is worth re-visiting what this “catastrophe was, as it illustrates what kind of ‘democrat’ Yeltsin really was, and reveals just as much about the US, which continues to hold the US up .
 "The Duma catastrophe" began with a political stand-off between the Duma and Boris Yeltsin . The Duma is the most powerful branch of Russian government .
 The Duma still had a large contingent of Communists who were resistant to the market changes which were, by all accounts, wreaking havoc in Russia . Yeltsin's pick for Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar.
 Democrats are now being urged to resist Trump . In other words, legislators were being asked by their constituents to resist an unpopular President .
 The Duma declared this action to be unconstitutional . Yeltsin tried to dissolve the Duma, but the action was deemed unconstitutional .
Yeltsin removed from office and installed Vice-President in his stead . They then proceeded to remove Yeltsin from office .
 Yeltsin responded by shutting off electricity and water to the White House . The White House then housed the Duma, which was then housed by Yeltsins .
 The actions of Yeltsin in bombing his own legislative building and assuming greater power were applauded by both Washington and the U.S. media .
 Venezuela has a tiny population (around 30 million) compared to that of China . The numbers are proportionately much greater than China .
 The Caracazo massacre deserves no commemoration by the U.S. government or media, says Ruben Navarrette . The killings were carried out by a government, he says, that was aligned with the United States at the time . He says Chavez stood up against this repression
 The result was that the path was laid for the pillaging of the country and the rise in Russia’s Putin . The result is that the country was pillaging.
 The Clinton Administration also showed no tangible concern for Yeltsin’s prosecution of a brutal war in the Chechnyaen Republic .
 Russian President Boris Yeltsin ordered 40,000 troops to Chechnya on December 11, 1994, to stop that republic's bid for independence .
Within one week Russian forces began bombing Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, in a campaign unparalleled in the area since World War II for its scope and destructiveness .
 Russian Human Rights Commissioner Sergei Kovalyev remained in Grozny through much of the bombing . He bore personal witness to the destruction of homes, hospitals, schools, orphanages and other civilian structures .
 Clinton prevailed upon the IMF to give a massive infusion of money to Russia in the year this Helsinki Watch report was written in order to guarantee Boris Yeltsin's re-election .
 In the end, there was nothing very democratic about the Yeltsin regime, and the US, beyond some lip service, did nothing to coax Yeltsins into being democratic .
 Russia was anathema to the U.S. goal of making sure Russia was subject to unfettered capitalism . The communists in the mid-1990s had much popular support .
 The US’s indifference to such measures proved once again that it is not repression per se which is a problem . As long as the West's free market goals are advanced by the repression, the U.S. is not a problem, says John Sutter .
 Putin has helped Russia rise from its knees and become an independent nation and world actor again . The U.S. galls the most about Putin is not how authoritarian and un-democratic they view him to be .
 Juring the long Cold War, the Soviet Union, which is Russia in most people's minds, was demonized effectively .
 The initial collapse of the USSR worked very much to the West’s advantage. Remember, the initial collapse in the USSR was very much more important to West .
 Yeltsin's oligarchs were able to seize and plunder the resources of the country . They could easily manipulate Yeltsina, and various oligarchs could easily control the country, according to reports .
 Ronald Reagan’s contribution to ending the Cold War . They are very troubled about the rise of the new Cold War.
 views are notably absent from the mainstream debate about current US-Russia relations . One might think that their views should count for something, and yet their views are absent .
 The Democrats and the Hillary Clinton campaign aggressively push the Russia-gate issue . This issue must be considered in the context of Bill Clinton’s meddling in Russia in the 1990s .
 Bill Clinton's role in propping up Boris Yeltsin has real impacts on the Russian people, including widespread suffering and premature deaths due to the economic policies imposed upon them by Clinton’s economic team .
Forgive me if I find their current protestations particularly galling and hypocritical in light of this history . Forgive me. Forgive us if you find your protestations especially galling in light.
 The Clintons have been the victim of all sorts of untrue and vicious ‘fake news’ hit pieces and conspiracy theories, says Hillary Clinton's former aide .
 The U.S. intervention in Guatemala in 1954 is a fine place to start, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is now generally accepted that the U.S. engineered the overthrow of the democratically-elected President, Jacobo Arbenz, in that year .
 United Fruit Company opposed Arbenz's land reform program . The government would buy United Fruit's land at the fair market rate as determined by their own tax records .
 Allen, who was head of the CIA at the time, and John Foster, Secretary of State, both had financial interests in United Fruit . The Dulles brothers were happy to protect their interests in Guatemala from such an affront .
 Many have written off the coup as simply dirty tricks by the CIA, but Guatemalans see this event quite differently . Thousands lost their lives during and in the immediate aftermath of the coup .
 The United States installed a military dictatorship in the place of President Arbenz that would rule Guatemala for almost 40 years . The U.S. supported the dictatorship, with support and funding from the US .
 This military dictatorship was responsible for the murder of approximately 200,000 civilians . Many of whom were “disappeared’ by the regime, many of them were ‘disappearing’
 The U.S. is considering building a wall to keep refugees like them out of the country . It may behoove us to consider how our government's policies have created the violence and suffering they are now fleeing from .
 I would go so far as to say that we owe these people entrance to our country as some measure of remediation for our crimes against them . I would say we owe them entrance to the U.S. as a measure of remedy for their crimes.
 ICE officials often subject unaccompanied children to sexual violence and other unmentionable abuses, victimizing them all over again . Instead, we try mightily to keep such migrants, many of them unaccompanied children, out of the country, out.
 ICE officials sexually assaulted two migrant girls who waved them down for help, and another group of ICE officials forced a young migrant to consume the blue meth he was carrying with him, thereby killing him .
 Possibly, instead of worrying about what Putin is doing over there, we could begin thinking about the crimes our people are committing at our own borders . Maybe we could start thinking about what we're doing at our borders .
 Charity starts at home, after all, though of course it is much more convenient and comforting to think of others' lack of charity .
 The U.S. claimed that it was fighting Communism in Guatemala, when in fact Arbenz was a social democrat, like Bernie Sanders .
The Cold War gave continued cover for such actions, which were inherently undemocratic . The Cold War was an unemocratic war .
 The Clinton Administration was pushing for Plan Colombia, the major military aid package pursuant to which we have provided the Colombian military with about $10 billion since Plan Colombia's passage in the year 2000 .
 The first city I visited was Barrancabermeja, an oil town which, at that time, was quite progressive in many ways . It was also the site of the wonderful Popular Feminist Organization .
 At the time, the OFP was sponsoring a photo exhibit featuring Che Guevara .
 I find feminists in Colombia to have a broader idea about what feminism means than folks in our country . I'm not sure what is particularly feminist about Che, but then again, I find feminism in Colombia more broadly than in the country .
 Shortly after I left Barranca, as it is known, the paramilitary death squads took over that town . They have yet to leave at the time of this writing .
 The OFP, which tried to hold out for years despite paramilitary threats, did end up leaving, along with a lot of other good people I met there .
 US claims to be the protector of women's rights around the world . OFP was driven out of Barranca, but I guess that's how it goes .
 A replica of the “Oil Jesus’s statute stands in the Magdalena River near the oil refinery . It is a replica of a statute which stands near the refinery .
I was told that it represents Jesus being crucified by the oil interests that govern much of Colombia . I was told it was a sign of Jesus' crucification by oil interests in Colombia .
 It is also an appropriate symbol for U.S. policy in Colombia, which is aimed at controlling Colombia’s ample resources, such as oil .
 In Colombia, it is also about fresh water, gold, emeralds and rich soil for the planting of cash crops like bananas and palm oil .
 Chiquita Brands International pled guilty to paying paramilitaries $1. million between 1997 and 2004 and running them 3000 Kalashnikov rifles . U.S. companies have themselves sponsored paramilitary to protect their interests in Colombia .
 The idea behind the death squads was to have a force which could carry out dirty jobs, including human rights abuses, without tarnishing the U.S. reputation .
 By 1962, he had brought in United States Special Forces to train Colombian officers in cold war counterinsurgency .
 U.S. Army Special Warfare team visited Colombia to help refine Plan Lazo, a new counterinsurgency strategy . General Ruiz was drafting the new strategy for Colombia .
 The team recommended that this structure “be used to perform counteragent and counter-propaganda functions and as necessary execute paramilitary, sabotage and/or terrorist activities against known communist proponents .
Plan Lazo was formally adopted by the Colombian military on July 1, 1962 . U.S. recommendations were implemented through Plan Lazo .
 The military presented Plan Lazo to the public as a “hearts-and-minds’ campaign to win support through public works and campaigns to improve the conditions that they believed fed armed subversion . privately it incorporated the Yarborough team’s principal recommendations .
 Armed civilians were expected to work directly with troops . "Civil defense," "self-defense" and "population organization operations" were also expected to be involved .
 The paramilitary groups did go on to work with Colombian troops, as the U.S. is quite aware of this day .
 The United States and Colombian armed forces are not supposed to do the dirty work that the U.S. and Colombian forces do . They are now denied their existence by both the United states and Colombian governments .
 U.S. Ambassador Kevin Whitaker said the paramilitaries no longer exist . The United States Ambassador had the gall to look us in the eyes .
 Father Sterlin, an AfroColombian priest in El Choco Department, alerted us to a paramilitary incursion . He was a friend of the priest who told him about the incursion.
 The paramilitaries, who we are told do not exist, killed several of the residents and “disappeared a number of others’s. They killed several residents, and ‘disappear’ a many others, according to reports .
 A report released by the Fellowship of Reconciliation shows a direct correlation between U.S. military funding and training, particularly at the School of the Americas .
 4.2% of land in Colombia remains in the hands of 67.6% of the population . 46.5% of all land is in the hand of a mere .4% of population . 4.4% are in Colombia .
 Colombia is one of the most unequal societies on earth, with a Gini coefficient of 885 . This unequal distribution of land, furthermore, has resulted in Colombia becoming one of most unequal countries on earth .
 The U.S. has contributed to the root cause of the conflict by siding with the small percent of the Colombia population that owns most of Colombia’s land, for it is this landed aristocracy .
 If this land were left to peasants, indigenous and Afrodescendants, they would insist upon using the land communally and for their own subsistence . The land is simply anathema to the United States and the logic of unfettered Capitalism .
 The U.S. has supported both the right-wing paramilitaries, as well as drug cartels . The DEA and CIA have supported these paramilitary groups in order to foster the unequal distribution of land .
 These narco-paramilitaries are rarely spoken of, as contrasted with the so-called “narco-guerillas’’s’ — a massive land grab by massacres and mass displacements of the population since the 1980s .
 During the same period, the United States supported the internal war on the side of these groups carrying out the displacements .
 The Washington Post ran a story in December 2013 about the CIA and NSA's role in helping to assassinate Colombian FARC guerillas . John Sutter: The story was strongly supported by a December 21, 2013, story .
 The US invented the Colombian paramilitaries in order to make Colombia, Latin America and other far-flung countries safe for maximum corporate penetration and resource extraction . This is all according to plan, and advances the interests of the US, which invented, and continues to support, the Colombian
 They have been brought to the US, where they have been tried for drug-related offenses only, and given cushy sentences of 10 years in prison on average . They were instead brought back to the U.S. where they were tried for drugs-related crimes only .
 “For some, there is a special dividend at the end of their incarceration. And, even more incredibly, “for some, ‘there is aSpecial dividends at theend of their imprisonment.’
 Colombian authorities wanted to stay in the U.S. Though wanted by Colombian authorities, two have won permission to stay . Their families have joined them .
 Mr Giraldo was known as ‘The Drill’ because of his penchant for raping young girls . Some as young as 9 years old, he was known for raping girls .
 Mr Giraldo too is being shielded by the U.S. from prosecution back in Colombia for his most atrocious crimes . He is being prosecuted in the United States for drug-related crimes only .
 The potential confession of paramilitary leaders to their links with the U.S. government was most certainly another reason for their extradition and treatment with kid gloves .
 The U.S. also shares an ideology with both Uribe and his paramilitary friends, Uribe says .
 The U.S. public supports such "freedom fighters" as well as the USSR . It's harder to justify to the American public, with the old Cold War over .
Colombia has had to come up with other pretexts for our war against social change in countries like Colombia .
 The Colombian government launched a scorched-earth counteroffensive against the FARC's rural strongholds after President Alvaro Uribe was elected in 2002 . The U.S. backed the government's counteroffensive .
 Government troops were often followed by right-wing militias that targeted suspected rebel sympathizers and massacred civilians .
 More Colombians were driven from their homes during the first stages of Plan Colombia than at any other time in the half-century conflict . More Colombian people were driven out of their homes in the first stage of the conflict .
 In the aftermath of the Cold War, when Plan Colombia was hatched, revelations of atrocities committed by Guatemala’s genocidal military and the US-backed government of El Salvador had stigmatized the idea of U.S. military intervention .
 The plan’s promoters advertised it primarily as a counternarcotics program . So the promoters advertised the plan as a counselling program .
 The pretextual nature of the war on drugs became evident to me when I visited the United States Embassy in Bogota in March of 2017 .
 Colombia's policies in Colombia are afoot with its policies, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Something else is afoot" with our policies in the country .
 The U.S. partnership in such crimes is its quest for a disproportionate share of the world's resources . Any countries trying to lay claim to their just portion (whether it be Colombia, or Russia, or China) need to be put in their place .
 Many refer to this as the “First 9/11,” and it would be much more devastating than the 9-11 the U.S. suffered in 2001 .
 At the time of the coup, Chile had been the longest-standing constitutional democracy in Latin America . U.S. would claim to support the coup .
 Allende chose to help foment the coup that toppled his government . It then continued to support the Pinochet dictatorship even as its human rights crimes became apparent . Allende, it chose to aid the coup, and then supported the dictatorship .
 The International Telegraph and Telephone Company and the Kennecott Copper Corporation tried to run our political life . Two firms that are part of the central nucleus of the large transnational companies .
 ITT is a huge corporation whose capital is greater than the budget of several Latin American nations . ITT was a sinister action to keep me from taking office as President in 1970 .
 The speech had a huge impact on me when I listened to it, he says . "This speech had an impact on him," he adds .
 The CIA was working with three different groups of plotters, all of which “made it clear’s clear that any coup would require the kidnapping of army Cmdr. Cm Dr. John Sutter .
 The CIA agreed with the assessment that the kidnapping of Schneider was necessary . It provided weapons for the kidnapping operation, and so it provided weapons .
 The kidnapping operation ended in the killing of Schneider when he tried to defend himself . The path was cleared for the military coup by the military .
 The CIA continued to assist the coup-plotters through the time Mr Allende was overthrown . The CIA also continued to aid the coup plotters through his overthrow .
 Once the coup took place, the United States continued to support the Pinochet regime . Manuel Contereras served as an agent of the CIA from 1974 to 1977 . He went on to head Chile’s intelligence agency, known as the DINA, which played the key role in
 The CIA concedes that its friend Contereras “became notorious for his involvement in human rights abuse,” and had a key role in the car-bombing of former Chilean Ambassador to Washington Orlando Letelier and his young American assistant Ronnie Moffit .
 The CIA claims that it aided and abetted such a historic subversion of democracy and human rights because of Cold War hysteria . In the end, the CIA says it aided the CIA in the end .
 The historical backdrop sheds important light on the policies, practices, and perceived urgency prevalent at that time . The historical background sheds importantlight on policies and practices .
 The Cuban revolution and emergence of Communist parties in Latin America had brought the Cold War to the Western Hemisphere .
 Thousands of Chilean military officers came to the United States for training . The training included presentations on the impact of global communism on their own country .
After Pinochet came to power, senior policymakers appeared reluctant to criticize human rights violations . U.S. diplomats urged greater attention to the problem .
 United States military assistance and sales grew significantly during the years of greatest human rights abuses . U.S. military assistance, sales grew dramatically during the times of the greatest human Rights abuses .
 The CIA does not reference any direct Russian involvement in Chile at this time . This is because the movement supporting Allende was home-grown and not dependent on any outside support, Russian included .
 The CIA talks about “global communism,” Allende was not in fact a Communist .
 The U.S. overthrew a constitutional democracy citing Cold War concerns, but such concerns were not bona fide in this case .
 U.S. trusted that Pinochet was the man to ensure Chile was in a subservient economic role . The Chilean 9/11 was about keeping Chile in an economic role, says David Frum .
 The Chilean coup had dire reverberations throughout the Southern Cone of South America . The CIA itself recognizes the coup as a coup .
 More than a “few’s political opponents were killed by these regimes, some of them, as in the case of Argentina, openly fascist, if not Nazi .
Colombia has more disappeared people than Chile, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay combined during Operation Condor years . That is, Colombia has more disappear people than the other countries .
 The U.S. continues to support a repressive military that colludes with death squad forces in that country . This is a direct consequence of the US’s continued support for the Soviet Union and the first Cold War .
 Bill Clinton, a very intelligent and savvy politician, quickly came up with a plan to intervene in other countries in the name of defending human rights . Clinton: "We would now go to war"
 The first known instance of it, that I know of anyway, was practiced by King Leopold II of Belgium . It was best described in the wonderful KingLeopold’s Ghost, by Adam Hochschild .
 Hochschild: King Leopold enslaved, mutilated and killed millions of poor souls in the Congo in 1885 to 1908 . He says he killed millions in order to plunder the Congo of its riches, such as rubber .
 He was able to convince many in the West that he was actually in the Congo for philanthropic purposes . He said he was helping the Congolese .
 The U.S. is the first country in the world to recognize Leopold’s claim to the Congo .
 Mark Twain was one of the co-founders of the Anti-Imperialist League . He helped to expose and petition for an end of Leopold’s atrocities in Africa .
 In this vast statement, I am well within the mark, several millions of lives with the mark . In the vast statement I'm well in the mark. In this huge statement, several million lives have been marked .
 Few writers and journalists of Twain's integrity today. Sadly, there are few writers of Twain’s integrity .
Journalist John Pilger refers to “antijournalists’ who merely parrot the state’s line in service of the empire . Pilger: "We have what a real journalist,John Pilger, refers to as ‘antij Journalist’
Bill Clinton might have things to say about King Leopold. If there were such journalists, they might have something similar to what Twain said .
 Clinton, borrowing a page from Leopold’s playbook, began to run amok in the world on the pretense that he was doing so to advance the cause of the countrymen with whom he was meddling .
One of the areas Clinton most effectively tried out this practice was in the Congo . The Congo is still uniquely rich in valuable resources .
 King Leopold's foray was absolutely cataclysmic for the people living there . The King's foray into the world was absolutelyCataclysmic .
 Clinton's first disastrous move was to aid and abet the genocide in Rwanda in 1994 . Clinton’s first attempt was to help and abat the genocide.
 The United States delegation at the UN dropped a ‘bombshell’ on the Security Council’s secret deliberations . They argued for total termination of the mission and pullout of the peacekeepers . But they did not have the votes given opposition from the Non-Aligned
 Experts and former officials gathered at The Hague last year for a critical oral history conference reviewing the Rwanda tragedy . They agreed that the UN pullout decision was a turning point, a “green light for genocide,” as the Nigerian UN envoy Ibrahim Gambari called it .
About 800,000 Rwandans lost their lives as a result of Clinton’s machinations, according to the National Security Archives . Clinton's machinations were carried out for the pretty meager quid pro quo of getting the French to send peace keepers to Somalia after the �
 Clinton hailed Kagame as a human rights hero . He has often been portrayed in such popular films as ‘Hotel Rwanda’ but he was anything but a hero .
 Clinton would support Kagame in his invasion of what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the “humanitarian pretext of going after the Hutu genocidaires there.
 Clinton administration attempted to make up for its shameful efforts to stop humanitarian intervention into Rwanda during the genocide by sending a hefty shipment of arms and military training to Paul Kagame’s government after the genocide .
 The U.S. sent $75 million in emergency military assistance to Rwanda in 1994 . The Clinton administration was actively lobbying to withdraw UN forces from the country . 19 Rwanda would use that military assistance, and continued military training from the US, to invade the DRC .
 Rwanda and Uganda helped Laurent Kabila overthrow the U.S.’s former client the brutal dictator Mobutu Sese Seko who had become less compliant.
 Laurent Kabila took power in 1997 . He quickly made sweetheart deals with U.S. mining interests .
 This became known as “Africa’s First World War,” though it received little press here at the time . The war was called Africa's first war .
Under Bill Clinton, the US would give military training and hardware to every country involved in that conflict . Even as the conflict escalated and the death toll surged, the U.S. would give training to all countries involved in it .
 The troops not only went after Hutus who had fled to refugee camps in the DRC, but also Congolese as well .
 Kagame has continued his rampage through the DRC with the knowledge, acquiescence and support of the United States . Kagame, along with the US-backed Ugandan military as well, has continued to rampage through DRC .
Nearly six million people have been murdered in the DRC since 1996 . Bill Clinton bears a large responsibility helping to set this slaughter in motion . George W Bush and Barack Obama continue what Clinton had started .
 Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney received concessions for mining and mineral resources worth over $157 billion . Bush and MulRoney were both Canadian Prime Ministers .
 Chaos allows resources to leave from the Congo at a cheap price . It’s actually being stolen from the Congolese people .
 The militaries of Rwanda and Uganda have both been trained by the U.S. The United States has trained both the countries .
 The U.S. did not want to have any of the troops in Africa anymore . Since the American soldier was killed in Somalia in Mogadishu, the United States has not had any troops there .
 The United States created a system in which they would train all the foreign military missions . The U.S. created the system to train all military missions.
 Ugandan soldiers in Afghanistan fighting the war on terror. I mean, can you imagine that ... today, we have Ugandan soldier in Afghanistan? I'm not sure . I mean. I'm just thinking about it .
 In the Congo millions have died from the Holocaust, and half of them are children under the age of 5 . If you are aware, just as we took action to end the Holocaust in Europe, if we know, you are complicit .
 Rwanda and Uganda are using the support that we are giving them to create, fabricate militia groups which are committing war crimes and crimes against humanity .
 Clinton, a modern day King Leopold II, would continue to wage war in support of human rights elsewhere in the world, as detailed elsewhere .
 Rwanda and DRC episodes must be looked at quite closely and with a critical eye. What is instructive about the Rwanda episodes, however, is that pretexts for war and intervention must be considered .
 Any state, including the U.S., including the US, truly acts for altruistic purposes, such as “democracy promotion,’s human rights, or freedom. On this score, I would argue quite adamantly that it is the very rare instance indeed that any state
 The United States press is all too willing to push any pretext for war that the U.S. government puts forth . It will rarely question the claims made in support of armed conflict .
 These lessons should be applied to the current claims about Russia and Putin, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin is not even in the ball park of someone like Bill Clinton in these respects . Putin's lack of sanity, foreign aggressiveness, and imperialist ambitions, he is not in theball park of Bill Clinton .
 U.S. has been lulled into accepting our country’s worst and most depraved crimes, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: But we in the United States have been lulling into accepting their worst crimes, and believing them to be acts of mercy and
 This is the greatest propaganda trick ever performed, and it undermines our society more than any alleged shenanigans by Moscow ever could. This is a great propaganda trick, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Some Congolese friends I have assisted with asylum applications in the US are not fooled. To be clear, some of whom I've assisted with Asylum applications in US are also not fooled .
 The DRC has been turning the screws on them in the DRC, and they are understandably outraged about it . They know who is turning the screw on them.
 The Clinton Administration did not want Hillary Clinton to become President, even in lieu of Trump, because of what the Clinton Administration had done to their country .
 The Congolese vote made much of a difference in the 2016 elections . However, I quite doubt that the Congoles vote made a difference .
 This has left a bitter taste in the mouths of Haitians, and the Haitian immigrant community . The Haitians' country is still a basket case post-earthquake .
 The Clintons have largely squandered the ample generosity of the many people who have donated to Haiti relief . The Red Cross has been a major source of donations to Haiti .
 Clinton admitted that his trade policies in Haiti allowed farmers, including Arkansas farmers, to dump cheap, subsidized food products into Haiti, destroyed the livelihood of Haitian farmers .
 Clinton admitted that those policies undermined the Haitian peoples’ ability to feed themselves, much like Clinton’s NAFTA policies did in Mexico .
 The FRAPH was backed by the US, and in particular the CIA, at the time of the coup and thereafter .
 Clinton was always playing both sides of the fence, continuing to back the brutal and violent FRAPH before, during and even after Aristide’s return to power .
 Clinton did so in order to “balance out’s Aristide, in the words of FRAPH leader Emmanuel Constant .
 The United States grew tired of Aristide again, and, along with France and Canada, kidnapped him and forced him into exile in the Central African Republic .
 Clinton was incredibly tough, if not downright cruel, in his treatment of Haitian refugees . In addition to helping starve the Haitians, Clinton was also supporting the FRAPH goons who killed and raped them .
 A federal court ordered him to stop. He did so for two years until a federal court found this treatment to be “outrageous, callous, and reprehensible,” he was ordered to stop .
After a successful Trump rally in Miami, Florida, the Haitian Florida community may have shifted significantly enough to Trump to have affected the outcome in that state .
 The fixation on Putin at this point is simply a distraction from this analysis, but maybe that is the very point of this fixation. The fixation is just a distraction.
 We have done so by erasing all such miserable chapters of our country out of our memory. And we have also done so, says President Barack Obama .
 The United States supported and in many cases engendered every right wing military dictatorship in the world after the end of the Second World War .
 I refer to Indonesia, Greece, Uruguay, Brazil, Brazil and Paraguay . I also refer to the Philippines, Guatemala, El Salvador, and Chile .
 The horror the U.S. inflicted upon Chile in 1973 can never be purged and cannot be forgiven . The horror of the United States inflicted on Chile can never been purged .
 The answer is yes they did take place and they are attributable to U.S. foreign policy . The answer to the question is yes.
 The crimes of the U.S. have been systematic, constant, vicious, remorseless, but very few people have actually talked about them .
 It has exercised a quite clinical manipulation of power worldwide while masquerading as a force for universal good . It has been used to manipulate power worldwide. It has also been used in the past to manipulate the world .
 The overthrow of democracy in Honduras with a little help from its giant neighbor in the North is not worth mentioning .
 President Obama and Secretary of State Clinton played an important role in the 2009 coup which deposed democratically-elected President, Manuel Zelaya .
 The military took the direct route, kidnapping Zelaya at gun-point in the middle of the night and flying him out of the country to Costa Rica .
 Luis Javier Prince Suazo is the head of the Honduran Air Force . He arranged to have Zelaya flown into exile . He was also trained at the School of the Americas .
 Putin is ridiculed for complaining about NED and NGO interference in the affairs of Russia and neighboring states . This is important to keep in mind when, as so often happens, Putin is mocked for complaining .
 Obama administration has indicated steps have been taken, but those steps were never taken, the National Catholic Reporter wrote .
President Obama's claim of a coup was false, says Father Roy Bourgeois . Bourgeois and other supporters of SOA Watch would witness firsthand the falsehood of Obama’s claim .
 U.S. Southern Command’s Joint Task Force-Bravo is stationed at Soto Cano/Palmerola Air Base in Tegucigalpa .
 The base was humming with activity, seemingly unaffected by the coup which had just happened . We asked a Sgt. of the base about the coup .
 Reyes at the base point blank whether it was true that the U.S. military had halted its joint operations with the Honduran military post-coup .
 The U.S. relationship with the Honduran military after the coup was “stable. Reyes responded, and I took notes of this at the time, that the United States relationship was ‘stable.’
 The U.S. stood nearly alone in the Western Hemisphere in recognizing the election of President Porfirio Lobo Sosa that followed the coup . This election took place in the absence of Zelaya being returned to Honduras and able to participate .
 President Obama quickly recognized Mr Lobo’s victory, even when most of Latin America would not . Most of the Latin American countries would not recognize the victory .
 It retains most of the military figures who perpetrated the coup, and no one has gone to jail for starting it . No one has been sentenced to jail.
 The U.S. has accepted a fraudulent election that it accepted, he says . This chain of events has now allowed corruption to mushroom, he adds .
 At least 13 journalists have been killed since Mr Lobo took office, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists .
 Berta was quoted as saying shortly before her death, “We’re coming out of a coup that we can’t put behind us.’s death, she said .
 Hillary Clinton practically said what was going to happen in Honduras in her book Hard Choices . The same Hillary Clinton, in her memoir, said what happened in Honduras .
 Leaked court documents raise concerns that the murder of the Honduran environmentalist Berta Caceres was an extrajudicial killing planned by military intelligence specialists linked to the US-trained special forces .
 The terrible repression unleashed by the 2009 coup continues at the hands of a military the U.S. continues to support .
 Latin American specialist Greg Grandin recently explained, “hundreds of peasant activists and indigenous activists have been killed.’
 Berta Caceres says what was installed after the coup was something like a permanent counterinsurgency on behalf of transnational capital . The coup was in response to a political crisis in the capital .
 While Clinton and her supporters cry foul about alleged Russian hacking, they seem to feel no shame about Clinton’s very real meddling . Clinton has destroyed the democratic system of Honduras and unleashed terror upon that population .
 There seems to be mass hysteria in this country about Putin’s conduct in Ukraine and Crimea . There is barely a whisper about the US misdeeds in countries like Honduras .
There is little said about the extraordinary killing of journalists in Honduras post-coup . As much concern is expressed about the fate of journalists.
 The same can be said about journalists in Mexico, who are also being killed in huge numbers with little concern expressed by U.S. press .
 NPR's reporting on March 23, 2017, is a great example of the selective concern of the U.S. press . NPR is reporting for the day of March 23.
 NPR had significant reportage of the murder of a former Russian lawmaker in Kiev . All trails always lead to Putin, as NPR would have us believe .
 NPR did cover a story about Tom Brady's Super Bowl jersey being found in Mexico . The story was about a journalist in Mexico.
Gay activists are being killed in Honduras by forces armed and trained by the US . In the same vein, while gay activists are killed by forces in Honduras, they do so in the almost total absence of criticism by folks in the US. Russia is criticized for its comparatively softer anti-gay
 The Russians had much to say about the US role in the Honduran coup, says CNN's John Sutter . He says they do not view what happens in this hemisphere as any of their business .
 Putin will be making some Reaganesque speech about the need for tearing down walls . Trump will build his wall on the Mexican border .
 The selective concern about such issues says much about the hypocrisy and foggy thinking which permeates the discourse in this country .
 Possibly, it is worth considering this before such thinking gets us into another world war. Possibly, this could be worth considering .
 The USSR and the East Bloc began to disintegrate during the late 1980s . The USSR was the most powerful country in the world .
 Mikhail Gorbachev decided to voluntarily let the Soviet empire go . There were many reasons for this, but one major reason was that the reformer had decided to let it go .
Gorbachev made this break even more explicit, telling the East Bloc governments that they were now on their own . The USSR had already abandoned the Brezhnev Doctrine.
 Gorbachev made it clear to governments that if they had trouble holding on to power, they should not expect them to come along to save them .
Michael Parenti says the process was relatively peaceful . Parenti: Maybe they weren't as repressive and power hungry as they were accused of being .
 In 1989, the Berlin wall came down, and it was time to decide about a huge issue for Russia and the USSR . In any case, in 1989, in Germany, the wall was re-unification .
WWI played a giant roll in the rise of the Bolsheviks to power in 1917, and WWI, in which the Soviet Union lost over 25 million lives . Russia was wary of a re-united and powerful Germany .
 In early 1990, U.S. leaders made the Soviets an offer to the Soviets .
 Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev agreed to begin reunification talks . Less than a week later, the Soviet President agreed to start talks .
 Gorbachev acceded to Germany's western alignment and the United States would limit NATO’s expansion . The U.S. would also limit NATO's expansion .
 Russia put missiles and advisers in Cuba in 1962, the world was brought to the brink of nuclear war . It was the one time ever that Russia engaged in an analogous action .
 Khrushchev agreed within a matter of days to take the missiles out of Cuba in return for the secret promise that the United States would take them out of Turkey months later . The U.S. would take its missiles out.
 The United States insisted that it be able to save face and not be made to look weak by having caved in to Soviet demands . The deal about the United States removing its missiles from Turkey was secret .
 The gesture of saving face was not extended to the Russians, who will always be seen as the ones who ‘blinked’ during this crisis .
 If "blinked" means being the one to back down and lose face, that is not something to be too ashamed of . If “blinking’s” means being a one to lose face so as to ensure the salvation of our planet
 The US did not relent in its continued milking of the ‘Soviet threat’ to justify its military build-up . But despite Russia’s quick responsiveness to the U.S. demand to leave Cuba, the US didn't relent .
 U.S. can have its way with Russia while not risking, and certainly never tolerating, reciprocal treatment . But, as usual, the US insists on running the world, and can have it's way.
 The United States cries foul and accuses Russia of imperialist ambitions . Russia dares to even assert itself on its own borders, U.S. says .
 I cannot describe such an attitude as anything other than galling, but I seem to be in the minority in this country with such a view . I can't describe such a attitude as any other than Galling, I say .
 The United States continues to hold on to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which it acquired by force in 1898 and then obtained a lease through threat of force in 1903 .
 Obama's promises, eight years ago, to shut down the prison there have long been forgotten . Obama’s promises to shut it down have been forgotten.
 The quick and extensive expansion of NATO to the Russian frontier after the Soviet collapse was not the end of what Russia reasonably viewed as the U.S. and West’s provocations .
 The Russians engaged in major bombing campaigns, lasting weeks at a time, in Honduras or Colombia, to halt the horrible human rights abuses .
 Such a scenario seems too absurd to even seriously contemplate, says author .
There is cause to doubt the humanitarian intentions of the U.S. and NATO in carrying out the Yugoslav intervention . There is cause for doubt the United States and NATO's intentions .
 U.S. intervention was motivated by the desire to destroy the last socialist state in Europe, says George Szamuely . The United States would use NATO to intervene anywhere in the world as it saw fit, he says .
 The “humanitarian war’s model was a perfect pretext for this goal, and has remained a powerful ideology to justify the multiple wars of the U.S. to this day, though they invariably cause more suffering .
 The West worked toward the goal of partitioning Yugoslavia, Szamuely says . The West first encouraged the secession of Slovenia and Croatia, then the breaking away of BosniaHercegovina .
 U.S. convinced Bosnian leader Alija Izetbegovic to renounce the 1992 Lisbon Agreement . It could have prevented the civil war from breaking out in the first place, which Izet begovic had already signed .
 The Canadian Ambassador to Yugoslavia at that time, James Bissett, has written, ‘The entire diplomatic corps was very happy that the civil war had been avoided, except the Americans .
 The U.S. was afraid that peace might break out, and did all it could to prevent this .
After the Lisbon accords were intentionally scuttled, the civil war broke out with disastrous consequences for all sides of the conflict . After the Lisbon Accords were deliberately scuttling, the conflict broke out .
 The major bombing campaign of NATO then occurred in 1999, and lasted for 11 weeks . The major bombings of NATO were in 1999 .
 Russia and China made it clear they would not give such authorization . This was the first sustained use of armed force by the NATO alliance in its 50-year existence .
 The Security Council is required by the UN Charter to attempt to use “pacific means’s’ to achieve this goal before authorizing force .
 In the case of Yugoslavia, the U.S. actually prevented any “pacific means’s’ from succeeding . The United States actually prevented the country from succeeding.
 NATO bombing seemed to only intensify the human rights abuses against the Kosovars . The bombing was allegedly intended to prevent the bombing, says Roberts .
 Over half a million people had fled from Kosovo into neighboring countries . Many thousands were displaced within Kosovo itself .
 During the whole period of the bombing, almost one million inhabitants left Kosovo . A half-a-million were internally displaced, according to NATO figures .
 She then expressed concern for whether the international humanitarian law norm requiring proportionality was being followed . She said she was concerned about whether the law should be followed .
 In 1999, there was another chance for peace that the United States prevented . This is an interesting argument, albeit a possibly callous one, and one that also ignores the fact that in 1999, the bombing began .
Slobodan Milosevic would have accepted an agreement pursuant to which Serbian troops would be removed from Kosovo . The United States inserted a poison pill in the agreement in the form of Appendix B, which would have required Serbia to give up its sovereignty to NATO occupation .
 No self-respecting country, of course, would have accepted such an arrangement . No self respecting country.
 The other part of the agreement would have required “a referendum be held within three years to determine the will of those citizens living in Kosovo regarding independence, MacKenzie says .
 Russia was powerless to do anything to stop the US/NATO campaign in Yugoslavia . In any case, it was another humiliating event for Russia, which was simply powerless to stop it .
 The United States has also meddled in the former Soviet Republics, most recently and notably in Ukraine . The U.S. has also decided to meddle in the ex-Soviet Republics in quite dangerous ways .
 The facts are at least more complex than this one-sided account. Of course, the press blames all of the problems in Ukraine on Putin .
 The coup d’etat in February, 2014, overthrew the democratically elected government of Viktor Yanukovych, a leader who was at least favorably disposed towards Russia .
 The ouster of Yanukovych was prompted by his “offense’ — or at least the press considered it an offense — of reconsidering whether to enter an association agreement with the European Union . The deal included Russia buying $15 billion of Ukrainian government bonds and cutting gas prices .
 The EU deal would have required Ukraine to submit to NATO military security policy . In addition, buried within the EU deal were provisos that would have been required by Ukraine .
 "WJe will continue to promote the development of greater interoperability between Ukrainian and NATO forces"
 NATO's enhanced advisory presence in Kyiv is already in place and will continue to grow . NATO’s enhanced Advisory presence inKyiv is in place, says NATO .
 Allies will continue to provide expertise as Ukraine completes its comprehensive defense and security sector review .
 Many in Ukraine, particularly in the West, were angered by Yanukovych’s vacillation on the EU deal, and that this anger led to his undoing .
 The U.S. press reacted to Putin's offer to keep Ukraine within Russia's orbit by offering favorable terms . The offer was seen as illegitimate for Putin to try to keep the Ukraine in Russia’s orbit .
 The EU was upset by this turn of events, but the U.S. simply does not stand to reason . It is understandable that the EU is upset, but it is not clear why this was a major concern .
 No one would care what Russia thought about such goings-on in this hemisphere anyway . No one wouldn't care what the Russian government was thinking about .
 We seem to begrudge Russia for any assertion of self-interest even at its borders . Meanwhile, we seem tobegrudge the Russian government for its own self- interest .
 Russia is to have no self-interest anywhere in the world, while the U.S. should be able to assert itsself-interest everywhere . It is as if Russia is not to have any self- interest anywhere in world, says CNN.
 Yanukovych's backing away from the EU deal proved to be his undoing, with people taking to the streets and his being forced from office .
 Many of those protesting were regular folks who had legitimate concerns about Yanukovych's policies . Some of those involved in the events of 2013-2014 were quite sinister, no doubt .
There are sectors of the U.S. government who support Ukraine forces in Ukraine . The United States government supports these forces in the Ukraine .
 Few in the U.S. press seem concerned about it, and few seem concerned. These are undeniable facts, and yet it is rarely reported .
 From all appearances, the mainstream U.S. media would prefer neo-Nazis running amok in Ukraine, and even taking charge of Ukraine .
 The Euromaidan protests in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev culminated this week . displays of open fascism and neo-Nazi extremism became too glaring to ignore .
Far-right streetfighting men pledge to defend their country’s ethnic purity . Protesters filled downtown square to battle riot police and demand ouster of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Putin overplayed his hand in trying to coax Yanukovych into rejecting the EU deal and accepting a deal with Russia, it is not at all surprising that Putin was spooked by the events in Ukraine . neo-Nazis seemed to have a role in both the coup which deposed Yanukovych, and
 The U.S. seemed to have a hand in these events, and to acquiesce in, if not outright encourage, the participation of ultra-nationalists in the Ukraine government, was predictably disturbing to Putin .
 The United States has had a hand in supporting Nazis in Ukraine and elsewhere for a very long time . It is also not lost on the Russians that the U.S. has supported Nazis in the Ukraine and other countries .
 The Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists, founded in the 1920s, was actively in alliance with Nazi Germany as the “14 Waffen SS Division’s” and continues to defend its war-time role today .
 The group calls for the purging of Jews, Poles and Russians from Ukrainian society . The group continues to wear the “SS” insignia on its uniforms .
 The OUN was also a key factor in the 2004 Orange Revolution, which the United States was also behind . Viktor Yuschenko was the Prime Minister of Ukraine from 2005-2010 .
 The U.S. was very aggressive in trying to keep the nationalists in power, says Bellant .
 The U.S. pumped millions of dollars into the Ukraine in the intervening period to help these nationalists return to power in the 2014 coup that precipitated the current crisis in Ukraine .
 The United States has continued to provide military training to the ultra-nationalist forces post-coup . Congress passed a law forbidding such training, as a consequence of their being so embedded in Kiev's regular forces .
 The taproot of the trouble is NATO enlargement, the central element of a larger strategy to move Ukraine out of Russia's orbit and integrate it into the West .
 The EU's expansion eastward and the West’s backing of the pro-democracy movement in Ukraine were critical elements, too . The Orange Revolution in 2004 was critical elements of the Orange Revolution .
 Russian leaders have adamantly opposed NATO enlargement since the mid1990s . In recent years, they have made it clear they would not stand by while their strategically important neighbor turned into a Western bastion .
 For Putin, the illegal overthrow of Ukraine’s democratically elected and pro-Russian president was the final straw for him .
 The downplaying of the role of neo-Nazis in the current Ukrainian conflict is just baffling. And frankly, it's just baffled, says the writer .
 Steve Inskeep mocked what he characterized as the “false flag’s conspiracies of some who, apparently, deserve no voice in the Ukraine debate .
 The truth is, these alternative viewpoints have little to do with alarm over “false flags, but over Nazi flags,’s Nazi flags .
 One would think this to be a worthy news item, but instead, it is dismissed out of hand . One would have thought it was a news item .
 It would be unfair to say that it was only Putin and Russia that were disturbed by these events .
 Ukrainians of Russian descent in the east of the country, particularly in the Donbass region, were frightened by the new government, as were residents of Crimea .
 It was not long before violent tensions began, and the blame for the violence cannot be laid solely, or even primarily, at Putin's feet .
 What has happened in Ukraine is the United States organized and financed a coup, says the U.S. government .
 The coup elements include ultra-right-wing nationalists whose roots go back to organizations that fought for Hitler in the Second World War against the Soviet Union .
 These elements destroyed Russian war memorials celebrating the liberation of the Ukraine from the Nazis by the Red Army and also celebrating Gen. Gen. John Sutter .
Southern and eastern Ukraine, which are traditionally Russian provinces, are under threat .
 Kiev parliament voted to ban Russian as the second official language . The other act alarmed the “traditionally Russian provinces’s’ Russian provinces .
 The result was that pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine, without any prompting or support from Vladimir Putin . The separatists in eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions in March of 2014. They declared their own ‘People’s Republics’ of course harkening back to the
 The new government in Kiev attacked the separatists in these regions in what they dubbed "anti-terrorist operations" A brutal civil war has broken out in the region, the government says .
 While the separatists have been vilified in the U.S. media as pawns of Putin, this is just not the case . The separatists are just not a pawn of Putin .
Militants want independence from Kiev government, which they view as illegitimate and fascist . They are homegrown militants who want independence. They view the Kiev government as illegitimate.
 The U.S. and E.U. were dead set against elections which the two Donbass regions called in November of 2014 to elect their own governments . The United States insisted on elections in Kosovo as a condition to avoid the 1999 bombing .
 U.S. and E.U. were critical of Russia’s willingness to honor these elections . Both the United States and the E. U.N. was critical of the Russian government .
 The U.S. is the United States which decides whether and when people can declare their independence . This goes to show again that it is the U. S. which decides if and when it can declare its independence .
 Putin's government in Moscow ended up following the lead of independent Russian militias in joining the fray in the Donbass . It is still fair to consider the forces on the other side that the Western governments and media are supporting against these peoples .
 Kiev's use of volunteer paramilitaries to stamp out the Russian-backed Donetsk and Luhansk "people's republics" should send a shiver down Europe's spine, U.S. says .
 Recently formed battalions such as Donbas, Dnipro and Azov, with several thousand men under their command, are officially under the control of the interior ministry . Their financing is murky, their training inadequate and their ideology often alarming .
 The proliferation of Nazis is not, by all appearances, of concern to the U.S. press, says CNN's John Sutter . The concern about Putin has risen to pathological levels, he says, and is simply beyond me . Sutter says the concern about
 The neo-Nazis are winning, with the civilian population of the Donbass taking a very bad beating, as well as the siege being laid to that area by the government in Kiev .
 One million children in East Ukraine are now in grave need of aid to survive, UNICEF has reported . The children are in need of help to survive .
Children in eastern Ukraine have been living under the constant threat of unpredictable fighting and shelling for the past three years, UNICEF says .
 The pro-West government in Kiev is carrying out this destruction, again to the collective yawn of the U.S. media .
 NPR has had nothing to say about the current starvation of children in Ukraine . The famine in the Ukraine in 1932-1933 is generally explained as an intentional man-made famine imposed by Joseph Stalin .
 The USSaudi imposed famine upon Yemen, which may kill up to seven million people through starvation . The same as the highest estimates of those who died in the Ukraine famine of the 1930s .
 It is always easier to dwell upon the crimes of Joseph Stalin over eighty years ago rather than focus on our own crimes . We could actually do something to stop, says the author .
 UNICEF recommends that in the interest of peace and the end of such suffering, all parties abide by what is known as the Minsk Agreements . The most recent version was put together by Germany's Angela Merkel and France's Franc¢ois Hollande .
 Minsk Agreements offer “a detailed roadmap for resolving the conflict’s conflict. As The Economist explains, the agreement offers a detailed roadmap .
 Kerry was intentionally undermined by the Biden wing of the Obama Administration . Before he even left Sochi, Kerry was deliberately undermined by Obama administration .
 Hunter Biden was suspiciously named to the board of a Ukrainian natural gas company in April, 2014 . He was named just after the 2014 coup in Ukraine .
 The Crimea conflict is also a cause to fear Vladimir Putin and Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Crimea is the question of the Crimea, which I often hear folks talk about as cause to worry .
 The facts are largely undisputed that on March 1, 2014, shortly after the coup, Putin, with Russian Parliamentary approval, and in the context of much unrest in Crimea provoked by the change of government in Kiev, decided to send troops to Crimea .
 Crimea had been a part of Russia from 1783 until 1954 when Nikita Khrushchev voluntarily “gifted’s’ Crimea to Ukraine . Crimea was part of the Soviet Union from 17 83 until 1954 .
 Russia would want to protect its interests, naval base and the Russian speakers in Crimea . It is not all too surprising that, in the time of crisis precipitated by the overthrow of Yanukovych, it is not too surprising .
 The US is currently occupying foreign territories with at best a dubious right to do so . I have little doubt that the U.S. would do the same thing .
 The Crimeans voted overwhelmingly in a referendum to secede from Ukraine and join Russia on March 16, 2014 . In any case, the Crimeans vote overwhelmingly to join Russia .
Sixty percent of Crimeans are Russian speakers . This is not too surprising given that 60 percent of Russian speakers are Russian .
Both the EU and the United States called this referendum a sham and refused to honor it . Polls show that Crimeans, including the Tartar minority, are happier under Russian governance than Ukrainian .
 The U.S. and European Union may want to save Crimeans from themselves, according to Forbes magazine .
 It is not clear how Russia's actions regarding Crimea, especially as they ended up being welcomed by the Crimeans, is any cause for Americans to believe that Russia is somehow a threat to humanity .
 The U.S. used the collapse of the USSR to expand throughout the globe . The United States had once put some brakes on the United States Empire, which had once been a major factor .
 Russia has no bases outside the former Soviet Union with the sole exception of Syria . Syria is the only country with the only exception to Russia's presence in Syria .
 US bases cause untold environmental degradation, have a huge carbon footprint, and encourage commercial sex zones around the world .
 A U.S. government spokesman and/or news pundit accuse China of military aggression because it is seeking some control over the South China Sea . It takes some umbrage at the US's attempt to assert control there .
We clearly do not understand how arrogant and insulting such a position is only reveals the depths of our own psychosis. That we clearly donot understand how arrogance is only revealed to be a psychosis .
 Russia and Vladimir Putin are accused of being the crazy ones . Meanwhile, it is Russia and Russia and Putin who are accused.
 Iran has cozied up to the US's old Cold War rival, Russia . Iran came to power in 1979 after overthrowing this torture state and then immediately proceeded to kidnap 52 Americans at the U.S. Embassy .
 Ronald Reagan, in order to win the 1980 election, undermined then President Jimmy Carter's negotiations with Iran to free the hostages . Reagan would later sell arms to fund his Contra terrorists.
 Robert Parry is the journalist most responsible for breaking this “October Surprise’s story, he says . Parry: Even if we accept the current allegations against Trump regarding collusion with Russia prove true, they would pale in comparison to Reagan's treacherous collusion with Iran.
 It goes without saying that there has been some terrible blow-back from this operation . We continue to experience to this day, and we are still experiencing blowback .
 The U.S. began to train, arm and support these fighters, he says . If you would allow me, terrorists would be a terrorist, he writes .
 According to the official version of history, CIA aid to the Mujahiddin began during 1980 . That is to say after the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan on December 24, 1979 .
 The president told him that in his opinion this aid was going to induce a Soviet military intervention . The president said he thought this aid would induce a military intervention.
 Brzezinski would have to concede that the Afghan escapade was worth it in terms of U.S. blood and treasure is now much different .
 Brzezinski bragged about Russia, but the results were devastating for the poor Afghanis, he says . The U.S. willingly sacrificed for their Cold War chess game.
15,000 Russian soldiers were killed in the war, while one million Afghanis lost their lives . In the end, 15,000 Russians were killed.
 Michael Parenti says the U.S. was fighting modernization efforts of a socialist government . The Soviet Union was not controlled by it, he says . Parenti: The United States was in reality fighting modernization.
 The government also continued a campaign begun by the king to emancipate women from their age-old tribal bondage .
 It provided public education for girls and for the children of various tribes . It also provided education for children of different tribes .
Despite the invasion of the Soviet Union, the jihadists were able to overthrow this progressive government . The government did hold out for six months after the Soviets left .
 The jihadist victory ushered in the Taliban, whose retrograde, medieval reign was marked by a return to the repression of women’s rights, religious intolerance and destruction of ancient historical ruins .
 Brzezinski's cost/benefit analysis in supporting extremists to throw Afghanistan into chaos was wrong, he says . The U.S. would intervene against the Taliban government right after the 9/11 attacks .
 The US's operations against the Taliban were greatly aided by Russia under Vladimir Putin .
 Russia had much to add to the efforts given the substantial assets it continued to have in Afghanistan . Russia had many assets to add in Afghanistan.
 Bush had met with Putin just months before 9/11 attacks . He claimed to have become fast friends with him .
 Bush would famously state of Putin, “I looked the man in the eye.’
 Bush did not show much appreciation to Putin, quickly taking actions which were predictably provocative to Russia . However, he did not appear to show much respect to Putin .
 Bush backed out of the anti-ballistic treaty which he knew Russia had greatly valued . He posted military trainers in the former Soviet country of Georgia .
 US-Putin relationship seems to have gone sideways when Putin did not go along with second Gulf War in 2003 .
 The U.S. started feigning concern about democracy in Russia after Putin's election .
 The news leading up to and stoking the invasion of Iraq in 2003 was as fake as a three-dollar bill . false intelligence was drummed up by the CIA about weapons of mass destruction that didn’t exist .
 At least half a million Iraqis were killed as a result of the 2003 invasion of Irag . Many Iraqis view as leaving their country in the worst condition it has been since the Mongol invasion of 1258 .
 Iraq continues to be a breeding ground for jihadists, this time in the form of ISIS . ISIS had no foothold in Iraq prior to the invasion, which had no footholds prior to invasion .
 Saddam Hussein was a secularist and a mortal enemy of such extremist forces . He was a "mortal enemy" of such extremists, he said .
 The toppling of Hussein and wiping out his entire Republican Guard only unleashed more terror on the world . It was claimed it was aimed at doing the opposite .
 As Iragis continue to suffer from ISIS terrorism, it is important to remember that it was a war of choice if there ever was one .
 One must forgive Putin, then, for having refused to go along with this insanity . One must forgiveness Putin, and one must forgive him .
 The invasion of Afghanistan after 9/11 was also a disastrous decision, writes John Sutter . Sutter: The invasion was also disastrous decision .
 Over 15 years and counting, the U.S. is still bogged down in Afghanistan, as should also have been predictable .
 The Taliban had come close to wiping out the heroin poppy fields there. In addition, it must also be pointed out that, for all of their many real faults, the Taliban had, by the time of the invasion, come near to wipe out the poppy fields .
There is nearly no public debate about the impact on the U.S. invasion on heroin supply, Nass says . Nass: "Heroin shipments from Afghanistan are at lower risk of being seized than heroin coming from Latin America"
 The U.S. has military and intelligence services, like the CIA, swarm all over Afghanistan, and yet the heroin flows out the doors . This is an obvious question, given that the U. S. has a military, intelligence services.
 Nass makes a quip about the CIA-ContraCocaine connection in her piece . Nass makes an appropriate quip in her article .
 The CIA also helped to run drugs to support the U.S. war efforts in Vietnam and support the Kuomintang's fight against Mao’s forces in China .
 The U.S. foray into Afghanistan bears a significant responsibility, says CNN's John Sutter . In any case, when a loved one of yours dies of a heroin overdose, it's a good chance one will, he says .
 The U.S. has spent over $5 trillion on post9/11 interventions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the U. S. has not appeared to do the world or the United States very much good .
 U.S. foreign policy appears to be getting crazier, but it doesn't get any crazier .
 U.S. began to try to weaken Iran and Syria by supporting Sunni extremist groups to subvert those countries .
 It goes on to detail the decades-long interference of the U.S. in Syrian affairs . It also details the years of interference in Syria's affairs .
 The United States decided to go so far as overthrowing the regime in Syria in 2009 after Assad refused to allow an oil pipeline which would have allowed Qatar to connect through Syria to Turkey, in lieu of a pipeline .
 Kennedy has been greatly maligned for this piece, especially given the US's general propensity to intervene internationally to protect Western interests in such valuable assets as oil .
 Bobby, Jr. wrote a piece about his father's assassination in light of his father’s assassination . For me, the piece is equally important for Bobby's attempt at soul-searching, says the author .
 The piece is a classic case of trying to “love thine enemy,’ which I have always believed we are called on to do, but which few dare to put into practice .
 In any case, the United States continues to intervene in Syria, as we know, in the most incoherent ways . The U.S. has intervened in Syria in many ways, including in the past .
 The U.S. media has been "tutting" about Aleppo, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This won’t stop the United States media’s “tuttting” about Aleppo. But again,
 U.S. has willfully allowed ISIS forces it has pushed out of Mosul, Iraq, to cross the border into Syria to fight against the Syrian government . Fisk also relates what many of us already know .
 The ancient Roman city of Palmyra has been destroyed by Roman forces in recent years . The city's ancient Roman architecture is still being destroyed .
 Yemen is one of the poorest countries on earth, by Saudi forces armed with U.S. weapons, including cluster bombs .
 Obama continued to supply such lethal weaponry even as the slaughter in Yemen accelerated, and Trump continues this supply even still .
 The UN has been saying for some time that Yemen is now on the verge of a massive famine which could kill millions . This would not be happening but for the US-Saudi war on that country .
 The news is being greeted with the sound of crickets chirping. And yet this news is not being greeted by crickets.
 When you can obsess about the crimes of others, like Putin, you don't have to worry about your own country’s horrible atrocities .
 President after President, Trump included, inexplicably continue to partner with the Saudi monarchy despite its suppression of women’s rights, and its authoritarian nature . Saudi Arabia does more than any other country to spread Islamist terrorism, including in the form of alQaeda, and despite the fact that
 Israel and its outsized influence over U.S. foreign policy. This is not even to mention the biggest elephant in the room, which is never to be spoken of .
 Putin’s Russia came much later to the game in Syria, not intervening militarily in that country until late September, 2015 .
 The dreaded Putin has been President on and off since 1999 . He did not stray beyond the old Soviet borders until nearly the end of 2015 .
 It was the invasion of Libya, moreover, that would ultimately lead to Putin's decision to intervene in Syria . It was also the invasion that led to Putin’s decision to invade Libya .
 The U.S. removed a secular leader in Muammar Gaddafi, possibly the greatest enemy of al-Qaeda, and allowed the country to be overridden by religious extremists . This was another case of the West, the United States included.
 ISIS controls huge swaths of the country, including the once-prosperous town of Sirte, which lies on the Mediterranean close to Europe .
 Vladimir Putin had been watching the United States rampage through the Middle East like a bull in a china shop . He rightly felt that Russia was bamboozled by NATO’s act of regime change in Libya .
 Russia, along with China, ultimately abstained from the Security Council resolution which authorized military action in Libya . The resolution had a limited goal of only authorizing a no-fly zone to protect civilians .
 Russia and China never wanted regime change in Libya and never authorized it . Neither Russia nor China wanted regime changes in Libya .
 NATO wasted no time after setting up the no-fly zone before moving quickly to regime change .
 Putin, then Prime Minister, publicly stated that NATO had no right to engage in regime change,*“”’s*”® and certainly hadno right to kill Gaddafi .
 Putin ultimately watched the video of Gaddafi being killed, and sodomized in the process, with horror . This played a big part in his deciding that the same thing would not be allowed to play out in Syria with the similar results .
 Putin publicly described the killing as “repulsive,” and publicly expressed his fear that the West was intentionally moving to destabilize various societies, including Russia .
 Clinton was the real architect behind NATO’s imperial assault against Libya . This is most appropriate, given that Clinton was behind NATO's imperial assault on Libya .
 The Clinton team peddled the most absurd lies to justify the NATO action, says Susan Rice .
 The general lie which led the United States and NATO into Libya was that we needed to intervene to protect the human rights of the Libyan people from Gaddafi, says DemocracyNow!
 The US and Clinton's team put forth the nowcommonly used pretext of humanitarian intervention . That is, the US, and Clinton’s team in particular, put forth. That is the now commonly used rationale for humanitarian intervention.
 The Clinton team itself did not believe, by the time the intervention started on March 17, that there was an impending human rights disaster that the Libyans needed protection from . Clinton’s own emails show that the emails were not hacked .
 Based on numerous eyewitness reports, it is the Embassy’s assessment that the government no longer controls Benghazi .
 Harriet Spanos of USAID sent an email describing the relative calm in Benghazi . Resolution 1973 was passed on March 2 .
 Blumenthal admits that there is really no humanitarian basis for continuing the conflict . NATO would go on bombing for another 7 months, Blumenthal says .
 Obama's approval ratings were anemic when he was president . He says the reasons for doing so include boosting Obama's then-anemic approval ratings .
 The pretext of saving Libyan lives is notably absent from this list . Again, the pretext ofsaving Libyan lives has not been included .
 A number of emails reflect the awareness that the bombing campaign, and the toppling of the aggressively anti-al-Qaeda Gaddafi, might open a space for al-Qaeda and allied forces to take over many parts of Libya, as they actually have .
 The eastern part of Libya has been a stronghold for radical Islamist groups, Blumenthal says .
 Blumenthal could then argue that “winning the war against Qaddafi was somehow necessary for regional security is bizarre in the extreme .
 The emails actually demonstrate a complete lack of concern for humanitarian violations by the pro-NATO rebels .
 Neither Blumenthal nor Hillary demonstrate much concern about such trifles . Now, summarily executing even armed combatants is a clear violation of the Geneva Conventions .
During the NATO invasion, it became known that the claims of foreign mercenaries fighting for Qaddafi were false . In fact, the alleged foreign mercenaries were really African guest workers .
 The rebels were summarily arresting and murdering people who happened to be black, and doing so in very large numbers . What was really happening was that the rebels were arresting and killing people who were black .
 The most outrageous lie which primed the world for the Libya intervention was that Gaddafi was allegedly handing out Viagra to his troops so that they could carry out mass rape .
Susan Rice made the claim with a straight face at the UN, Susan Rice, says John Sutter . Sutter: "This claim was patently absurd and not worthy of belief. I recall thinking when that claim was made"
 Human rights groups investigating this claim ultimately found no evidence of it . Of course, human rights groups found no proof of it.
 The Clinton emails reveal that before and during the NATO conflict, Clinton and her team knew very well, and actually feared that the conflict in Libya might very well have been resolved through negotiations . Muammar Qaddafi’s son Saif was actually trying to find ways to do just
 Gaddafi government had already been making great efforts in achieving rapprochement with Washington, giving up its nuclear arms .
 Clinton shunned all efforts by the Gaddafis to avert an invasion, instead preferring a war in Yugoslavia . Both Bushes had preferred wars in Irag, despite its predictably horrible consequences . The U.S. and its allies wanted the hand they wanted in the future of Libyan
 The welfare of the Libyan people, and of the people of Northern Africa, were sacrificed, not protected, by such a choice . In the end, the welfare of Libyan people were sacrificed .
As with all of our supposed “humanitarian interventions, the cost to those enduring the intervention is always ignored. Indeed, as with all the supposed ‘humanitarian intervention,’ the cost of those enduring it is often ignored .
 NATO allegedly intervened to protect Benghazi, but it proceeded to level the important port city of Sirte, which also happened to be the city in which the African Union was founded . Gaddafi hoped to have his own currency in lieu of both the US dollar and the Euro .
 Libya went from being the most prosperous nation pre-invasion to being the least prosperous . Libya's advanced social system was destroyed, with its advanced social systems destroyed .
 NPR reported that Libyan workers would be forced to enter the dog-eat-dog world of the free market . But, of course, this was all to the good, according to NPR .
 NPR's "Libya's Economy Faces New Tests after Gadhafi Era,’78° explained that the biggest impediment to the new economic era is the Libyan worker who was simply spoiled by Gaddafi .
 NPR assured the concemed listener that the new regime would see to it that the Libyans would adapt to this new world order and get to work as they should .
 U.S. and NATO have shown their willingness to ravage an entire country to keep countries like Russia out of the economic game there . Other world leaders, such as Vladimir Putin, looked upon these events with grave concern .
 The United States blocked this resolution because it was now its jihadist friends who were threatening the city . If there were any, it was extended only to would-be victims of Gaddafi .
 The jihadists did a very thorough job of laying Bani Walid, and other areas of the country, to waste . And the jihadists did an extensive job of laying the area .
 Bani Walid was among the last cities to fall under the control of anti-Gaddafi forces during Libya’s internal conflict last year .
 Hundreds of residents from Bani Walid have been arrested by armed militias . Hundreds of people have been detained by armed militia members .
 Many continue to be detained without charge or trial across Libyan prisons and detention centres, including Misratah . Many are detained in Libyan prisons.
 The entrance of anti-Gaddafi forces into Bani Walid in October 2011 was accompanied by widespread looting and other abuses .
 Thousands of individuals suspected of having fought for or supported the government of Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi continue to be detained .
 The vast majority of people have yet to be officially charged or brought to trial . The majority of those charged are still not officially charged .
 Since the fall of Tripoli, human rights abuses continued to take place in a climate of impunity . The majority of the country under the control of anti-Gaddafi forces in August 2011 was under Gaddafi's control .
 To date, armed militia seize people outside the framework of the law and hold them incommunicado in secret detention facilities . They are vulnerable to torture of other illtreatment, according to reports .
 U.S.-backed ‘freedom fighters’ laid waste to the all-black town of Tawergha, again with little attention given in the United States .
 Libya was just the first of numerous new military interventions the U.S. would make in Africa . As it turned out, Libya was the first.
 Still it is argued that it is Russia which is trying to take over the world . Still it's argued that Russia is attempting to take the world over .
In any case, the US/NATO destruction of Libya had two impacts vis a vis Russia . In any case.
 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev believed that he had been tricked by the West in assenting to NATO intervention . Medvedeva's comments undermined then-Russian President DmitryMedvedev in the eyes of Russians .
 Stephen F Cohen says Medvedev was set up as the more moderate one between himself and Putin . He says the West made a huge error in setting him up as a fool by sucking him into believing that the intervention would merely take the form of a no-fly zone .
 In a 2015 interview on CNN, Obama claimed that he wanted a “re-set’ with Russia under Medvedev .
 Obama takes no responsibility for his own conduct in undermining Medvedev and paving the way for the return of Putin . Putin has a different view of the U.S. trustworthiness of the United States after the Libya debacle .
Russian President Vladimir Putin would decide to intervene militarily in Syria in 2012 . Putin would become President again in 2012, if he decided to intervene in Syria . The intervention would play a role in leading Vladimir Putin, who would be President again.
 Putin, notwithstanding his anger at Obama's Libya foray, pulled Obama's chestnuts out of the fire in Syria . Of course, let us not forget that, before militarily intervening, Putin, had pulled Obama’s chestnuts from Syria .
 Putin brokered a deal over Syria’s chemical weapons in 2013, which saved Obama from having to greatly up the U.S. military intervention in Syria .
 Putin knows all too well that no good deed goes unpunished . But of course, as Putin knows too well, no good deeds go unpunishes .
 Samantha Power feigned outrage, not in response to this ill-timed mass killing, which ensured there would be no peace soon in Syria . Russia’s audacity in bringing her into the UN ona weekend to hear Russia complain about who killed whom in Syria.
Friends on an almost daily basis talk about how allegedly crazy Vladimir Putin is . It's not the first time friends have been talking about Putin .
 It is not fathomable that our leaders are crazier or more reckless than our leaders, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It is their mental health that Americans should be worrying about .
 Jimmy Carter opined in July of 2015 that America is no longer a democracy, but rather, “an oligarchy with unlimited political bribery’s essence of getting the nominations for president or being elected president.
 The same thing applies to governors, and U.S. Senators and congress members .
 U.S. elections ranked dead last among Western democracies in March of 2016, Washington Post reported .
 The US’s poor ranking is also due to the disenfranchisement of voters, particularly people of color, through voter ID laws, and the unprecedented power that money has in the election process, a problem only exacerbated by the Citizens United decision .
As the U.S. becomes more economically unequal and disparate, this problem will only grow and magnify . The United States will become more economically equal and disparate .
 Thousands of people mistakenly listed as ex-felons were mistakenly listed from the voter rolls . Other problems include partisan gerrymandering, particularly by the Republicans, and removal of ex- felons .
 This is not even to mention the outdated, anti-democratic Electoral College system, which allows someone to win the popular vote but lose the election anyway . The system is not just a result of the election, but it is a result.
 In short, the "land of the free" is not so free, and it's not so democratic, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I was one of those people who voted third party because I truly could not decide who was the lesser of the two evils in this election . I was a third-party voter who couldn't decide who would be the better of the other two .
 Hillary Clinton had a well-established record of maneuvering the U.S. into destructive wars such as Libya . Clinton was instrumental in making permanent the destruction of democracy in Honduras, he says .
 I also could not vote for Donald Trump, who ran on a racist and xenophobic platform that is simply unconscionable . I also couldn't vote for Trump, but I could not support him on the platform .
 Trump wanted to make peace with Russia, which he sincerely believes is a worthy friend and ally . The one redeeming attribute I did see in Trump, however, was the one at the heart of this book .
 In any case, I ended up going to the polls with the belief that both major candidates being offered to us were deeply flawed, but in different ways .
 At least on the Democratic side, such an awful offering was not necessary, inevitable or desirable. And certainly on the Democrats, it was not needed, or desirable .
 The DNC was dead set against who could have been a more popular, change candidate in Bernie Sanders, from winning the nomination .
 The Clintons ran against Donald Trump in a terrible miscalculation of his chances of winning . We also know that they ran against the candidate they hoped to run against .
Tom Perez is the DNC's new leader over the insurgent candidate, Keith Ellison, who was backed by Bernie Sanders . Perez could seal the Democrats’ fate in the next round of elections .
 Democrats have now seized upon a plan which is as dangerous as it is unprincipled, says John Sutter . Sutter says the plan appears to be working for them .
 FBI Director Comey announced that the FBI's investigation into Hillary Clinton’s private email server was still ongoing in light of emails found on the server of one Anthony Weiner, also a Democrat, and the husband of Hillary Clinton's trusted adviser, Huma Abedin . The FBI is still investigating Weiner
 The Hatch Act forbids government officials from engaging in conduct which could impact the outcome of an election . At the time, there was an outcry that Comey should be investigated .
 Comey is pushing the Russian collusion story because it takes all the attention away from his own misdeed, which most certainly influenced the outcome of the 2016 elections .
 The bureau has been investigating the Trump-Russia connection since July 2016, but is only speaking up now . It is just bizarre that he claims his bureau is investigating.
 The FBI is still investigating the matter, he says . The FBI has not commented on the matter .
 Democrats have largely stopped complaining about Comey's pre-election publication of the continuing FBI investigation into Clinton's emails . For their part, the Democrats have mostly stopped complaining .
 The Comey letter may have doomed Clinton’s election bid, but may have been an error in judgment if not much worse . The letter certainly grew out of wounds self-inflicted by the Democrats themselves, the letter says .
 Hillary Clinton has admitted on several occasions that she committed a huge error in judgment by maintaining a private, unsecured email server as Secretary of State .
 If she had not committed such a lapse in judgment, the Comey letter obviously never would have come about . If she hadn't committed such an error, the letter would have been written .
 Anthony Weiner's obsessive sexting also played a role in this letter being issued .
 Weiner may have thrown Weiner to the curb a long time before, again possibly averting the Comey disaster . Huma may not be polite to do so, one might also wonder what Huma was thinking .
 The Comey letter, as damaging as it was, is an inconvenient fact for the Democrats to focus on for these reasons . In any case, the Comey letter is as damaging to the Democrats as it is to the Obama administration .
 The Democrats have now seized upon the allegation that Putin personally ordered the hacking of the DNC, with the knowledge and complicity of the Trump campaign, in order to help Trump get elected .
 No one really believes the emails did much, if anything, to affect the outcome of the election . So the “no harm, no foul rule’s may properly be invoked here, and so the ‘no harm’ may be invoked .
 The U.S. has instigated and/or supported regime changes throughout the globe over many decades . Such an act on the part of the Kremlin would be mere child’s play compared to the election interventions and even violent coups and regime changes .
 Basil’s Cathedral (which most people mistakenly believe is the Kremlin) ominously fires a laser down at The White House .
 "C.I.A.," for its part, worked to overthrow regimes in Iran, Cuba, Haiti, Brazil, Chile, and Panama . Even this article, whose graphic tells you where they are coming from, begrudging acknowledges that “he C.
 The ferocity of the Democrats’ expressions of concern on this issue is inversely proportional to what they have to offer the American people in terms of real policies . But again, the ferocity. of the Democrat’s expressions of concerns on this Issue is in
 The White House watched for signs that Russian intelligence was crossing the line between covert influence and adversely affecting the vote count . No evidence that it had done so, a senior national-security official said .
 At the time, Clinton was leading in the race, the official said . Obama's decision not to respond more aggressively was reinforced by Clinton .
 The claims have been made about our ostensible foes, only to be seriously questioned, if not debunked, later and then forgotten . Let us recall, first of all, how other similar claims were made in the past about us .
 The alleged plot comes to mind is the “North Korea hacked Sony’s Sony scandal a couple years back .
 The FBI quickly pointed the finger at North Korea after the hacking . The press had to sheepishly admit later that the hacking was most likely an “inside job” by a disgruntled Sony employee .
 John McAfee correctly stated at the time that North Korea was not behind the Sony hack . McAfee says Russia was not responsible for the DNC hack, and that Russia was behind the hack .
 The CIA said it is virtually impossible to find attribution for any hack because a good hacker can hide their tracks plus make it look like someone else did it .
 McAfee believes the Russian hack story is a politicallymotivated ploy being pushed by the Democrats who revile Vladimir Putin . McAfee says the Democrats are desperately in need of a scapegoat for their recent election loss .
 "Russia-gate" is the source of the Russia-Trump conspiracy theory, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
There is some reasonable suspicion that the CIA is lying about the Russians having hacked the DNC . The CIA was the one who procured and leaked the DNC emails themselves in order to set up the Russians .
 The CIA is a nefarious, criminal organization which often misleads the U.S. public and government into wars and misadventures . It should have been done away with long ago, says John Sutter . The CIA should have gone away with it long ago.
Jack and Bobby Kennedy were told wrongly by the CIA that the Cubans would rise up against Fidel Castro during this counter-revolutionary uprising . The CIA dispersed the CIA to the four corners of the earth .
 The Kennedys never trusted the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, feeling that they had been misled about the chances of success of the operation . I do not know if that is truth or apostasy.
 The CIA provided much of the bogus “evidence’ of WMDs which justified the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003 .
 The CIA has shown its cards with regard to its desire that Trump not get any strange notions about ending the new Cold War . Trump has even made not-so-veiled threats against him in the event he does .
 The U.S. media has been all too willing to accept and regurgitate the CIA’s claims about Russian hacking and Trump's alleged conspiracy with Russia to steal the election .
 Democratic leaders are now warning their base to stay on the right side of the party .
There is smoke, but there is no fire at all, Greenwald says . “There’s no little campfire, there's no little candle, there’'s no spark,’ he says .
 They have been looking for it since July of 2016, and still haven’t found anything. Not only are they look for it, I would emphasize, but they have been searching for it .
 The Senate Intelligence Committee is starting to panic about the real possibility that no evidence of collusion between Trump and Putin will be found . Greenwald says the Senate Intelligence committee is beginning to panic.
 Veterans of U.S. Intelligence Services find the claims dubious .
 They believe that the DNC emails at issue were leaked, and not hacked by Russia or anyone else . They believe, in fact, that the emails were not hacked .
 The NSA should be able to say with certainty who hacked the information, if it was hacked, and to whom that hacked information was sent . Veterans explain, with technology they have, it's not a hack .
 The information was not in fact hacked at all, but leaked, for example by someone in the DNC copying the emails on a thumb drive and then sharing it from there . The fact that the NSA cannot do this, as it admits, demonstrates to the Veterans that the information is not in
 Such a leak would not have been detected by the NSA, the Veterans claim . The Veterans claim.
 The NSA knows who did it, but won’t say because the source of the hack is not a convenient culprit .
New revelations of Wikileaks have been made as part of a new book . This brings us to the new revelations, which have been published as a book .
 Wikileaks has released a veritable treasure trove of CIA documents, which justify fearing that organization much more than Putin . The CIA had the means to hack the DNC itself and make it look like the Russians did it .
 If this doesn't make you feel less secure about your privacy and the safety of your information and communications, I don’t know what will .
 Wikileaks documents show that the CIA has possession of foreign hacking-software tools, including Russian, which they could have used to hack the DNC themselves and make it look like someone else did it .
 The C.I.A. has collected from malware produced by other countries, including Russia . Another program described in the documents is called Umbrage .
 A large number of techniques allows the C.I.A. to mask the origin of some of its attacks and confuse forensic investigators, WikiLeaks says .
 Trump appears to be blackmail proof, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Trump weathered so many scandals, sexual and otherwise, with ease . He says he could kill someone and still not lose the support of his sizable base .
Obama's former CIA chief also cast doubt on the credibility of the infamous, explosive ‘dossier’ Originally published by BuzzFeed, says its author, Christopher Steele, paid intermediaries to talk to the sources for it .
There is in fact good reason to believe that it is not the Russians at all who are blackmailing Trump, but rather the CIA itself .
 The Russians came to Trump to tell him that they had incriminating evidence on him, as any blackmailer would do . It was not the Russians who came to him to say they had evidence .
 The conduct of U.S. intelligence officials is not only “unusual,’ I would contend, but totally improper. This conduct of United States intelligence officials, he says, is "unusual"
Few in the mainstream press are concerned about the plausible blackmailing operation of a now-sitting U.S. President . This certainly sounds like the conduct of a blackmailer, says the author .
 The intelligence community's successful attempt to remove Mike Flynn, another open friend of Russia, is a high crime . Flynn's friendship with Russia is apparently being aHigh crime these days .
 Flynn might have spoken to the Russian Ambassador after Trump was elected . Flynn would have an official role in his administration, but it's not clear how that is some crime .
 The substance of the communication with the Russian Ambassador was the problem . It seems that, in reality, it was not the fact of the conversation .
 Dennis Kucinich, who broke ranks with fellow liberals over this issue, says the real crime here was the U.S. intelligence community’s spying on Flynn . The real crime was the United States intelligence community's spying, he says .
 The implications of the coy revelation of the Flynn conversation with Kislyak were far-reaching . The implications are far- reaching, according to CNN.
 Any interception of a communication by the NSA or FBI has always been considered one of the most highly classified secrets in the U.S. intelligence universe of secrets .
 Officers have long been under orders to protect the name of any American involved in any such intercepted communication at all costs .
 The senior official who leaked the story to Ignatius did not feel bound by any such rule . But the senior official did not.
 The leak was the first in a concerted campaign of using such leaks to suggest that Flynn had discussed the Obama administration’s sanctions with Kislyak . The Obama administration is trying to undermine Obama a23 administration policy .
 Democrats have tried to portray Flynn as being on the Russian payroll . Flynn's communications with the Russian Ambassador are also alleged .
 Flynn received payments from “several Russia-related entities, totaling nearly $68,000’ The largest share of the payments came from a speech he made at an anniversary dinner for RT News, for which he received $45,386 .
 Flynn's relationship with Russia should be more troubling to the U.S. than the paltry one Flynn seems to have had with Russia .
 Jeff Sessions is under investigation for possible conversations with the Russian Ambassador before Trump took office . The McCarthyite witch hunt against those who would even speak with or to the Russians continues .
 Trump's policy of Trump’s that actually makes sense, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he takes great umbrage at the use of the new Russian Scare .
 That Trump is right on Russia only proves the old adage that a broken clock is right twice a day .
 Obama's Ukraine policy may have been motivated by the Ukrainian business interests of Vice-President Biden’s son Hunter . Trump's friendliness with Russia may be motivated by his business interests .
 To ally with a country like Russia to confront such challenges makes all the sense in the world, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Obama himself once talked about ‘our Sputnik’ moment, a reference to the US’s great strides with our space program . The US's great strides were motivated largely by Russia’'s own strides before us .
 Russia led us to great advances in space travel and science, but it also helped shame us into advances in civil rights . The first human rights institution, the International Labor Organization, was created in 1918 .
 To shun the Russians now simply makes no sense, and it is Trump who is pushing a sensible policy towards Russia does not make this policy any less sane .
 Trump has enunciated a clear three-part position on Russia, which contrasts strongly with that of most of the U.S. political elite .
 Washington has pursued policies that have ignored Russian interests in order to encircle Moscow with military alliances and trade blocs .
 Trump’s at-least-stated goal of finding ways to cooperate with Russia is reasonable on its face . It is never clear exactly what Trump may truly be thinking or intending.
 Trump may himself decide to do if he is goaded enough by the media and liberal establishment, who accuse him of being “too soft’ on Russia . Johnson was goaded into invading Vietnam because he feared being accused of being too soft on Communism .
 This not only risks a nuclear conflagration, but it will certainly serve as justification for the US’s continued military expenditures and expansion, both of which are undermining the real security of the United States as well as the lives of thousands of innocents abroad .
 The results of these wars, if not the aims, have been the opposite of what we were told they were, writes David Frum .
 The war in Vietnam, for example, was not about defending democracy, but about destroying it . The war was about destroying democracy, not defending it .
 The War on Terror quickly morphed into something else which actually spread the very terror, and from the very sources (e.g., Saudi Arabia), which we claimed to be fighting . We claimed to have been fighting .
 "Humanitarian interventions" have only undermined the human rights and well-being of the peoples, says Peter Bergen .
The US has fought against nearly every war of liberation waged by the peoples of the Third World . The US has many times partnered with right-wing fascist forces, including in Ukraine .
Up until 1991, the U.S. has justified such reactionary wars based on claims that the USSR was somehow behind these indigenous struggles for self-determination .
 The current demonization of Russia will be used to justify unjust wars that destroy the lives of poor people abroad, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Democrats see the Russia-bating as a way to get rid of Trump, either through impeachment, or in the next election, they must realize that this is a short-sighted gamble that is both unlikely to succeed . That will do much harm to international relations even if it does
 They would be better to focus on principled fights over health care, infrastructure improvement, jobs, a living wage, rather than pursuing this short-end game .
 President Trump is proposing a massive increase in the military budget . He is also proposing to slash federal jobs and social benefits .
 He is also doubling down on the US’s involvement in the slaughter in Yemen . U.S. is also upping the US's aggressive posture towards Iran and North Korea .
 This is the exact opposite of what we should be doing, and this must be resisted . This is not the same thing we should do, says the author of the book . "This is the same way we should have been doing," he says .
 Those who used to resist such things (liberals, for lack of a better term) have become so inured to ridiculous military spending and adventures .
 There is nearly no debate in this society about war and peace, says author . War and peace is one of the most profound and pressing issues a society must grapple with, he says .
 In the end, it is important for U.S. citizens, both liberal and conservative, to stand against such madness .
 The U.S. also had no problem with a similar event which took place in the very same year as the Tiananmen Square massacre . It is worth noting that the United States also hadno problem with the similar event .
 In other words, the estimates of those protestors killed in Venezuela are identical to those killed in Beijing, China . The estimates are similar to those in China .
 Venezuela has a tiny population compared to that of China . The numbers are proportionately much greater than that of Venezuela .
 The Apocalypse The Men Who Are Destroying Life on Earth. Dick Russell Edited and Introduced by Robert F Kennedy Jr.
 The planet is heating up at an alarming rate, and the results are everywhere to be seen . The planet has been heating up in recent years .
 Powerful politicians like senators Mitch McConnell and Jim Inhofe receive massive contributions from the oil and coal industries .
 Most of these men are too intelligent to truly believe that climate change is not a growing crisis . Most of them are too smart to truly think that climate changes are not a problem .
 They have put their profits and careers ahead of the health and welfare of the world’s population . And yet they have also put their own children and grandchildren ahead .
 Horsemen of the Apocalypse takes a personal look at this global crisis, literally bringing it home . The Apocalypse is based in the United States .
 Chris Hedges has been shining a light on the most overlooked people and issues for nearly four decades . But he has also been shining the light on most overlooked issues for almost four decades.
Radical journalist David Talbot talks about burning topics in a new interview with fellow radical journalist .
 Hedges offers his unvarnished views on topics rarely aired by the corporate media . Hedges: The difficulty of challenging the prevailing story lines of elite consensus, the disturbing parallels between current United States and the collapse of Balkans society .
 Chris Hedges is unafraid to say what is necessary and true, and has always been . All of which is to say, he is to says, but he's always been.
 Baltimore blew up when Trayvon Martin was shot by a wannabe cop in Florida . Ferguson, Missouri, and then South Carolina hit the headlines; and then Baltimore blown up .
 D. Watkins is a rising young literary talent . Watkins is the author of a new book about the war zone in the U.S.
 He writes openly and unapologetically about what it took to survive life on the streets . His own brother was among the casualties, including his own brother .
Watkins was on the streets as Baltimore erupted as the city erupted . Baltimore residents finally decided they had had enough .
 He writes about his bleeding city with the razor-sharp insights of someone who bleeds along with it . He also shares his insights of his own bleeding city .
 President Trump will succeed despite behavior that would cripple any other politician .
 The Gilded Rage provides insight into the forgotten Americans that continue to befuddle pundits and “experts’ on CNN and FOX alike .
 This grippingly intimate and heart-breaking book provides a portrait of the walking wounded who make up the base of the Trump movement .
 These men and women feel forgotten and screwed over by political, corporate, and media elites . They feel that Donald Trump might well be their last chance for salvation .
 Alexander Zaitchik in this important book takes us deeper into the ravaged soul of America than any other chronicler of our times .
Scapegoats is an important book that shows Islamophobia must be addressed urgently . President Jimmy Carter never makes his religion the central issue, unless he is a Muslim .
 The Muslim faith has been criticized for its anti-Islamist views in the past . The Muslim community has a history of anti-Muslim sentiment .
 Bill Maher has made Islam a routine target for Fox News talking heads . Bill Maher regularly smear Muslim leaders as secret terrorists, to Bill Maher .
 Arsalan Iftikhar, better known as ‘The Muslim Guy, is a popular commentator . Now popular commentator, he has a passionate pushback .
 Iftikhar’s spirited defense of his faith is timelier than ever, as politicians, members of the Trump administration, and pundits vie to be the toughest on the block .
 The Hunting Ground is the award-winning documentary by filmmakers Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering . It has become a galvanizing catalyst for discussion at hundreds of campuses where the documentary is being screened each month .
 This companion volume is a companion volume to the film . It offers an inside perspective on the "rape culture" on campus . It also offers guidance on how to learn more and get active .
 The film is based on the personal stories told by female students . It's the first time the film has been released in the U.S.
 Snowden did it, but you need to know the stories of two other men . He did it in the way he did it. But if you want to know why it was done, you need the stories.
 The first is Thomas Drake, who blew the whistle on the very same surveillance ten years before Snowden did and got crushed . The first was Thomas Drake .
 Former Pentagon official describes how his superiors repeatedly broke the law to punish Drake . The other is The Third Man, a former senior Pentagon official who comes forward in this book .
 When insiders blow the whistle on high-level government or corporate lying, the public can benefit enormously, says John Sutter . Sutter says the public benefit enormously.
Liberty is defended, deadly products are taken off the market, and wars are ended . Liberty is defended. Liberty is also defended .
 The whistle-blowers generally end up ruined when they refuse to back down in the face of ferocious official retaliation . The whistleblowers themselves, however, often end up ruining their own life .
 This moral stubbornness despite terrible personal cost is the defining DNA of whistle-blowers, says the author . The author says this moral stubborns despite terriblepersonal cost is a defining DNA.
Lead journalists are seduced and manipulated by the agencies they cover, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: In many cases, this trust is misplaced, as leading journalists are manipulated by agencies .
Schou documents how the CIA has embedded itself in Hollywood to ensure that its spies get the hero treatment on-screen . The CIA has created a special public affairs unit to allow celebrities involved in pro-CIA projects .
Schou relates how the CIA vets articles on controversial topics such as the drone assassination program . Schou also gives friendly reporters background briefings on classified material .
 These revelations will help readers see the ways our media has been hijacked by the intelligence community and bring its activities to scrutiny .
 No high U.S. official has been prosecuted for violations of war crimes, many legal observers consider war crimes . But while the press occasionally exposes the dark side of the war on terror, no high United States officials have been prosecuted .
 The U.S. helped establish the international principles guiding the prosecution of war crimes . The Nuremberg tribunal followed World War II, when Nazi officials were held accountable for their crimes against humanity .
 The U.S. government and legal system have consistently refused to apply these same principles to our own officials . But the American government has consistently refused the same principles .
 Rebecca Gordon takes on the explosive task of “indicting’ing the officials who should be put on trial for war crimes . Gordon: “In a just society, officials in just society’s just society should be on trial.
 Some might dismiss this as a symbolic exercise, but what is at stake here is the very soul of the nation .
Military commanders are not victims of ruthless enemy warfare, but of their own military commanders . They are not the victims of brutal enemy warfare; they are the commanders of their military .
Military contractors incinerated mountains of trash, including old stockpiles of mustard and sarin gas, medical waste, and other toxic material . These soldiers, afflicted with rare cancers and respiratory diseases, were sickened from the smoke and ash swirling out of the "burn pits"
 Based on thousands of government documents, over five hundred indepth medical case studies, and interviews with more than one thousand veterans and active-duty Gls, The Burn Pits is a shocking read .
 The book is more than an explosive work of investigative journalism . It is the deeply moving chronicle of the many young men and women who signed up to serve their country in the wake of 9/11 .