 A thesis presented to the Faculty of the United States Army Command and General Staff College in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree MASTER of MILITARY ART and SCIENCE General Studies . Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited .
 Were Russian Unconventional Paramilitary Formations a key component 5b. Was a key part of the Russian Un Conventional Paramilitary Formations .
 Ukraine is now on the front line of a new generation of hostilities, in which Russia is overshadowing the boundary between war and peace .
 For Ukraine the point of reference in this new generation of war has become the Kremlin’s seizure and annexation of the Ukrainian Crimea in February-March 2014 .
 In April 2014, Russia began an armed conflict on the Eastern part of Ukraine, which continues to this day . Two months later, in April 2014. Two months after the conflict began, the conflict continues to continue .
 The Kremlin says the ethnic Russians in the Crimea used the international right to selfdetermination and armed conflict in the Donbas . Retired U.S. Army generals Wesley Clark and John M Keane highlight the “truth is that it is a planned, guided and financed Russian new generation of
 The work analyzes two case studies assessing the role of Russian unconventional paramilitary formations during the Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine .
 Author provides recommendations which may help to develop an effective strategy of reforming and modifying the Ukrainian army for a successful counter-action in the future .
 There is a threat of a repetition of the Ukrainian scenario in the Baltic States . The material presented in this research can be useful for European security experts .
 Russian Hybrid War, Russian Unconventional Paramilitary Fomations, Russian-Ukrainian War 16. The Russian-Ukraine War 16 .
 The opinions and conclusions are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College or any other governmental agency .
Sergii Sundukov, Lieutenant Commander, 88 pages . RUSSIAN UNCONVENTIONAL PARAMILITARY FORMATIONS .
 Ukraine is now on the front line of a new generation of hostilities, in which Russia is overshadowing the boundary between war and peace . Russia is overshadowed by the border between the two countries .
 The Kremlin says the ethnic Russians in the Crimea used the international right to selfdetermination and armed conflict in the Donbas . Retired U.S. Army generals Wesley Clark and John M Keane highlight the “truth is that it is a planned, guided and financed Russian new generation of
 The material presented in this research can be useful for European security experts since there is a threat of a repetition of the Ukrainian scenario in the Baltic States . This thesis was possible only through the support and assistance of many people .
Dr. Gregory Beck's thesis committee. First, he would like to thank the members of his thesis committee .
 I am grateful that you believed in me and helped me make it to the end. I'm grateful that I was able to do so. I am also grateful to the people who helped me get through the tough times .
 I appreciate the countless hours you spent reading and rereading this work, sharing your knowledge, offering guidance, and providing motivation when necessary . I thank you for your work and for your knowledge .
 Mobilization and concentration is not part of the period after the onset of the state of war as was the case in 1914 . But rather, it proceeds long before that .
 The Kremlin says the ethnic Russians in the Crimea used the international right to self-determination embedded in the U.N. Charter . Retired U.S. Army generals Wesley Clark and John M Keane highlight the “truth is that it is a planned, guided and financed Russian new
 Crimea was gifted to Ukraine in 1954 by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Crimea remained culturally and politically linked to Russia until the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics collapsed in 1991 .
 Ethnic Russians made up 65 percent of Crimea’s total population at the beginning of 2014 . Ethnic Russians make up 65% of Crimea's total population .
 The Ukraine Government suspended the process of signing the Association Agreement with the European Union . The decision to suspend the process led to a protracted political crisis .
 On February 2014 a massive peaceful protest action in the center of Kyiv took on a sharply radical anti-presidential and anti-government character .
After Yanukovych the state was headed by the chairman of parliament, Alexander Turchinov . After Yanukovych the country was headed at that time, he was in charge of the state .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin confessed in a documentary Crimea .
 The Way Home, after the November events in Ukraine, started working on returning Crimea to Russia . He could not leave Crimea with Ukrainian Government because he was not allowed to leave Crimea .
 After President Yanukovych left the country, demonstrations arose in Crimea promoting the idea of Crimea re-joining Russia .
 The first demonstration, organized by Russia, occurred in Sevastopol, Russia, on February 27, 2014 .
 organized groups of armed men supported by the unrecognized armed forces units started to blockade the Ukrainian military bases . The Ukrainian Military demanded that the Ukrainian Military lay down their arms and surrender the bases .
 Russian political pressures led to a Crimean referendum where the majority of the Crimean population voted in favor of Crimea joining Russia Federation .
 Anton Alex Bebler is a Slovenian professor of Political Science and Defence Sciences . He studies the conflict between Russia and Ukraine . Bebler identified several factors 6 Andrey Kondrashev, ‘Crimea.’
 A major advantage for the Russians during the annexation was the number of Russian military personnel in Crimea .
 The Russian Naval Forces had been stationed in the region since 1997 as a part of agreement with the Ukrainian Government permitting them to have up to 25,000 troops in the Crimea .
 The second factor is the short distance to the strategic objects in the Crimea that allowed for the quick insertion and the acquisition of targets . The third factor is a short distance from the strategic object in Crimea that allows for quick insertion.
 The third factor is; orders which were given by Kyiv to the Ukrainian Military not to resist . The orders were given to Kyiv by the Ukrainian military to not resist .
 Oleksandr Turchynov says Russia had 200,000 Russian troops ready for an immediate invasion of Ukraine in February 2014 . The Ukrainian Armed Forces resisted or defended Crimea, he says .
About 70 percent of Crimea-stationed Ukrainian military members became turncoats . Some Ukrainian Navy commanding admirals were turnedcoats.
 armed groups of men took over the local police departments and city commission government buildings across Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine . Twenty days later after the annexation of Crimea, armed groups took over police and city commissions buildings across Ukraine .
 insurgents distributed the weapons taken from police armories to crowds of the local pro-Russian population who supported the insurgents’ actions .
Mass demonstrations were organized in the administrative centers of the regions to support the separation of two eastern regions from Ukraine, followed by a referendum . The Crimea scenario was similar to the Crimea scenario .
 This was the beginning of destabilizing of the situation in the east of Ukraine, which later turned into a full armed conflict . This is the first time the conflict has become a full conflict .
 The main components were Russian conventional forces and unconventional paramilitary formations which are different by purpose and structure . The main part of the Russian forces were conventional forces.
 Ukraine continues to face hybrid threats that create the current and future security situation in the state . Ukraine today continues to be under threat from hybrid threats .
 Ukraine has gotten it is critical to develop an effective strategy for countering the Russian military assets in a hybrid war . Based on experience that Ukraine has got it is crucial to develop a strategy .
 The first step will be correctly identify the key component of military assets which has led the Kremlin to achieve their desired intent . In order to complete that task the first step is to identify the main component of the military assets .
 More specific research questions need to be presented and answered . In order to answer the primary research question, more specific questions must be presented .
 Ukrainian Forefront (Kharkiv: National Institute for Strategic Studies, 2017), 89, is the latest in a long line of studies .
 The author will be able to determine the criteria which will be used during analysis . Through answering these questions the author will determine the specific criteria which is used .
 Significance of the Study has been almost five years since the annexation of Crimea and the beginning of the war in Eastern Ukraine .
 A large number of scientists, military theorists and specialists of military sciences devoted their research work to the Russian Hybrid War .
 There is no definitive answer to the question which actors played a key role during the military operations on the annexation or in the east of Ukraine .
 Attempting an answer to this question will probably help to develop an effective strategy of reforming the Ukrainian Army for a successful counter-action in the future .
 There is a threat of a repetition of the Ukrainian scenario in the Baltic States . The material presented in this research can be useful for European security experts .
 Ukraine has changed the foreign policy vector toward joining the EU and The North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Russia will keep the Donbass territory in a state of chaos and instability .
 The longer this situation exists, the longer Russia will attempt to negotiate a political solution favorable to itself . Russia will try to negotiate an agreement favorable to its own interests .
 There is a possibility of escalation of conflict with the application of unconventional paramilitary formations . There is also a possibility.
 Research conducted in this thesis will be based on understanding and interpreting unclassified sources of information written in the English, Ukrainian, and Russian languages .
 This study focuses only on military activities conducted by the Russian Federation during Crimean annexation and war in Donbass .
 Study will be restricted to events that happened in Ukraine between 2014 and 2015 . Study conducted in this thesis will be carried out in Ukraine .
 The activities of RCF and RUPF during Crimean annexation and war in Donbass were accompanied by Information operations in support of Russian actions .
 In this research, the information operations component will not be considered . The information operations part of the research will be not considered .
 The definition of Russian unconventional paramilitary formations would not entail RCF, special operation forces, and Russian military advisers which took part during operations in Ukraine 2014 and 2015 .
 The hostilities are taking place in this area from April 2014 to the present . The hostilities have been taking place since then .
 Responsible for conducting operations in the military, military-political,Military-political and military-technical, military9 economic spheres . Responsibility for conducting military operations in military, political, military and economic spheres.
 The organizational structure of GU includes several units, such as spying bureaus, signal intelligence units and other units . The organization is called GU .
 The Special Operations Forces of Russia under the Special Operations forces Command of the GU was established in 2013 . The Special Operation Forces Command of Russia was set up in 2013.
 The organizational structure of SOF is kept secret but possibly includes Army special operation brigades and naval special operations brigades . The organization's organizational structure is still kept secret .
 Information was taken from TRADOC G-2 Analysis and Control Element , Threat Tactics Report .
 This chapter will show and discuss the breadth and depth of materials and significance that relate to this research . The chapter will also discuss the depth of material and significance of this research. This chapter is the first of its kind .
 What is Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine and its primary characteristics are the main characteristics of it .
 There are sufficient numbers of available sources such as books, publications, journals, and monographs written on related topics . There are enough numbers of books and publications to use .
 The paper uses Ukrainian, Russian, European and United States sources . In order to avoid biases and provide a qualitative assessment, the paper uses Ukraine and Russian sources .
 The literature review consists of distinct blocks . The first refers to Russian Hybrid Strategy and Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine with its primary characteristics .
 The second block refers to Russian unconventional paramilitary formation and its characteristic application and activities, as an element of hybrid war . The secondBlock refers to Russia's unconventional paramilitary formations .
 We can determine what we understand as the Russia’s Hybrid War against Ukraine, based on empirical data filling in the definition of the war .
 The lack of a clear definition is associated with the fluid dynamics of this phenomenon and uniqueness in each particular case . The absence of aclear definition is linked to this phenomenon .
 The first definition of hybrid war was made by Frank G Hoffman who has been dedicated to studying this phenomenon for more than 10 years .
 Hoffman analyzed the changing nature of modern wars . He considered the debate about the evolution of modern warfare .
Future opponents are capable and willing to use a combination of such capabilities . Future opponents are able to use such capabilities.
 In 2009 Hoffman published another article ‘Hybrid Warfare and Challenges’ which identified that a hybrid war can be performed by state and non-state actors . “Hybrid warfare and challenges’s’ can be done by state, non- state actors.
 Under the term non-state actors the author implies irregular forces and their activities . The author implies the author's involvement in the activities .
 He agrees that non-state actors conducting hybrid wars in a modern operating environment can act with the lethality of state actors . He says non- state actors in modern operating environments can act in the same way .
 The access to modern weapons, combined with modern forms of communication and interaction, makes non-state actors more capable of confronting the state . The use of modern weapons and communication make non- state actors more able to confront the state.
In 2012, Hoffman clarified his definition of hybrid war by adding ‘simultaneous’ to use of conventional and irregular military assets . Hoffman continued to study the phenomenon of hybridwar and in 2012, he added “simultaneously’
 The hybrid war has adapted to its current manifestation. Which makes the definition of the hybrid war adapted to the current manifestation .
 Study will use Hoffman’s definition of hybrid war to achieve the desired political and military goals .
 Ukrainian specialists say hybrid war is a modern phenomenon of hybrid war . It will be logical to consider the opinion of Ukrainian specialists about hybrid war given their experiences .
 Volodymyr Horbulin is one of the leading Ukrainian specialists who is studying the question of Russian aggression against Ukraine . He is a leading Ukrainian expert who is also studying the issue of Russian aggressions against Ukraine.
 He is a Ukrainian politician, a member of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . He is Director of the Institute of National Security Problems at the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine.
 The term ‘hybrid war’ became part of global political science terminology after the shock of the Munich Security Conference in 2007 .
Under the concept of Russian Hybrid War, he determined the application of methods used by Russia . He determined the use of traditional military means, special operations and subversion methods .
 The author's point of view that term is theoretically and practically the most appropriate for determining the specifics of Russia’s actions against Ukraine .
 Ukrainian expert's definition is similar to the definition of hybrid war presented by Hoffman . He describes in more detail the specific means used by Russia against Ukraine .
 Russia applies all elements in a coherent and interconnected manner, says the author . Russia's example is unique, he says, because it is unique .
Horbulin gives an expert assessment of the possibilities of the emergence of hybrid conflicts in other states of the world . Horbulin describes in detail the preconditions, possible indicators and methods of counteraction .
Horbulin’s monograph is the first and only publication in Ukraine covering issues of the Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine .
 The new Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed the economic part of the Ukraine– European Union Association Agreement and described this as Ukraine’s ‘first but most decisive step’ towards EU membership .
 President Poroshenko initiated the process for the accession of Ukraine to the NATO alliance with European and U.S. partners .
 The Kremlin would be a colossal defeat for the Kremlin in the international political arena . It would be the first time the Kremlin has lost in the political arena.
In case Ukraine would join NATO, Russia will appear surrounded by the Allied countries .
 From Russia’s perspective, this would create a threat to its national security, and would change the balance of power in the region . From Russia's perspective, it would create an issue of national security .
 Specialists of the Center conducted research on the characteristics of the Russian Hybrid War in general and its individual elements . Former diplomats and representatives of special services of Ukraine conducted research .
 The new type of war has a hidden character and is observed mainly in the political, economic, informational and diplomatic spheres . The new kind of war is seen mainly in political and economic, economic and informational spheres .
 The conventional force methods for solving individual problems are involved in a small number of cases . The force methods are used to solve individual problems .
 The characteristics of Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine will be defined by the following . For the purpose of this study the characteristics of the Russian hybrid war against Ukraine would be defined .
 The purpose of the active phase was the occupation of the Crimea and the continuation of destabilization of the situation in Ukraine through the initiation of the armed conflict in the east of Ukraine .
 The implementation of the active phase became possible due to the synchronized use of military, quasi-military and informational elements of hybrid war . The implementation became possible because of the use of the military and quasi- military elements of the hybrid war.
 The second phase of the hybrid war was the annexation of the Crimea and the formation in February 2015 of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics . The result of the second phase was the annexing of Crimea .
 Russia moved to the third phase of the hybrid war. With the creation of self-proclaimed republics, Russia moves to the fourth phase of its hybrid war .
During this phase the Russian Federation is trying to “freeze the conflict in Eastern Ukraine’s Eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian Government is forcing the Ukrainian Government to recognize the separatists in a ‘negotiating process’
 Russia continues to use all elements of the hybrid war to increase pressure on Ukraine . Russia is increasing its troop presence near Ukrainian borders .
 Russia denies its participation in the conflict and at the same time conducts a large-scale information campaign against Ukraine’s orientation .
 This article provides a lot of insight into conceptualization and understanding of Russian Hybrid War . For the purpose of this study, this study will be used for describing the characteristic of Russian hybrid War .
 In February 2013 the Chief of General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, Army General Valery Gerasimov, published in the weekly Russian newspaper Military Industrial Courier . The article entitled “The value of science in the foresight.’
 He based on the Soviet Union’s military tactics of strategic management . 20 developed a new theory of modern war .
 Gerasimov wrote that in the XXI century there is a tendency to erase the differences between the state of war and peace .
Gerasimov never used the word hybrid war and only referred three times to “asymmetric’s forms of conflict. It should be noted that in the article GerasimovNever used the term hybrid war .
 The Russian Hybrid War definition is a combination of traditional military and information . It highlights the Russian hybrid war definition as well as information, political, economic and diplomatic pressures .
 Russia implements political and diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions, economic blockade, conducts an informational campaign and military operations . During initial conflicting actions and “crisis’s’ phases Russia implementsPolitical and diplomatic Pressure, economic pressure and economic sanctions .
Gerasimov states that the correlation of non-kinetic to kinetic methods is 4 to 1 . Gerasimov says the correlation is 4-1 .
 There are a lot of available sources about the Russian military component, its composition, and activities used during Crimea annexation and the war on Donbass . There are also available sources.
 Western and domestic sources supplement information about this question . Western and Domestic sources supplement info about this issue .
 The expert's point of view is different in regards to which units played a key role in those case studies . Despite this, the expert’s points of view are different in relation to how units played an important role in the study .
 RUPF will be considered a variety of pro-Russian insurgent and militia organizations utilizing irregular tactics . The study will focus on the principles of unity of control applied by Russia during the Crimean annexation and war at Eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Forefront provides insights into the utilization of military components during the Crimean occupation and conflict on Donbass .
 The analysis is based on official information, with reference to sources such as the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense and testimony of direct participants .
 The author focuses on the application of pro-Russian militias and Insurgent Organizations as the effective element of RUPF in the Donbass .
 Horbulin followed the transformation of ways of implementing the pro-Russian Militias and Insurgent Organizations based on analysis of the active phase of the conflict, starting with the Crimean events in February 2014 till 2017 .
 The author emphasized that Russia was flexible in its application of pro-Russian militias . Russia is flexible in the application of its militias and constantly changed the concept of their application .
 The author says changes also took place in the organizational structure of pro-Russian Militias and Insurgent organizations .
 At the initial stage, these were decentralized formations headed by retired officers, experienced veterans, and mercenaries . At the first stage, they were headed by Russian retired officers.
After the reorganization, paramilitary units got effective mission command systems . Subsequently, after the reorganizing, paramilitary groups got effective command systems.
 To increase the combat capability and efficiency quasimilitaries needed to organize effective training. To increase combat capability, training is needed to increase the effectiveness of combat training .
 Russia supported paramilitary units with weapons and heavy military equipment . There was also a need for training operators .
 In the following chapters, the author examines in detail the operations where pro-Russian 24 Militias and Insurgent organizations fought against UAF units .
 The author emphasized that Russian Military success in Crimea and in the Donbass region depended on the effective implementation of paramilitary units in the right place at the right time .
 The monograph of Horbulin represents the one of the most complete sources that can be helpful to answer the main research question .
 The Russian forces include the naval infantry, the Airborne Forces and the special operation forces units . The Russian army includes the airborne forces and special operation units .
 From these authors’ point of view the use of these units led to the success of the entire operation, says the authors .
 Employment of high-proficiency units, used undercover, managed to save control of Russia’s own forces and prevented unexpected crises .
 Moscow used the separatist armed units formed from volunteers from Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine . Moscow also used mercenaries from the Russian Federation and abroad .
 As a rule, armed units of the separatists were headed by retired officers of the Russian Armed Forces . They were 43 Horbulin, The World Hybrid War, 270 .
 Russia was difficult to implement a coordinated management of these units . Russia was not able to manage these units as a result .
 The activities of these units were characterized by the lack of coordinated actions at the operational level of combat operations . The activities were described by the absence of coordinated operations .
 Low staff training and low level of discipline led to significant losses in equipment and personnel during combat operations . The loss of equipment, personnel and equipment was significant.
 The use of RUPF provoked more chaos than reaching the planned Moscow objectives, Kofman and Migacheva say .
 Russia will avoid the formation and use of RUPF in the accomplishment of military objectives as a part of Hybrid War . The authors suggest that in the future, Russia will not use RUPf in a Hybrid War.
 The Russian private military companies are no less important as a tool in RUPF . They were widely used during 2014 and 2015 . The Russian Private Military Companies in a Russian Hybrid War .
Until recently, Private Military Companies were considered to be nongovernment contractors that provide professional security services . Until recently, private military companies had been considered to provide security services.
 Their tasks were mainly limited to the protection of production facilities, the escort of valuable goods or protection of Very Important Persons from attacks .
 Russian Private Armies conducted an analysis of the history and present-day use by the Russian Federation of PMC for the achievement of military objectives in the context of Hybrid War .
 The authors say there is irrefutable evidence of the participation of seven private companies in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine from 2014 to 2015 .
The main task was to conduct reconnaissance and sabotage activities against the armed forces of Ukraine . The main task is to conduct reconnaissance and sabotage activities .
 Wagner's Group was the most capable and famous PMC which operated in Ukraine . Wagner’s Group was a successful PMC.
 The first testing ground for the Wagner Group was the Ukrainian Crimea . The Wagner Group is based in Ukraine .
 Russian troops struggled to hide their identity and avoid identification . Wagner's PMC was quite well suited to conduct certain tasks in Crimea .
 This Threat Tactics Report focuses on three distinct operations initiated by Russia in Georgia in 2008, Crimea in 2014, and Eastern Ukraine in 2014 and 2015 . The report also focuses on Russia's actions in Georgia, Ukraine and Ukraine in the past .
 The Threat Tactics Report presents and analyzes the tactics used in these conflicts . It also analyzes tactics used by the Russian Armed Forces .
 The authors analyzed in detail the composition and interconnection of conventional and unconventional components used by Russia during Crimean annexation and war in Donbass . The significance of the work is that the authors have analyzed in Detail the composition of conventional, unconventional components.
 The authors identified critical operations which led Russia to successes during both case studies . RUPF contribution to achievement of the military objectives .
Critical operations will help to determine the specific criteria which will be used during analysis in order to answer the primary research question . Those critical operations will also help determine the exact criteria for the analysis .
 The first part of this chapter considers the literature that defines and characterizes the main features of the Russian Hybrid War against Ukraine . The second part considers the Literature that defines the main feature of the Russia Hybrid War .
 The second part presents sources that reveal the RUPF composition and activities that may have played a major role during the Russian War against Ukraine . The secondPart presents sources.
 The sources which were used in the work represent both Western, Russian and Ukrainian specialists points of view . The sources were used by both Western and Russian specialists .
 This will help to avoid subjectivism during the attempt to answer the main research question . This will be used to help avoid subjectivist during the research question.
 The Gerasimov Doctrine describes current Russian actions against Ukraine as the “Modern type of War’s’.
 The next chapter will provide the methodology used by this study to answer the primary and secondary research questions . The study will also provide the methods used by the study to answers the questions .
Research paper concentrates on descriptive content analysis of primary and secondary information to examine the RUPF during Crimea annexation and war in Donbass as an element of Russian Hybrid War .
 This chapter will discuss the research methodology designed to answer the primary and secondary research questions . The chapter will also discuss research methodology for secondary research .
 Research is significant help to the Ukrainian Army to develop an effective strategy of reforming and modifying their army for a successful counter-action in the future .
 The material presented in this research could be useful for European Security since there is a threat of a repetition of the Ukrainian scenario in the Baltic States .
 The purpose of this study is to examine the role of RUPF during the Hybrid War against Ukraine. Purpose and Organization are the purpose of the study .
 The purpose of this chapter is to present the academic methodology which guided research and describe the process of how each case study is analyzed . The purpose is to show how each study is analysed .
 John Creswell, in order to explain how analysis is derived from cases, he says . John C Reswell is a former journalist and author of the book, "Creswell"
 Third, this chapter delineates the process used for evidence collection and a method for analysis . This chapter also includes the method for analyzing evidence .
 Methodology will be conducted using a qualitative methodology based on case studies . This research will be done using a quizative methodology .
 Creswell argues that it is the obligation of the researcher to determine the number of cases required, identify the individual cases, explain why these cases facilitate a greater understanding of the research topic .
 The first case study is the 2014 Russian Hybrid campaign as a result of which during less than one month Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula . The 2014 Russian hybrid campaign is the first of which Russia has taken control of the peninsula .
 It examines application of both conventional and nonconventional, quasi-military assets and activities . It examines applications of both traditional and non-conventional assets and activity .
 The second case study covers the Russian campaign in Donbass in the 2014 to 2016 time period . The second study covers Russia's 2014-2016 election campaign .
 During this time there was a destabilization of the situation in the Donbass region . The region was followed by active military operations with use of a quasi-military component .
 The research data will be collected from the primary (Ukrainian and Russian texts) and secondary sources .
 A significant amount of research was conducted via the Ike Skelton Combined Arms Research Library . The library is based in the UK .
 secondary sources include books, reports, scholarly journals, magazine articles and digital resources . The secondary sources consist of the variety of literature .
 Reviewing multiple data sources increased the credibility and validity of the research . Reviewing several data sources included reports, news articles, scholarly journal articles, books, student papers and indepth .
 The collection and selection of data and information were developed in the first phase . The collection of data was developed in a first phase.
 Second phase was to categorize information resources and distinct relations of primary and secondary research questions . The second phase was the second phase of categorization of information resources .
 The second phase established methods, criteria, and metrics of comparison between cases of unconventional paramilitary formation operations . The third phase also established methods and criteria for comparison between unconventional formations .
 In the final phase, collected data and information is compared and analyzed to formulate a clear and concise conclusion . The final phase of the analysis is compared to the previous phase .
 The methodology used for this study is a qualitative content analysis method of research aimed at assessing both case studies by sequential consideration of the critical operations that occurred during Crimea annexation and War in Donbass .
 The RUPF were a key component during Crimea annexation and war in Donbass as an element of Russian Hybrid War . Once case studies have been analyzed, key deductions will be consolidated and used .
 A preponderance of evidence for each criteria will be the metric to determine how Russia employed RUPF, how effective they were, and if they were a key component of Russian Hybrid War . The metric will be used to determine the effectiveness of Russia's military forces .
 Below is an illustration of how text will be analyzed in an effort to visually depict the paragraph structure in the analysis portion of the case studies . The illustration is an attempt to visually show the structure of the paragraphs in the analyzed portion of case studies.
 Applicability of the conclusions beyond the examined cases requires further research. Applicability to the conclusions of the cases requires more research .
 Two case studies will provide the appropriate breadth and depth necessary to determine key findings . Two cases will provide a range of studies to determine the depth and breadth of the study .
 chapter 3 defines the process through which the case study will be analyzed, as seen in the above illustration . Chapter 3 defines how case study is analyzed .
The following chapter examines and analyzes the details of the two case studies . The following chapter analyzes and analyses the facts of the case studies.
 Crimea annexation case study will be followed by the war in the Donbass case . First, the Crimea annexation cases will be considered by the Crimean war .
 Chapter 4 concludes with a cross comparison of the individually evaluated case studies . The study is based on a study of a number of different cases .
 The organization of chapter 4 includes a detailed description of the critical operations conducted by conventional forces and Russian unconventional paramilitary formations during the Crimea annexation and war in the Donbass 2014 and 2015 .
After the description of each critical operation, will be a transition into the analysis of the supporting questions, as depicted in chapter 3 .
Based on this agreement Russia could increase the number of military units if needed . Russia could also increase the numbers of units if necessary .
 Initiation of Anti-Government Demonstrations February 23, 2014 was the official launching date of the Crimean occupation operation . February 23 is the official launch date.
 At an early stage the Kremlin expected to capture Crimea exclusively by non-kinetic methods .
 Russian undercover SOF operatives and pro-Russian Cossacks from Kuban, Rostov-na-Don and Serbia were to initiate anti-Ukrainian demonstrations in Crimean cities of Simferopol and Sevastopol .
 Crimean parliamentarians were supposed to hold a general referendum on the accession of Crimea to Russia . Then in response to popular calls, with support of SOF operatives, the Crimean parliamentarian was supposed to make a decision .
 Russian mass media announced about 20,000 participants . Local sources reported about three thousand participants .
 The aim was to destabilize the situation on the peninsula and create conditions for a decision to hold a referendum . The aim is to destabilise the situation.
 The representative of a Cossacks organization was spotted during demonstrations . He was spotted wearing camouflage uniforms and Cossack hat .
 In the meantime, people went to a big rally on Lenin Square in Simferopol .
 The demonstration consisted of pro-Russian-dominated representatives as well as supporters of a united Ukraine, and Crimean Tatars who also supported the Ukrainian Crimea .
 During the demonstration, the first clashes between representatives of opposition groups were observed .
 During the period from 23 to 26 February, pro-Russian demonstrations covered almost the entire peninsula . Tensions on the Crimea Peninsula gradually escalated .
Deputies of the State Duma of the Russian Federation arrived in Crimea to assist the Crimean parliament to decide on a referendum . The Crimean parliament will decide on the referendum on February 26 .
 Russian parliamentarians planned to hold a closed session of the Crimean Parliament to decide on a request for assistance from Russia in order to protect the Crimean Peninsula from Ukrainian nationalists and conduct a referendum .
 Representatives of the supporters of Russia turned out about five thousand people . About five thousand Russians turned out to support Russia .
 Russian leadership did not expect that 12,000 people would come out in support of Ukraine . But they quickly suppressed the opposition forces and prevented Crimean parliamentarians from entering the session hall .
 Russia used RUPF basically in a supporting role in anti-government demonstration operations . GU agents and SOF operatives were the main assets .
 GU and SOF organized the coordination center in Sevastopol which conducted planning, organization and allocation of financial resources for anti-government demonstrations . Allegedly, GU andSOF organized.
 The only representatives of RUPF were the Cossacks organizations . Their primary objective was to prevent intervention of Ukrainian Law enforcement units .
 Kremlin authorities did not achieve their desired end state. Effectiveness at this point was not achieved .
 The Ukrainian demonstrator's capabilities were able to prevent the Crimean parliamentary sessions . However, the significant miscalculation was the insufficient appreciation of the demonstrator’s capabilities .
 President Putin ordered the Ministry of Defense to conduct a spontaneous and comprehensive inspection of Western and Central Military Districts forces combat readiness . The Crimean Parliament, Cabinet of Ministers, and SBU Departments took over the Crimean Parliament .
 The Russian Federation announced four-day military exercises along the Russian-Ukrainian border . The exercises are part of a series of exercises between Russia and Ukraine .
 Russian military authorities started to project forces into Crimea under cover of military exercise .
 Russian Defense Minister says increase in number of Russian Military in Crimea was because of the need to reinforce the protection of Russian Federation strategic military infrastructure located in Crimea .
 The next day, on February 27, at 4.20m. less than a company of well-armed military personnel took over the Crimean Parliament and Cabinet of Ministers' buildings in Simferopol .
There are alternative viewpoints that exist that exist which suggested that taking over the administration building in Simferopol was conducted by unconventional paramilitary formations .
 An Analysis of Russia’s Operations in the Near Abroad stated that ‘local paramilitary forces and Cossacks stormed the parliament’ on February 27 .
 Most of the U.S. and Ukrainian sources assume that operation was conducted by professional Russian Military . In spite of a variety of opinions most of the United States and Ukraine sources assume it was done by a professional Russian military .
 Ukrainian analyst Volodymyr Horbulin in his research assumes that the primary role in the takeover operation was played by Russian military personel undercover . Horbulin says it was representatives from Russian SOF units .
 The next day, Acting President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov issued an order to local SBU and the National Police departments to regain control of government buildings .
 The SBU and NP leadership remained reluctant to comply with the order . They had defected to the 62 Bukkvoll, “Russian Special Operations Forces in Crimea and Donbas,’ 17.
 An Analysis of Russia's Operations in the Near Abroad ” (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2015)
 RUPF used intimidation, bribery and blackmail. Against NP and SBU officers who resisted, the RUPf used intimidation and blackmail .
 The Crimean Parliament and Cabinet of Ministers’ buildings were seized by force . The main task of this stage was the seizing of the Crimean Parliament .
 Crimean parliamentarians made the decision about the initiation of the process of Crimean separation from Ukraine and conducting the following referendum . The Crimean parliamentarian made a decision on the process .
 The decision was made to hold a referendum on the separation of the Crimea from Ukraine during the parliament session on March 14, 2014 . The 65 Ukrainian collaborator Sergei Aksenov was elected prime minister of Crimea .
 Prime Minister Aksenov's actions contributed to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . The actions of PM Aksensov contributed to accelerating the process of annexing Crimea .
 RUPF is most likely representatives of Russian Armed Forces . Most prominent role played in the Russian Campaign . RupF is the most prominent role in the campaign .
 Russia employed conventional forces to take over the Crimean Parliament and Cabinet of Ministers’ buildings . Russia used conventional forces.
 RUPF continued to play a secondary role taking part in demonstrations to support Crimea's reunification with Russia . In that activity, they continued to take part in protests to support the reunification of Crimea .
 RUPF were employed for intimidation, bribery and blackmail of SBU and NP officers who had resisted . Also employed for intimidating, bribery, and blackmailing SBU officers who resisted .
SBU and local NP leadership defected to the Russian side without any resistance . SBU and Local NP leadershipdefected to Russian side with no resistance from any resistance.
 Crimean Peninsula is connected to mainland Ukraine, forming the Perekop Isthmus . Taking over the Transportation Hubs and Communications Networks in the north.
 In parallel with the seizure of the Crimean Parliament on February 27, the blockade of large transportation arteries began .
 The main highways toward to the major cities of Crimea such as Sevastopol and Simferopol were blocked . Then the main highways to the Crimea were blocked.
 The RUPF established checkpoints and inspected all transport and population . The RupF established checkpoints and inspected the population .
Only the population with a Crimean registration was allowed to pass through . Only the population of a Crimean population was allowed through .
 Armed Cossack units and local self-defense detachments are formed of pro-Russian volunteers . They are manned and secured checkpoints .
 All internal and external flights were canceled and the staff were removed from their jobs . The staff were also removed from the jobs .
 The airport was fully under the control of the Russian Military, but continued to carry out all scheduled flights . The airport has been fully under control of Russian Military .
 Crimea was transformed into an informational isolated island on February 28 by unknown forces . Crimea was turned into an information isolated island in February by unknown force .
 Urktelecom is the primary telephone and Internet communications provider in the region . It is also the main telephone and internet communications provider.
 The company lost the technical ability to provide a link between the peninsula and the rest of Ukraine, as well as on the peninsula itself .
 Several fiber-optic main cables of the company were physically damaged . As a result of the actions of the “unknowns,’s’ actions, the company says .
 During 28 February, Russian military personnel who were supported by local self-defense units took control of the Crimean State Television Company .
 The information and communication blockade of the peninsula took place . Thus, the information and communications blockade took place, according to a report .
 The role of RUPF in this stage of the Russian Crimean annexation was secondary. Employment was secondary to the role of the group in the Crimea annexation .
 As in previous stages they performed supporting action while the conventional Russian Forces conducted critical actions . The Russian Forces performed critical actions while the Russian Forces did not .
 RUPF represented by Cossacks and local self-defense units were only responsible for establishing the checkpoints on the main roads that connected the Crimea Peninsula and Ukraine .
 No doubt that RUPF's actions were effective, according to the report . There is no doubt that it was effective .
 Controlling the main roads allowed Russia to prevent possible projection of Ukrainian Armed forces by land . Controlling main roads helped Russia prevent possible deployment of Ukraine Armed Forces by land.
 control of major airports gave Russia ability to regulate what forces could be brought into Crimea by air .
 Russia completely blocked transmitting Ukrainian mass media thought TV and Ethernet . Russia also blocked transmitting Ukraine's national television and Ethernet networks .
Attackers are allowed to shape their message to those living on the peninsula, in other words conduct informational operations . It is allowed the attackers to not just transmit, but shape their messages .
 Russia continues to increase the number of military forces on the peninsula .
Self-proclaimed prime minister of Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov, declared that he had exclusive control over the local police . He requested that Putin help in the protection of the region .
 referendum on the independence of Crimea was scheduled for March 30 (this later date had been changed from March 16, 71 TRADOC G-2 Analysis and Control Element Threats Integration, Threat Tactics Report, Russia, 27. He noted that the referendum was scheduled to
 Putin’s plan was to take over all Ukrainian military bases and force the Ukrainian military personnel to abandon Crimean territory by the referendum date .
 Around 10 armored tactical vehicles and 8×8 wheeled amphibious armored personnel carriers arrived for reinforcement . Later, around 10 armoredTactical vehicles and eight-wheeled armored carriers arrived .
 By morning the Ukrainian military base was completely surrounded by Russian Military .
 At that time, only about 60 Ukrainian military personnel were inside the base . At the time, there were about 60 military personnel .
 Ukrainian officers and soldiers tried to get inside the base during the day . During the day any attempt by Ukrainian police and soldiers were thwarted .
 Rear Admiral Denis Berezovsky switched to the Russian side . The commander of the Naval Forces of Ukraine in Sevastopol switched to Russia .
 The Ukrainian military contingent on the peninsula became isolated, and remained in place without guidance . The military contingent became isolated .
 The Russians started to take over the Ukrainian warships in March 2014 .
 This was done by blocking Ukrainian ships at the port exits preventing them from access to the open sea . This is the first time this has been done.
 The flooding of old ships at the exit of the bay completely blocked Ukrainian ships inside . The widespread tactic was the flooding of ships.
 Russian crew members captured Ukrainian ships using high-speed boats . After that, Russian crew member captured Ukrainian vessels using high speed boats .
 The blockade of the Ukrainian Fleet in Donuzlav lasted from March 3 to March 27, 2014 .
 Russian conventional forces took over two Coast Guard bases in Kerch and Balaclava . In a similar scenario, the Russian Coast Guard took over the two bases .
 The only difference was that Russian military personal did not hide their belonging to the Russian Army . The only differences was that Russia's military personal didn't hide their own military personal .
 The RUPF, in particular Cossack units, were used primarily to secure the area around the bases from civilians . The RupF was also used to secure areas around the base from civilians.
 The Russian Army and RUPF used a combination of naval and land blockades to prevent the Ukrainian Military from getting inside or outside of their bases .
 All actions were supported by psychological warfare, intimidation, and bribery to convince most Ukrainian units to surrender without offering resistance .
 In units whose commanders initially refused to surrender, a few well-placed shots and a couple of resulting casualties typically sufficed to quickly change the resistors’ minds .
 Crimea was the major theater of the conflict in Ukraine . In February and March of 2014, Crimea was a major theater in the conflict .
 In the same time the protests against the new Ukrainian Government began in almost all major cities of Eastern Ukraine .
 Starting from April 2014, the epicenter of the conflict shifted to the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The conflict began in April 2014 .
 Following the same scenario as in Crimea, Russia actively started to destabilize the situation in the region by organizing the anti-Ukrainian protests .
Anti-government demonstrations and seizing the RSA activities will be considered as one activity because those events occurred in the same time . In this part the anti-government protests and seize the RSA events will be seen as one.
 Ukrainian Parliament voted to repeal the official status of the Russian language in February 2014 . A major part of Ukraine's population speaks Russian .
Pro-Russian population in the region are protesting against the Russian government . This event, coupled with the Russian intent to destabilize the region, encouraged the pro-Russia population to protest .
 At the same time Russia sent to Ukraine the first representatives of Cossacks and other separatist organizations to organize mass protests . Russia sent first representatives to Ukraine to organize the protests .
 The head of the Security Service of 49 Ukraine stated that Russia started to project the private military companies to prepare the RSA takeover operations . The head said that at that time Russia was planning to take over the RSA .
 The Ukrainian Government did not give due consideration to the rising tide of anti-Ukrainian protest in Donbass region .
 Several thousand demonstrators with Russian flags and symbols came out to the cities’ central square .
 They demanded the federalization of Ukraine and recognition of the autonomy of the Donbas . They also demanded the statehood of Ukraine .
 During that demonstration were the first attempts to seize the RSA building . The RSA building is located in the centre of the world's largest city .
 Protesters took over the RSA buildings in Luhansk, Donetsk, and Kharkiv in March . They want a referendum be held on reunification of the Donbass region with Russia .
 In some cases, local police did not offer any resistance, and permitted the protesters to take over the buildings . In other cases, the protesters were not offered any resistance .
 Security forces regain control of all the captured RSAs in three cities . Only after direct orders from Kyiv on March 10, did the security forces manage to regain control .
 On 6 April, 1,000 to 2,000 pro-Russian protesters once again gathered at a rally on Central Square next to the RSA building in Donetsk to demand a referendum similar to the one held in Crimea in March 2014 .
Russian PMC, Chechens, Cossacks, and volunteers from the Caucuses conducted an armed takeover of the RSA building . During that demonstration the representatives of Russian PMC and Chechens took over the building .
 separatists claim the Peoples Republics in Donetsk and Luhansk . Later on the separatists claimed the People's Republics. Later on they claimed the PeoplesRepublics.
 The role of RUPF was unique from the previous case study in that it played a major role in initiating the destabilization of the situation in the Donbass region .
 The goal was to gain control of key centers of power and government in the Donbass region . The goal is to gain Control of key power centers and government .
 The RUPF were prepared, organized, and conducted the rally protests against the Ukrainian Government . The rally took place in Kiev, Ukraine, with subsequent seizing of administrative buildings .
The critical events occurred simultaneously throughout the entire Donbass region . The critical events took place in the region .
 The seizure of administrative buildings in all cities took place under the cover of the demonstrations .
 The seizure made it difficult for the national police to actively oppose the seizure as they simply could not approach the buildings. In this case, it made it hard for the police toactively oppose it .
 During the first unsuccessful takeover attempt the RUPF were acting unarmed . The first attempted takeover attempt was unsuccessful .
During the next effort they used light small arms presumably brought from Russia . During the next attempt they used small small arms possibly brought from Russian .
 The initial RUPF action effectively started the process of sociopolitical destabilization in the Donbass region. Effectiveness in terms of results, says the initial RupF action .
 delayed and indecisive response of the Ukrainian Government to events caused the unravelling of the situation . The Ukrainian Government's response to the situation was delayed.
 The new DPR and LPR called for a referendum on independence .
 In 2014, there were two regional directorates of the SBU in the Donbas region . The SBU is based in Donbas .
 There were two NP divisions in Donetsk and Luhansk and in each city at least one NP station . Also, there were twoNP divisions in the city of Donetsk and one in LuHansk .
 Second regional directorate of SBU in Luhansk was seized . A couple of days later the second regional directorates of SBu was seized.
 By the end of April the separatists without much resistance managed to gain control over two NP divisions in Donetsk, Luhansk and Kramatorsk .
 In all of these cases the seizers were gaining access to the weapons lockers . The seizers gained access to weapon lockers in some cases .
 By August 2015, Ukraine’s chief military prosecutor reported that about 5,000 police had defected to the separatists .
 Allegedly, these assaults were coordinated by Russian GU operatives and SOF operators . Alleged assaults were carried out by Russian operatives andSOF operators.
 To integrate disparate RUPF units they were unified under a single chain of command system . To integrate the units, they were united under the single command system.
 Igor Girkin led a large conglomeration of insurgents called the South-East Army . He became the leading political figure of the separatist movement on Donbass .
Before taking over the NP and SBU departments the separatist often used tactics of bribery and intimidation of the officials .
 Most times the SBU and NP serviceman allowed the insurgents to occupy the buildings and did not resist or assist them . Most times they did not help or assist the insurgents .
 The insurgents took over the buildings usually at night to use the element of surprise or on weekends when they knew the staff would not be inside .
 RUPF involvement about 5,000 police defected to the separatists . As mentioned above, with the RUP F involvement about five,000 officers defected .
 Alexander Khodakovsky defected to the separatist side in April 2014 . He became the commander of the RUPF Vostok Battalion which participated in almost all major battles during the 2014 and 2015 period .
 insurgents took over all NP and SBU buildings in the Donbass region in less than one month . As a result of careful planning and effective actions they took over the buildings .
 Taking over the armories allowed the RUPF to arm the fighters and further spread the insurgence . Taking over armories allows the RupF to arms the fighters.
 insurgents gave the Donetsk and Luhansk Peoples Republics a sense of legitimacy . The political aspect of success was total control of government and law enforcement installations by insurgents .
 The Ukrainian Army with Interior Ministry forces started the counter-terrorist operation in the Donbass region .
 The tasks were to suppress the RUPF movement and regain control in the conquered cities . The task was to stop the movement from taking control of the cities .
 The RUPF set up checkpoints throughout the Donbass to prevent slow down .
 Insurgents manned checkpoints in most major cities and towns to control movement and traffic . The insurgents manned checkpoints to control traffic and movement .
 RUPF blocked the Ukrainian military columns movement using pro-Russian civilian mobs and at the same time hiding behind them .
 The Ukrainian soldiers and officers were confused by the situation . They did not know how to deal with the insurgents that were accompanied by pro-Russian civilians .
 The 84 TRADOC G-2 Analysis and Control Element Threats Integration, Threat Tactics Report, Russia, 36, was published by Russia's Defense Department .
 Ukraine feared that Russia would use air transport for bringing weapons and equipment into Donbass or insert troops into the region as they had done in Crimea .
 The RUPF played a primary role during seizing and establishing control over major transportation hubs in the Donbass . Employment the RUPf played a key role in seizing andestablishing control over transportation hubs .
 The idea was to establish the checkpoint networks on major roads and on every road coming in and out of the cities . The idea is to set up the checkpoints on major highways and on all roads .
 RUPF could control people and car traffic, and block the roads if necessary . It could also block the streets if necessary.
 In most cases manning the checkpoints was the responsibility of the ‘Donbass Peoples Militia’ units which consisted of local volunteers .
 In order to delay or completely block the Ukrainian Army movement the insurgents often used unarmed civilians . They conducted demonstrations on traffic routs .
 During the first attempts, Russia employed lightly armed RUPF units such as “Donsky Cossacks’ and the “Russian Orthodox Army’s” in their attacks .
 In the first battle, the enemy grouping took heavy losses in personnel . The enemy grouping takes heavy losses.
 Those units were equipped with a full range of artillery systems, infantry fighting vehicles, and tanks . Those units had a range of weapons and vehicles, including tanks .
 The Russian Military authority understood that direct attacks would not bring the desired result . After 56 a while the Russian military authority understood it would not be able to direct attacks .
 Russia constantly conducted artillery strikes on the airport. Simultaneously Russia constantly carried out artillery strikes . Russia constantly conducts artillery strikes.
 DIA allowed rebels to control movement in certain areas of Donbass, monitor Ukrainian Forces movements, acquire equipment and disarm Ukrainian troops . Effectiveness in terms of effectiveness, control over transportation hubs and DIA.
 Six armored vehicles were captured by the RUPF accompanied with pro-Russian civilians at a checkpoint near Kramatorsk .
 RUPF was transforming the Donbass into an informational island isolated from the Ukraine area . The next critical activity carried out by the group was turning the region into a informational island .
 The new TRADOC G-2 Analysis and Control Element Threats Integration, Threat Tactics Report, Russia, 38. Also for the leaders of the newly 85TRADOCG-2 analysis and Control Elements Threats integration, threat tactics Report, 38 .
 RUPF took over the local TV and radio main office in Donetsk on the night of April 16, 2014 .
 A few days later, the regional office of the local TV channel was captured in Lugansk . The regional office was captured.
 As a result of separatist actions, the Ukrainian television and radio broadcasting was completely stopped .
The next step was to seize offices and communication equipment of local mobile operators . The next step would be to seize office and communications equipment .
 The new DPR and LPR authority set up new local mobile communication. It should be noted how fast the new authorities set up local mobile communications .
 The same applies to newly established separatists TV and radio channels . The same apply to the newly established separatist TV andRadio channels .
After one month in control of the region there were broadcast about 30 Russian and four local separatist TV channels . After one month of control, there were about 30 Russians and four separatist channels .
 Experts say that the broadcasting signal is so strong that it reaches neighboring regions . Experts say it is so powerful that it can reach neighboring regions.
 Russia employ RUPF representatives. Employment To complete the above mentioned activities Russia employ Russia employ Russian representatives .
Eyewitnesses say seizures were carried out by representatives of the Donsky Cossack units .
Ukrainian Law Enforcement was completely suppressed in the region . During the take over the insurgents did not meet any resistance from the Ukrainian side .
 Russia allowed Russia to manipulate political and social perceptions, and to dis-inform and destabilize the Donbass society . It allowed the Russian government to manipulate social and political perceptions, according to reports .
 The RUPF effectively began to use it to determine the position of the Ukrainian units .
 artillery strikes made on the positions of the Ukrainian forces . After that, artillery strikes were made on positions of Ukrainian forces.
 Ukrainian Military Base Blockade and Taking Over the Border Crossing Points in April-May 2014 . LPR and DPR authorities understood that it would be impossible to avoid full-scale military operations against Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 On April 14, Kyiv launched an anti-terrorist operation inn the Donbass .
 At that point, the RUPFs were mostly armed by light small arms . The few combat vehicles captured during the battles were captured .
 The priority for RUPF leadership was to get military equipment such as tanks, infantry combat vehicles, artillery systems and ammunition .
 Historically, in the Donbass region there were not any UAF combat military bases . Historically, there were no UAF military bases.
During the Soviet Union historical period the Soviet authorities concentrated major military power closer to the Western Ukrainian border . That is because during the Soviet era the authorities concentrated big military power.
 In 2014 there was only one National Guard military base in the south of the Donbass region . In 2014 only one military base was in the region .
 The main intent was to get access to the weapons which were stored in the base . The main aim was to gain access to weapons stored at the base.
 A police special operation unit with the 59 National Guard opened fire on the insurgents . After warning shots, a police special operations unit opened fire .
Once three insurgents were killed and 13 got wounded the Cossacks retreated . Once three insurgents died and 13 were wounded .
 After that, the epicenter of hostilities shifted to the Ukrainian–Russian border .
 The defenders only had light small arms which were not enough and reinforcement did not get there in time . The defenders were not strong enough to protect themselves .
 During a two-day siege, on June 4, the building and the area were captured by insurgents .
 On June 5, a group RUPF crossed the Ukrainian border and attacked the border crossing point of Marinovka from Russian side .
 Later on the series of attacks on Ukrainian BCPs spread along the Ukrainian-Russia border .
 Ukrainian border guards did not have the ability to resist the RUPF attacks for a long time . Any reinforcement was complicated because the lines of communication were blocked by the insurgents .
 The major role was played by representatives of RUPFs. Employment during Ukrainian military base blockade and taking over the BCPs .
 The rebels from the “Army of the South-East’ and “Cossacks National Guard’s’ were employed to storm the Ukrainian BCPs along the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 The rebels took over the BCPs without any resistance because they threatened the Ukrainian Border servicemen with reprisals against their families if they tried to fight .
 raids were carried out at night when part of the border guard personnel was at home .
 Only failed action occurred during the attack on the Ukrainian National Guard Base . Donsky Cossacks were forced to retreat after taking casualties .
 The RUPF set up an effective line of communication through the Ukrainian-Russia Border . The BCPs took control of the movement of supplies and increased their arms and equipment .
 Russia started to funnel tanks, various artillery systems, armored fighting vehicles, and ammunition to support the insurgents .
 RUPF has been taking over the cities in late August and early September 2014 . This significant weapons buildup allowed the UAF to effectively confront UAF and continue to take over cities .
 The table is organized by supporting questions detailed to demonstrate how they contribute to assessing the role of RUPF in each critical activities .
RUPF obtained intimidation weapons and mil. equipment . RUPF played major role role in securing the BCP secure the border .
 The RUPF played the role of provocateurs and incited the Russian supporters for aggressive clashes against pro-Ukrainian demonstrators .
 RUPF prevented Ukrainian Police from resolving conflict situations during demonstrations . Ukrainian Police prevented conflict situations from being resolved during demonstrations.
 RUPF members were employed for extortion, bribery and intimidation of Ukrainian officials and Ukrainian servicemen . RCF seized and got control of all critical objects in Crimea Peninsula .
 When analyzing RUPF actions during critical activities, all of them were aimed to support and provide assistance to RCF performance .
 Only one of the critical activities failed to achieve the desired result in the Crimean major cities .
 At that point the Kremlin authorities did not achieve their desired end state . The Kremlin authorities didn't achieve the desired endState .
Pro-Russian protesters succeeded in organizing and involving a large number of pro-Russian people in demonstrations . They succeeded in organized and involved a large numbers of pro, Russian people .
 The RUPF performed their secondary role effectively as demonstrated by the fact that Russia achieved the desired end state . In all other critical activities the RupF performed its secondary role .
 RUPF played major role in all critical activities during War in Donbass 2014 to 2016 Period . It is safe to state that RUPf played a major role during Russian Campaign in the Donbass .
 The RUPF exercised a variety of tactics and procedures during critical activities . The group was involved in a number of critical activities during the week .
 RUPF members actively used non-kinetic methods to achieve the goal . At the time of initiation of the anti-Ukrainian rally and seizing the RSA, SBU, and NP departments, the RupF members usednon-kinetics methods .
 RUPF used bribery, extortion, and intimidation to win over Ukrainian Military, law enforcement personal or local officials . For instance, they used bribery and extortion.
 Later on during Battle for the DIA and following actions, the insurgents effectively employed the variety of military equipment; tanks, BTRs, multiple launch rocket systems, howitzers, and unmanned aerial vehicles .
After the RUPF got control over regional communications networks and media they set up local separatist TV and radio channels . After the R UPF set up their own radio and TV channels.
 That indicates their capabilities in conducting anti-Ukrainian information operations, according to a report . That indicates that they may be able to conduct anti-Ukraine information operations. That indicates they are capable of carrying out such operations .
 RUPF established control over portions of the 64 Ukrainian-Russia state border and set up LOC with Russia . Within a couple of months the Ukrainian authority in the region was eliminated .
 The insurgent’s actions effectively destabilized the Donbass region, resulting in the emergence of two separatist republics .
 The role of RUPF was not identical in both case studies. By comparing the key findings it is seen that the role of the RupF were not identical .
 RUPFs were used as a main instrument throughout the War in Donbass campaign from 2014 to 2016 .
 Chapter 5 outlines answers to the main and supporting research questions, key findings, and recommendations for future study . Chapter 5 further outlines the answers to key research questions and findings .
 The purpose of this research paper is that given the experience that Ukraine has gotten from the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbass, it is critical to develop an effective strategy .
 RUPF and their role in Russian Hybrid Warfare were examined . The Russian military is known for its use of Russian Hybrid warfare .
 More specific research questions needed to be presented and answered . In order to answer the primary research question, more specific research question is needed .
 The author was able to answer the primary question and examine Russian unconventional paramilitary formations and their role in Russian Hybrid Warfare . Through answering those questions the author was unable to answer those questions .
 Chapter 4 provided interesting data that demonstrated in both cases that RUPF played a role in both examples of Russian Hybrid War . Chapter 4 provides interesting data.
 RUPF played an important but supporting role in the annexation of Crimea but was the major player in the war in the Donbass .
 The interpretation of the findings from chapter 4 follows in the next section . The interpretation is based on the findings of chapter 4 .
 The secondary research questions must be answered first in order to provide the data necessary to answer the primary question . Interpretation of Findings must be followed by the primary research question .
 The broad definition of Russian Hybrid War includes the combination of traditional military means, special operations and subversion methods . It also includes separatist terrorist groups, as well as informational, economic, and diplomatic pressures used against Ukraine .
 During shaping phase, Russia used informational, economic and political elements of influence, shaped the ideological, political and military preconditions for their future aggression .
 The purpose of the active phase was the occupation of Crimea and the continuation of destabilization of the situation in Ukraine through initiation of the armed conflict in the Donbass .
 The second phase of the Hybrid War was the annexation of Crimea and the formation of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics . The result of the second phase was the annexing of Crimea .
 Russia continues to use all elements of the Hybrid War to increase pressure on Ukraine . Russia is increasing its troop presence near the Ukrainian border .
 Russia denies its participation in the conflict and at the same time conducts a large-scale information campaign against Ukraine . Russia also denies its involvement in the war .
 The thesis mainly focused on Russian unconventional forces activities during the Russian active phase of Hybrid War .
 Crimean annexation was characterized by limited application of RUPF during the conduct of critical events . The Crimean annexation is characterized bylimited application of the RUPf during the Conduct of critical Events .
 The only representatives of RUPF were Donsky Cossacks, Local self-defense units, and Ukrainian collaborators . The only representative of RupF were Ukrainian collaborators.
 During the Crimean Campaign Russia employed RUPF in combination with RCF, where RupF performed the supporting and supplementary functions . During the Crimea Campaign Russia used RUPf in combination.
During the War in the Donbass the RUPF were used as primary Russian military assets to conduct all critical operations in the region . However, during the War the RupF were also used as main military assets .
 In the beginning of the conflict they were employed for initiation of the anti-Ukrainian movement in the region . They were employed in the start of the war.
 RUPF could see a small regular army effectively employing the variety of military equipment such as tanks, BTRs, multiple launch rocket systems, howitzers, and unmanned aerial vehicles . Later on we could see the small army effectively using the range of equipment .
 The broad duplication of RUPF is indicated by the number of unconventional military formations that operated in the territory of Donbass .
 There was also shown to be the participation of eight Russian PMCs and variety of militia formations which were mentioned in chapter 1 of chapter 1 .
 The main indicator of effectiveness is the result of the two campaigns . The main indicators of effectiveness are the results of the campaigns .
 In the first case within one month and six days Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula . The annexation resulted in the violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Ukrainian State .
 In the second case through ongoing conflict Russian created in the Donbass a chaotic and unstable environment . In the first case, a chaotic environment was created by the Russian conflict .
 The longer this situation exists, the more likely Russia will attempt to manipulate Ukraine to conform to Russia’s self-interests .
 The RUPF role was not identical during the Crimea annexation and War in the Donbass 2014 to 2016 . The RupF role is not identical to that of the Crimea annexing and War.
 In the Russian Crimea Campaign the RUPF were not a key component of Russian military assets . In the Russia Crimea campaign the RupF was not a major component of Russia's military assets in Crimea .
 During demonstrations organized by Russia, the number of pro-Ukrainian supporters exceeded twice as many pro-Ukraine supporters . The number of protesters in Russia exceeded twice the number in Russia .
 The Crimean Tatars are ardent opponents of Russia . The main part of them were the representatives of the Crimean Tatar .
 This caused a breach in the Kremlin’s plans for the rapid seizure of the Crimean Peninsula . The Crimean Peninsula has been under the control of the Russian peninsula .
 The Russian actions in Crimea can not be easily generalized for future scenarios . The Russian action in Crimea cannot be easily generalized for future situations .
 A series of highly favorable circumstances-political, political, historical, geographical, and military . The military is a series of very favorable circumstances .
 It is difficult to envision the same combination of circumstances which will intersect to create another similar situation . It is impossible to envision a similar situation, says the author .
 Ukraine did not resist militarily, and therefore this operation cannot be analyzed for lessons on how Russia will employed RUPF or RCF during future operations . Russia did not resisting militarily .
 Russia carried out the Crimean annexation at a time when Ukraine was vulnerable because of the revolutionary events causing governmental weakness . Russia carriedout the annexation at the time of the Crimea annexation .
 Crimean case should be looked at as providing a warning of possible Russian actions . On the other hand should a similar intersection of circumstances occur (in the Baltic)
 The Russian actions in the Donbass can be generalized for future scenarios, according to the Russian government .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan are states where significant growth of Russian influence can be observed . This is true as well as well for Belarus and Kazakhstan, which are states with significant influence .
 The results of the analysis carried out in the work can be used to develop doctrinal documents for an effective counteraction of RUPF . The results are expected to be used as a result of the work .
Internal security services operatives in potentially vulnerable regions in order to identify or prevent illegal separatist activities . Increase the presence of internal security operatives in vulnerable regions .
 Early identification of the sources of support for separatist movements both internal and external .
 Increasing the criminal sanction for participation in separatist organizations . Increasing thecriminal sanction for participating in separatist groups .
 Regulation of mass media resources to eliminate any possibilities of separatist propaganda or other elements of enemy information operations . Regulation of media resources will eliminate any possibility of separatistaganda .
 The material presented in this research can be useful as “lessons learned’ for Eurasian security experts . Due to the potential threat of a repetition of the Ukrainian scenario in the Baltic States and some former Soviet states, the material is useful for Eurasians .
 Russia has had extensive and thorough information warfare (also known as INFOWAR) campaigns during Crimean Campaign and war in Donbass which supported RUPF activities . Russia has also had extensive information warfare campaigns.
 The recommendation for future research is the analysis of how effective was Russian INFORWAR campaigns during Crimean and Donbass operations against Ukraine .
 Since the definition of Russian Hybrid War includes other non-kinetic aspects such as economic, political, and diplomatic pressure, they also present opportunities for further research .
 The research findings can be generalized for possible future scenarios of Russian Hybrid War in the Baltic and some post-Soviet Union states .
 Crimean annexation and Donbass War scenarios as an element of Russian Hybrid War should not be considered as a model of future Russian actions but, 72 rather as lessons .
 Chivvis, Christopher S. Understanding Russian Hybrid Warfare and What Can Be Done About it. ChivVIS,Christopher S. S.
 The Crimean Federal District Census was held in Crimea . It was the first time the population was counted in the Crimea . The population was estimated at 1,000 people .
 Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2015. Monograph: School ofAdvanced Military Studies .