 U.S. mainstream media wants people to believe that it is the Guardian of Truth, it is actually lost in a wilderness of propaganda and falsehoods, says John Sutter . Sutter: The future of humankind is at risk as tension escalate with nuclear-armed Russia .
 This media problem has grown over recent decades as lucrative careerism has replaced responsible professionalism . The media problem is now a problem that has grown in recent decades .
 Pack journalism has always been a threat to quality reporting but now it has evolved into a self-sustaining media lifestyle . The old motto, “there’s safety in numbers,” is borne out by the fact that being horrendously wrong leads to almost no accountability
 There has been no accountability after many mainstream journalists falsely stated that “all 17 U.S. intelligence agencies’ concurred that Russia did “meddle” in last November’s United States election .
 For months, this claim has been the go-to put-down whenever anyone questions the groupthink of Russian venality perverting U.S. democracy .
 President Obama's Director of National Intelligence James Clapper issued a statement last Oct. alleging Russian meddling . It was at best a needled distortion of a claim by President Obama’s director of national intelligence .
 Clapper was the chief of the U.S. Intelligence Community . His opinion morphed into a claim that it represented the consensus of all 17 intelligence agencies . It was a dishonest twist that Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton began touting .
 A 17-agencies consensus has a specific meaning, some form of a National Intelligence Estimate that seeks out judgments and dissents .
 There was no NIE regarding alleged Russian meddling. But there was no formal assessment from a subset of the agencies at the time of Clapper’s statement .
 President Obama did not order a publishable assessment until December – after the election – and it was not completed until January . The report presented the opinions of analysts from the Central Intelligence Agency, Federal Bureau of Investigation and the National Security Agency .
 CNN fake news continues to trot out known perjurer Clapper as their "expert" on Russian hacking . The reference to “hand-picked” analysts pricked the ears of former U.S. intelligence analysts .
 Former CIA Director John Brennan confirmed Clapper’s description in congressional testimony . He said only four of the 17 U.S. agencies took part in the assessment .
 Some news organizations had been waving around the “17-intelligence-agencies’ meme . They subtly changed their phrasing to either depict Russian “meddling” as an established fact no longer requiring attribution .
 All 17 agencies were in accord, but not exactly saying that, according to the report . This “unanimous judgment’s formulation was deceptive, too, because it suggests that all 17 agencies are in accord .
 For more than a month after the Clapper-Brennan testimonies, there was no formal correction . For over a month, there were no formal corrections for the testimony .
 The Times had little choice but to append a correction to the article . The intelligence “assessment was made by four intelligence agencies,’s director of national intelligence .
 The Associated Press ran a similar “clarification” applied to some of its fallacious reporting . Some of its reporting repeating the “17-intelligence-agencies’ meme.
 The mainstream media was finally adjusting its reporting to conform to reality, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 One of the pillars of the Russia-gate “scandal’s” had crumbled, the certainty that Russia and Vladimir Putin did “meddle” in the election . But that would mean that one of the pillar of the Russian-gate scandal had
There appeared to be no stomach for such soul-searching. The story would have to go back to square one . The major news organizations would have had to begin reporting on whether or not there was solid evidence to support what had become a “certainty’
 All the important media figures had made the same error . It would be much easier to simply move on as if nothing had changed .
 The Post did not identify the country, but suggests that more than one key element of the case for Russian culpability was based on the work of external organizations .
 Democratic National Committee denied FBI access to its supposedly hacked computers . DNC used a contractor called CrowdStrike, which has a checkered record of getting this sort of analytics right . CrowdStrike's chief technology officer, Dmitri Alperovitch, is an anti-Putin Russian ém
 "Crime of the century" has pushed the world closer to nuclear annihilation, says author . The U.S. government is dependent on dubious entities outside the United States government, he says .
 U.S. media displays deep-seated bias toward both Putin and Trump, says CNN's John Sutter .
Major news outlets continue to embrace the “17-intelligence-agencies’ canard, albeit in slightly different forms. Mostly, major news outlets continued to brush aside the clarifications and return to various formulations .
 Anyone who questions established conventional wisdom is still crazy and out of step . Anyone who question conventional wisdom should be careful .
 James Holmes of Esquire was stunned on Thursday when Trump reminded the traveling press corps about the inaccurate reporting regarding the 17 intelligence agencies .
 Russia-gate business has been rocked by a series of false intelligence reports . The Russian intelligence agency has been accused of lying to the media .
Major U.S. news outlets have adopted a consistently propagandistic approach to everything relating to Russia . The larger danger is how the major U. S. news agencies have adopted an aggressive approach .
 Vladimir Putin began to rein in the U.S.-prescribed “shock therapy,’ which had sold off Russia’s assets to well-connected insiders, making billions of dollars for the West-favored “oligarchs,” even as the process
 The U.S. mainstream media’s contempt for Putin reached new heights after he helped President Obama head off neoconservative demands for a full-scale United States military assault on Syria in 2013 .
 The neocons delivered their payback to Putin in early 2014 by supporting a violent coup in Ukraine . They overthrowing elected President Viktor Yanukovych and installing a fiercely anti-Russian regime .
 The U.S. operation was spearheaded by neocon National Endowment for Democracy President Carl Gershman and neocon Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Victoria Nuland .
 Despite clear evidence of U.S. interference in Ukrainian politics, the U. S. government and the mainstream media embraced the coup . The United States accused Putin of “aggression’ when ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine resisted the coup regime .
 There were no images of tanks crashing across borders or amphibious landing craft on Crimean beaches . No such “invasion’s’ had occurred .
 There was no tolerance for skepticism about whatever the State Department or the Washington think tanks were saying .
 U.S. mainstream media has been linking up its groupthinks about the Ukraine “invasion’s “hacking” the election . President Trump is scheduled to meet with Putin at the G-20 summit in Hamburg, Germany .
 There is no doubt that Russia “invaded” Ukraine, “seized’ Crimea, ‘seized. Crimea’ and “meddled’ in U.S. and European elections, says CNN .
 All these groupthinks should be subjected to skepticism, not simply treated as undeniable truths . But all these groups should be subject to skepticism.
 The U.S. mainstream media is at this point in history. But seeing only one side to a story is where the United States mainstream media are at this time .
 Russia was responsible for the Democratic hacks and did funnel the material to WikiLeaks, but evidence has so far been lacking .
 The major media acts as if only one side deserves any respect and dissenting views must be ridiculed and condemned .
 In this perverted process, collectively approved versions of complex situations congeal into conventional wisdom, which simply cannot be significantly reconsidered . The process is a process that cannot be reconsidered.
 As offensive as this rejection of true truth-seeking may be, it also represents an extraordinary danger when mixed with the existential risk of nuclear conflagration .