 Mr Ramirez Carreno Agenda Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council . This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches given in other languages .
 The meeting was called to order at 3.05m. Ukraine 21/01/2015. Please recycle S/PV.
 The Secretary-General's good offices will continue to be in charge of his good offices . He will brief the Council on developments related to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 The Council meets amid the worst hostilities in eastern Ukraine since the ceasefire and the Minsk protocol were agreed to on 5 September .
 Encouraging signs of progress, such as the exchange of hundreds of prisoners, are quickly being overshadowed.
 Ukraine, as well as its neighbours and the broader region, cannot afford the current violent status quo . Ukraine's neighbours and its broader region can't afford the status quo, says the author .
Heavy fighting in Donetsk and Luhansk has killed more than 100 people in the past few days . The violence is spreading throughout the region, including in heavily populated civilian areas .
 The conflict is also reportedly inching dangerously close to cities such as Mariupol and Debaltsevo . The conflict has been inching close to areas that until recently have been relatively quiet .
 In another sign of escalation, reinforcements of fighters are reported on both sides . The deployment of more sophisticated and heavier weaponry is also reported .
 President Poroshenko stated that there were more than 9,000 regular Russian troops in Ukraine . Moscow denies the accusation .
 On 13 January, 12 civilians lost their lives and 17 were seriously wounded when their, bus was hit in Volnovakha . The bus was struck by a bomb in the city's capital, on January 13 .
 The United Nations has no means of verifying the facts independently . The U.N. has visited the site three times and conducted crater analysis . It concluded that the rockets that caused craters 1 and 2 had been fired from a north-north-eastern direction .
 The incident is a stark reminder of the urgent need to halt the violence, says the Secretary-General . "This incident must be thoroughly investigated," he says .
 The humanitarian situation has deteriorated further as conflict has again intensified. Let me also say a few words on the humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated.
 Ukraine has at least 850,000 citizens displaced within its borders and over 600,000 in neighbouring States . Ukraine had no displaced people until a year ago .
 All parties to the conflict have an obligation to guarantee free and unhindered humanitarian access to all people in need . All parties have to fully respect international humanitarian law, and have to respect international law .
 A recent directive with respect to crossing the contact line from Government-held to rebel-held areas could make it difficult for humanitarian actors to move aid into areas beyond Government control .
 It is critical that resources be made available to meet life-saving needs on the ground . It is crucial that resources are made available for life- saving needs on ground .
 The 2015 Strategic Response Plan requests $189 million, and few commitments have been made as yet . The 2015 strategic Response Plan request $189million .
 Secretary-General insists there is no substitute for direct and constructive dialogue to move peace forward .
 The enforcement of a sustainable ceasefire, which presently exists in name only, is both urgent and of primary concern . The enforcement. of the ceasefire, currently in name, is a major concern .
 The other elements of the broader Minsk peace plan require expeditious implementation as well . The line of contact should be observed, and the other elements need to be observed .
 Normandy format meeting in Berlin at the Foreign Minister level will achieve the progress required to return to the implementation of Minsk . The Normandy Heads of State will meet in Berlin today .
 Minsk agreements offer a solid basis for a resolution of the conflict in the Donbas . The Minsk agreement offers a good basis for the resolution of a conflict.
 There cannot be any unilateral attempt to change their provisions, nor should any party selectively interpret the accords’ stipulations, says the author .
 It is our understanding that the apparent differences in interpretation of the Minsk accords are small, but the implications of addressing them in any other way but through dialogue are immense .
 In continuation of Secretary-General's good offices, I returned to Kyiv from 15 to 17 December 2014 to exchange views with President Poroshenko .
 New Ukrainian Government formed under Prime Minister Yatsenyuk . All interlocutors expressed their conviction that there was no more scope for delay .
 I assured my interlocutors that the United Nations would never waver in its solidarity with the country. I assured them that the U.N. would not waver.
 We remain ready to support all efforts to end the fighting so that a durable and lasting peace may prevail . We will continue to assist the Ukrainian authorities and citizens of Ukraine to usher in the changes that will be vital for a democratic, secure, independent and prosperous future .
 In contrast to the present situation, Donbas was relatively calm during his visit .
 All of my interlocutors shared the assessment that even if there is progress on the Minsk process, there is no quick resolution of the numerous challenges facing Ukraine, given the deep economic and geopolitical rifts that have been caused by and remain intrinsically linked to the conflict .
 All of us, especially the parties to the conflict, have a responsibility to concertedly, writes Peter Bergen .
 The meeting was held in view of the recent deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine and continuous violations of the Minsk agreements .
 I believe no one in this Chamber has any doubt that a country under attack would do its utmost to protect itself . I believe that no one has any doubts that a nation under attack will do its best to protect its own country .
 In the face of aggression, it is the inherent right of each and every State to defend its land and its people .
 Ukraine is defending itself in the face of the ongoing attacks against its unity, sovereignty, and territorial integrity . That is exactly what Ukraine is doing — defending itself .
Time and again in recent months, leadership has sought to salvage the ceasefire with new proposals, new deadlines and new periods of silence . Time and again, its leadership has been trying to salvage a ceasefire .
 The militants have benefited from Ukraine’s restraint by regrouping, rearming and grabbing more land .
 Russia’s borders remain wide open to the flow of deadly weaponry and soldiers of fortune . In spite of the many calls of the international community to close its borders to the illegal flows of arms and foreign fighters, Russia remains wide open .
 The little that can be gleaned from the two kilometres where the OSCE observer mission is active is clearly indicative of what is happening away from the eyes of the observers . The two kilometres between the two-kilometre-long mission are clearly indicative.
 Russia keeps blocking all attempts to expand the OSCE border observer mission to cover more ground . It is no wonder that Russia keeps blocked all attempts.
 The war in eastern Ukraine is not a civil war, as some try to portray it, but a calculated and systematic attempt to destabilize Ukraine . The war is a foreign-sponsored war.
 The militants continue their barrage of deadly attacks. Backed by sophisticated weaponry including Grad rockets, artillery systems, modern tanks, armoured personnel carriers, and an influx of foreign mercenaries .
 The past few weeks in particular have seen a disturbing increase in ceasefire violations . A massive onslaught by the militants on the Donetsk airport has been seen .
 intensive fighting reported in several locations, including north-west of Luhansk . Militants destroyed one of the checkpoints of the Ukrainian military .
 Growing evidence points to a systematic use by militants of residential areas as a cover for launching Grad rockets and shelling the Ukrainian forces .
Volnovakha bus attack was a bus attack on a bus in the Russian city of Novakha . The bus was attacked by a bus driver in the early hours of the morning. The bus driver was killed in the attack .
 "We must ensure that perpetrators of this reprehensible act, and all the countless acts of violence and gross violations of human rights, are brought to account," says the U.S.
 Russia has never even once condemned or disowned the illegal and lawless separatist militants . Ukraine is blasted by the Russian propaganda as ceasefire violations .
 Russia’s intentions to rewrite the Minsk agreements in a way that would legitimize and accept the territorial gains achieved by the militants speaks to the Kremlin's wholehearted support for those criminals . Russia”s intentions.
The agreed parameters of the ceasefire already exist and must be respected . The agreed parameters already exist, and the agreed parameters must also be respected.
 We urge all sides, in particular Russia, to engage and fully implement the Minsk agreements in their entirety .
 Russia must stop destabilizing Ukraine, stop military supplies to its proxies, stop the illegal separatist groups and withdraw all military equipment . If Russia is genuinely interested in putting an end to the devastating violence and deaths in eastern Ukraine, it must stop .
 All hostages and illegally detained persons must be released, including the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko, who was kidnapped and is being held illegally in Russia .
 International observers must be allowed full and unconditional access throughout Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea . International observers, including the United Nations and OSCE monitoring missions, must be able to stay in Ukraine .
 My delegation firmly supports Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and will not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea .
 We urge Minsk signatories to spare no effort in seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis . We urge the Minsk signingatories to stop trying to solve the crisis.
 Russia is pursuing the annexation of Georgia’s Abkhaz and Tskhinvali regions under the guise of the so-called treaties on alliance and strategic partnerships . We urge Russia to embrace the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the U.N.
 President Obama convenes today’s meeting on the ongoing crisis in Ukraine . President Obama thanks President Obama for convening the meeting .
 UnderSecretary-General Feltman's unflagging attention to this alarming situation . He sounded in the Security Council today in very explicit terms .
 The Council's first meeting on Ukraine in 2015 is the Council’s first on the crisis in the past 11 months . It is far more than on any other situation during the same period .
 Russia continues to choose a path of escalation and obfuscation. We keep meeting on Ukraine because, despite countless commitments made to the international community to de-escalate, we say .
 Russia continues to train, equip and fight alongside separatists in eastern Ukraine . In addition to occupying Crimea, Russia continues.
 Russia has broken its commitments and violated its obligations not to lop off part of another country . Some in the Council may begin to accept Russia’s behaviour as an unfortunate but inevitable reality . A new normal would be dangerous for Ukraine and dangerous for international peace and security .
 Russia continues to train and equip separatists with heavy weapons and to fight by their side . It is dangerous because Russia continues. It is flagrant violation of the September Minsk agreement, Ukrainian sovereignty and international law .
 separatists trained, supplied and supported by Russia are launching a full-scale attack on Debaltseve, inside Ukrainian-controlled territory . In blatant violation of the 19 September Minsk ceasefire lines, they are trying to gain control of a significant rail juncture .
 30 Grad rockets hit the city on 19 January, killing 3 civilians and wounding 12 . The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported yesterday that at least 30 rockets had struck the city .
 The OSCE confirmed that those rockets had come from the direction of the separatist-controlled city of Horlivka . The rockets were launched from the separatist city.
 separatists blew up a rail bridge connecting the port city of Mariupol to the rest of Ukraine .
 Donetsk must rely on northern access via Donetsk, effectively isolating it and leaving it vulnerable to separatist attacks . Thankfully, there were no casualties, but now the city must rely upon northern access .
 President Poroshenko announced the unilateral silence regime on 9 December . separatists and the Russians who backed them have carried out more than 1,000 attacks against Ukrainian positions .
 These latest transfers come atop previous transfers of hundreds of pieces of Russian military equipment to separatists since September . The latest transfers include tanks, armoured personnel carriers and heavy artillery pieces .
 The OSCE is allowed to operate at only two checkpoints on the vast Ukrainian-Russian border . The Ukrainian-Russia border is one of the world's largest border crossings .
 Hundreds of individuals in military-style dress freely cross the border every week . From those two checkpoints alone, monitors note hundreds of individuals.
 The separatists have a larger fighting force than some European countries . They have more weaponry than other European countries, with more weaponry .
 Russia is reportedly preparing to deliver its twelfth resupply convoy to separatists in Ukrainian territory at the end of the month . Meanwhile, Russia is also reportedly planning to deliver the convoy to the separatists in Ukraine .
 Russia will deny international monitors or Ukrainian authorities the ability to fully inspect the convoys . If the past 11 deliveries are any indication, Russia will refuse international monitors .
 OSCE monitors serve on behalf of the international community . It is dangerous because separatists continue to harass, threaten and intimidate monitors .
 Separatist guards kept their guns pointed at the monitors during the exchange, the monitors said . The team posed no threat and, mercifully, had no camera .
 Russia continues to break commitments it has made to the escalades . It is dangerous because Russia is still breaking commitments it's made to escalades.
 Ukraine and the international community have launched several serious efforts to seek a peaceful resolution to the conflict . Ukraine, the Minsk agreement, the Normandy group and other negotiating forums have been launched .
 We continue to believe that there can be no military solution and that political negotiations are key . We believe that the military solution is not a military solution .
 Russia's words promise peace while Russia's actions make war. Yet, time and again, Russia’s words promisepeace while Russia”s actions makewar .
 President Putin has extended an olive branch in one hand while passing out Grad missiles and tanks with the other .
 Russia's actions are directly contributing to a humanitarian crisis. It is dangerous because Russia’s actions are contributing to the humanitarian crisis . It is also dangerous for Russia to take responsibility for its actions .
 The bus was struck while waiting at a Ukrainian security checkpoint at Volnovakha . Many of us have seen the ghastly images of the attack .
Images of the blood-soaked snow alongside the bus, of its blown-out windows and the gapping holes left in its seats and curtains .
 Thirteen civilians were killed in that attack and at least 16 more people were wounded . Thirteen people were killed and 16 more were wounded in the attack .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission said in a 17 January report that it had “conducted a comprehensive inspection, focusing on five craters caused by explosions that occurred during the incident .
 The investigation included comprehensive crater analysis of two specific blast craters . The crater is located 10 metres from the side of the passenger bus .
 The conclusion of the impartial OSCE monitoring mission is that the craters at the crime scene were caused by rockets fired from the north-north-east direction from the checkpoint .
Multiple reports have shown separatists firing Grad rockets from the territory to the north-north-east of Volnovakha . That area is controlled by Russian-backed separatists, according to reports .
 The same day the bus was struck, the SMM reported hearing Grad rockets fired from several other separatist-controlled areas .
 At first, separatists bragged on social media about the strike on the Ukrainian security checkpoint . At first.
 Vut the postings disappeared after it was reported that a busload of civilians had been hit . Vut was reported to have been hit.
 For every attack on civilians that makes headlines, there are dozens more, no less deadly, that go unreported . For each attack on a civilian, the death toll is higher than any other attack .
 Since the conflict began, more than 10,000 people have been injured in the conflict . More than ten,000 have been wounded since the conflict started .
 mortars struck two houses in the Governmentheld town of Hranitne, wounding a girl .
 She died of her injuries before she reached the hospital — she was three years old . She was three when she was injured .
 Russia's most recent efforts to blame Ukraine ring so hollow are some of the reasons why the Russians' most recent attempts to blame the country are so hollow .
 President Putin issued a last-minute invitation to President Poroshenko to discuss a new Russian-conceived peace plan . The plan would free Russia from the commitment it made in Minsk to withdraw its fighters and return control over the international border to Ukraine .
 The plan would seek to legitimize territorial gains made by separatists since September . It would also seek to legalize Russian personnel and military equipment on the territory of Ukraine .
 peace plans like that before in Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria . We have seen peace plans before in the past .
 Russia immediately launched a diplomatic and media blitz, claiming it was proof that Ukraine was not interested in peace . President Poroshenko did not accept Putin’s offer .
 Russia has signed and broken peace plans. We need to implement the peace plans we already have, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 If Russia is serious about peace, it should follow through on Minsk, to which it had agreed more than four months ago . Russia has agreed to a peace deal with Minsk.
 Savchenko has been on hunger strike for nearly a month to protest her detention . Savchenko is suffering serious health problems and is suffering from serious health issues .
 Ukraine has consistently taken steps to de-escalate the crisis, according to Russia . Ukraine has passed key reforms to reduce corruption and grant greater authority to its regions . In contrast to Russia, Ukraine has shown measurable progress.
 In September and December, President Mr Poroshenko announced unilateral ceasefires on the part of Ukrainian forces . The ceasefires resulted in brief but significant decreases in violence .
 Ukraine has been forced to respond to cynical attempts by separatists and Russian forces to use the ceasefires to gain additional territory . The Ukrainian forces have tried to hold the agreed line .
 Ukrainian Government must abide by international norms, even as it defends its land and its people . Of course, the Ukrainian government must abide with international norms .
 European Council's report on abuse in Ukrainian prisons. We urge Government to conduct thorough, impartial investigations into its findings .
 We take seriously reports of the alleged use of cluster munitions in populated areas . We are concerned about cluster munitions.
 All sides should take every feasible precaution to prevent any loss of civilian life, including by indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas .
 There is a broader reason it would be dangerous to accept Russia’s actions as the new normal .
 Before eastern Ukraine, we saw it in Crimea, and before Crimea in Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Before that in Georgia and Transnistria, we seen it in Georgia, and in Transnistsria .
 Russia is consistently working to put those frozen conflicts under a deeper freeze . Russia is also trying to put that freeze under a deep freeze .
 In recent weeks, Russia was flouting its Minsk agreements . Russia was also flouting the Minsk agreement .
 President Putin was putting the finishing touches on another set of agreements . De facto authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia are in charge of the deal .
 Those treaties will compound years of violations of Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . Georgia's territorial integrity will be violated by treaties .
 The U.N. and Security Council were created to address problems that are frozen . In sum, all of the problems that the United Nations, and the Security Council are frozen.
 If Russia succeeds in achieving its aims, if we allow this behaviour to become the new normal, this will not be the last time Russia uses this well-worn playbook . Russia's behaviour has been used by Russia in recent years.
 The Security Council holds a large number of meetings on a number of worthwhile topics in this Chamber .
 We use many beautiful words about the need to peacefully settle political crises, about the impossibility of a military solution . We also talk about rule of law, democracy and the inclusiveness of political processes .
 Ukraine has been in the news for more than 30 years . The country has been accused of failing to act properly to protect its people . The situation in the country is not well-aligned with the situation in Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation is ensuring full compliance with the Minsk accords to settle the Ukrainian crisis . The Russian federation is ensuring the full compliance. The Ukrainian crisis has been dubbed the Ukraine crisis.
 Ukraine and the rebels have been involved in the conflict since the start of the Ukraine-Mediterranean conflict . The Ukrainian government has been accused of using the Normandy format of negotiations .
 Donetsk airport has become the epicentre of clashes. The situation on the ground has recently worsened significantly, with the airport becoming a major battleground .
 The airport was to have been given to the militias, in line with the Minsk agreements . But disputes in other areas of the engagement line have not been resolved peacefully .
 Ukrainian armed forces have continued to shell Donetsk and other populated areas . A large number of civilian casualties have been reported .
 The Russian side expressed its readiness to bring its influence to bear on the militias to ensure that the option was adopted in good faith and to avoid civilian casualties . The Russian government suggested providing assistance to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 The letter was sent in accordance with a request discussed during telephone contacts between Russian and Ukrainian leaders . I underscore that the letter was send in accordance to a request from Russian and Ukraine leaders .
 Ukrainian side resumed artillery shelling of Donetsk . Instead of responding to the proposal, the Ukrainian side continued artillery shelling .
 The current escalation of the situation in Donbas is hardly fortuitous. The current situation in the region is hardlyFortuitous .
 Ukrainian side violated the Minsk agreements by stepping up its military presence in the south-east of the country . There was a strengthening of militarization and regrouping, as well as new waves of mobilization .
 Kyiv irresponsibly provided Ukraine with military-purpose items. At the same time, a number of countries actively supported the “war party’s’S” in Kyiv .
 The events of recent days are yet another attempt by Kyiv to resolve the internal political conflict . The events will definitely lead to exacerbating the crisis of the State of Ukraine and civilian casualties .
 Many times in the Chamber, we have pointed to the fact that those who come to power as a result of a coup d’etat are enjoying support from armed radicals . The policy has nothing in common with establishing a country of national unity .
 Kyiv casts aside all instruments concerning a political settlement of the internal crisis . Kyiv has cast aside all the instruments concerning the political settlement.
 The 21 February agreement signed by Yanukovych and the opposition on the establishment of a Government of national unity had become a dead letter by next day .
 Geneva statement of 17 April, providing for swift and comprehensive constitutional reform involving all regions and political forces, was ignored . The Geneva statement was ignored.
 The first thing that the forces that came to power after the coup in Kyiv did was to forge ahead with decisions aimed at restricting the rights of linguistic minorities and suffocating dissidents . The coup was the first thing they did.
 Half of the country speaks in Russian, almost all Russian-language media were closed down . Political forces representing the Russian citizens in southeast Ukraine were intimidated or simply banned .
 The south-east and south saw horrific crimes be committed, which have not yet been brought to light or seriously investigated . The crimes have not been brought into light or investigated .
 On 2 May in Odessa, dozens of people were burned alive in the House of Trade Unions building .
 On 9 May, Victory Day in the Great Patriotic War, in Mariupol, civilians were shot . On May 9, victory Day in Mari upol was Victory Day .
 At the beginning of July there were again airstrikes in Luhansk . At the start of July, there were also airstrikes in the city .
 The nature and dynamics of the Ukraine crisis are difficult to understand without an understanding of the ideological undercurrents . The nature of the crisis in Ukraine is hard to understand, says the author .
 14 October was declared a public holiday in Ukraine . It was the day of the establishment of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army . The army fought against the Nazis .
 That is an all-out glorification of Ukrainian Nazi collaborators and misanthropes Bandera and Shukhevych, who have the blood of tens of thousands of Soviet and Polish citizens on their hands .
 Bandera gave indiscriminate orders to execute his opponents on a massive scale, in particular on the grounds of nationality .
 The Waffen-SS is held openly, with the approval of the Kyiv authorities . Now incendiary marches, in the style of the Waffens-SS, are held completely openly .
 The people of eastern Ukraine view this as Americans would feel if in the U.S. the founding day of the Ku Klux Klan was proclaimed a national holiday . The members marched in Washington, D.C., with burning crosses and formed detachments to put things in order .
 Apparently, he would like Ukraine to remain under Nazi occupation even today . He would like the country to remain in Nazi occupation .
 It is very strange that those who claim to be civilized can tolerate such a subversive ideology. Indeed, it's very strange to those who say they are civilized.
 This is the ideology guiding Kyiv’s so-called “anti-terrorist operations, which are, in reality, punitive operations . Kyiv is known for its anti-terrorist policies, which include the use of the term “terrorist”
 Aircraft, heavy weaponry, artillery, banned cluster and phosphorus munitions, tactical missiles, and multiple rocket launchers are being used against cities in the southeast .
 In Donetsk alone, more than 1,000 houses have been destroyed . In the city of Donetsk alone. More than 2,000 homes were destroyed .
 Small towns and other inhabited areas have been totally destroyed . Many small towns have been completely destroyed .
 There have been strikes against residential areas and infrastructure, with total disregard for international humanitarian law and basic moral decency . There have also been strikes on residential areas, infrastructure and infrastructure .
 Even major western non-governmental organizations say that the Ukrainian security forces do not distinguish between military and civilian targets .
 Kyiv reacted immediately to the incident, leveling charges at the militias without any investigation or trial . The incident occurred on 13 January in Volnovakha, Ukraine .
 The firing came from the north-north-east direction, which is an area where it is dubious rebels could be . However, according to the conclusion of the OSCE Mission, the firing was from the North- north-east .
 The Ukrainian Government is using the tragedy to the full extent so as to incite militaristic hysteria . The Ukrainian government is using this tragedy to a full extent to incite military hysteria .
 The Ukrainian brass stepped up artillery and bomb strikes against the cities of Donbas . Dozens of civilians, including women, children and the elderly, were killed .
 A bus stop was hit yesterday, resulting in two deaths and 11 serious injuries . The bus stop is located in the middle of a busy intersection .
 A Russian television station on the ground said that in Donetsk eight civilians had been killed and 30 wounded, including children .
 Ukrainian newspaper reports that five civilians have been killed and 29 wounded . Meanwhile, a Ukrainian newspaper reported that today five civilians were killed .
Up to 10 citizens killed today as a result of salvoes from multiple rocket launchers . Up to 10 people were killed in Stakhanaov, Luhansk district .
 A significant military force in the south-east is made up of the so-called ‘volunteer battalions’ funded by Ukrainian oligarchs and answer to no one .
 Kyiv authorities have not taken a single step towards genuine national dialogue or constitutional reform with the participation of all groups and regions . The Kyiv government is constantly referring to the unity and territorial integrity of the country .
 Kyiv is doing everything to cut off the south-east in practical terms, including cutting off the east .
 A decision has been made to withdraw all State institutions and terminate payments from the budget, including welfare and pensions . The decision was made to pull all state institutions from budget .
The movement of persons and goods is limited along the lines of engagement . The movement of people and goods has been limited by the line of engagement.
 transportation between Ukraine and Luhansk has been at a standstill since 12 January . Since 12 January, transportation between the two countries has been on hold .
 "Just last summer, we raised this issue and proposed that the Council adopt a draft resolution in this regard," we wrote .
 Some members of the Security Council, unfortunately, did not heed our call . The Security Council has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 United Nations humanitarian actors view the situation as a full-scale crisis calling for a presence on the ground . U.N. humanitarian actors say the situation needs a presence in the world .
 Kyiv authorities have reported a deterioration in the situation regarding the delivery of aid due to further obstruction from the Kyiv Authorities .
 Russia is providing significant humanitarian assistance to Donbas . Some members of the Council have attempted to raise in this regard .
 Kyiv continues to seek agreement with Kyiv, in spite of its obstruction, on the conditions for the provision of such supplies . At the same time, we continue to seek an agreement withKyiv, according to the government .
 We give timely information regarding sending humanitarian convoys and cargo . We give time-saving information on humanitarian convoy and cargo.
 Russia has just decided to contribute $5 million to the World Food Programme’s humanitarian assistance to the people of Ukraine .
 The Minsk agreement laid the groundwork for a peaceful settlement . The agreement was signed in September by Kyiv and representatives of Luhansk and Donetsk with the mediation of the OSCE and Russia .
 There is a need for the swift resumption of practical work with the contact group for the full implementation of the new contact group . The contact group is currently working on their full implementation .
 We urge all responsible members of the international community to put pressure on the Ukrainian authorities to move away from confrontation and bring to an end its policy on forced suppression of the south-east .
 The most pressing need now is to launch direct Ukraine-wide dialogue to discuss the constitutional makeup of the country, which should be comfortable and safe for all citizens without exception .
 The Chilean presidency is holding a debate on the issue of the country's constitution . The president has said he would like to thank the Chilean presidency for its initiative .
 I would also like to thank Mr Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing .
 Chad is concerned by the deteriorating security situation in Ukraine . Tensions have been on the rise since the beginning of 2015 .
 Exchanges of fire and violent confrontations broke out around the airport of Donetsk on 29 December 2014, resulting in a number of victims, including Ukraine soldiers and separatists .
 That constitutes a serious violation of the ceasefire under the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September 2014 . The ceasefire was agreed under the agreement between the two sides .
 At least 12 civilians, most of them women, were killed by rockets in eastern Ukraine . The firing of rockets on 13 January at a bus near Volnovakha killed 12 civilians .
Several deaths have been reported in Ukraine in the past 48 hours . The violence has caused several deaths among Ukrainian troops and civilians .
 We call upon the parties to respect international humanitarian law, in particular with regard to the protection of civilians in armed conflict . We call on the parties of both sides to respect humanitarian law .
 Ukrainian Parliament adopts law for partial mobilization of 50,000 reservists to the army in 2015 .
 The Ukrainian crisis will be political, but it largely depends on the willingness of Ukrainians themselves to undertake a genuine negotiating process .
 Chad calls upon the parties to show calm and restraint . He urges the Government to establish a direct and inclusive national dialogue in order to bring about reconciliation .
 Ukraine's civil war sadly took a very high toll in 2014 in terms of lives lost . Ukraine’s civil war was the worst in 2014.
 Chad encourages the international community to increase and diversify its mediation efforts aimed at relaunching the peace process in Ukraine .
 U.N. calls on countries that wield influence with parties to exert pressure in pursuit of peace in Ukraine . Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations .
 Many meetings have been held on the issue of Ukraine, both in the Security Council and the General Assembly .
 Spain will never tire of defending the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine. I would like to state very clearly here that Spain will always defend the unity of Ukraine . I would want Spain to defend Ukraine's unity, territorial integrity .
 The Security Council continues to closely follow developments in the situation. That is why we feel that it is important that the Security Council continue to follow the situation .
 UnderSecretary-General Feltman qualified the situation on the ground as alarming . We heard with great concern.
 The Permanent Council of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe met and made the same observation about the situation on the ground .
 Spain of course supports the OSCE activities and the efforts of the trilateral contact group aimed at bringing about an effective ceasefire and implementing the pending elements of the Minsk agreements . Spain also supports the efforts to bring about aneffective ceasefire and implement the pending element of the
 The Minsk protocol and memorandum continue to be the fundamental reference points . They should not be reinterpreted, they should be re-interpreted .
 All efforts aimed at a return to the path laid out by the Minsk agreements would be welcome . The Minsk agreement was reached in 2011 .
 The Normandy format has been under fire in recent days in the Normandy format . We hope that efforts will continue to make progress in the group .
 "We are extremely concerned by the escalation of the situation on the ground. As I said, we are very concerned," he said .
 "Preventing their suffering is an indispensable and urgent task," he says . "With regard to the civilian population, I would say that preventing their suffering was an indispensable, urgent task"
 The European Union has shown and will continue to demonstrate itself to be an asset in that regard . The EU has shown that it is an asset to the European Union .
 We have so far provided €76 million in aid and are working to increase that amount . We have thus far given €76million in aid .
 Of that, 40 per cent has been allocated to the inhabitants of the conflict areas controlled by the rebels .
 There is a clear risk of humanitarian assistance being used for the wrong reasons, says David Frum . He says there is a risk of aid being used in the wrong way .
We would stress that any lasting and sustainable solution must include respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, Mr Garcia Margallo, will convey to the Kyiv authorities when he travels to the region on 8 and 9 February .
 Spain's first non-permanent membership in the Security Council will be on a trip to Spain . It will be one of his first trips since the start of Spain’s non-Permanent membership . He will be in Spain for the first time since starting the
 We have heeded his warning regarding the deterioration of the security situation in Donbas over the past few days . The security situation has deteriorated in the last few days in the area .
 Fighting has resumed with an intensity that we had not seen in Ukraine for several months, especially around what remains of the Donetsk airport .
 What is urgently needed now is to achieve a de-escalation in order to put the political dialogue back on track, says David Cameron . "What is urgently need is to achieved a de -escalation," he says .
 The parties must understand that there can be no military solution to the conflict, which has already claimed over 5,000 lives . Ukraine, Russia and the European Union have been involved in the conflict . The conflict has already killed over 5k people and has cost the EU and Ukraine more than
 Only the full implementation, in good faith, of the Minsk agreements will provide a way out of the crisis . The full implementation of the agreements by all parties will provide the way to end the crisis.
 France remains fully mobilized with a view to achieving a peaceful and lasting settlement of the conflict . France is fully mobilized, and supports all international initiatives that share that goal .
 Minister Faurent Fabius is in close contact with his German, Russian and Ukrainian counterparts . Fabius has been in contact with both Russia and Ukraine .
 There have been further exchanges between the Ministers under the Normandy format . Today in Berlin, there have been more exchanges between ministers .
 The Permanent Council of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe adopted a political statement calling for a de-escalation and the full implementation of the Minsk agreements . Russia and Ukraine are represented in the statement .
 We now need concrete and verifiable action. But beyond mere words, and above all, we now need real action . We need concrete, verifiable actions, and more.
 The Security Council last year dealt with the Ukrainian crisis on more than 30 occasions . It should support those efforts and participate in the search for a lasting solution .
 The risk of the crisis spreading within Ukraine and beyond should not be underestimated. The risk is not underestimated, according to experts .
 Ukraine must remain at the heart of the Security Council’s priorities, it says . Ukraine must also remain at heart of Security Council's priorities .
We want to open a new chapter in 2015 to find a way out of the spiral of confrontation . We want to do so without abandoning our principles, we say . We also want to make sure we don't abandon our principles .
Nothing can undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its international borders . Nothing can undermine Ukraine's sovereignty or territorial integrity within the international borders.
 The situation is now, paradoxically, clearer than it was a few months ago, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the situation is clearer now, and it's better than before .
 The parameters necessary for an end to the crisis are now known to all, including the Minsk agreements . The Minsk agreement is now in place .
 The road map was upheld until last week . Despite alternating periods of violence, it was upheld by the Supreme Court .
 The discussions in the contact group are too slow and only lead to modest results . The contact group is too slow. The discussions are only leading to modest Results .
 The Russian and Ukrainian parties are distrusting each other . That is due to the significant distrust that prevails between the two parties .
 That state of affairs must be overcome, and we must encourage each party to have the courage to get involved, says David Cameron .
 The situation on the ground today makes tragically clear . However, much remains to be done, as the situation is still not clear .
 We must move forward if we want diplomatic dynamics to prevail over violence and chaos . We need diplomatic dynamics. We need to move forward.
 Russia is reluctant to engage openly and lastingly to normalize the situation . It seems clear to us that Russia is not willing to engage in any way .
 The recent violence is further evidence of Russia's capacity to fuel tensions even as a diplomatic process begins .
 We call on Ukraine to launch a process leading to institutional reforms giving Donbas greater autonomy while respecting the sovereignty of Ukraine . We also call on Ukrainian to launch an institutional reforms leading to greater autonomy .
 We call once again on Russia to stop the transfer of arms and individuals across the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 We call on Russia to bring all of its influence to bear on the separatists to ensure that the ceasefire is fully upheld . We also call on the Russian government to bring its influence into the conflict .
 Securing the Russian-Ukrainian border remains vital to emerging from the crisis. Securing Russia's border is vital to emerge from crisis, according to Russian media .
 Russia must all be deployed in accordance with Ukrainian law . Convoys coming from Ukraine, European Union and European Union must be deployed . Russia must also be deployed.
 Our resolve is unshakable alongside our European and American partners, says U.S. President Barack Obama . "Our resolve isUnshakable," says Obama .
 Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Jeffrey Feltman, for his comprehensive briefing . He was given a comprehensive briefing by the U.S. Under- secretary general for political affairs .
 Jordan expresses concern vis-a-vis the accelerating deterioration of the situation in Ukraine . Jordan expresses its concern vis a-vis.
 The Security Council and the international community must work harder than ever before to resolve the crisis . The crisis has reached dangerous proportions, and the Security Council must work hard to resolve it .
 More than 4,700 people have died so far and more than 1 million have been displaced to other regions within Ukraine and neighbouring countries . The conflict in the east and the deterioration of the humanitarian situation there is a result of the conflict in Ukraine .
 This is in addition to the flagrant and systemic violations of human rights being committed . This is also a violation of the human rights of the United States. This is not the first time this has happened .
 We do not need to reiterate them at every meeting, but to affirm that they must come to an end . We need to continue to reiterate the need to end, we say .
We call on all parties to show selfrestraint and to immediately stop using force so as to salvage the peace process through a return to peaceful negotiations . That would only lead to more violence among the parties to the conflict .
 There is a need to stop the escalating use of provocative language among the parties so as to give reason and dialogue a chance. We reiterate that there is a needs to stop.
 Jordan reiterates its belief that it is important to respect the borders of Ukraine as well as its sovereignty and territorial integrity, not to interfere in its internal affairs . Jordan also wants to stem the flow of foreign fighters and weapons.
 Instability in Ukraine will be bad not only for Ukraine but also for all the countries of the region and beyond, and the negative political and economic impact will affect the whole region .
We feel that we must take practical steps to comprehensively implement the Minsk accord for peace both in letter and in spirit . That is why we feel that it must be done in letter or in spirit.
 The political framework was agreed by all parties with a view to achieving a comprehensive peace . That is the political framework that was agreed to achieve a complete peace .
 Ukrainian Government to continue with its reform programmes, especially in the public and justice sectors . We also call on the Ukrainian government to continue its reform programme .
 We affirm the need to take every possible measure to protect civilians, we say . We need to provide basic services for citizens and implement the human rights strategy .
 Jordan values and supports all efforts to bring about peace and to restore stability and security to Ukraine . Jordan also supports efforts to host a Quartet summit at the end of this month .
 Jordan looks forward to that summit and to the urgent meeting of the Minsk Contact Group . Jordan is also looking forward to the meeting of Minsk contact Group .
We hope that the two meetings will lead to a positive outcome . We hope that a solution will be reached that is satisfactory to all parties . The two meetings are expected to take place in the coming days .
 We call on the parties to show a genuine commitment to work to pacify the situation in Ukraine and to bring about lasting peace . We also call on them to use this opportunity to work for a lasting peace.
 I welcome the briefing today by Under-Secretary General Feltman following his recent visit to Ukraine .
 The worrying surge in violence over the past week underlines the grave threat that the situation in eastern Ukraine continues to pose to international peace and security .
 At least 12 civilians were killed in Volnovakha earlier this month . Reports of hospitals being shelled in Donetsk have also been reported .
 More reports of Russian personnel crossing the Ukrainian border . We have seen yet more reports of Russia crossing the border .
 Russian denials and misinformation have been common in recent years . We have heard the usual pattern of Russian denial and misinformation .
 Russia's actions continue to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, he says . It is clear, just as it was when we last met, in November, that Russia's action continues to undermine the United Nations Charter .
 As winter deepens, the situation will only get worse, with the elderly, the young and the infirm all increasingly vulnerable .
 The separatists must allow Ukrainian humanitarian convoys to enter the regions they control . Russia must stop using its unilateral humanitarian convoy as cover to supply those separatists with arms .
 The human rights situation gives equal cause for concern, with human rights violations reported in the illegally annexed peninsula . The Crimean peninsula is under separatist control .
 Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity have not been heeded, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It should dismay us all that repeated calls for a ceasefire and for respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty have not be heeded .
 All sides must engage in constructive dialogue and bring about an end to violence in eastern Ukraine . All sides need to engage inconstructive dialogue and end violence in Ukraine .
 Russia must take steps to withdraw its equipment and troops from Ukraine, cease its support for the separatists . Russia must effectively control its borders and effectively control the country's borders .
 Despite persistent claims to the contrary, the evidence of Russia’s support is beyond denial . Russia's support for Russia in the past is beyond deny, according to CNN .
 Two days ago, two companies of Russian troops crossed the border into Ukraine . Up to 30 armoured personnel carriers and a dozen tanks were seen crossing the border in Ukraine .
 We have also seen Russiansupplied T-72 BM tanks in the streets of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 The consequences of the situation in the Donbas continue to hurt both the people and the economies of Ukraine and Russia .
 More than 1,000 people have been killed since the September agreements were made . separatists have taken control of a substantial additional area of Ukrainian territory since the agreements .
 Russia and separatists to implement 10 out of the 12 commitments made on that occasion . Russia and the separatists failed to implement ten out of 12 commitments .
 Russia’s refusal to implement two key provisions continue to undermine the prospects for peace in Ukraine . In particular, Russia's refusal to implementation of the key provisions continues to undermine peace in the Ukraine .
 All sides agreed to secure continuous monitoring on the Ukraine/Russian border and verification of the creation of a security zone in the border regions of Ukraine and Russia .
 Only two checkpoints are currently monitored on the Russian side, leaving hundreds of kilometres free for the flow of weapons and personnel into Ukraine .
 Russia must stop blocking the expansion of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, Russia says . If it is serious about Minsk, Russia must be serious about the mission, it says . Minsk must also stop blocking OSCE's expansion of its Special Monitoring mission, says
 Hundreds of Russian troops still remain on the territory of Ukraine . Thousands of so-called volunteers, in flagrant violation of the protocol, still remain .
 The withdrawal of those forces is fundamental to the Minsk agreement and the only way to secure the future territorial integrity of Ukraine . The withdrawal is fundamental. It is the only thing to secure Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 It is important that the Council continue to pay the closest attention to the situation in Ukraine and insist on further progress towards implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 Russia has chosen not to uphold its commitments and pursue this path to restoring stability . Russia has not been able to fulfill its commitments to restore stability .
 Russia has made an agreement with a breakaway Georgian province of Abkhazia . Russia is in the process of doing the same with another Georgian region .
 This demonstrates a pattern of Russian interference in the domestic affairs of its neighbours . This shows a blatant disregard for their sovereignty and territorial integrity, says the author .
 We call on Russia to exert its influence over separatists, cease the destabilizing activities and work in good faith to find a political solution . We call for Russia to exerted its influence on separatists .
 I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing . I would also like to thanks Under- Secretary-General for his briefings .
 The current situation in eastern Ukraine remains turbulent, with an increase in armed clashes and acts of violence resulting in human casualties and the destruction of property .
 The top priorities now are to effectively and comprehensively implement the Minsk agreements by all parties concerned, to prevent further escalation of the conflict and confrontation .
 China believes a political solution is the only way to settle the Ukrainian issue . China believes that a political Solution is the best solution to the issue .
 The crisis in Ukraine is rooted in complex historical facts and contemporary causes . The crisis is based on complex historicalfacts and modern causes .
 A fundamental solution of the Ukrainian issue lies in fully taking into account the legitimate rights and aspirations of all regions and ethnic groups of Ukraine, says the author .
 China welcomes and supports the recent positive efforts of the relevant parties to push for a political solution to the Ukrainian issue . China hopes that they will join hands, fully take into account the legitimate interests and reasonable concerns of each side .
 It is China’s long-standing position to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries .
We support all actions conducive to the holding of dialogues and consultations in search of a political solution to the Ukrainian crisis . We support all action conducive to holding of dialogue and consultations .
 We will maintain our just and objective position by playing a positive and constructive role in finding a political solution to the Ukrainian issue. We will play a positive role inFinding a political Solution to the Ukraine issue.
 The Security Council on Ukraine is holding a meeting on Ukraine . The meeting will be held in Kiev, Ukraine .
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, has been briefed on the current situation in Ukraine .
 The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law . The country supports the idea of peaceful settlement.
 We advocate a political and diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis to be brought about constructively in accordance with the norms and principles of international law .
 We are convinced of the need to put an end to the hostilities in south-eastern Ukraine as soon as possible . We are firmly convinced of a need to end the hostilities as soonAs possible .
 We reject acts of violence and ethnic and political persecution and acts of terrorism regardless of who commits them . We reject the acts of Violence and Ethnic and Political persecution and we reject them .
 Direct negotiation is the most appropriate means for achieving that goal . There should be no interference in matters under the domestic jurisdiction of States, be they military, political or economic .
 Venezuela stresses mediation of regional organizations is the path to a negotiated settlement of the conflict . Venezuela stresses that the mediation of Regional Organizations is the way to a settlement . The mediation is a key part of a solution to the conflict.
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Germany and France support the efforts to promote dialogue among Ukraine, Russia and the Donbas region .
 We hope political meetings will help to bring about a ceasefire that will lead to lasting peace in strict compliance with the Minsk agreements . We hope that the recent political meeting will bring about the ceasefire .
 Venezuela believes that the parties should act with moderation in order to avoid the dialogue being affected by unilateral actions that could jeopardize the peace process . Venezuela believes the parties must act with Moderation to avoid unilateral actions .
 The U.S. says unilateral coercive sanctions are contrary to international law and counterproductive to the desire for peace and stability in the region .
 All efforts should be made to address the historical and root causes of the crisis in order to achieve a strong and lasting peace that includes all parties involved. All parties involved should be involved in the crisis.
 We call upon the parties to strictly observe the commitments concerning the protection of civilians in the areas affected by violence . The need to ensure access to humanitarian assistance for internally displaced persons, refugees and others living in the area affected by the conflict .
 We call on all parties to redouble their efforts in the search for a just and lasting political solution, which is in everyone’s interest .
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his in-depth briefing . My delegation extends its appreciation to the Under- Secretary-General for his briefing .
 Malaysia shares grave concern on the deteriorating situation on the ground in the east of Ukraine . Malaysia shares the grave concern expressed by Under-Secretary-General Feltman .
Fighting at Donetsk airport has threatened to unravel the September 2014 ceasefire . As expressed by the Secretary General on 18 January, the SecretaryGeneral said the fighting had threatened to end .
 Malaysia calls on the conflicting parties to cease fighting and adhere to their commitments to implementing the Minsk protocol and memorandum in their entirety . Malaysia calls to immediately de-escalating the situation .
 A military solution would not be sustainable and would not benefit anyone . The military solution is not sustainable and is not likely to benefit anyone.
 Close to 5,000 people have been killed, while over 1 million have been displaced . Over 1 million people are displaced, according to reports .
 Malaysia is deeply saddened by the recent tragic shelling of a bus transporting civilians on 13 January in the Donetsk region . The shelling killed 12 and injured many more, among them women and children . Malaysia has been deeply saddened.
 Malaysia calls for an independent investigation into the incident to hold the perpetrators accountable . Malaysia has called for a probe into what happened to the perpetrators .
 The latest incident is yet another instance of senseless killing in eastern Ukraine . More and more innocent victims have been killed in the conflict in the eastern Ukraine.
 The conflict has been prolonged and grown more intense since then, claiming more and more casualties, and causing a humanitarian crisis . The conflict is now being prolonged and growing more intense, causing more casualties .
 It is our conviction that adherence to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance in maintaining international peace and security . It is also our conviction to adhere to the principle of the charter of the UN.
 Ukraine says it is committed to sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . Ukraine is also committed to the principle of non-interference in its internal affairs .
 Malaysia condemns any threat or use of force against territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine . Malaysia views such threats as a violation of the United Nations Charter .
 Malaysia calls for constructive engagement on all sides . Malaysia urges conflicting parties to continue to explore all possible avenues to find a peaceful solution .
 Malaysia supports every peaceful effort, including international diplomatic initiatives aimed at resolving the situation in Ukraine . Malaysia supports all peaceful efforts.
 We call on all parties to respect the rule of law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law, to act responsibly and to aim towards finding a peaceful settlement .
 Malaysia stands ready to play a constructive role towards de-escalating the crisis and resuming talks to restore Ukraine’s stability and territorial integrity . Malaysia has been in talks with Ukraine since the start of the crisis .
 We hope both sides will adopt a moderate approach and find a mutually acceptable solution . We hope that both sides would adopt a Moderation approach .
 The interest, welfare and security of the people of Ukraine must be given top priority by all parties . The interest and welfare of the Ukraine people must be top priority.
 Nigeria is deeply concerned that despite the various efforts aimed at resolving the crisis in Ukraine, the situation on the ground has not changed . Nigeria is also deeply concerned about the situation in Ukraine .
 The fighting between Government forces and separatist rebels continues unabated and has indeed intensified .
 The U.S. has called for a political solution that adequately addresses the concerns of the separatists . The Ukrainian government has been accused of separatists in Ukraine .
 The recent escalation of violence in Ukraine is a very serious threat to what were at best, says David Cameron . The escalation is fragile steps towards a peace, he says .
 The Under-Secretary-General’s report that there is a mounting alarm at the situation, particularly the humanitarian situation, is one with which we can only agree .
 New Zealand continues to be deeply concerned about this conflict . It has implications for the Charter of the United Nations, such as territorial integrity .
 The conflict has so far led to an unacceptable loss of life, especially that of civilians . The conflict in the past has led to a number of deaths .
 More than 1 million people have been displaced from their homes, and they now face a very harsh winter . More than a million people are displaced.
 The destruction within the past 24 hours of a major bridge into Luhansk, while no doubt a military objective, also impedes desperately needed humanitarian relief, and that is totally unacceptable . The destruction of the bridge in the last 24 hours is unacceptable .
 We urge close cooperation among all relevant parties, including the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe .
 The conflict continues despite the clear and unequivocal commitments recorded in the Minsk protocol and memorandum . It is a particular concern that the conflict continues. It is also a concern that it is not being resolved in the memorandum .
 We call on all parties to fully implement their commitments, including an immediate and full cessation of all hostilities, with a clear definition of the line of contact between the parties .
 The conditions must come into effect immediately to allow the resumption of productive diplomatic discussions, especially the planned summit-level consultations . These conditions must be put in place immediately .
 It should be clear to all of us that this crisis cannot be resolved by the use of force, says David Cameron . The crisis should be solved by force, he says .
 We continue to read with alarm reports indicating Russian troops and materiel in the conflict . We urge both Russia and the pro-Russian separatists to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 We also call on Russia to use its influence, as its representative just told us it has done before, to ensure that pro-Russian separatists fully respect the ceasefire .
 OSCE is mediating role of the OSCE, and we encourage it to continue its efforts to end the fighting . We welcome the mediating roles of OSCE and we welcome it, we say, to continue efforts to stop fighting .
 The Security Council must live up to its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations . But we also believe that this Security Council should live up with its responsibilities .
 The Council met no fewer than 27 times to discuss the situation in Ukraine in 2014 . But so far, we have seen very little impact from all of that high level attention .
 The 28th meeting of the New Zealand Council is held in Auckland . The Council calls for a more purposeful Council engagement with a real focus on negotiating a resolution to the conflict .
 Only then will we see tangible outcomes for those most affected — people of eastern Ukraine. Only then we will see tangible results for those affected .
 Under-Secretary-General Feltman gave a very in-depth briefing to the Council . The meeting will be held in London this afternoon .
 The crisis in Ukraine has serious consequences for the political, economic and social stability of its people . We agree that all peaceful means must be found to resolve it .
 The Minsk agreement signed in September is an important basis for a settlement . All parties concerned can demonstrate the political will to make it a reality, in spirit as well as in letter .
 Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany will meet this afternoon in Berlin .
 It is possible to reach a negotiated solution if the parties have the political will. It is our conviction that it will be possible to reached a negotiated deal .
 The Council is set to begin deliberations on the crisis at the beginning of a new year . It would be a welcome development for the Council at the start of the new year.
 The humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine is deplorable, says U.S. State Department . It is unacceptable that so many people continue to be killed, maimed and deprived of food, clean water, housing and other essentials of human life .
 Angola appeals to all the parties directly or indirectly involved in the conflict to use their intelligence to find possible solutions to safeguarding international peace and security in this conflict .
 Mr Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing . We thank him for his briefings .
 I would first like to say how deeply concerned we are about the new escalation of the crisis in eastern and southern Ukraine, particularly around the Donetsk airport . I would also say that we are deeply concerned.
 "We deplore the worsening security situation, which has had serious consequences for the civilian population," says the U.S. State Department .
 The Minsk accords have been agreed to be monitored and verified by the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . We urge the parties to comply fully.
 The agreement is designed to achieve peace and tranquillity for the entire population of eastern Ukraine . We are confident in the full ability of all the parties to implement the agreement, we say .
 We urge all parties to pursue the high-level dialogue in order to find a peaceful solution to the conflict . We urge restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that could exacerbate tensions .
 We hope that the Minsk contact group can deliver positive results in the coming weeks . We hope to see positive results.
Until a permanent peaceful solution is found, humanitarian assistance should be provided without delay and in accordance with humanitarian principles . Until a permanent peace solution, humanitarian aid should be given without delay .
 The efforts of the international community must be channeled through the host Government . The host Government has primary responsibility for aiding and protecting its people .
 Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, according to the Charter of the United Nations, General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international law, as well as respecting the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of another State .
 The SecretaryGeneral's continued efforts to end the situation that Ukraine is enduring, says the U.S. State Department . "We hope that the various independent international mechanisms will continue to contribute to resolving this crisis"
 President Barack Obama congratulates President Obama on his effective leadership of the Council . Obama says he will take this opportunity to congratulate him on his leadership .
 Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela are the new members of the Council . Angola is the first time my delegation has taken the floor this year . I would also like to congratulate new members on their election.
 UnderSecretary-General Feltman has been given a briefing. I am grateful to you, Sir, for convening this meeting, and would also like to thank him for his briefing . The meeting will be held in New York City.
 The Russian Federation manipulated two of the basic principles of the U.N. in order to create a fake legal pretext for invading Ukraine .
 As a result, it occupied and then annexed part of Ukraine, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol .
 The Russian Federation will be brought to justice for that particular crime of aggression against Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation is continuing its military aggression in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine . It is delivering heavy weapons to local terrorist groups, training, equipping and financing mercenaries .
 The aggression is aimed at forcing my Government to change its constitutional and territorial order . That aggression is intended to undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity and political sovereignty .
 Every day of the past year has been traumatic for the Ukrainian people, says the Ukrainian government .
On 8 June, militants from the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic tortured and killed eight priests and parishioners .
 On 17 July, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was brought down from a zone controlled by the terrorists .
 Last week, terrorists fired on a passenger bus near the Ukrainian town of Volnovakha, killing 13 and wounding 15 civilians . The attack killed 15 Ukrainian civilians .
 The shelling was carried out from the north-north-eastern areas occupied by illegal armed groups . The ongoing investigation of that tragic terrorist attack on civilians near Volnovakha is ongoing .
 It is fighting on the front lines for such universal values as freedom, sovereignty and democracy . It is also fighting for the future of democracy, freedom and sovereignty .
 In the wake of the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September 2014, the President of Ukraine declared a ceasefire and began to implement all points .
 Russian side and Russian-backed terrorists have persistently violated the Minsk agreement . Despite the fact that they are signatories to the agreements, the Russian side has repeatedly violated the agreement .
 In contravention of the ceasefire regime, the shelling of Ukrainian positions has increased . The shelling has increased.
 In the past 10 days alone the total shelling has surpassed the numbers for the whole of the previous month . In particular, in the past ten days alone, the total shellings have surpassed the number for the entire month .
 Russian side has significantly increased its military presence in Donbas . Since signing the Minsk agreements in September, Russia has filled the region with heavy weapons .
 The terrorists recently announced that they have created their own air force . The terrorists have been known to be terrorists for years .
 We presume that is a manoeuvre to cover up the future deployment and use of Russian military aircraft in action . We presume it is a move to protect Russia's future deployment of military aircraft .
 The build-up of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border has also increased and has now reached 50,000 . Russian troops in Ukraine have also increased .
 With your permission, Mr President, I would like to say a few words in Russian .
 There is a battalion from the 76th Motorized Brigade from Maikop and the 49th Brigade from Stavropol . There is also a brigade from the 49st Brigade from the Stavrool Brigade .
 Russia officially denies sending troops, but the families of troops killed tell a different story . Russia officially denied sending troops to Russia, but families of soldiers killed tell different stories .
 The Council's attention to the fact that the illegal armed groups intensified their attacks and shelling after receiving reinforcements from the territory of the Russian Federation .
 Russian officials have tried to shift responsibility for violations onto Ukraine, including those which the Russian delegation has made to the Security Council today . We denounce the provocative statements made by Russian officials .
 I do not have any intention of continually commenting on or of repeating the disinformation concerning the implementation of the Minsk agreements by my Government or the measures the Government of Ukraine has taken to meet the needs of Ukrainian citizens in Donbas .
 Recently, we helped disseminate information on that issue to all members of the Security Council . The Security Council has been given information on the issue .
 Ukraine remains fully committed to a peaceful settlement of the crisis, which should be based on the Minsk agreements . Ukraine remains committed to the territorial integrity, sovereignty, sovereignty and political unity of Ukraine .
 Ukraine and Russia signed a working document envisaging a clear schedule for the implementation of the Minsk agreements . In particular concerning assurances of the ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons and return to the touch-line .
 Ukraine once again reiterated its appeal to the Russian Federation . Russia should sign the timetable for the implementation of the Minsk agreements, as worded on 13 November 2014 . The ceasefire would start on 19 January .
 The strict implementation of the document will create appropriate conditions for holding consultations of the trilateral contact group in the near future . The summit of Heads of State and Government to be held in Astana .
 Ukraine is ready to sign the ceasefire agreement, despite the escalation of pressure and activation of terrorists, says President Petro Poroshenko . Ukraine's President has stated that the agreement is in line with the Minsk agreements .
 We still expect the same commitment to the Minsk agreements on the part of the Russian side . The Russian side is expected to continue to sign the agreements .
 President of the Russian Federation has repeatedly confirmed his adherence to the Minsk agreements in their full scope and without exception .
 That position was affirmed, inter alia, at the multilateral summit in Milan . That position has been affirmed at the summit .
 Ukraine, Europe, the Security Council and the world. We sincerely thank all our partners for their solidarity with us at this crucial time .
 Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savachenko is illegally detained in Russia . The pilot was released today .
 The Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make an additional statement . The representative of the Russian Federation wants to make a further statement .
 The Security Council was supposed to hold closed consultations to consider whether or not the Security Council could make a contribution to settling the Ukrainian crisis .
 The delegation of the U.S. showed its hand, and we know why, as colleagues have complained .
 The representative of the United States went beyond the Ukrainian topic and made a number of inappropriate insinuations regarding Russia’s policies .
 The U.S. has played a destructive role in the Ukrainian crisis, says John Sutter . Sutter says the U.N. has been playing a provocative role in Ukraine .
 The Kyiv Government has stepped up the confrontational nature of its activities . The current military escalation coincides with the visit to Kyiv of the commander of the American forces in Europe .
 Washington, D.C., turns its gaze on Iraq, Libya, Syria, Ukraine, everywhere . It's surprising that wherever Washington turns its eyes, we see destabilization, crises and bloodshed .
 The U.S. believes that Europe does not have enough problems and that the eastern part of the continent needs a long, drawn-out crisis .
 It would seem that some European capitals have begun to understand where things are going . But not yet all, as demonstrated by today’s discussion.
 Power and other colleagues talked about certain conflicts that occurred as a result of the fall of the Soviet Union . For some reason, they blamed Russia for them .
 The conflict in Transnistria could have been settled back in 2005 if Washington, D.C., had not intervened at the last moment, writes John Sutter .
 Abkhazia, in South Ossetia, would not have declared its independence if in 2001 Washington, D.C., had not provoked an eruption of Saakashvili's unbalanced regime .
 During today’s discussion, we have heard a number of specific grievances against Russia .
 I would recommend that colleagues carefully study the text of the major press conference held in Moscow today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of our country .
 Ukrainian representative: "I have only one thing to say. In regard to the statement made by the Ukrainian representative, I have onlyone thing to says"
 The Ukrainian delegation has never uttered a respectful word and has actually been insulting when referring to the southeastern part of his country . In all our many discussions in the Security Council, the Ukrainian delegation hasn't uttered a disrespectful word .
 I have yet to hear my Ukrainian colleagues raise the subject of inclusive political dialogue . I have not heard my Ukrainian colleague raise the issue of inclusive politics .
 The Kyiv Government does not seem ready to take this up, it is now time to do so with political courage .
 The representative of the U.S. has asked for the floor to make a further statement . The representative has also asked for an additional statement .
 Russia continues the same tactics of supporting the separatists in Ukraine, it also continues its same tactics in the Council . It seems that while Russia continues to support the separatists, it continues to show a repeated preference for fantasy.
 It has been claimed that the Russian Federation is striving for implementation of the Minsk agreements . The Russian Federation has been accused of failing to implement the agreements .
 Russia and separatists it supports have taken practically no steps to implement the September Minsk agreements . In fact, Russia and the separatists have taken virtually no steps.
 Weapons, heavy artillery and military personnel continue to flow across the border from Russia to the separatists .
 The border remains unsecured and hostages are still being held, including on Russian territory . The border is still unsecuring and hostages remain being held .
 Ukraine has taken great strides to implement the 5 September Minsk protocol, including twice declaring a unilateral ceasefire as separatists continue to fire .
 It has been claimed that Ukraine is building up its military presence and resorting to militarization . Ukraine has been accused of building up military presence .
 Ukraine is attempting to hold the ceasefire line agreed to on 19 September . In fact, Ukraine is trying to hold a ceasefire line .
 The fact that the Russian-backed separatists have decided to ignore the line and try to take additional territory does not provide a basis to renegotiate that line. The fact the separatists are ignoring the line does not give a basis for renegotiating it .
 The separatists have gained additional territory through repeated ceasefire violations since September . The line should not be renegotiated because the separatists are gaining additional territory .
 Donetsk airport should be under the control of the Russian-backed separatists, it has been claimed . It is claimed.
 The 19 September Minsk agreement stipulated that all forces would draw back at least 15 kilometers on both sides of the ceasefire line . In fact, the line of contact should go straight through the Donetsk airport .
 The airport would have remained neutral territory if the Minsk agreements were properly implemented . The Minsk agreement would have kept the airport neutral territory .
 The representative of the Russian Federation claims that Ukraine will not respond to President Putin’s latest proposal .
 There is no need to renegotiate a new peace plan or a new ceasefire line. In fact, there is not a need for renegotiating a new deal or a ceasefire line .
 The September Minsk agreements provide for cessation of fighting, permanent international monitoring of the border . The removal of all Russian equipment and personnel from the Ukrainian territory, the release of all hostages, and increased autonomy for the region within Ukrainian law, remain the best path to de-escalating the
 The Russians seem to be doing not to implement Minsk, but to redraft the line of control articulated in it .
 Russia and separatists it supports should fulfil commitments they made in September . Russia and the separatists should fulfil their commitments, rather than attempt to reopen negotiations .
 Power decided that she had not been eloquent enough in setting out the American position . She decided that her Deputy needed to repeat some portions of her statement .
 Ambassador Power has decided not to continue this principled discussion with us on matters of international policy . I regret that Ambassador Power will not continue the principled discussion. I regret the decision .
 The representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further statement . Ukraine's representative of the Ukraine says the floor should be asked to make further statement.
I apologise for taking the floor again, but my country has been mentioned several times in the past few minutes . I apologise. I apologise fortaking the floor. I apologised for taking a floor again .
 I will make a few comments on the so-called national dialogue on decentralization in Ukraine and the humanitarian situation . I will also make a couple of comments on Ukraine's situation .
 All members of the Security Council sent information on the social and humanitarian situation in Donbas . The measures taken by the Government of Ukraine to meet the needs of the Ukrainian citizens inDonbas .
 The Russian colleague has told the mistruth that we are not commenting on Ukraine’s policy of inclusiveness . Everything is contained in that paper, so I do not know why the Russian colleague had told themistruth .
On mobilization, yes, we are in the process of reforming our army, which was fully destroyed in recent years . The army was completely destroyed in the past years, the army says .
 Thousands of Russian nationals and sophisticated weaponry are in Donbas, Ukraine, with thousands of Russians .
 U.N. has called on many countries and organizations for assistance . Based on the United Nations principle of collective self-defence, we have called for help .
As to the issue of Ukrainian citizens, the paper I mentioned is addressed to the Ukrainian citizens in Donbas .
 Those who killed the passengers of Flight MH-17 would be considered terrorists anywhere, whatever their nationality or the threat they represent . Those who kill priests and those who killed civilians are terrorists .
 They are terrorists and they are called by that name because their actions identify them as terrorists . They are called as terrorists because they are identified by their actions. They are also called terrorists .