 Russia's 'traditional' or 'historic' sphere of inﬂuence, to which in their view Ukraine belongs. These ﬁndings challenge the veracity of the claim currently widespread among the Western left .
Socialists' claim by socialists is questioned on normative as well as analytical grounds . Such a claim by socialist groups is questioned by analysts on normative grounds .
 This article explores the origins of the Ukrainian crisis in several historical developments that came together in 2014 . Ukraine; Crimea; Russia; European Union; USA; Imperialism; War . This article also explores the history of the Ukraine crisis .
 The situation has unfolded inside Ukraine itself since 1991 with the establishment of a new nation state simultaneously with the return of capitalism .
 The ﬁfth development is the overarching confrontation between a declining U.S. power and a reviving Russian power in Europe .
 Academic and political ﬁgures right across the political spectrum in the West claim that the USA bears primary responsibility for the Ukrainian crisis .
 Euro-Atlantic core states had the initiative after the collapse of the Soviet bloc . The Euro- Atlantic core states were the first to have the initiative .
 Central European and Baltic littoral states into the EU and NATO on their own terms from the end of the Cold War right up to the international ﬁnancial crisis and the Russo-Georgian war .
 Russia retook the initiative in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, the eastward drive of NATO and the EU stalled . The role of the USA in the region’s affairs became increasingly a reactive one .
 Ukrainian crisis matured and then erupted in the period from 2008 to 2014 . This was the broader context of the Ukrainian crisis, which matured in the past .
 The Fragility of the Ukrainian State The Maidan arose in 2013, as it did in 2004 . The new Ukrainian ruling class failed to share state power democratically or to invest in its own society .
 The state turned the state to enabling new rounds of wealth accumulation from the living labour . This social class then turned to the private sector .
 The Ukrainian people are as poor today as they were in the last year of the USSR, and they are riven by far more inequalities than they were then .
Public policy and public institutions remain weak, even if they have managed to recover their basic rights to free expression, assembly and self-organisation . Their inﬂuence over public policy andPublic institutions remains weak.
 The present crisis is in the ﬁrst instance attributable to the failure of a newly independent state to meet the mass expectations on which it was founded in 1991 .
 The Maidan in the winter of 2013–2014 was the latest revolt against the new ruling class . It drove its most powerful faction out of the country, but ultimately failed to dislodge it from the political and economic institutions .
 Maidan was sufﬁciently threatening to compel the Russian state to intervene and seize Crimea . The Maidan wanted to arm a revanchist insurgency in the Donbas .
 The International Isolation of the Ukrainian State was the second historical development that contributed to the outbreak of the current crisis . The Ukrainian state has failed to integrate successfully into either the Euro-Atlantic alliance or the Russia-led alliance .
 Leonid Kuchma pursued a strategy to build a national ruling class that could hold its own place in the international political economy . He was president of Russia in 1994 and has since become president of the country .
 His strategy required keeping Western and Russian capital out of the ﬁrst big privatisations of property .
 Kuchma’s strategy failed because the state leadership could not compel its own capitalists to keep their wealth in the country to upgrade and diversify the domestic economy .
Social inequalities in the midst of a rapid rate of economic recovery on the back of an export boom and an increasingly repressive regime were the triggers for the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 Russian capitalists succeeded in placing substantial investments in the Ukrainian economy . From Kuchma's second term in ofﬁce and Putin’s ﬁrst in Russia, Russian capitalists placed substantial investments.
 Each side was trying to incorporate Ukraine’s natural resources, cheap labour and markets onto a low technological echelon of its own regional chains.
 The 2008 crisis prevented either side from making a bid for a dominant position . Yet the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis prevented both sides from making any bid for the dominant position.
 Ukraine ended up in the grey zone between US-led Europe and Russia . The likely recipient of friction between them grew as Russia revived and United States in Europe waned .
 The third historical development contributing to the current crisis has been the revival of Russian imperialist ambitions . The Revival of Russian Imperialism has been a revival of Russia's imperial ambitions .
 From around 2000 Putin began to restore Russia’s position as a power in Eurasia .
 He focussed on rebuilding Russia's economic ties in the ex-Soviet space by reclaiming state control over Russian energy and mineral resources .
 Russia’s biggest energy and mineral producers are Russia's biggest energy producers . Later, the restored economic links with Russia's near abroad would lay a path to securing transnational competitive status for Russia .
 Russian expansion has relied on its competitive advantages in global markets of fuel, energy and mineral resources . American capitalism expanded globally with a far more diversiﬁed production base and with already saturated domestic demand .
 It is not diversiﬁed nor is its bourgeoisie willing to invest in its diversi ﬁcantly in its diversi cities . It is not diversi and its bourgeoisie is not investing signi�
 Property ownership in Russia is too insecure, access to domestic resources and markets is in the gift of state authorities . Better security and investment opportunities exist for Russian capital investment abroad .
 Russian capitalism has become diversiﬁed both sectorally and geographically along transnational chains of production, trade and investment . The Russian national economy is not diversi.
 A Deutsche Bank report in 2008 concluded that Russia had become the largest outward investor of its capital of all the BRIC countries .
 Russian overseas direct investment was double that of its nearest rivals India and China at $160 billion, up from $20 billion in 2000 .
 Russia was already the second largest source of ODI in emerging markets after Hong Kong . Russia is the second biggest source of the ODI.
 Russian private capital was invested ﬁrst in the near abroad and then expanded outwards, seeking new markets and new technologies . Russian private Capital was invested in fuel, energy and metals .
 A survey of 25 top Russian ﬁrms shows they sent 52 per cent of the ODI into Western Europe . 22 per cent to the near-abroad countries and 11 per cent in Eastern Europe .
 Evraz in Canada, the USA and Ukraine, Severstal in the USA, Lukoil in Italy and Gazprom in Belarus. Evraz is in Canada and the USA .
 The biggest transnational corporations of Russian origin at the time also included Sistema, Sovkomﬂot, Norilsk Nickel and Basic Element . The largest transnational corporation of Russian origins also included the biggest trans national corporations .
 By 2010 ODI by Russian ﬁrms exceeded $200 billion, and was going mainly to the CIS and EU countries .
 For the past 15 years Russia has targeted Ukraine for reabsorption into its traditional sphere of inﬂuence . Ukraine has been targeted by Russia for 15 years. Russia has also targeted Ukraine in the past.
 There was an ongoing desire to preserve joint production in engineering, defence, aerospace and other high-technology sectors that survived the Soviet break-up .
 It holds downstream transit facilities and processing industries that Russian energy, minerals and chemical producers need . It holds the downstream transit and processing facilities and supplies for Russian energy and minerals producers .
Russian producers made their ﬁrst such cross-border acquisitions in 2000 . Russian producers made such acquisitions in 2001 .
 Ukraine's gas and oil transit pipelines through Ukraine have remained steadfastly in state hands . However, the pipelines link Russian suppliers to European consumers, the most valuable transit facility of all .
 The period of Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency saw further popular alienation from the political order . The economy falter under the blows of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, and the state face a zero-sum choice of accepting either Russia’'s or the West�’
 The mixture of these three factors exploded in Kyiv in the winter of 2013-2014 . The mixture was a result of the three factors.
 Yanukovych narrowly defeated Yuliya Tymoshenko for the presidency in 2009 on a platform of political stability and the restoration of economic ties with Russia .
 Ukraine–Russia relations were dominated by disputes about the cost of Russian gas and its transit to Europe . Ukraine-Russia relations are dominated by disagreements about the costs of gas and transit .
 The meltdown in 2008 that battered people’s livelihoods in 2008 convinced enough voters to give Yanukovych a chance to turn things around .
 The arrival of Armani-dressed oligarchs in limos with tinted windows and bodyguards inside to Yanukovych’s inauguration in January 2010 gave everyone a taste of things to come .
 Yanukovych perfected the scheme of taking bribes from all of the businesses his ministries permitted to trade . Yanukovych perfected a scheme to take bribes from his ministries .
 Yanukovych created his inner circle, called ‘the Family’ from the seven most powerful capitalists . Yanukovych's inner circle is called 'the Family, from the 7 most powerful capitalism .
 Dmytro Firtash had had with Naftogaz Ukrainy during Yushchenko and Tymoshenko’s terms . They tried to close him down when they tried to shut him down . He was given 12 billion cubic metres of Russian gas in settlement.
 Gazprom opened an $11 billion credit line for Firtash, which he used to build a monopoly stake in fertiliser processing in Ukraine . The company also built a port facility, a bank and the national television channel Inter .
 Rinat Akhmetov, the country’s richest man, was also blessed when Yanukovych granted his ﬁrm DTEK a monopoly on electricity exports .
 DTEK’s electricity from coal-burning stations, to levels comparable to those paid to state-operated nuclear power stations . He also ordered the state energy regulator to increase the tariffs local and regional authorities paid for electricity from DTEk .
Both Akhmetov and Firtash won tenders to privatise regional electricity distributors . Both Akh Metov and Firtash won tenders for privatising regional power distributors .
 Both placed their representatives into the state energy regulating commission to ensure that they continued to get high returns for their gas and electricity . Both put their representatives in the commission to make sure they got high returns .
 In November 2012 President Yanukovych signed a Double Tax Treaty with the government of Cyprus to replace the Soviet-era treaty . The treaty was signed in November 2012 .
 The channel was used by the biggest corporations to expatriate their proﬁts, either permanently or to recycle them back to Ukraine as foreign investments and loans .
Flight of capital to tax havens was taking place through various channels used by Ukrainian and foreign ﬁrms .
 The state's budget is between $10 billion and $20 billion every year . They consistently deprived the state budget of $10bn to $20bn every year. The state budget is $20billion a year .
 Yanukovych moved to strengthen presidential authority over the legislature, judiciary, public procuracy and the Kyiv city government .
 He appointed his own Cabinet of Ministers under Mykola Azarov . Azarov denies the legislature its constitutional prerogative .
 The October 2012 elections to Verkhovna Rada were the dirtiest in the history of independent Ukraine .
 Yulia Tymoshenko and Yuriy Lutsenko were jailed for 7 years . They were barred from public ofﬁce for seven years . Their imprisonment served to intimidate the entire parliamentary and extra-parliamentary opposition .
 A determined attempt was made to muzzle the media by making slander of public ofﬁcials a criminal offence . In the end unsuccessful, the media were made to make slander a crime .
 Putin had the hallmarks of the drive to ‘sovereign democracy’ made by Putin years before in neighbouring Russia .
 GDP dropped more than 15 per cent in the following year in 2008 . Latvia was the second deepest fall in Eastern Europe after Latvia .
12 Commodity prices recovered at the end of 2009, but in the longer term international demand did not . The private sector was left holding debts equivalent in value to a year's GDP .
 Ukraine’s recorded annual GDP grew again in 2011 by just over 5 per cent . But then fell back and registered no growth at all in 2012 and 2013 . In 2011, Ukraine's GDP grew by just five per cent, but then dropped back to just over
 In 2014 it began to contract as a result of the Russian seizure of Crimea and the war in the east of the country . In 2014 the war began in 2014.
 Ukraine covered its trade deﬁcits with Russia and the EU by generating surpluses from trade with the East Asian, Middle Eastern and African countries .
 The trade deﬁcit grew year on year, reaching $15 billion in 2012 . In 2013 Russia began a trade war with Ukraine in response to the easing of trade barriers between the EU and Ukraine .
Ukrainian dairy products, fruit, vegetables, meat, oil and alcohol banned . It banned imports of Ukrainian dairy products.
 Investment Annual foreign direct investment leapt forward after the Orange revolution from $1.7 billion in 2004 to a peak of $9. billion in 2007 .
 Ukraine was second only to China in these years in terms of per capita investment in the country . China was second in the world in the terms of investment in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian banks set up subsidiaries to provide both corporate lending and retail services . Many foreign banks setting up subsidiaries.
 Most foreign direct investment went into export credits for agricultural and mining concerns, consumer lending, real estate and the domestic trade in imported luxury goods .
 The proportion of foreign capital held in Ukraine’s banks grew from 13 per cent to over 50 per cent between 2004 and 2008 .
 The banks of six EU member states held 30 per cent of the banking capital . Between them the banks of the six member states hold 30% of the financial capital .
 The European share was held overwhelmingly by large commercial banks . Raiffeisen of Austria, Unicredit and Intesa San Paolo of Italy, and BNP Paribas of France.
 The Russian share was distinguished by the predominance of state banks among their holders . VTB, Vneshekonombank, Sberbank, BM Bank and Prominvestbank were among the banks tied to the Kremlin .
 The international financial crisis in 2008 forced the rival centres of foreign capital to alter their positions in the Ukrainian market .
 Ukrainian banks that had bought up the domestic networks of several Ukrainian banks were forced to sell . Facing serious problems at home, the banks had to sell.
 Ukrainian oligarchs had sold their banks at lucrative multiples of their book value . They now bought them back at a good discount .
 Russian banks, on the other hand, were better protected by ample credit from their own government’s sovereign funds .
 Ukrainian banks increased their share of assets in the banking system from 40 to 51 per cent between 2008 and 2012 . The biggest initial winners were the Ukrainian private banks, which increased their shares from 40 per cent to 51% .
 The share of Russian capital rose to 12 per cent, making it the largest bloc from any one country and double that of its closest rival, Cyprus, at 6 per cent .
 A considerable share of Cyprus-exported capital came originally from Russia . Cyprus's capital came from Russia.
 It had developed strong positions in mass media, telecommunications, insurance, business information and information technology . It also had developed positions in telecommunications, telecommunications and insurance .
 The country’s gross external debt, which included that of the private sector, was double that amount at $142. billion . The government had taken $3. billion in IMF Special Drawing Rights in August 2008 to bail out the country's banks and repay sovereign debt for Russian gas
 The Ukrainian government was additionally in arrears to Gazprom for several billions of dollars’ worth of gas . The government was also inArrears for several billion dollars' worth of energy .
 Debt repayment became an increasingly heavy burden on the state budget . At the end of 2014, 40 per cent of total expenditures were spent on debt repayment .
 Ukraine's indebtedness provided a handy lever to inﬂuence its government . For both the West and Russia, Ukraine’s indebtedness provides a handy Lever to in שּׁquire its government.
 The IMF was the arbiter of its creditworthiness and gatekeeper to international capital markets . The IMF has been in charge of the IMF for more than 20 years .
 It tried to impose its conditions on the government to decrease state 17 Kuznetsov, ‘Industrial and geographical diversiﬁcation’ The government tried to reduce the state 17.
 The Russian government used Ukraine’s indebtedness and its dependence on Russian export markets to leverage the Kharkiv Accords in April 2010 .
 In June of that year the Verkhovna Rada excluded the goal of NATO membership from the country’s national security strategy . The country has since restored its non-aligned status .
 Labour Migration The movement of labour also reveals the pattern of Ukraine’s incorporation into the international political economy .
 Ukrainian migrants number in millions, and their outmigration has had a profound impact on the Ukrainian economy . They number in the millions and have had an impact on Ukraine's economy .
 It has lost skilled and well-educated people to countries where they are now employed as cheap, illegal or legally precarious labour . It has also lost skilled, well- educated people.
 Communities depopulated by the outmigration have seen their social and family structures severely degraded . Communities are seen as a result of the migration .
 Migrant workers are sending remittances from their earnings home that are estimated to exceed the combined foreign direct investment coming into Ukraine .
 The Zero-sum Choice Labour migration, trade, the repatriation of proﬁts from foreign direct investment, debt repayments and capital are all tributaries for the extraction of wealth from the Ukrainian economy .
 The fact that its economy was closely tied to both the Russian and EU markets, asymmetrically but in equally strong measure, was ignored by Russia and EU leaders .
 Association Agreement and common ‘deep’ free-trade area based on laws, state competition policy and production standards . They had been negotiating since 2007 .
 The Verkhovna Rada was urgently adopting the requirements throughout 2013 . The requirements would add considerable costs to the state and private sector in Ukraine .
 The abolition of almost all tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade would expose several Ukrainian industries to sustained and ruinous competition from the EU side .
 The Customs Union and its successor Eurasian Economic Union offered Ukraine something different . Ukraine is a member of the European Union .
 European Union's integration project was far less developed than the European Union’s . This integration project is far lessdeveloped than the EU's .
 Russia accounted for 90 per cent of the combined GDP of the Customs Union’s members . Russia would dominate the Union whatever its formal governing structure was created .
 The Russian establishment saw in this project one of the important means to reclaim great power status . The Russian government saw in the project as a way to reclaim power status.
 Putin called it ‘a powerful supranational association capable of becoming one of the poles in the modern world’ The bridge was hardly possible to build without Ukraine .
 Russian diplomacy focussed on this challenge, trying to coax it into the Union by promising generous energy subsidies if it joined and trade sanctions if it did not .
 Even under Yanukovych and in the worsened economic situation, the government continued to resist . The government continues to resist, despite the worsening economic situation .
 There was a lack of trust between Kyiv and Moscow, at the heart of which was the refusal of the Russian state to acknowledge Ukraine’s independence .
 This refusal is rooted in a long history of Russian imperial domination of Ukraine . This refusal has been rooted in the history of Russia's domination of the country .
 Ukrainian leaders regularly faced jibes from their Russian counterparts about when they would come to their senses and stop playing their nation building .
 Putin expressed perfectly the paradox that Ukrainian statehood poses to Russia’s leaders . He told George W Bush in April 2008 that Ukraine really was not a state, but if it tried to join NATO it would cease to exist as a state .
 Kharkiv Accords lowered the price for Russian gas by $100 per thousand cubic metres . Ukraine continued to pay more than Germany and Italy .
 Belarus sold the country's gas transit pipelines to Gazprom . Belarus enjoyed a lower price.
 Ukraine's inability to service its foreign debt brought matters to a head at the beginning of winter in 2013 . The Ukrainians began to diversify their sources of supply, reducing imports from Russia from 57 million cubic metres to 33mcm in 2012 .
26.26 He proposed as a way out of the situation that Moscow be involved in three-way negotiations with the EU and Ukraine . He said he has been alone for three and a half years in very unequal conditions with Russia .
 By the time Yanukovych uttered these words, the protesters on Kyiv’s Maidan had grown to several thousand .
 No-one was paying attention to the very real shortcomings of the Agreements, or that the EU was not prepared to offer more than 10 million euros to help the government service a debt in the billions .
 The treatment caused outrage in the capital and the numbers on the Maidan the following day swelled to tens of thousands .
 The two sides agreed a loan of $15 billion to Ukraine, a lower price for natural gas and easing of some restrictions on cross-border trade in 2013–14 .
 No agreement reached concerning Ukraine’s participation in the Customs Union . No agreement was reached about Ukraine's participation.
 Putin insists that it was not even an item of discussion at the talks . Putin insisted that it wasn't even an topic of discussion .
 If that was meant to placate the protesters then Putin and Yanukovych were poorly advised . Putin and Yanuk Yanukovych were well advised, according to a report by CNN .
 That evening the crowds on the Maidan were bigger than ever, covering the entire square and spilling over .
 Their demands grew in response to the government’s ham-ﬁsted brutality against them .
 Initially they were limited to demanding that Yanukovych sign the association agreement and hold a public inquiry into the beating and imprisonment of the students . Initially they wanted Yanukovych to sign the agreement. Initially they had demanded that Yanukovych signs the agreement .
 The protesters put up barricades on Hrushevsky Street, which leads from the Maidan to the parliament, on 19 January .
 The protesters are demanding the resignation of Yanukovych and immediate presidential elections . They now want the release of all detained demonstrators, Yanukovych’s resignation .
 A month of violent confrontations between riot police and demonstrators began a month ago . The riot police have been involved in a series of clashes with demonstrators .
 Government buildings across the country came under siege . The confrontation in Kyiv grew to the brink of a shooting war .
 By the end of January protesters had seized Oblast State Administration builings in ten regional capitals in western and central Ukraine . Protesters had seized builings.
 In six other regional capitals they were surrounded by mass demonstrations, defended by Interior Ministry troops and gangs of titushky . In six of the other cities they were also surrounded by protests .
Army barracks of Public Prosecutor and State Security Service came under siege . mobilisations spread to eastern and southern Ukraine .
 From the beginning of February the government made preparations to introduce martial law in Kyiv . The government has been preparing for martial law since February .
 State Security Service announced a more targeted ‘anti-terrorist operation’ to dismantle the barricades, reclaim the occupied buildings and disperse the Maidan .
 Seventy-seven people were shot dead, by far the single largest number of fatalities in a day .
 President Yanukovych entered into negotiations with leaders of the three opposition parties mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland and France . A ceaseﬁre ensued overnight and on 20 February President Yanukovych enter into negotiations .
 Russia's ambassador to Ukraine and Putin's special envoy were present at the negotiations . Russia’s ambassador to the Ukraine and later Putin'sSpecial envoy were also present .
 Agreement was reached on the same day, signed by all present except Russia’s representatives .
 It was put to the Council of the Maidan, who accepted it by 34 votes to 2. It was accepted by 34 vote to 2 vote .
 embalmed bodies of demonstrators laid out on the stage before the assembly . All this took place in the presence of embalbed bodies of protesters laid out.
 During the day practically all Interior Ministry troops and Security Service left the government quarter in convoys that were escorted out of the city for their own safety .
 Some were reported leaving with their families for their home towns or out of the country altogether . Some were said to have left with their family for their homes or for other places .
 President Yanukovych left the capital for his mansion compound at Mezhyhiria . Yanukovych left for the mansion compound.
 At the compound his aides destroyed thousands of ﬁles, throwing some into the artiﬁcial lake from which they were later retrieved .
 The documents included detailed records of bribetaking over several years . The documents include detailed records. The documents also included detailed details of bibetaking .
 Two helicopters could carry Yanukovych to Donetsk airport . They loaded all the valuables that two helicopters could carrying .
 The parliament convened on 22 February and restored the parliamentary republic under the 2004 constitution . The parliamentary republic was restored by the parliament in 2004 .
 Oleksandr Turchynov was elected as interim president . The parliament called new presidential elections for 25 May .
 Yanukovych claims he was the victim of a coup d’etat, and that he would refuse to leave Ukraine or the presidency . Yanukovych responded to these developments, still from inside Ukraine, saying he would not leave the country .
 The helicopter was denied clearance by air trafﬁc controllers in Donetsk, Russia, on 22 February .
 days later he appeared in Crimea and from there he left by sea for Russia . Days later he was seen in Crimea .
 The meeting accused the parliament of dishonouring the 21 February accords . It declared its decisions illegitimate in view of what it described as a climate of terror in the capital .
 separatist movement was launching across eastern and southern oblasts . It was launching the separatist movement across the east and south of the country .
 Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov told U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry that the Ukrainian opposition parties had broken the 21 February accords . Lavrov told the United States secretary of state John Kerry the opposition parties broke the 21 Feb accords.
 Russia is preparing to occupy and annex Crimea, and promote the separatist movement in the eastern oblasts . Russia demanded they return to the accords, but it began preparing immediately to occupy the region .
 He had signed an accord that stripped him of executive powers and denied him the right to form the government . He had also signed a deal that denied him a right to run the government.
 He would be investigated by a commission looking into the fatalities, disappearances and tortures . He would also be investigated into the deaths of people who have been killed .
 His continuation in ofﬁce was rejected by the assembled thousands on the Maidan . The Berkut, Alfa and Omega squads had protected him as they headed for Crimea and the Donbas .
 All three opposition parties stood by the accords and earnestly recommended them to the Maidan . Foreign ministers who mediated the talks were also involved .
 Yanukovych's position was bleak, if not impossible, after the troops and special forces left the government quarter . The now armed Maidan refused to move until Yanukovych stepped down .
Members of his party and their Communist allies were also intimidated and in some cases terrorised by the angry mob and armed vigilantes .
 The Maidan's stewards and members of the other opposition parties gave them protection as they continued to sit in parliament and vote in the new government .
Deputies like Oleksandr Tsariov and Vadym Kolisnychenko quit Kyiv immediately for Crimea, Kharkiv, Donetsk and Luhansk to organise separatist movement .
 These acts hardly amount to a case that the USA inspired a coup to overthrow Yanukovych, says John Sutter .
 Russian state actors had considerably more inﬂuence than their U.S. counterparts over the unfolding events than their American counterparts .
 The power ministries in Crimea went over fully onto the side of the occupier . A lot of weapons were removed from the occupiers .
 In reality, we had our own power structures, but in reality they were working for our opponent . That is to say, formally we had Our own power structure, but we had their own power Structures .
 Russia's leaders have repeatedly claimed Kyiv after Yanukovych came to be ruled by a fascist junta . Another claim made soon after these events by Russia’s leaders was that Kyiv had been ruled by the junta.
 The new government was elected by an elected parliament . Made up of 21 ministers .
 Ministers were put before an assembly of the Maidan for approval, which it gave with some reservations . These ministers were put ahead of an assembly for approval .
 The UDAR party of Vitali Klychko declined to take any portfolios . The government was dominated by the Bat’kivshchyna party .
 Oleh Makhnitsky as Prosecutor General, Oleksandr Sych, deputy PM, Andriy Mokryk, environment minister and Ihor Shvayka as agriculture minister .
 Dmytro Yarosh, leader of Right Sector, was offered the post of deputy to Parubiy, which he declined .
 The far-right and fascist paramilitaries who had stood on the Maidan would either pose a threat to public order if they were not disbanded, or might merge with state structures .
Members of these groups turned quickly towards the eastern oblasts after Yanukovych fell and the separatist movement emerged . The separatist movement has emerged.
 For its part the government actively drew these militias into the eastern oblasts once the Anti-Terrorist Operation began . The anti-terrorist operation began in eastern parts of the country .
 In May, the Maidan’s self-defence forces were ofﬁcially disbanded . But various groups continued to function on their own or as recognised units of the army or interior ministry .
 After Russia intervened in the south and east, the far right lost its claim to the nationalist mantle . A sense of nationalist resistance spread across practically the entire Ukrainian political arena .
 Svoboda candidate Oleh Tiahnybok took 1. per cent of the votes in the May 2014 presidential elections . Right Sector’s Dmytro Yarosh took 0.% of the vote .
 The September elections to the Verkhovna Rada saw Svoboda’s share of the vote fall by more than half compared with the 2012 elections .
 They failed to clear the 5 per cent hurdle needed to take any seats by proportional representation . They failed the 5% hurdle needed for any seat in the House of Representatives .
 The Ukrainian Crisis Internationalised Russia turned the struggle for power inside Ukraine into an international crisis . The crisis was sparked by the Ukrainian crisis in Ukraine .
 Russian forces began taking control of the Crimean government after Yanukovych's overthrow . Russian forces are laying siege to Ukrainian military bases there .
 By seizing Crimea Russia violated the Budapest Declaration, which it signed along with the USA and the UK in 1994 .
 In exchange for Ukraine giving up its nuclear weapons, the signatories promised to respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity and national sovereignty .
 It violated the UN Charter by changing international borders by force . It offered as its only defence that Western powers had done the same by upholding the separation of the Kosovan statelet from Serbia .
 Putin acknowledged much later that he ordered the occupation and annexation of Crimea .
 Russian FSB agent Igor Girkin-Strelkov served in Crimea before being dispatched to the Donbas . He described how Russian armed forces, and not local authorities, organised the so-called referendum .
 If successful, this would have given Russia a land bridge from its western border through to Crimea and across to Transnistria . This would have cut Ukraine off completely from the Black Sea .
 Ukraine's separatist offensive in January 2015 accounted for a quarter of its GDP and around 30 per cent of export earnings . Initially constituting about 4% of the territory of Ukraine in 2014, and 5 per cent after the offensive in 2015 .
 Rinat Akhmetov, a prime beneﬁciary of Yanukovych’s patronage, provided the initial ﬁnance for its armed detachments . Akh Metov's businesses are concentrated in the Donbas .
 separatists’ declared aim was to protect the region’s Russian speakers from Ukrainian ‘fascists and banderites’ Allegedly coming from Kyiv to ethnically cleanse them .
 The real aim was to prevent the spread of the Maidan into the east where the oligarchs’ industrial assets and power were concentrated . However, their real aim is to stop the spread.
 The separatists were reinforced by Russian nationalists, fascists, mercenaries and soldiers ‘on leave’ from across the Russian border .
 Russian nationals took over the leadership of the Donetsk People’s Republic and its Slovyansk military headquarters .
 Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics did establish a certain social base and a professional cadre drawn from the region itself . Their military, diplomatic and ﬁnancial capacities were almost entirely dependent on the Kremlin .
 Russia’s principal motive in seizing Crimea was not to gain territory, but above all to suppress the Maidan . Yanukovych had previously guaranteed the government in Kyiv that Yanukovych had already guaranteed .
 Russia was weaker militarily than the USA, but only in an abstract comparative sense . Russia was stronger militarily. But only in a comparative sense, according to the study .
 In the real disposition of their forces Russia was stronger than NATO in its own near abroad . In the world, Russia's forces were stronger than the NATO forces in their own near overseas .
 NATO was unable to project and sustain its power in the region . Its immediate neighbours were militarily weak and its immediate neighbors were weak . NATO was not able to project or sustain power in its region .
 It could not fulﬁl its commitments to mutual defence of members in Eastern Europe for strictly logistical reasons . It had no forward bases there of any signi ﬁcance and could not establish them quickly .
45 most important to Putin's calculations were the political divisions between the USA and its European allies over relations with Russia .
 Germany, France and Italy were not prepared to come to the defence of East European member states like Latvia, Lithuania or Estonia if they were attacked by Russia .
 There was a growing resistance among the American public to more military campaigns abroad . The U.S. military campaign in Iraq and Afghanistan is one of the most successful military campaigns in the world .
 All of these factors emboldened Russia to intervene in Ukraine at the moment of opportunity, for which it had been preparing . Russia was emboldened to intervene at the time of opportunity .
 Russia was rebuilding its military capabilities and placing them forward across its own borders . Russia was building its own military capabilities .
 The Russian Federation held onto military bases in Belarus, Transdnistria, Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan .
 After Putin became president, they were augmented with new bases and additional forces at existing ones in Belarus, Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine .
 Moscow annulled its previous agreements with Ukraine on its bases at Sevastopol, Kerch and other Crimean locations . In 2014, after annexing Crimea, Russia annulls its previous agreement with Ukraine .
 Russian defence ministry issued new military doctrine in January 2015 . Plans to spend 20 trillion roubles by 2020 to upgrade its military capabilities in Crimea, Kaliningrad and Arctic .
 Putin's aim was to dissuade the Ukrainian state from seeking closer ties with NATO then his actions had the opposite effect . If Putin’s aim was for Ukraine to be dissuaded from closer ties, it would have a negative effect .
 As a percentage of GDP, Russian defence spending grew from 3. per cent in 2010 to 4.per cent in 2013 . Russian defense spending grew to 4 per cent last year, according to the GDP .
 Over the same period the USA’s defence spending fell from 4 to 3 per cent . The USA's defence spending has fallen from 4.5 per cent to 3.3 per cent in the past year .
 The government sought lethal military equipment from NATO, which was refused . The government wanted lethal equipment from the NATO .
 The attitude of the population towards NATO membership also made a historic shift from a majority consistently opposed since 1991 to a majority in favour .
 Ukraine had a right to seek NATO membership and to actively discourage any such application . The position of NATO states, including the USA, was no more than stating that Ukraine had the right to seeking NATO membership .
 Russia stepped up deliveries of heavy weapons to the separatists in the summer of 2014 . It sent in its own trainers and political advisors, helping them to halt the Ukrainian offensive .
 Poroshenko walked away from the NATO summit in Wales in August 2014 without the weapons he asked for .
 Kuchma was forced to negotiate the Minsk Accords with the leaders of the separatist republics in September . The leaders were recognised as parties to an interstate agreement .
 Putin had planned a rapid advance deep into the country, seeking to envelop eight eastern and southern oblasts . He had planned to acquire an unassailable position from which to dictate his terms to the Kyiv government .
 Pro-Russia separatist forces were contained in the eastern reaches of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . He failed to achieve that position and the pro-Russia separatists were contained .
 The Russians’ advantages in speed and geographic proximity diminished as the conﬂict dragged on, leaving them with superiority only in ﬁrepower .
 The war of movement became a war of position, and the longer it dragged on, it encouraged NATO states in the region to seek reinforcements of their own borders with Russia from their Western allies .
 The Balance of Power Framing the Ukrainian crisis is the changing balance of power between Russia, the USA and Germany as the leading EU state .
 Germany has admitted signiﬁcant Russian inward investment in return . It has the biggest investment in Russia of any country in the world .
The imposition of Western sanctions against Russia has created huge uncertainty as to its future . The imposition of sanctions on Russia is creating huge uncertainty.
 This axis passes through a speciﬁc faction of the ruling class in Ukraine grouped around the tycoon and key Russian point of contact Dmytro Firtash .
 This group is trying to build an EU–Kyiv– Moscow axis to compete with the existing Washington–Kyv–Moscow axis . The group is also trying to create an EU-Kyiv-Moscow axis.
 Agency for Modernisation of Ukraine was created in Vienna in March 2015 . The agency is based in Vienna, Austria .
 The Employers Federation is headed by Firtash himself . Its members’ businesses accounted for 70 per cent of the country’s GDP in 2014 .
 This faction has been trying to discipline the biggest oligarchs Rinat Akhmetov, Ihor Kolomoisky and Dmytro Firtash to its pro-Western course . This faction is trying hard to discipline them, including the biggest Russian oligarchs .
 The war between Russia and Ukraine has become the issue through which Washington tries to contain German ambitions and marshals European allies to oppose Russia .
Conclusions: I have not ventured into the period since the start of the war in the east . Conclusions: It has not been a long time since the beginning of the conflict .
 A million now internally and externally displaced people, a million internally and internally displaced people . A deepening economic and social crisis throughout the country, the imposition of Western sanctions against Russia, rising nationalisms in Russia and Ukraine .
This is the ﬁrst and necessary condition for the activation of all the other roots . This is the necessary condition to activate all the others .
Ukrainian ruling class is incapable of defending its country's national independence. It will have to confront the failure of the contemporary ruling class to fulﬁl the popular expectations arising from independence in 1991 .
 The current situation powerfully echoes the two previous attempts to build an independent state centred on Kyiv and the Dnipro River basin . In 1648 and 1917, a new social class tried and failed to build a new state .
 The social forces mobilised by the Maidan in 2013–2014 also failed, in their case to offer up an alternative, revolutionary leadership and a way out of the crisis .
 Ukrainian and international left as much as it does to anyone else. This particular failure belongs to the Ukrainian and the international left . The Ukrainian left is a particular failure.
Until the left gets involved with these social forces on the ground the nationalist right will continue to dominate the political terrain on which the Ukrainian question is contested . Until the left get involved with the social forces, the Ukrainian political terrain is still contested .
 John Mearsheimer does not even want to know about the internal situation. I can understand why he doesn't want to talk about the situation .
This is not simply a failure of analysis, but a failure to uphold these people’s democratic right to national self-determination . This is not just a failure. It is a failure, but an attempt to uphold the right to self- determination, he says .
 Many left-wing organisations and individuals standing in the camp of Russian imperialism . That leaves them, and many avowedly left- wing organisations, standing in Russian imperialism.
 The revival of Russian imperialism since 2000, the divisions in the Western alliance over policy towards Russia, and the diminished capacity of the USA to project its own power into the region .
 It provoked the Western powers to respond with economic sanctions and strengthening the capacity of NATO member states bordering Russia and Ukraine . It provoked a response from the West.
 The harder it is pressed, the less room there is for its manoeuvre between them . The harder you are pressed, less room exists for the manoeuvre .
 One or another faction of the Ukrainian ruling class may submit to such a claim, or even to a joint Russian–Western tutelage over the country .
 Ukrainian people will not be accepted by the Ukrainian people, nor should it be by those who want to support them . Sooner or later their common class interests will lead them to it, but it will not.