 Vladimir Putin’s regime is not a monolith and neither can his security apparatus – or special services – be described as such .
 The rivalry between military intelligence and Chekists from Lubyanka has been going on since the Soviet times . It has not died down in Putin’s Russia .
 GRU and FSB try to act hand in hand when key state interests are at stake . It plays out under many disguises, but when the key state interest is at stake.
 The conflict in Donbas is still ongoing, and the result remains uncertain . But it shows how fierce the rivalry between military and civil forces can be .
 GRU colonel Anatoly Chepiga, the assassin from Salisbury, was killed in Ukraine in 2014 . He was killed by Russian forces during the operation against Ukraine . The GRU Colonel's death reminded us of the key role that Moscow's secret services played in the
 Some sources say Chepiga was behind the mission that transported the overthrown president Viktor Yanukovych to Russia .
 According to another, Chepiga played an essential role during the annexation of Crimea . According to one report, it played a key role in Crimea's annexation .
 Chepiga could have taken part in both the GRU operations in Kiev and Crimea, according to the timeline . The timeline suggests that Chepga could have been involved in the most critical operations.
 It is possible that he took part in a massacre of protesters in Maidan before his unit transported Yanukovych to Russia . He is also believed to have taken part in the massacre of Maidan protesters .
 General Oleksandr Skipalski is convinced that the Spetsnaz unit – with Chepiga at its head – took part in the escalation of conflict in Kiev . General Skipalsk is a former head of Ukraine's military intelligence .
Over 20 Russians stationed in SBU Alfa Spetsnaz base, a separate building that could not be accessed by Ukrainians . The building is located in a different building, which is not accessible to Ukrainians .
 These Spetsnaz soldiers, supposedly, wore Berkut uniforms and, later, fired at protesters .
 When the revolution in Kiev broke out, Russian services were in quite a comfortable position . Russian services are in a quite comfortable position.
 Since the beginning of the Yanukovych presidency, they could act freely in Ukraine . Since the start of the Ukraine presidency, the government has been able to act freely .
 The SBU-FSB agreement from 2010 assumed that Ukraine’s counterintelligence stop operations against Russia .
 Russia’s services were involved in the events in Ukraine, and subsequent decisions of Ukraine's authorities were not only consulted with Russia but planned in Moscow .
 Nine days later, the first brutal police raid on a tent camp took place .
 FSB officers arrived in Kiev with the task to forcibly suppress the protests . Two weeks later, Hennadiy Moskal, an opposition MP, declared that many FSB officer arrived in Ukraine with thetask to forcibly suppressed the protests.
 Vladislav Sukrov is an advisor to the president, associated with the GRU . Siergey Biesieda is head of the FSB particular unit responsible for the post-Soviet area .
 The first group of the FSB “consultants’ were in Kiev between December 19 and 24 . The FSB was in Kiev from December 19 to 24 .
 The guests from Moscow were located in luxury villas on the Kiev suburbs . The operational headquarters were found in the nearby SBU's training ground .
 All costs related to Russian's stay were covered by Ukraine, the head of the SBU said . Guests could use Ukrainian governmental communication channels .
 Colonel general Biesieda is a trusted officer of Putin and the man responsible for exceptionally sensitive missions . He is responsible for extremely sensitive missions in Russia .
 He is the head of the 5th Service, which includes a department of Operational Information . He is also the chief of the Department of Operational Information .
 Under this enigmatic name, one can find an FSB intelligence unit which operates on the territories of post-Soviet republics .
 Russian aircrafts provided Ukraine with a few tonnes of “special resources’ that were supposed to help in quelling the Maidan protests . It is known that at least twice – on January 21 and 24, 2014 – through the airports adjacent to Kiev, Russia provided the aircrafts
 Between February 18 and 20, Ukraine’s forces tried to suppress Maidan protests .
 A special delegation from Moscow arrived in Kiev and was greeted by the Russian SBU general Vladimir Bik who coordinated the suppression . On the second day, known as “Black Thursday, a special secret delegation arrived in Ukraine .
 The delegation spent only a day in Kiev because the next day Yanukovych signed an agreement with opposition forces and then fled the country . The delegation was in Kiev for a day because Yanukovych signed a deal with the opposition .
 A large group of Russian officers associated with three different services was established in Kiev on February 20 .
 Twelve from the FSB, three from the SVR RF and five from the GRU, among them many colonels and generals . The GRU is one of the most powerful military organizations in the world .
 Valentin Nalyvaychenko, head of the SBU, said Russia’s special services took part in the operation . Surkov oversaw the firing squad, which, supposedly, was composed of the Spetsnaz GRU soldiers .
 The same Spetsnaz soldiers may have secured the evacuation of Yanukovych .
 FSB or GRU played leading role in Russia’s operation in Kiev . We still have too scant information to assess which service played the leading role .
 Kiev's FSB had more to say, it was military services that had their say in Crimea .
 The FSB took part in the annexation of the peninsula . The military intelligence played a leading role in annexing the peninsula.
 Surkow, a superintendent of the Ukrainian policy of Kremlin and an ally of the GRU, paid two secret visits to Crimea .
 Putin lies by saying that the decision to take over Crimea was taken on an ad hoc basis as a consequence of the events in Ukraine .
 The only decision that was taken was the one to proceed with the plan that had been agreed before .
 heads of the FSB and the GRU were among Putin’s four guests .
 The FSB played an important role, as it prepared the ground for the annexation . The F SB played a key role in preparing the ground.
 The Ukrainian state turned out to be deprived of its forces in Crimea . In pivotal moments, it helped in staging a performance with a “spontaneous” protest of a local community .
 Russians, approximately 1700 persons in total, were hidden under the decks of the ships of the Black Sea Fleet . They were returning from Sochi, where they protected the Olympic Games .
 The majority of this contingent included soldiers from the 3rd and 22nd Spetsnaz GRU brigade in Togliatti and in Krasna Polana . Also veterans of the former Chechen GRU Vostok battalion. The majority included soldiers.
 At the same time, unmarked aircraft with Russian Spetsnaz soldiers in unmarked uniforms landed on the airport in Simferopol .
 Small units of the “little green men’s” moved across the peninsula and blocked key Ukraine's facilities and units . From the port in Sevastopol and the airport in Simferopol, small units of ‘little greenMen’ moved across
 FSB actions could all happen because of the total inactivity of the local forces and administration . It could all happened – thanks to the FSB action – because of its inactivity .
 Two self-proclaimed units of “Crimea citizens’ self-defence force’ took over the buildings of parliament and government in Simferopol .
 The takeover of Belbek airport and disarmament of the Ukrainian marines brigade in Feodosia were bloodless . Two other key GRU special operations after the takeover of the buildings are bloodless.
 Russia recognised the independence of the Republic of Crimea and on March 18, the accession treaty was signed . Next day, Russia recognised Crimea's independence .
 The referendum was still miles away when Moscow began to transport groups of GRU “little green men’s’ to Donbas .
 Local forces were either infiltrated by Russia’s special services or disloyal to the new authorities in Kiev .
 The Donbas police and majority of the SBU immediately went over and sided with Russia .
 Moscow did not expect the operation to go as smoothly as in Crimea, even despite the weakness of the Ukrainian army . Moscow, however, does not expect it to go smoothly as well .
 GRU and FSB agents and Spetsnaz operators were transported over the border . A few thousand of the GRU agents and F SB agents were transported to the border.
 The Malaysian Boeing MH17 was also accused of shooting down the MH17 . Quite naturally, they were also accused in the crash .
 The more time has passed since the end of the open war in Donbas . The more the more the need to gradually demilitarise operations of “people’s republics’ in Donetsk.
 The never-ending rivalry between FSB and GRU was still the issue, and in Donbas, it had a financial background . Also, the rivalry between the two sides was still an issue .
 Whoever dominated in the occupied territory, could have gained the highest profits from smuggling, or stealing “humanitarian aid’s aid from Russia .
 Surkow – “people’s republics” superintendent – grew weaker and with the wane of his power, the power of the GRU was weakened . With time, Surkows' power grew weaker.
 Igor Plotnicki, Surkov’s protégé, was replaced by Leonid Pasecznyk . The FSB man, LeonidPasecznnyk, has been replaced by the FSB's Igor Plotniki .
 Aleksandr Zacharczenko, one of the self-proclaimed leaders of the Donetsk People’s Republic, died in a bomb attack . He was one of a few weeks ago.
 Only after the “elections’ in November, will it turn out which service will gain the upper hand .
 Its highlight was the recent series of failures of the military intelligence during its operations in the West .
 Those residing in Lubyanka could not hide their satisfaction with their colleagues . For sure, their civil service colleagues – in fact, they could not hiding their satisfaction .