 Triangle Revisited Ukraine has long been considered as a bone of contention between the EU and Russia . It could eventually lead to a split of the country along political, cultural or religious lines .
 This interpretation fails to explain the dynamics of the Ukrainian revolution and the Russian-Ukrainian war . This interpretation, however, fails to understand the dynamics.
 Ukraine has been repeatedly described as an apple of discord, bone of contention, root of disagreement between Russia on the one hand, and the EU on the other .
 The EU-Ukraine-Russia triangle resonates with general studies which construe EU-Russia interaction as reflecting a clash of various irreconcilable dichotomies .
 Ukraine is reduced to a mere object of Russia-EU competition. In analyses of this kind of Ukraine, the Ukraine is less than an object of EU competition .
 If Russia and the EU had engaged in some sort of fundamental conflict over Ukraine, it would have become a battleground for fierce competition . It would have been torn asunder by the two actors and split into a pro-European Ukrainian part and pro-Moscow Russian-speaking part .
 Some might argue that Russia’s annexation of Crimea and unrest in the East of Ukraine are manifestations of the conflict between pro-European Ukrainians and pro-Moscow Russophones .
 Maidan activists in November 2013 included both an Ukrainian ultranationalist groups and a predominantly Russian-speaking population of the Ukrainian capital Kyiv .
 It also fails to explain why the Russophone population in the South and some Eastern regions of Ukraine strongly supports the European trajectory of Ukraine and opposes the separatist movement .
 The problématique suggests that Russia-EU interaction in their shared neighbourhood is informed by a dynamic which is more complex than ideological or geopolitical competition .
 Prozorov explains both the cases of collaboration and conflict in Russia-EU interaction . Attributing the same – ‘integrationist’ and “sovereign’ features to Russia and the EU .
 This trend has recently been applied in the research of the Black Sea region . The trend has been applied to the research in the region .
 Others acknowledge that it was the EU that was inconsistent in its policies in the region . Others acknowledge the EU was inconsistent and reluctant to engage Russia in EU policies .
 They also point to the need for the EU to engage Russia in joint actions . They also say the EU should engage Russia with joint actions.
 Russia and the EU in their shared neighbourhood produce a more complex effect on the region. Drawing on the above critique this paper suggests that the regional projects of Russia and EU in the region produce more complex effects on the area .
 Ukraine’s predicament concerning its geopolitical choice should be studied at the sub-unit level of analysis . Ukraine's situation should be examined at the Sub-unit levels of analysis, according to experts .
 Langenhove’s conceptualisation holds that there are three significant social actors – government, society and business elites .
 The three actors often have divergent interests and/or motives for action . It is suggested that a state should not be construed as a rational system .
 The paper argues that the interests of these actors may differ in the various dimensions . The balance of preferences will differ in various dimensions, it says .
 It is necessary to analyze the dimension of international security politics which is an important indicator of regional alignments of Ukraine .
 The paper will analyse each dimension and will identify in which of them preferences of main actors generate zero-sum logic . It will also analyse each of the main actors' preferences .
 EU and Russia each pursue their own objectives, which to a great extent are mutually exclusive or even antagonistic . For the present purpose, the phrasings ‘zero-sum dynamics’ imply that he EU and Russian each pursue its own objectives .
Until recently relations in the triangle EU-Ukraine-Russia were depicted as a more or less homogenous complex of zero-sum dynamics . Slicing the EU- Ukraine-Russia triangle was seen as a "homogenous complex"
 The EU seeks to encourage Ukraine to pursue transparent democratic procedures and respect human rights . Russia tries to implement its own sovereign democracy model .
 Ukraine’s choice of models was considered antagonistic and generated zero-sum dynamics for Ukraine's choice . These models were considered antagonism and generatedzero-sum Dynamics for Ukraine .
 EU and Russia seek to involve Ukraine in their security projects the EU is seeking Ukraine's alignment with CFSP decisions and its participation in CSDP missions . Russia is seeking to involve both in closer security partnership, bilateral or multilateral pact, or at least, to secure its neutrality .
 Russia's sensitivity about Ukraine’s accession to NATO was also framed in zero-sum terms . Russia is also concerned about Ukraine's access to NATO .
 Russia's ideology has been developed in recent times through the appreciation of its unique national character and extreme experiences . Russia's right to seek its own unique way to become 'a normal' European country.
 Russia offers Ukraine an ideology based on glorification of their shared Soviet and pre-Soviet past, common culture and language . Thus, Russia offers Russia an ideology.
 The EU offers Ukraine its own post-modern understanding of Europe based on human rights, freedoms and liberties . The EU is a teleological point of the development of any human society .
 Ukraine’s rejection of its Soviet past and history and focus on its own trauma and promotion of its own language seem to be important element of Ukraine's modern nation-building programme and return to Europe .
 It was suggested that the two programmes were antagonistic and defined Ukraine’s choice in zero-sum terms . The two programmes have been described as antagonistic .
 The paper will analyze each of the above dimensions and identify the preferences of the three main societal actors in Ukraine – the government, business elites and the population .
 The analysis of the balance of preferences of the three actors will help account for the dynamics in the triangle . The analysis will be based on the preferences of three actors .
Ukrainian actors have a certain degree of agency to Ukrainian actors . In addition to a more refined analysis, this approach allows for attributing a Certain degree of Agency to actors .
 The agency is clearly exercised when the interests and motivations of two of the three major societal actors coincide and lead to shaping a certain policy choice .
Ukrainia is not pro-European or pro-Western, but it shows Ukraine’s ability to diminish the zero-sum dynamics in the triangle . It is not clear whether Ukraine is pro-EU, pro-West, or anti-EU .
 The paper also analyses changes in the interests of the EU and Russia across different dimensions . The paper is published in the UK and Russia .
 The balance of preferences will demonstrate where zero-sum dynamics prevails, i.e. where the interests of EU and Russia are likely to remain irreconcilable, and where different dynamics can be identified .
 The paper will look at how changes in the dynamics within one dimension affect its interface with other dimensions . Overall, the paper will also look at the dynamics of one dimension .
 The dominant narrative of the last year’s events in Ukraine contends that the pro-European, democratically-minded Ukrainian public rallied against authoritarian President Viktor Yanukovich after he refused to sign the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement .
 The Ukrainian revolution, often branded as Euromaidan, is described as a civilizational choice of the Ukrainian people for democratic European values and against authoritarian Russia .
 Ukrainian elites constructed a strong link between the nation’s renaissance and historical return to Europe on the one hand, and the country association with the EU.
 Drawing on this link, the EU could build up strong moral authority in Ukrainian politics . The EU could also build up a strong moral power in Ukraine .
 The EU-Ukraine association agreement will be signed only if the problem of selective justice will be resolved . Cox-Kwasniewski's mission to Ukraine has seen 27 visits to Ukraine .
 The EU's response to politically motivated criminal processes against the leaders of the opposition resonated with the demand of the society . In addition, the strong response of the EU to the political process against the opposition has added additional significance .
 Ukraine’s return to Europe is now a broader discourse about the country's return to the European continent .
 All this made the soft power of the EU stronger and provided it with some leverage in Ukrainian politics. All this makes the EU's soft power stronger and made it stronger .
 The link between the economic and political dimension should not be taken for granted . However, the link between economic andpolitical dimension should be taken to granted .
 Large rallies did not lead to mass mobilisation and radicalisation of the protests . However, these large rallies didn't lead to the radicalisation and mobilisation of protests .
 The mass mobilisation and violent protests that eventually led to overthrowing President V Yanukovich took place after the night of 31 November .
 The acts of unmotivated violence by the Ukrainian riot policy were broadcast widely and triggered mass mobilisation of Kyiv residents and protestors from other cities .
 The protests were rebranded from the ‘Euromaidan’ to the Revolution of ‘Dignity’ The protests brought together the broadest spectrum of social and political forces .
 replication of Russian model of governance in Ukraine did not produce analogous societal and political outcomes in Ukraine . Nevertheless, replication of the Russian model in Ukraine didn't produce analogous outcomes .
 A 4 combination of a number of internal and external structural factors produced the opposite effect . In fact, a four combination of the four factors produced a different effect .
 President V Yanukovich faced popular resentment and tension in his elite base . Even well before the Vilnius Summit, he faced serious resentment .
 The next section pinpoints some crucial factors which play an important role in the launch of ‘authoritarian projects’ and will assess and compare parallels between Russian authoritarianism and its Ukrainian replica . The next part pinpoints key factors that play a key role in launch of
 In 2001-2002, Vladimir Putin launched an authoritarian regime combined with progressive economic reforms and deregulation of small and medium business . Putin launched the implementation of the authoritarian regime in 2001- 2002 .
 The Russian President bought the loyalty of the population with petrodollars . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in charge of the country for more than a decade .
 The war against Chechen rebels and general disappointment with the West were also a plausible excuse for gradually limiting the public sphere . The war in Chechen was also a possible excuse for slowly limiting public sphere.
 Yanukovich took over the office in the conditions of a global economic crisis . Ukrainian industries are negatively affected by the drop in the demand on the Ukrainian metals and chemical products on the world markets .
 Ukrainian government to introduce serious austerity measures and reforms aimed at optimizing budgetary spending and facilitating economic growth .
 Yanukovich's reforms went against populist electoral promises by Yanukovich . The problem was that these reforms wentagainst populist electoral promise by Yanukovych .
 The new tax code increased the tax-burden and posed arbitrary economic pressure on small and medium enterprises .
 A geographic reconciliation gradually took place in Ukraine after several scandals involving the embezzlement of public funds in energy/infrastructure projects .
 It is indicative that the movement of Afghan War Veterans has its social base in Eastern Ukraine, including Yanukovich’s stronghold, the Donetsk region .
 It can be concluded that the implementation of a Russian authoritarian model in Ukraine lacked the necessary economic base and, consequently, produced the opposite effect, namely mobilization of the population and broader societal demand for redistributive justice .
 Afghan veterans demanded to keep their high pension rates and traders rallied for maintaining their tax exemptions .
 Relations between Government and Elites was a factor that affected the Russian authoritarian model in Ukraine . Relations between the government on the one hand and the parliamentary institutions and business elites on the other .
After the Duma election in 1999, V Putin could rely on a significant pro-presidential majority in the Russian parliament . After the 1999 election, Putin could have a significant majority in parliament .
 Apart from the dogmatic Communist party and small centrist and centre-right factions, there was almost no noticeable liberal parliamentary opposition .
 The implementation of administrative centralisation in Russia took place in more favourable conditions, according to Russian authorities .
 In the case of Ukraine, President V Yanukovich started political centralisation when the Ukrainian parliament had significant opposition factions .
 The Parliament remained an important national site for political debate, particularly in the face of the new government's controversial policies .
 The success of radicals from Svoboda demonstrates voters’ preferences to consistent and value-based parties, sociologists say .
 All the opposition parties seem to have realised the great potential of non-partisan civil society . They have started working closely with its most active representatives to forge alliances .
 Ukraine's smaller size of the Ukrainian economy and fewer lucrative business assets did not allow the president to secure an advantageous role in interaction with business elites similar to that of V Putin’s in Russia .
 The strong business interests of the President's family raised concerns among major businesses about their future .
 Some experts believe no oligarch, including those who keep a low profile, could feel safe after the Tymoshenko case .
 Some of them moved their assets to Europe from where they continued to support some opposition movements . Some of their assets moved to Europe where they supported opposition movements.
 Several oligarchs, including his close associate S Lyovochkin, withdrew their support from President V Yanukovich at the peak of the protests .
 V Yanukovich fled the country on 21 February 2014 . They also helped to secure a peaceful transition of power after he fled .
 Moscow treated the coloured revolutions in the post-Soviet states as Western geopolitical plots, and b) aimed to export authoritarian models to these countries . The argument about Russia’s resentment about the coloured revolution suggests that Moscow a. a) treated the colour revolutions as Western plots .
 The deterioration of relations between Russia and the coloured democracies in Ukraine, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan in 2003-2008 seems confirm this interpretation . Russia and Georgia have been at odds for years over the past .
 The claim that Russia seeks to build a special relationship with post-Soviet countries on the basis of ideological affinity and promote authoritarianism is not entirely valid .
 In Georgia, in 2003, Russia even played a positive role in the Georgian Revolution of Roses .
 It facilitated the removal of the incumbent President Shevarnadze and consolidation of the new government headed by Mikheil Saakashvili . The new government was formed after the departure of the President and the resignation of Shevaradze .
 Russia's attitude to democratic revolutions is not the revolution per se, but the perceived ideology behind this revolution and the pro-Western geopolitical orientation that it can bring . The major factor that affects Russia’s attitude to democracy is not that the revolution is the revolution.
 Moscow can more effectively project its influence and expand its economic presence in democratic societies, rather than in autocratic systems .
 Ukrainian nationalist Prime-Minister Y Tymoshenko signed a highly profitable gas contract for Gazprom in 2009 .
 She was then convicted for this under “pro-Russian’s President Yanukovich who tried to re-negotiate the contract . She was also convicted under ‘pro- Russian’ president Yanukovich .
 V Yanukovich exercised pressure on several Russian energy companies . Ukraine can also manipulate RussianUkrainian energy interdependence .
Pro-Russian authoritarian leaders became less comfortable interlocutors for Moscow than pro-Russian leaders in Ukraine . Similarly, in Belarus and Central Asia, pro- Russian authoritarian leaders become even less comfortable Interlocuts for Moscow .
 democratic systems seem to be the framework in which Russia is able to play a greater role in the political debate in Ukraine . So ideology apart, it seems to be a framework for Russia to exercise its soft and economic power in the Ukraine .
 Russia’s uneasy feeling about democratic revolutions is a function of how Moscow perceives the outcomes of these revolutions. One can conclude that Russia's uneasy feeling is a result of how Russia perceives these revolutions .
 Russia has no prejudice as to the form of government in place . As long as Russia can maintain its strategic influence over the territory, it has no prejudices .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and creation of pro-Russian enclaves in the East of Ukraine . Moscow effectively recognized the newly elected centrist President Poroshenko .
 The state-controlled Russian media started to wrap-up the militant rhetoric against ‘Ukrainian Kiev junta’ and stopped broad-casting press-conferences with former President Yanukovich .
 The internal political system has currently ceased to generate zero-sum political logic . Therefore, the political system is no longer generating political logic.
 This interest will not push Russia to pursue active policies of democracy promotion. This interest is not to push Russia for active policies.
 Moscow will not pursue counter-democratic restorations. But it will prevent Moscow from pursuing counter- democratic restoration .
 Russia can promote its economic interests in Ukraine as will now be discussed 2.2. It is in this democratic landscape that Russia can promoting its economic interest in Ukraine . Russia can now be talked about 2.3.5 years ago .
 Russia has attached great importance to the Customs Union and Ukraine's accession to the block . Russia has a strong relationship with Ukraine and Russia has long been involved in the region's development .
 Ukraine would be entitled to collect the export tax on all the volumes of gas and oil pumped by Russia and Kazakhstan through its territory . The Russian President went so far as to promise that Ukraine could collect the tax .
 The EU has contributed to generating zero-sum dynamics in the economic dimension . The EU also contributed to creating zero- sum dynamics in economic dimension.
 EU officials made it clear that while free trade area with Russia is fully compatible with the DFCTA, the accession of Ukraine to the Customs Union would make DF CTA with the EU impossible .
 Moscow and Brussels engaged in numerous negotiations on the eve of the EU Big Enlargement in 2004 . Russia's concerns ranged from trade agreements with Poland and Bulgaria to a transit regime between Russia and Kaliningrad .
 No similar trilateral discussion to address Russia’s concerns took place in the case of Ukraine, which escalated the zero-sum logic in the economic dimension .
 At the same time, most Ukrainian government and business sector have for the most parttried to escape this binary vision . Most Ukrainian government, business sector are trying to escape it .
 The Customs Union would pave the way for the creation of supranational regulatory bodies .
 The weight of Putin’s close associate and Russian representative V Khristenko was more than significant . Despite the formal principle of consensual decision-making in the Board of the Eurasian Economic Commission, it was clear .
 In the existing political architecture in Kremlin, Russian companies would have much stronger lobbying capacities, which would lead them to be taken over by their stronger and more aggressive Russian counterparts .
 Kiev and Moscow reached deals on gas discounts and basing rights for the Russian fleet in Crimea . Another reason for scepticism was a great disappointment about the deals .
 Moscow’s offer to collect export tax on all gas pumped through Ukraine seemed too good to be true .
 The Yanukovich government adopted a number of practical measures to reduce Ukraine’s gas dependence on Russia . The disappointment resulted in some practical measures.
 Ukraine switched many of its electricitygenerating capacities from natural gas to coal . Despite lack of transparency in the energy and electricity projects in 2010-2013, there was no transparency .
 Yanukovich and his business and political elite sought safe havens in the European Union . The risks of living and making business in developing markets offer high profits, Yanukovich says .
 President V Yanukovich and his family developed business activities in the European markets . Pro-Russian as they were, President Yanukovich was President of the Russian government .
 Petro Poroshenko has prepared to 9 depoliticize the economic dimension and confine these relations to the technical domain . The appointment of the highly respected centrist businessman and politician was another indication that Yanukovich has prepared. Yanukovich's skilful mitigation of the 'cheese war'
 The alternative formula ‘3+1’ is essentially Free Trade Area with the countries of the Customs Union . Ukrainian elite would be ready to accept it .
 Russia still viewed the EU-Ukraine trade deal as a threat to the Customs Union . Despite all Kiev efforts, Russia still considered the deal a threat.
 President Putin repeatedly stated that after the EU-Ukraine deal Russia would face a huge inflow of cheap European consumption goods . President Putin said after the deal Russia will face a massive inflow.
 At the same time, the Russian leader never specified what cheap and high-quality European consumption goods were .
 Putin repeatedly stressed that the EU-Ukraine deal was negotiated without taking note of Russia’s concerns . More importantly, Putin stressed that it was negotiated with Russia's concerns .
 The economic dimension might look like the most conflict-prone one because of these clashing preferences .
 The first wave of protests in Kiev and other major centres of Ukraine directly affected by the EU-Ukraine trade deal did not provoke any significant civil conflict or geographical clash . However, it should be noted, that the firstwave of protests did not cause any major conflict .
 It was mostly peaceful and involved art-related activities, which generated no violence or any politically-geared agenda . There was no political agenda .
 Protestors refused to give the floor to the opposition leaders . Neither the government nor pro-Russian oligarchs saw it as a threat .
 Most of the protests phased out and most likely would have ended up with nothing . By 30 November 2013, most of the demonstrations had been phased out .
 The riot police triggered mass mobilisation and radicalisation of the protests . As mentioned above, it was the excessive violence by the riot police which triggered mass mobilization .
 Ukrainians are fighting for European values of freedom of assembly and speech, writes John Sutter . Sutter: This fight was only marginally related to the EUUkraine DCFTA agreement .
To attribute to the economic dimension a causal power for the future events would be a post-hoc fallacy . To attribute to economic dimension, a causalPower for future events could be post- hoc fallacy.
 Zero-sum logic in the economic dimension was not powerful enough to produce a conflict within Ukraine . It was one of the factors that provoked the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Some specific economic interests drove Russia to invade Crimea . It was not the economic interests that drove the invasion .
 Russia's desire to 10 negotiate the EU-Ukraine relations in a trilateral format had a strong symbolic effect . It was rather the rejection of Russia’s desire to10 negotiate the European Union-Ukraine Relations .
 The right to negotiate with the EU over various arrangements in Europe has been an important element of Russia’s great power identity . Russia's great power is an important part of its great power.
 The rejection of Russia’s claim to take part in negotiations about various, even minor, deals between Europe and the Eastern Neighbourhood challenged Russia's great power status .
 Russia’s response was merely rhetorical and not even aggressive . Petro Poroshenko signed EU-Ukraine DCFTA in July 2014 .
 DCFTA per se does not pose any threat to the economic interests of Russia and Eurasian Customs Union . This indifference demonstrates that DCF TA per se is not a threat to Russian and Eurasia Customs Union.
 Kiev suggested a trilateral meeting in the format Ukraine Eurasian Customs Union – European Union . Ukraine failed to quickly put down the rebellion in the South-East of Ukraine .
 Russia’s harsh response to the EU-Ukraine DCFTA arose mostly from the fact that Moscow was not consulted before the negotiations .
 Russia imposed bans on some Ukrainian products, but this does not amount to the fully-fledged trade war which Russia waged against Ukraine in July-August 2013 .
 Ukraine appears to be more inclined to accede to DFCTA with the EU without committing itself to deeper and formal integration with Russia .
 A mere trade agreement has acquired a strong symbolic meaning and is linked to great power politics and the dimension foreign policy orientation . The main obstacle to this process is that a mere trade deal has acquired an symbolic meaning, says the author .
 The comparison of the two triangles 11 demonstrates that the Ukrainian elite and society at large are trying to find a compromise on the international security . The comparison shows that the Ukraine's elite is trying to make a compromise .
 PoR played an important role in blocking Ukraine’s application to NATO Membership Action Plan .
 The main reason for not joining NATO was because Ukrainian society was reluctant to make hasty decisions on such sensitive issues as membership in multilateral defence alliances, whether Russia-led or promoted.
 This is especially the case when an issue such as this is associated with notions of clandestine diplomacy or corruption . This is particularly the case in the case.
 Ukrainian society was not happy about a hasty accession to the alliance . The incident happened in January 2008 .
 Anatoliy Grytsenko has had to accept that Ukrainian society is not ready to make a decision on NATO membership . He publicly requested the President of Ukraine to withdraw the membership application .
Ukrainian elite had to face the fact that Ukrainian society did not want NATO membership .
 Even Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the Russian-Ukrainian war in the South-East of Ukraine in 2014 did not reverse this trend .
 Many opposition parties re-introduced the issue of NATO membership to the public debate . The issue was re- introduced by opposition parties .
Despite the return of the Euro-Atlanticist idea, the presidential elections have shown that the major centrist trend has prevailed in Ukrainian politics .
 Petr Poroshenko ran for president with explicit pro-European slogans rather than Euro-Atlanticist slogans .
About 12 million USD allocated to several NATO awareness campaigns and embezzled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs further undermined the idea of Euro-Atlantic integration 12 Atlantic trajectory .
 The link between the European Union and Ukrainian security has been eroded, according to the EU .
 The idea of Europe and European norms and standards remains synonymous with the idea of normal prosperity .
 The European Union in the security domain has been losing its appeal in Ukraine . But what is important is that in Ukraine's perception, the European Union has lost its appeal .
 Ukraine's disillusionment in the CFSP is one of the reasons for the Ukraine’s disillusionment . EU's past failures to stick to its CFSP commitments are the reason for the Ukrainian disillusionment, says the EU .
In 2004 German diplomats exerted pressure on Ukraine to impose an effective ban on exports of unregistered Transnistrian enterprises through Ukrainian territory .
 Brussels failed to stand by Moldova and Ukraine. Russia exerted pressure on Ukraine to lift the ban .
 Germany did not curtail its extensive collaboration with Transnistrian metallurgy plans . Germany itself didn't curtail its collaboration with the metallurgical plans .
 Neither did EU always enforce travel bans on the Transnistrian leadership . EU did not always enforceTravel bans on Transnists .
 Germany is supposed to display a certain solidarity and appreciation of our effort . But Germany is not supposed to show solidarity or appreciation of its effort .
 Russia plays s with Russia because Russia sticks to its values and defends them . Now, it plays s. Now, Russia is playing s with the U.S. because Russia is defending its values .
 With Russia's annexation of Crimea and the war in the Eastern Ukraine this disillusionment touched even the most convinced Europeanists . Maybe we should also get arrogant for the EU to start taking us seriously.
 Brussels’ refusal to provide Ukraine with military support, the adoption of economic sanctions against Russia and the deployment of the EU Assistance Mission with a limited budget, have convinced Kyiv to reconsider its security approach .
Ukrainian president followed Finnish model of centrist consensus . Ukrainian president followed the Finnish model .
Ukraine has renounced its strategic goal to join European security system . This is not to say that Ukraine has renounces its strategic goals to join Europe's security system.
 Kyiv will refrain from strong symbolic steps which could trigger escalation of Russian-Ukrainian war . It rather means that Kyiv has chosen more self-centred tactics,e.e. It is not the first time the country has made such a move .
 Ukraine will continue its cooperation with the EU in those fields where it does not inhibit Ukrainian interests. Within this logic, Ukraine will continued its cooperation.
 Ukraine’s participation in the EU naval operation Atalanta . Ukraine is part of the EU's naval operation in the Balkans . The EU is also involved in visa liberalisation, justice, security, border control .
 At the same time, the EU acknowledges the limitations of the EU’s external action .
 Ukraine will abstain from some strong CFSP resolutions . In weighing the EU CFSP against its own national interests, Ukraine will not take part in the vote .
 Kyiv will not exert any pressure against Belarus and will seek temporary alliances with the countries of broader Eurasia . For example, Kyiv won't exert any Pressure against Belarus .
 Kyiv will pursue a strategy of increasing its low-profile military defence through practical cooperation with individual players of the Euro-Atlantic Community . The long-term strategy is to increase the low- profile military defence .
 Ukraine to 13 increase its defence capability without creating a risk of large-scale war with Russia . This tactic will allow Ukraine to increase its defences without creating risk of war .
 Pro-Russian political elite glorifying Soviet past, vilifying Ukrainian nationalists and narrowing the space for the Ukrainian language .
 At first sight reports of ultranationalist party “Svoboda’ and a new radical group “Right Sector’s’ that were leading the violent protests at Maidan seem to confirm this kind of interpretation .
 This section will deal with the fusion of these three concepts – national identity, interpretations of history and the language issue . This section explores their link to the dimension of national identity and history .
 Both above interpretations are reductionist for several reasons, according to the authors .
First, active participation of the above ultranationalist parties in the violent protests in February 2014 has not resulted in their growing popularity among the broader society . First, active Participation of theabove ultranularist parties hasn't resulted in the growing popularity of them .
After the transition of power in February 2014, these parties effectively lost their dominant position in the opposition movement . The opposition movement has been in power since February 2014 .
 In October 2014 parliamentary elections the extreme nationalists failed to pass even the minimum threshold . In the October 2014 elections, they failed to passed even theminimum threshold .
 Several new political forces, such as the pro-President block “Solidarity-Poroshenko’s, feature in their electoral party lists Russian-speakers from Donbas .
 They share more or less similar concerns about good governance, corruption and the economy . They also share more than similar concerns.
 Most of these parties seek to conduct reforms of government institutions, the army, police and other institutions . In order to reinstall due political process and legitimacy of the state, these parties want to reform government institutions .
 A number of top figures in the current Ukrainian government are native Russian-speakers . They represent the South and East of the country .
 Avakov started his political career in the East of Ukraine in Kharkov . He comes from the Eastern Ukrainian regional centre Dniepropetrovsk .
 The ruling political class is committed to a civic nationalist paradigm. The similarly multi-ethnic composition of the legislature, judiciary and bureaucracy indicates that the ruling class is also committed to the nationalist paradigm .
 The war in Donbas provides significant evidence which undermines any potential link between language and alleged pro-Russian, non-democratic preferences .
Major proportion of Russian-speaking community of the region remains loyal to Ukrainian state project . Despite the fact that the part this region has been arena of an intense military conflict, the numbers show that the majority of the Russian community remains loyal.
 Some polls have shown that about 30-percent of the local population support the independence of Donbas . The number of those who would be ready to fight for an independent Donbas was tiny .
 Defence Minister Igor Girkin-Strelkov had to admit that the whole Donbas region produced less than a thousand volunteers for the independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic .
 Geographical evidence also shows no clash between Russian-speaking and Ukrainian speaking territories . No clash between Russia and Ukrainian territories.
 The secessionist forces were able to expand their control on just half of the Donetsk oblast and one third of the Luhansk oblast . Less than 10% of the territory of the Russian-speaking South-Eastern Ukraine .
 While the government and broader public support the civil nationalism paradigm, the big business sectors seem to be divided .
 It is difficult for this group of businessmen to mobilize significant popular support. It is, however, difficult for them to mobilizesignificant popular support .
 First, they have been heavily compromised both in Kyiv and Russianspeaking regions because of their close links with the Yanukovich government . First, it is because they have a close relationship with the Yanukovych government .
 The "centre-periphery" has manipulated the discourse to mobilize electoral support, but have never delivered on their promises . They have repeatedly manipulated the “centre’s” discourse in order to mobilize support, according to CNN .
 Eventually, this discourse was hijacked by more radical groups, both local and Russian proxies . The discourse was eventually hijacked by both local, Russian and local groups .
Major businesses lost effective control over rebels in the region . As a result, the major businesses lost control over the rebels .
 Kolomoiskiy and S Taruta, who suffered under Yanukovich, have all the reasons to support the current democratic regime .
 Some of the formerly pro-Yanukovich and neutral oligarchs decided to support Ukraine’s territorial integrity and peace negotiations under the pressure of Western sanctions . Dirtash, a famous intermediary in numerous semi-transparent gas deals, decided to back Ukraine's territorial integrity .
Business elite of Ukraine appears to be show a growing sympathy towards a civic national identity .
The pro-Ukrainian narrative victimises Ukrainians and vilifies the Soviet past . The pro- Ukrainian narratives victimise Ukrainians, vilifies Soviet past.
 The pro-Soviet narrative criminalises Ukrainian nationalism and glorifies the Soviet past . The Pro-Soviet narratives criminalise Ukrainian nationalism .
 The society managed to escape from the conflicting discourse is that both narratives were heavily compromised . One of the reasons why the society escaped from the conflict is that the two narratives are heavily compromised.
 Yushchenko and Y Tymoshenko failed the Orange revolution by implementing ineffective policies and getting involved in corruption and personal quarrels . Yushchen and Yymoshenko also failed to implement ineffective policies, they failed to get involved in political disputes .
High school and university students from the West and the East discussed controversial issues surrounding WWII and the role of Ukrainian nationalism . Several examples of such reconciliation between the two parts of Ukrainian society are some highly popular TV-shows .
 This reconciliatory meta-narrative had a knock-on effect on the political elites . This is the result of a reconciliation between the two sides of the debate .
Ukrainian political class is not altruism of the Ukrainian political class. This change took place not because of the political class's altruism .
 The policy of historical reconciliation has most likely gained ground among various political forces in Ukraine . Any party trying to play one part of the country against the other is unlikely to win significant support .
 Elections are won by those parties which can attract a critical mass of voters in one of ideologically extreme regions . The nationalist West or pro-Russian South-East can gain some votes in the politically moderate, less ideological Central Ukraine .
 Any political forces which try to stir nationalist fanaticism either in Western or Eastern Ukraine are doomed to fail .
Ukrainian political class chose a post-modern European metanarrative. This Ukrainian political class refused to make a choice between a pro-Soviet Russian narrative and pro-Ukrainians narrative .
Ukrainian society departed from the exclusivist conflictual paradigm of the Soviet vs. nationalist paradigm . The debate evolved around the celebration of Soviet Victory Day during 2011-2013 .
 On 9 May 2011 Ukraine witnessed scenes of clashes between those who came to commemorate Victory Day and the local Ukrainian nationalists .
Supporters of Ukrainian nationalism expressed their indignation with the violence rather than with the commemoration of the Soviet Victory Day .
 A year later, the same date was marked more by symbolic and rhetorical stand-offs . All parties were trying to stress the non-violent character of their actions .
 Ukraine is gradually making a more European choice in the domain of ideology . This change demonstrates that Ukraine is slowly making a less European choice .
The trend prevailed during the presidential and parliamentary elections on 2014 . The trend prevailed in presidential and Parliamentary elections .
 Ukrainian business elites have shown they have chosen a “reconciliatory’ paradigm. Like the government and the broader society, they have demonstrated that they have decided a ‘reconCiliatory' paradigm .
 leading industrialists prefer not to take sides with one or another narrative . Leading industrialists don't want to be seen as a political party with a narrative .
 Ukraine will not “criminalize’s Soviet past, like happened in Poland and Baltic states . One could predict that most likely Ukraine won't ‘criminalize its Soviet past.’
 The Ukrainian government, elites and society opted for tolerance and reconciliation of the two histories – the Soviet and nationalist – does not make Ukraine an accomplished nation if judged against the standards of Central European nations .
 This does not mean that the country will remain in Russia’s embrace, however, it does . This doesn’t mean that Russia will stay in Russia's embrace .
 Ukraine has stepped out from the “conflict-generating’ trajectory. Ukrainians are similar to Spaniards, who have reconciled around the heritage of Franco, and Italians who can have their own disagreements about Mussolini, but do not turn into violence .
 A similar dynamic can be observed in the discussion about the problem of the Russian language and its status . A similar Dynamic can be seen in the debate about the language and status of Russian language .
 This issue seems to have lost its social significance because it has been discussed too often and has become overly politicized . This issue has been talked too often, it has become too politicized.
 President Yanukovych stated that he would upgrade the status of the Russian language to the second state language . In March 2012, President Yanukovych said he would upgraded the status.
 This pronouncement, which would have stirred a storm a few years ago, hardly produced any effect .
 Centrists put forward a reasonable argument that proper implementation of the law would result in every village and community proclaiming its own regional language, not only Russian, but also Romanian, Hungarian, Bulgarian, etc.
 centrists argue that would undermine the state institutions and even basic communication between the central and local authorities .
 A considerable part of moderate Ukrainian speaking voters could potentially vote for PoR . As a result of this law, some of these voters have moved to the right .
 Some of the most active proponents of official reinstating of Russian language were jailed by President Yanukovich's repressive machine in 2013-2014 .
 Further developments with the controversial law about the status of minority languages demonstrate the prevalence of the centrist paradigm .
 Acting President O Turchinov did not hesitate to veto this move . The new government and nationalist forces mobilized support to abolish the controversial law .
 He gave part of his inaugural speech in Russian and even launched Russian-language news programmes on the national TV channels . He has also launched Russian news programmes.
 The leading political forces seem to agree not to politicize the question of the Russian language . Overall, the leading political parties seem not to be politicized .
 The removal of the language issue from the political agenda does not imply it has been explicitly resolved and will never reappear in the future .
 Both the Russophones and the Ukrainians seem to seek reconciliatory solutions . But they reject the idea of violence in bi-communal relations, which is effectively a European paradigm .
 The Ukrainian government, society and business elites are looking for ways to find a balance between their own interests and Russia's influence . Europe's power of attraction and Russia’s influence is seen in the overlapping gravitational field.
 The trajectory of Ukraine in each dimension is shaped by the balance of preferences among the main societal actors .
 Ukraine opts for European choice. At least two out of three of these components find the attractive power of the EU stronger than Russia .
 This paper looked at the Ukraine-Russia-EU triangle from the perspectives of societal practices rather than from the point of view of formal institutions .
 Ukraine is gradually moving to the European path of development. Drawing on this approach, it can be concluded that Ukraine is moving to a European path .
 Broader Ukrainain society is raising the issues of social equality and fair play and elites are trying to establish a predictable and safe environment .
 Lame authoritarianism, rigged parliamentary elections in October 2012 combined with ill-implemented neo-liberal reforms, corruption and inefficient governance, stirred public resentment against the Russian version of Ukrainian authoritarianism and led to the democratic revolution in Ukraine in 2014 .
 The paper has also demonstrated that Russia’s uneasy feeling about the democratic revolutions is a function of how Moscow perceives the outcomes of these revolutions .
 In 2013-2014 Moscow decided to change the balance of preferences and exerted strong pressure on Ukrainian government and businesses . In 2013, Russia decided to changed the balance.
 Yanukovich government postpones signing of contract with Ukrainian industries . Ukrainian industries, backed by the Ukrainian government, decide to start bargaining .
 Moscow construed these two events as part of a single plot aimed at squeezing Russia out of its traditional sphere of influence and depriving it of the status of great power . This paper has shown that these developments in the economic dimension were not linked to the dimension of political practices .
 Russia effectively undermined its objective economic interests and its authority among the partners in the Eurasian Economic Community and in the international arena . By annexing Crimea and stirring up conflict in Donbas, Russia effectively undermine its objectives and authority in the world .
This behaviour reveals a strong link between the economic dimension and the dimension of international security . This behaviour reveals the link between economic and international security.
 This suggests that quite often the subjective self-perception of a country may prevail over its costbenefit considerations . This suggests the subjectiveSelf-perceptions of a nation may prevail.
 Kyiv keeps trying to decouple the two above dimensions from the military political one . Moscow has tied the economic and political dimensions together .
 Kyiv seeks to avoid a zero-sum game in the dimension of international security . Kyiv wants to avoid an international security crisis in the future .
 Its major entrepreneurs refrain from expressing strong Euro-Atlanticist views . The group's major entrepreneurs have not expressed strong views .
 There is a growing popularity for NATO among the broader Ukrainian public . But there is still a relative minority in Ukraine .
 The majority of Ukrainians and President P Poroshenko continue to stick to a centrist paradigm and refrain from strong symbolic actions, which could provoke further Russia's response .
 The country is eliciting close de facto cooperation with the most active NATO members . At the same time, the country is developing low profile defence capabilities .
 Ukrainians seem to be moving away from the conflictual paradigm and an inclusive civic national identity is being developed . In the dimension of ideology, Ukrainians are moving towards an inclusive national identity .
 Ukrainians appear to be developing immunity against political and ideological extremes . Ukrainians have lived with strong polarisations around ideological issues .
 The decline of far right political parties (both pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian) indicates the emerging centrist consensus .
 The Ukrainian ruling elite and wider society seem to be learning from their own mistakes . They want to avoid societal violent stand-offs around history .
 The Russian-speaking community has largely ignored the calls of Russian leaders to join the fight for independence of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk . Despite a measure of support in Donetsk and Crimea to secession from Ukraine.
 Ukraine is moving on to European path of development by a) reaching broader consensus on less controversial issues . The Ukraine government is refraining from certain actions that could generate zero-sum logic in the EU-Russia context .
 A multidimensional analysis can provide deeper insight into complex dynamics and controversial phenomena of the Ukrainian crisis . This paper has shown that a multiddimensional analysis can help to understand the Ukraine crisis .
 Slicing the EU19 Ukraine-Russia triangle allows to identify and deconstruct links between various dimensions and create areas for meaningful peace dialogue . The triangle was created by the European Union and Russia to create peace talks .
 Opozytsiynyi shtab natsionalnogo sprotyvu ogoloshue zagalnonatsionalny straik . OpozzytsIynyi. Shtab nattyvu is a straik for a single person .
 Khvatit rassuzhdati o sferakh vliania, Kommersant, 18 Feb.14 AZAROV, M. 2012 . Khvatshdati is a Russian state-run city in the city of Kommeria .
Ukraina gotova doluchytsia do budivnytstvo Transanatoloiyskogo gazoporovodu. Ukraina gotovnyt stvo.
 Department of Information and Communication of the Secretariat of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. Department of information and Communication.
Geopolitics, Institutionalisation and the Reconfiguration of European Security. Geopolitics and Institutionalization of European security .
 Anatoliy Grytsenko upevneniy shcho do momentu uhvalenniya rishenniya pro pryiom Ukrainy v NATO ukrains'ke suspilstvo bude gotovo pidtrymaty .
 Lessons from the Moldova-Transdniestria Conflict, Washington, Wilson Centre .
 The EU Common Strategy on Russia and the Finnish Institute of International Affairs . The European Union's strategy on Russia is based on the EU's approach to Russia .
 Bolshynstvo Lvovian schiatyut shto v sobytiah 9 Maia vinovny pro-rossiyskie sily . Maiavny v inovny Pro-rossIyskie. sily. Sily.
 The Regionalization of the World Order, interaction in conflict resolution Ashgate, is a key part of the conflict resolution .
 Azarov podpisal vygodniy dlia Rossii dogovor o ZST v SNG bez soglasiya Yanukovicha. Azarov Podpisal Vy Godniy Rossii Dogovor. ZST is a Russian-born Russian
 Vystuplenie na Rasshyrennom Zasedanii Kollegii Federalnoi Sluzhby Bezopasnosti. VyStuplanie is the name of a town in the city of Zasednii Kol
Ukraina s assotsiatsiei s ES navsegda zakryvaet dveri v Tamozhenyi Soyuz . Ukraine is a country in Ukraine .
 Zolotaryov ‘Sprava Tymoshenko pogany znak dlia Pinchuka ta Komois’kogo.’s ‘ sprava tymoshenko’tymoshenkopogany’dia’