 Norwegian College of Veterinary Medicine in Oslo is based in Oslo . Eight departments, associated research institutions and other institutions are located in the city .
 Noragric’s contribution to international development lies in the interface between research, education and assignments .
 The findings do not necessarily reflect the views of Noragricric. The findings in this thesis do notnecessarily reflect the view of the Noragic .
 Extracts from this publication may only be reproduced after prior consultation with the author and on condition that the source is indicated . The author of this publication is not allowed to reproduce the extracts .
 Sources of information other than my own have been acknowledged and a reference list has been appended . The list of information has been appended .
 This work has not been previously submitted to any other university for award of any type of academic degree . This work was not previously submitted by any other school for award.
 I thank my husband Fredrik Larsen for supporting me during the research and writing of this paper . I thank him for helping me with research, writing and research .
 Geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine over Ukraine 13 2.2.3%. Russia and West have been at odds over Ukraine for years .
 Diverse memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine in 29 2.5.5 years .
 Crimean annexation by Russia happened in 2014 . The Crimean annexation was the first by Russia in 2014.
 It violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine as well as established international order between the states . It violated Ukraine's sovereignty and its territorial integrity .
 The main causes of the annexation were diversity of regions, ethnic diversity, diversity of memories, beliefs and views between ethnic Ukrainians and Russians . The Crimean Autonomic Republic has a special status given to the Crimean Autonomous Republic .
 The main external causes were geopolitical controversy between the West and Russia, and applying diverse security concepts in a common dialogue between them .
 The annexation of Crimea is a dispute over geopolitics, not of international law . The annexation is not a matter of law, but of geopolitics .
 The thesis explores how the state can react against the international system in the name of its national interest . The thesis also explores the state's national interest in the world .
 The Crimean annexation, Russia, the Black Sea Fleet, NATO and the European Union expansion, Ukraine, the Ukrainian revolution, geopolitical controversy and security, security, diversity of regions, ethnic diversity of Ukraine .
 It is an area with both diverse population and religion, but also with an important geopolitical location with its access to the Black Sea . The area has both a diverse population, religion, and a significant geopolitical location .
 Several state transformations of Crimea made civilians of Crimea confused . Many state transformations made civilians confused .
 Crimean civilians want to participate in referendum of March 16th, 2014 . The referendum was organized by the Crimean Government with Russian military presence on the peninsula .
 The annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 happened because of both domestic and external causes . Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 because of domestic and External causes . The annexation was due to both domestic, external causes.
 The external causes of the Crimean annexation were geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West . Russia and West applied diverse security concepts in common dialogue between them .
 The domestic causes which also provoked the Crimean annexation were the diversity of regions, the ethnic diversity of Ukraine and diverse views, memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine .
 Crimea is currently a key issue in the increasing tension between Russia and the West . Crimea is also an issue of political disagreement between these actors. Crimea is a key topic in the growing tension between the two countries .
 Ukraine, together with the West, claim that the Russian military invasion of Crimea was an act of aggression against Ukrainian sovereignty, territorial integrity and international order . Ukraine and the West claim that Russia's invasion was an attack on Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Crimea became a part of Russia according to national laws of both Crimea 7 and Russia . On the other side, Crimea became part of the Russian government .
 The Russian Federation and Crimea signed an agreement about the Crimean accession to Russia . The agreement made Crimea a federal subject of Russia in accordance to its national law .
 The Crimean Annexation is a complete overview of the Crimea's Annexation . To conclude, studying all causes can help to build a complete understanding of the Crimean Annexations .
 The thesis paper includes Abstract, Introduction, Methodology/Background, Main Discussion and References . The paper is titled ‘Causes of the Crimean Annexation by Russia in 2014’
 The purpose of the work is to study the causes of the CA and to discover and analyze different views on why it happened . The purpose is to look at the CA in order to get a complete view of theCA .
 Russia would not have responded by annexing Crimea. Without threats such as the expansion of NATO and the EU near the state’s border with the Russian Federation, the Ukrainian revolution, and the newly established pro-Western government in Ukraine, Russia wouldn't have responded .
 For Russia it was important to keep its position in Crimea as well as over the Black Sea . Russia was important for Russia to keep it in Crimea and over the black sea .
 Crimea would not have supported illegal actions by the Russian Federation on the Peninsula . Without these domestic causes, Crimea would have not been supported by Russia .
Without both of them, the CA would not have happened in 2014 . Ultimately, these factors are interconnected, and without both they would have happened .
 This paper shows how the highlighting of all causes helps to understand why Crimea became de-facto Russian .
 It presents ideas for potential further research about how to predict such events in the international arena . It also presents ideas to solve such events peacefully if such events have already happened .
 The CA is a good illustration of when a state can break international norms in the name of national core goals and interests . In the end, the case of the CA is an example of a state breaking international norms .
 For Russia, it was strategically important to keep its influence and position in Crimea . Ukraine took a proWestern side in Crimea when Ukraine took pro-Western side .
 A state can act against the international system of rules, when it contradicts its national goals and core interests, says the paper . This paper also illustrates how a state can also act against its own goals and interests .
 Crimean annexation is a complex issue that requires a complex approach to studying it . There is a close correlation between the external and domestic causes that provoked the Crimean annexation .
 Since Crimea stays de-jure a part of Ukraine, the causes presented as domestic and external are relative to Ukraine, not Russia . Ukraine is not Russia.
 Also analysed were the biggest TV channels and mass media editions of Russia and Ukraine . Academic articles and books explore the causes of the Crimean annexation .
 Studying the causes of the Crimean annexation will help to understand Russia’s motives and what provoked Russia to carry out the annexation .
 A complex study of the causes of the CA will also help to predict similar events on the international arena . The CA is the largest arena in the world .
 The Crimean region was transformed from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Republic in 1954 . The Crimean area was transformed into the UkrainianSoviet Republic in 1953 .
 This was mostly explained by the territorial link of Crimea to Ukraine. This was mainly explained by Crimea's territorial link to Ukraine .
 The transition was held without providing a referendum, which would have determined the people’s wishes regarding this transition . The transition has been held without a referendum .
 The Crimean annexation preceded such events as NATO and the European Union expansion on the East, and the Ukrainian Revolution . The Crimea annexation preceded the EU expansion of Ukraine and NATO .
 Crimea has close historical and cultural ties to Russia, and mostly ethnic Russians live on the Crimean Peninsula . Crimea has a long history of Russian culture and history .
 The close ties of Russia and Crimea are exemplified by common 9 language, values, history, traditions and views . The close relationship between Russia and the Crimea is exemplified in 9 language and values .
Historically and psychologically Crimea is much closer to Russia then to other Soviet Republic states . According to Bebler, historically and psychologically, Crimea is far closer than Russia then .
 Crimean Annexation is also relevant to highlight the ‘triple transition’ of Crimea .
 The fact that Crimea floated between Russia and Ukraine made Russia have some claims about Crimea possibly belonging to it .
Transitions made ordinary people lack understanding about the difference between what was legal and illegal in the overtaking of power in Crimea .
 International financial services such as VISA and MasterCard do not work there, nor are there international organizations on the Peninsula .
 Economic sanctions against both Crimea and the Russian Federation are still in force . The sanctions provoked a financial crisis and the decline of the ruble .
The Russian Federation was suspended from the Group of Eight after the annexation of Crimea . The Russian Federation also was suspended after Crimea's annexation .
Relations between Russia and the West are the 'coldest' they have been since the Cold War . In conclusion, today's relations are the ‘coldest’ they have ever been .
 Crimea occupies strategically important space between EU/NATO member states and Russian Federation with its access to the Black Sea . Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, including Crimea .
 The Agreement of Political and Economic Cooperation between Ukraine and the EU by the current Ukrainian government in 2013 provoked mass demonstrations in Kiev and the subsequent overtaking of power by pro-Western political forces in Ukraine .
 Such a power shift from pro-Russian to pro-Western was not welcomed by Russia . It was declared violent and illegal by Russia. Such a change was declared Violent and illegal .
 Crimea has been an important strategic territory due to geopolitics and its position in providing security for Russia . Since Tsarist Russia until today, Crimea is a strategic territory .
 Russia kept the Russian Black Sea Fleet on the Crimean Peninsula for security and geopolitical purposes . Even after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia kept it on the peninsula .
 Russia taking control of Crimea can be explained by external causes such as diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West . The Ukrainian Crisis and geopolitical controversy between the West and the Russian Federation can be seen as a factor .
 The first external cause of the Crimean annexation by Russia in 2014 was the Crimea annexation in 2014 . Diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West were key to the annexation .
 Both parties made the dialogue between them difficult, but almost impossible . By applying only their own perception to an explanation of the UC and the CA, both parties made it difficult .
 According to Sakwa, there are also diverse perceptions and visions of what ‘Europe’ is .
Diverse ideas of what ‘Europe’ should be created diverse 11 perceptions of how to provide security for each nation’s regions .
 The West saw providing security through the integration process “as a form of international cooperation’ (Rieker & Gjerde, 2015,6), and the potential integration of Ukraine into the EU/NATO was also seen as a step forward .
 The expansion of the EU/NATO was seen as a threat to Russia’s security according to the Russian Security Concept, 2009 .
 Yelsin, the first President of the Russian Federation, had spoken about the potential tension between Russia and NATO/EU states .
Dealing with post-Soviet states, especially with Ukraine, was always one of the most important issues in the Russian security strategy . Dealing with Ukraine was always a key issue in Russia's security strategy, according to Russian officials .
 The shift from pro-Russian to pro-Western seemed to pose direct danger to the Russian Federation's security due to the loss of influence and control over their neighbour’s country . The overtaking of power in Kiev during the Ukrainian Revolution seemed to be a direct danger
 Russia argues that the EU and NATO are in very close cooperation and “EU’s foreign policy is linked to NATO” and interprets Western foreign policy 12 towards Ukraine as a threat to Russian security .
Security is one of the most important issues for the Russian government, according to the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 Geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine is closely linked to the geopolitical controversy over Ukraine . Diverse perceptions of how to provide security in Ukraine are linked to geopolitical controversy .
 A geopolitical controversy between states or a group of states is a clash of opposing geopolitical interests of those states .
 The West and the Russian Federation were involved in a geopolitical controversy, which ultimately provoked the annexation of Crimea by Russia . The West was involved in the geopolitical controversy .
 There were some attempts to build relations between Russia and the West on equal terms . There were also attempts to building relations between the West and Russia .
 2004 – the Orange Revolution with the West support and defeat of pro-Russian candidate Yanukovich at the president elections of Ukraine . 2004–2010 – 2004-2010 – The Orange Revolution. 2004-2004 – The Russian-backed Orange Revolution .
 Political power in Ukraine has changed from the pro15 Western to the pro-Russian several times, as well as the direction of Ukraine’s state course towards Russia or the West .
 The annexation of Crimea started with the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004 and finished with the overthrow of the pro-Russian government on February 22nd, 2014 during the Euromaidan .
 Tsygankov starts his study of Russia’s Ukraine policy and what provoked Russia to annex Crimea in 2014 with the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004 .
 The geopolitical controversy between the West and Russia began in 2004, with pro-Russian and pro-Western candidates during the presidential vote .
 When it came to the new presidential elections in Ukraine in 2010, the pro-Russian government took control over the state .
 The Russian government has tried several times to keep Ukraine under its sphere of influence and control . Russia has tried to keep the country under its influence .
 Membership of Ukraine in the Eurasian Custom Union was supposed to provide a common custom territory and closer economic, as well as political, political, ties between Russia and Ukraine .
 Russia's offer of $15 billion in aid from Russia to Ukraine was made in October 2013 . A last attempt to get Ukraine on Russia’s side was made last year with $15billion in aid .
 Yanukovych’s government was overthrown on February 22nd during the Euromaidan . Russia ‘lost’ Ukraine to the proWestern opposition and the West, according to the West .
Claims about a clear annexation of the neighbour territory become irrelevant .
 The annexation of Crimea happened when the dialogue between Ukraine, the West and Russia became impossible .
 The Ukrainian crisis had a close correlation with the geopolitical controversy between the West and the Russian Federation . Ukrainian crisis was a cause of the above-mentioned controversy .
 The power shift on February 22nd, 2013 played a vital role in the Russian government's decision to take control over Crimea .
 Ukraine stayed ‘close’ to Russia with a proRussian president and gas interdependence . Russia was sure of its geopolitical position, as long as Ukraine stayed close to Russia .
 Russia's decision to take control of Crimea seemed like a last attempt to keep its influence over part of the post-Soviet space . Russia’s decision to control Crimea seemed to be a last effort to keep it in control .
 Russia does not consider NATO an enemy organization or view its existence as a tragedy, according to the President of the Russian Federation .
 It was born as the antipode to the Warsaw Pact, as the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe . The Warsaw Pact was the first Soviet Union to be formed in the 1980s .
 The reality is that NATO is expanding. We do have to follow the reality, and the reality is NATO is growing .
 NATO promised that they will not expand to the East after the fall of the Berlin Wall . Otherwise, they started to expand by taking control over our allies of the Warsaw Agreement and then over the post-Soviet Balkan states .
 In this case, it is more than enough to make a deal about help for guaranteeing the security of these states .
 The answer was that it is not our case, and that people and countries have the right to choose how to handle their security . The answer is that it's not our cases, and people and nations have theright to choose their security.
 It is true that they get closer and closer to our border and we get more questions . But it is also true, that they are also closer to each other, says CNN .
 NATO ships will base on the Russian city of military glory, Sevastopol . The first and the most important, of course, was to support Crimeans .
 If NATO could come to Crimea, they could 18 create military installations against us . If NATO comes to the Crimea, it would be the first time they could be there .
 Putin confirmed the geopolitical meaning of the annexation of Crimea .
 The Russian government had seen the annexation of Crimea as a response to the new pro-Western government in Ukraine . The new government wanted to continue negotiations about partnership with the EU/NATO during the geopolitical controversy .
 There is no data to show supportive evidence about NATO’s promise to not expand on the East .
 The annexation of the Crimean Peninsula during the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West is a good illustration of an instance where a state involved international norms in the name of protecting its own core national interests .
 Russia did not respond to Ukraine's aggression against Ukraine, but became an aggressor itself . When it came to protecting the interests of Russia, which was linked to Ukraine, Russia became a aggressor .
 Such geopolitical ambitions to keep control over the Crimean Peninsula come from the common past of Russia with the Soviet Union . The Crimean Peninsula is part of the Crimean peninsula.
 Russia showed interest in keeping military bases on this peninsula and meant to have control over it . Ukraine signed agreements with Ukraine about the presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet on Ukrainian territory .
 The Russian government gave up its military position on the Crimean Peninsula for the sake of NATO . The move was unacceptable to the Russian government .
 If Ukraine were to become a member of NATO, it would be hard to imagine there being two opposing military forces in one territory .
 Russia has control over the Black Sea . It has always held a lot of meaning for Russia, especially during the controversy over Ukraine .
 NATO and the EU 20 also had access to the Black Sea . It was important for Russia to keep its position in Crimea in order to keep the balance between the two forces .
 The desire to keep free access to the Black Sea via Crimea provoked the annexation of this territory . The desire for a military base in Sevastopol City, Crimea, sparked the annexation .
 Mearsheimer argues that it is wrong to blame only Russia for the military capture of the Peninsula .
 The CA can be explained as an offensive reaction in the geopolitical controversy against losing influence on the post-Soviet area of Crimea . The CA has important meaning for the Russian Federation .
 NATO’s Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg: ‘Crimea has been annexed’ ‘Borders have been changed by use of force’ for the first time since the Second World War .
 NATO made no excuses for Russia intervening in a neighbour’s state and annexing part of its territory . Russia is a member of the European Union and the United States .
Before the annexation of Crimea NATO saw Russia as a partner in keeping security for both countries .
 CA, NATO and EU member-states instated sanctions against Russia and Crimea . Relationship between both parties was suspended after sanctions .
 Ukraine has been involved in a dispute between Russia and the West . It is also important to look at the role of Ukraine in this dispute .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine appeared as only an act of aggression against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, without any reference to the geopolitical controversy between the two nations .
 The idea of defending their security interest by destroying it was not welcomed . The idea was not welcome to the idea of destroying it .
 Ukraine has played the role of the victim in this geopolitical controversy. Unfortunately, Ukraine has been playing the victim, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The controversy did not cover the interests of Ukraine as a sovereign and independent state . Ukraine would only get the advantages of being in a buffer zone position between the West and Russia for both sides .
 Maybe it would have been better to stay neutral and have contacts with both parties in order to prevent geopolitical controversy over Ukraine .
 Ukraine was not ready to do so for many reasons, one of them being Russian control over many areas in Ukraine . However, Ukraine has not yet been ready to take on Russia .
 Ukraine showed which side it preferred and which way Ukraine would develop by signing the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement on March 21st and June 27th, 2014 . Ukraine will sign the agreement in March and June 21st .
 The Association Agreement is still under the EU-states ratification process . It is being ratified by EU- states .
 This Agreement also outlines the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between the members . This Agreement was signed in 2007 .
 The annexation of Crimea was the last thing Russia could do to avoid being ‘defeated’ by the West in Ukraine .
 The West could also predict that signing the agreement about the association with Ukraine might provoke controversy between them and Russia . But it could have been possible to agree about Ukraine .
Russia and Ukraine share a long geographic border and Slavic culture . It was wrong to start negotiations about their partnership with Ukraine without keeping in mind Russia’s interests in Ukraine .
 Ukraine was supposed to do major research to find out what kind of consequences Ukraine might suffer before signing the above-mentioned agreement . According to the Kiev Center of Political and Conflict Studies, Ukraine was meant to do a major research.
 Ukraine's economy had been in close connection with Russia for such a long time for this agreement . Ukraine's need to adapt its economy was the right choice, according to the Russian government .
 The West provided sanctions for both Crimea and Russia and suspended EU/NATO–Russia relations . Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014 .
 The division of Russia’s policy in Ukraine into four stages showed how the relationships between the parties were compounded step by step, not suddenly .
 The geopolitical controversy over Ukraine, which then provoked the annexation of Crimea, put other countries that were not involved in the controversy in an awkward situation .
 The majority of the United Nations’s members recognized the annexation of Crimea, as well as the illegal referendum in Crimea on March 16th, 2014 . The most of the U.N. members recognize the annexation.
 There were two levels of causes, named as external and domestic, and both provoked the CA in the year 2014 . As highlighted before, there were twolevels of causes.
Domestic causes are indirect and because of them, Crimeans supported Russia during her military invasion and the annexation of the Peninsula .
 Crimean annexation was not a clear grab of a neighbour’s territory, but an event where civilians supported the illigal actions of the other state . This meant that the Crimean annexation wasn't a clear grabbing of a neighbouring's territory .
 Domestic causes of the CA on the interstate level were linked to each other as well as each other . The CA on interstate level was also linked to the state of California .
 The Russian Federation would not have support from Crimeans during the annexation without these domestic causes and the ethnic conflict in the state .
 A legal dispute between Ukraine and Russia over Crimea, as well as gaps around the status of Crimea, are also domestic causes of the annexation .
 The unclear procedure of the self-determination made people think that there was not an annexation, but that it was the Crimean's people own decision about the Crimean future .
 Ukraine presents the first domestic case of the Crimean annexation in 2014 . Diversity of regions in Ukraine presents first case of Crimean annexation .
 Ukraine has a long history of difference between each other . Zakarpatia, Crimea and Donbass have different historical and traditional approaches, as well as different views .
 The Euromaidan in 2013-2014 was the largest region in the region . The region was not so obvious until the 2013- 2014. The diversity of the region was the first to be seen .
 During the Euromaidan Ukraine was split on several points as Crimea, Eastern and Western Ukraine showed diverse points of view about to the potential state development .
 Ukraine was not a presenter of one united territory, and such diversity of regions was a direct route to conflict . Ukraine is not a member of a united territory .
 It was only a question of time when the different nationalities would stand for their interests and beliefs . It was just a matter of time.
 The struggle combined with the Russian military invasion of Crimea. Of course, this was combined with Russia's military invasion.
There were several attempts to keep this region under control and keep it united with the rest of Ukraine on a different level of selfdetermination than other oblast1 in Ukraine . There were several efforts to keep the region undercontrol .
 According to the Waltz’s ‘First Image’ , the primary cause of the conflict is a human behaviour .
In this case, the behaviour of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine, and the diversity between them, were causes of the Crimean annexation . The behaviour of the ethnic Russian and Ukrainians were the cause of the annexation .
 The main cause of the CA was the ethnic diversity behaviour of Russians and Ukrainians during the conflict .
 Report from Pew Research Center proves that ethnic diversity between Ukrainians and Russians has place to be in Ukraine .
 Sasse’s ‘State of Regions’ presents the idea that the Crimean annexation could have been provoked because of diverse ethnicity, which is closely connected to diverse views .
 Ethnic diversity built the 'wall' between Russians and Ukrainians before the military invasion by Russia into the Crimean Peninsula in February 2014 .
 Crimea has a long cultural and historical connection to the Russian Federation . Crimea has been a part of Russia for decades .
After several attempts of the Ukrainization of Crimea, Saluschev claims it was not a surprise that ethnic Russians supported Russian actions .
 Russian actions in Crimea in 2014 received active support from the Russian population of Crimea .
 The biggest national group of Crimea is Russian, while the biggest group of Ukraine is Ukrainian . The largest national group is Ukrainian.
 The Euromaidan was named during the critical period of Ukrainian history . It was the first time the country had a name in the name . It is now the name of Ukraine's second largest city .
 The ethnic conflict between Russians and Ukrainians had a latent character before the Ukrainian Revolution in 2014 . The Ukrainian Revolution was the first in Ukraine to take place in 2014.
 Ethnic diversity had become a ‘binary opposition between Russians and Ukrainians’ and tensions between them were blurred until the Euromaidan .
 Sasse examined how and why such ethnic diversity could provoke a conflict between these nations in the future .
 The ‘hot spot’ of the confrontation between Ukrainians and Crimean Russians occurred during the Euromaidan due to diverse views of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine .
 Both groups had diverse views about the potential cooperation of Ukraine, which included Crimea at that time . Both had different views on Ukraine's potential cooperation .
 The new 'pro-Western' government of Ukraine overtook power in Kiev on February 22nd, 2014 . The new government continued dialogue with the EU and NATO about Ukraine’s potential cooperation .
 Crimea has been under pressure from the Russian Federation to act in its own interests, but also with support from Russia . Crimea is the region of Crimea in Crimea, which has been in Crimea for more than a decade .
 The Crimean and Ukrainian governments did not come to any agreement about common development of Ukraine and Crimea as one state .
 There is a correlation between the two diverse nationalities and two diverse views of Crimean Russians and Ukrainians .
 Ukraine played a significant role during the Euromaidan and then during the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . To sum up, these diverse views of different regions in Ukraine played significant role.
 Yanukovych’s presidency in Ukraine was a guarantor of a close relationship with Russia . Yanukovych's presidency was a close ally of Russia .
 Crimea refused to be controlled by Kiev with its illegal government by public and government opinion of Crimea . After the fall of his regime in February 2014, Crimea refuses to becontrolled by Kiev .
 Previous votes in Ukraine showed how strong the Crimean pro-Russian position was . Previous votes show how strong a pro-Russia position was.
 Signing an agreement with the EU meant that Ukraine would go out from under Russian influence, which Crimeans did not want . Signing a deal with the European Union meant Ukraine would be under Russia's influence . Crimeans didn't want Ukraine to go out of the
 Ukraine should follow interests of all its regions, but not just part of them, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine should also follow the interests of its state, he says .
 Ukraine was split in two again when it came to cooperation with the EU and NATO or with the Eurasian Custom Union . Ukraine was also split with the European Union and the EU .
 Ukrainians and Russians in Ukraine did not find a common view that would follow the interests of both of the two countries .
 Western and central parts of Ukraine broke all ties to Russia by identifying themselves as a pro-Western region .
 Diverse memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine. There are different memories of ordinary people in Ukraine .
 These memories are diverse because of previous state affiliations of Crimea and then Ukraine . These memories of previous states are diverse.
 Diverse memories and beliefs split Ukraine in two, and also provoked the CA on the domestic level . The CA is based in Kiev, Ukraine's capital city .
 Crimea is a strong pro-Russian region due to common memories and symbols, especially from the World War II times . While “symbols combine suggestive, emotional and political power” (Sasse, 2007, p.
 The role and victory of Soviets in WWII are some of the most significant memories for Russians in Crimea . The role, victory and role of Soviets are among the most important memories for Russia .
 Ukraine is trying to revive its own history without the Russian influence . On the other side, it is important for Ukraine to revive itself without Russian influence.
 Diverse memories made people diverse in their understanding of who is a hero and who is an enemy .
 Crimea was a part of the Russian Soviet Republic during WWII . Stepan Bandera will always be an enemy for Crimea .
 Crimea has been declared a national hero by Crimea's government . Crimea is a Crimea region in Crimea . Crimea's Crimea is the Crimea region of Crimea .
 The CA was founded by the California legislature in 2008 . It was the first time the state has been named a state in its history . The state was elected to the National Council of Representatives in 2010 . It is the second largest state in the country, the U.
 Manipulations around the status of Russian language in Ukraine before the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 .
 Ukrainian government made it possible for the Russian government to start its company around defence of the status of Russian language in Crimea and ethnic Russians as minority in Ukraine .
 Whether or not to recognize equal positions for Russian and Ukrainian languages has been an open question in Ukraine for a long time .
 Russian action in Crimea was supported by ethnic Russians in Crimea . For Crimeans it was important to keep at least regional status of the Russian language 30 on the peninsula .
 In opinion of Russians in Crimea the Ukrainian Government started to reform country from a wrong question . To add, in opinion of Russia, the Ukrainian government started to reforms from the wrong question.
 Ethnic Russians as a minority in Ukraine were afraid for their rights in Ukraine in the future with such active pro-western position of the Ukrainian Goverment .
 There is a close correlation between the conflict over Crimea in 2014 and the internal structure of Ukraine . In accordance with Waltz's the Second Image ‘International Conflict and the Internal Structure of States’
 An inter-state system can prevent or provoke conflicts, such as what happened over the Crimean Peninsula . The Crimean Peninsula is a peninsula in the Crimean peninsula .
 A weak state-building process of Ukraine as a unitary state provoked the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . In this case, a weak state building process provoked the annexed of Crimea .
 Waltz stays that human behaviour is a main cause of conflict . This refers to the ethnic diversity of nations in Ukraine and their diverse views .
 There are several domestic causes in Ukraine which together provoked the CA, and dispute around the formation of the Ukrainian government is also one of them .
 A federation would give more self-determination to the different regions of Ukraine . It means that even with previous questions about the status of the Russian language, its cancellation and manipulation could never come true .
 "Crimea is a clear exception" with its status of autonomy, own government, and constitution, says the author . "CrimeA is aclear exception," says author .
 Federation as a form of territorial formation could help Ukraine to take into account the opinion of every region . Federation could be used as a way to help Ukraine take account of its opinion of all regions .
 For Ukraine, it is difficult to operate as a unified state by following only one view without acknowledging the others . Ukraine is one of Ukraine's most populous countries in the world .
 Crimea de-facto Russian 31 as well as Ukraine's Crimea, as well. Ukraine is in potential cooperation with the EU and NATO, according to the European Union .
 A geographical and political centralization of power in Ukraine with the exception of the Crimean Autonomic Republic was already a mistake of the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine with the Autonomic Republic made Ukraine de-facto a decentralized state . “The inherent tension between centralization and decentralization was inscribed in the constitution”
 The choice of Ukraine to be a unified, centralized state in 1991 also provoke the annexation of Crimea in 2014 by the Russian Federation . The diversity of the Crimean region compared to other regions of Ukraine .
 The status of Crimea as an Autonomous Republic with a special status for Sevastopol City also provoked the annexation of Crimea on the domestic level . The status. of the Crimean Aut autonomous Republic also provoked annexation of the Crimea .
 Crimean Peninsula was given autonomous status in 2002 . It was made to prevent a potential conflict over the Crimean Peninsula . Such separateness from other regions of Ukraine provoked the annexation of the Peninsula .
 The CA happened because of the unclear legal designation of the autonomous rights of Crimea and Sevastopol . In addition, the CA happened due to the unclear status of Crimea.
 Crimean Republic had a president and a Constitutional Court until 1996 . The Crimean Republic was a republic until 1996.
 Russian Black Sea Fleet presence in Crimea provoked easy over-taking of power by the Russian 32 Federation in 2014 . Sevastopol City has special status with the Russian Black sea Fleet presence .
 Russia did not break the rules de-jure, according to the agreements between both parties . Russia did use its already present military staff for taking full control over the Peninsula .
 The ethnic composition of Sevastopol also drove this region to support Russia during the time of the annexation .
 It will look like their own opinion have only people, who are in Kiev currently . Otherwise, it would look like they have only a few people .
 The Government has to not allow the anti constitutional way of revenge of bankrupt political forces professing an extreme nationalism in Ukraine .
 There is no doubt that this referendum was illegal according to Ukrainian and international norms . But it also provided the Russian military with support on the Peninsula .
 This referendum must be examined, because the results have shown the will of the majority of Crimeans . The referendum must also be examined .
 The annexation of Crimea was held peacefully, without civil war or civil demonstrations . Most Crimeans wished to become a part of the Russian Federation .
 The Crimean annexation happened with the support of the Crimean people, according to reports .
 The Euromaidan is the result of orders sent by the Ukrainian Government from Crimea to protect the civil order in Ukraine and the current government . Those who participated in demonstrations and were killed got honorary titles as Heavenly Hundred Heroes of Ukraine .
Pro-Russian demonstrations in Odessa on May 2nd, 2014 resulted in 46 people being burned alive . Crimeans became more sure of their choice to support Russia .
 Fear played a vital role during the Crimean annexation and while the referendum was held . The Crimean annexation was held during the referendum .
 Civilians were under fear “for their memories, culture, language and views because of new pro-Western government’s new government” and for what happened in Kiev.
 Crimean and Russian governments made civil people confused, while in Kiev a violent over-taking of power had happened . Such claims from both the Crimean and the Russian governments make civil people confuse .
 In the Russian documentary movie Crimea. In the opinion of several respondents in the film, Crimea is a documentary movie .
 Crimean government said that its people’s wishes would be heard this time. Operating with the results of the Crimean referendum in 1991 .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union came almost a year later in December 1991 . The referendum was held in January 1991, while the collapse was a year earlier .
 It was clear that the annexation had been hidden under the people’s will and referendum . The annexation was hidden under people's will.
 The Supreme Council of Crimea and the Sevastopol City Council promoted the Crimean Autonomous Republic Declaration of Independence . The results were announced by the Supreme council of Crimea .
 The Ukrainian government did not give enough attention to the worries of the Russian minority in Ukraine, who were mainly based in Crimea . In conclusion, one the eve of the Crimean annexation and the Crimean referendum.
 There were no attempts to explain to Russians in Crimea that they were part of Ukraine .
 There were no open appeals to stay away from the Russian influence nor explanations of what was really going on in Kiev . Ukraine would always respect the rights of ethnic Russians in Ukraine.
 Sanctions against Crimea and Russia provoked the financial crisis and the collapse of ruble in Russia . Sanctions also provoked the economic crisis in Russia and Russia .
 NATO–Russia Council relations are temporary frozen as well as EU–Russia relations . As a consequence of the annexation, NATO-Russia relations are also temporary frozen .
 The CA involved Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, according to the paper . This paper claims that it happened because of Russia’'s protection of its national interest in the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West .
 The loss of control over Crimea could be a geopolitical defeat for Russia . Russia has lost control of Crimea in the past.
 The external causes provoked Russia to take control over Crimea . Domestic causes provided the support of Crimeans during the annexation of the Peninsula .
 The annexation of Crimea is a complex issue, the study of which has to account for both domestic and external causes . In summary, the annexation is acomplex issue.
 Crimea has been an important strategic territory due to geopolitics, providing security for Russia . Since Tsarist Russia, Crimea is a strategic territory for Russia.
 Diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West made for diverse understandings of the annexation of Crimea by both parties . Diverse perceptions of Russian and West make for diverse understanding of Crimea's annexation .
 Russia's and the West's interpretations of 'Europe' are different . There will also be diverse understandings of how to provide security in their regions .
 The potential integration of Ukraine into the EU/NATO was also seen as a step forward for providing security in Europe . Russia's expansion of the EU-NATO is seen as an threat for Russia’s security according to the Russian Security Concept of 2009 .
 CA by Russia in 2014 was the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine . Another external cause of Russia's CA was the controversy between the West and Russia .
 Ukraine would always have special meaning for Russia due to geopolitics and its position providing security near Russia’s border . As long as Ukraine was ‘a state on the border between Russia and the West’
 This paper looked the development of the controversy between Russia and the West through Russian Foreign policy towards Ukraine . The paper looked at the development.
 This paper covered the main events from the Orange Revolution to the overthrow of the pro-Russian government on February 22nd, 2014 . In the end, Russia annexed Crimea in order to protect its position during the controversy with the West .
 This paper has examined the controversy by looking at Russian politics in Ukraine as divided into four stages . This approach helps to understand why the CA did not happen prior to 2014 .
 The annexation of the Crimean Peninsula during the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West was a good illustration of a state invoking international norms in the name of protecting its own core national interests .
 Russia’s geopolitical ambitions to keep control over the Crimean Peninsula come from a common past with the Soviet Union . Russia's geopolitical ambitions come from the common past.
 The second part of the thesis covered causes of the CA from a domestic perspective . The third part covered causes for the CA in the domestic perspective.
 Domestic causes of the CA on the interstate level were linked to each other . The CA on interstate level was linked to the state's interstate level .
 The CA would not have happened without the ethnic conflict 38 between Russians and Ukrainians . It arose out of their diverse views of the future of Ukraine on the eve of the annexation .
 The first domestic cause examined in this paper was the diversity of regions . The first national cause examined was the Diversity of regions.
 Following Sasse’s definition of Ukraine as ‘a state of regions’, these diverse regions provoked a division of the country into several parts .
 The ethnic diversity of Ukraine, as the second domestic cause, has a close correlation with the diverse views, memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine .
 Crimeans took a pro-Russian stance about political and economic cooperation with Russia . They also shared common beliefs and memories with Russia and then with the new Ukraine .
 Such diversity provoked active support of Russian actions on the Peninsula by the ethnic Russians in Crimea . Such diversity sparked active support for Russian actions.
 Crimea and Ukraine had diverse views about the political and economic development of Ukraine at the time of the annexation . Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in February 2014 .
 Crimea claimed to stay close with Russia and started to negotiate membership in the Eurasian Custom Union . Kiev actively supported the idea of continuing dialogue about potential cooperation with the EU .
 In addition, manipulations around the status of the Russian language in Ukraine made Crimeans confused on the eve of the annexation .
 Claims that the status of Russian as the regional language would be abolished by the new pro-Western government simply made people scared .
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet provoked easy over-taking of power by the Russian Federation in 2014 . The presence of the Russian Black sea Fleet in 2014 provoked easyover-taking power .
 Crimean status referendum has shown most Crimeans wished to separate from Ukraine and become part of Russia . Previous domestic causes provoked the CA .
 The results of the referendum showed the readiness of civilians to support the illegal actions of Russia for the sake of protecting their own interests .
 Ukraine’s cooperation with Russia to include Crimea simply was seen by Crimeans as simply a guarantee of keeping close cultural and historical ties with Russia .
 ethnicity is one of the most powerful instruments for achieving state objectives . In summary, ethnicity is a powerful instrument to achieve state objectives.
 The state can manage its own interest on the specified territory . Under the calls about protection of common values and interests 39 of civil society, the state can.
 Ethnic Russians in Crimea truly believed in a fair reunion with Russia, while Russia just wanted to protect its state interests against the policy of the EU and NATO in Ukraine .
 Russian and Western sides are trying to find an answer for the second potential RQ (What are the different views on the Crimean annexation by Russia in 2014?), but this became irrelevant .
 Russia's official view de-facto agreed with the annexing of Crimea as defence of Russian national interests in the geopolitical controversy with the West . Russia’s official view of the annexation of Crimea was that it was in defence of Russia.
 The Russian Federation did break international rules in the name of their national interest . Unclear attempts at explaining why the annexation was legal, as well as comparing the CA with the Kosovo precedent .
International society just has to approach it as another precedent on the international arena, with the reference to the close historical and cultural ties of Crimea with Russia . Russia's state opinion, according to Russia’s state opinion.
 This thesis did not address the domestic causes of the CA in the Russian Federation .
 There were some causes in Russia which played a part in provoking it to annex Crimea .
 Both the domestic causes in Russia which provoked it to annex Crimea, and the involvement of the Crimean Tatars in the conflict are good topics for future research .
 Analysis of the domestic and the external causes of the CA can be a relevant basis for developing policy recommendations . It shows the annexation as a complex issue, not just a clear grab of a neighbour’s territory .
 The CA happened because of domestic and external causes, says the CA . Russia reacted illegally in the name of protecting its national interest, the CA says . The CA was a result of domestic, external causes.
 This basis could provide insight into how to deal with such situations on the international arena, as well as how to predict them . The basis could be used to help players deal with situations in such situations .
 Ukraine is a clear violation of Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty, and to isolate Russia from international society . One approach would be to admit that there was a clear violations of Ukraine's territory and sovereigns .
40 NATO and the EU made a strategic mistake by involving Ukraine in the integration process . Another would be to admit that 40 NATO and EU made an error in the process .
 A new referendum could be provided to Crimea under international supervision . Third, a new referendum would be given to Crimea by international supervision.
 The Constitutional Process in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in the Context of Interethnic Relations and Conflict Settlement . The Constitutional process is called the Constitutional Process .
 The EU–Russia competition in the shared neighbourhood and the Ukraine crisis. The EU-Russia competition is in the midst of a crisis in Ukraine .
 Customs Union between Republic of Belarus, Republic of Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Community .
 Ethnic Russians of Crimea as an instrument of the Crimean annexation in 2014 . Ethnic Russians were given the right to vote in Crimea in 2014.
 Ukrainians want to remain one Country One Country Many Leery of Russian Influence, as Putin gets Boost at Home .
 Russian and EU perceptions of European security and potential implications for Europe and Norway . Russian and European perceptions of Europe's security and implications for Norway .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg made the statement at the CSU conference in Wildbad Kreuth, Germany .
 Association Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine of the other part, was signed in 2009 .