 The media learned the date of the next meeting of Surkov and Volker in the Donbas . The media also learned the dates of their next meeting .
 Trump lawyers are worried about Russia's interference in elections . Trump lawyers fear Russian interference in the elections .
 Anti-corruption court should become operational before presidential election, EU Ambassador Mingarelli says .
 Saakashvili almost does not deny the fact of conversation with Kurchenko . Kurchenko is a former member of the Ukrainian army .
 Ukraine Court Rejects Saakashvili's Plea For Protection From Extradition . The court also rejects the request to stay in Ukraine .
 The council made amendments to the law on the reintegration of the Donbas .
 Russia backed Luhansk ‘republic’ bans Jehovah’s Witnesses and other ‘non-traditional’ faiths .
 The richest Russians lost 2. billion dollars due to the collapse of the United States stock market . The collapse occurred on February 5 .
 Russians in this list are currently 27 people, in 25 of them the strength was reduced and only in two increased . In 25 of the 27 Russians in the list are now stronger than previously thought .
 Roman Abramovich became richer in the day by 68. million dollars . The owner of the mining and metals group Evraz and the Norilsk Nickel minority became richer .
 LetterOne and Alfa Bank Peter Aven received another $ 29. million . The co-owner of LetterOne received $29. million.
 Their wealth amounted to 13. billion and 5. billion dollars respectively . Their wealth was 13.billion and 5 billion dollars .
 Alexei Mordashov suffered most in one day he lost 203. million dollars . The owner of "Severstal" suffered most during the day .
 U.S. stock indices dropped by 3.8-4.6% on Monday, pulling down Asian stock indices . European stock exchanges are losing at the opening of auctions of 3-3.5% after that .
 Special Representative of U.S. State Department for Ukraine Kurt Volker may hold a regular meeting with the President of the Russian Federation Vladislav Surkov in a month .
 It is reported by "Interfax-Ukraine" with reference to a source familiar with the preparation of the meeting . The meeting is expected to take place in Ukraine .
 "Another time K Volker and V Surkov can meet in March," said the source .
 According to him, the concrete date of the meeting and the place of its holding are not defined at the moment .
 Attorneys of Donald Trump advise him not to testify in the investigation of Russia's interference in the 2016 U.S. election . Special prosecutor Robert Muller is being held by a special prosecutor .
 Lawyers are afraid that the U.S. president may lie oath . The reason for this was the whole list of statements by Trump .
 Trump himself says he wants to talk to Mueller about the possible connection of his people and the interference of russia in the election .
 The U.S. president is expected to announce his decision to give testimony in the next few weeks .
 Donald Trump's lawyers and advisers strongly oppose the U.S. president giving evidence of Russia's interference with the elections . They believe that Robert Muller will not officially call Trump for interrogation, since he does not have legal rights to do so .
 Trump was indignant at the fact that nobody draws attention to economic indicators during his presidency . He only talk about Russia's interference in the American elections .
 EU Delegation to Ukraine Hugues Mingarelli told Ukrainian lawmakers that it is critical for Ukraine to create an anti-corruption court before the presidential election .
 He said at a meeting with members of Eurooptimists Interfactional Union, an association of members of the Ukrainian parliament, Censor.NET reports .
 Ukraine, unlike Armenia, Azerbaijan and other countries, has undergone significant changes over the past few years . Mingarelli noted that Ukraine has had significant changes in recent years .
 A great price was paid for the changes while they take place not so smoothly, the diplomat said . A great cost was paid, he said .
 Ukraine must determine the red line in the fight against corruption, he says . According to him, Ukraine must decide the red lines in the battle against corruption .
 Mingarelli noted that corruption exists in many countries but all of them have certain red line . He said corruption is a problem in most countries but it is not all of it .
Anti-corruption court needs to be operational before the election as well privatization and other reforms should start being implemented. Therefore, the anti- corruption court must be operational.
 Ukraine’s Western backers have long called for the authorities to establish an independent court to handle corruption cases .
 Mikheil Saakashvili, leader of the Movement of New Forces, does not deny the fact he talks with Sergei Kurchenko, who is hiding in Russia .
 "It was decided not to continue at this stage a precautionary measure," says Deputy Prosecutor General .
 The decision to extend the preventive measure is the prerogative of the investigator and the procedural chief . He stressed that the decision to extended the preventive measures is theprerogative.
 The prosecution party has filed a petition for the decision to elect Saakashvili as a preventive measure round-the-clock house arrest . The prosecutionParty has filed the petition .
 The Pechersk District Court did not satisfy the prosecutor's request to elect a preventive measure in Saakashvili in the form of a round-the-clock house arrest .
 It should be noted that during a search in Saakashvili's apartment, he rose to the roof of the house where he was detained .
 The activists took Saakashvili out of the car of the law-enforcers . Later, it became known that the activists took him out of a car . The activists were arrested after the incident .
 Mikheil Saakashvili was arrested December 8 in Solomyansky district of Kyiv . He was arrested in the evening.
 The Administrative Court of Appeals said on February 5 that a January 3 decision by another court, which in turn had upheld a previous ruling, remained unchanged . A January 3 ruling by the same court was upheld on January 3 .
 Saakashvili walked out of the court after several of his motions were rejected . He contended that the ruling was politically motivated and dictated by President Petro Poroshenko .
"This is yet another decision by Poroshenko, not by the court," he wrote on Facebook . "This isyet another decision," he said .
 Saakashvili, who was president of Georgia from 2004-2013, is wanted there on charges including abuse of office . He says the charges are fabricated .
 Saakashvili lost his Georgian citizenship in 2015 . He accepted Ukrainian citizenship and Poroshenko's offer of a job as governor of the Odesa region .
 He resigned from the post in November 2016, accusing the government of undermining his efforts to fight corruption and carry out reforms . But he resigned in November last year .
 Saakashvili has become an outspoken opponent of Poroshenko . Poroshenko came to power after Moscow-friendly President Viktor Yanukovych fled amid massive protests known the Euromaidan .
 The Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada Andriy Parubiy said he intends to sign it publicly at today's parliamentary sitting if he has time to prepare it .
 According to the document, Russia is recognized as an aggressor state, which is responsible for the occupation of Ukrainian territories . The document says Russia is also responsible for occupying Ukrainian territories.
 At the same time, during the occupation, she used her regular connections and units of the armed forces .
 The adoption by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of the law on the reintegration of the Donbas could be called preparation for a new war . The Russian Foreign Ministry stated that the adoption of the Rada could be a preparation for the new war.
 The authors of the bill are People's Deputies from the Opposition Bloc Yuriy Boyko, Alexander Vilkul and Mykhailo Papiyev . The bill is expected to be passed in the coming weeks .
Head of the Verkhovna Rada Andriy Parubiy could not sign the said law until the people's deputies would consider this decree .
 The move comes just days after the Kremlin-backed ‘LPR parliament’ passed several ‘laws’ including one aimed at hunting down and prohibiting so-called extremism in religious or political organizations .
 Monday's announcement is the first formal confirmation of an actual ban on the organization . The Jehovah's Witnesses had been removed earlier, but not its literature .
 It was claimed that the material aroused enmity on religious grounds and propagandized the superiority of Jehovah’s Witnesses over other faiths .
 Leaflets from SBU and Azov Civic Corps, it was claimed, had previously been pasted around Alchevsk .
 The suggestion that Jehovah’s Witnesses should have “assisted radical, neo-Nazi groups and other military formations’ was overtly absurd, and unbacked by any evidence .
 All religious organizations and associations in ‘LPR’ will need to undergo compulsory registration . The same ‘law’, according to the same 'law'
 It is unclear what is required for such compulsory ‘registration’ But the imposition of Russian requirements in occupied Crimea was used to put pressure on religious organizations .
 In both Crimea and the militant-controlled areas of Donbas all faiths and denominations under the Moscow Patriarchate have come under pressure .
 There is nothing to suggest that the Luhansk militants would follow different policy. While that was in ‘DPR’, there is no suggestion that the militants would following different policy .
 The bill establishes ‘a system of state bodies’ aimed at countering ‘extremism’ The bill now establishes a ‘system of state body’ to counter it .
 The same ‘preventive measures’ are allowed with respect to the mass media . If political, religious or other organizations are carrying out harmful extremist activities, their activities can be suspended .
 Dissolution is envisaged by court order of legal entities considered to be providing an ‘extremist organization’ with financial support, venues, printing or educational facilities and technical back-up .
 Some of the measures are directly lifted from the Russian measures seen in Crimea since Russia’s invasion .
 In Russia, two such ‘warnings’ can be sufficient to seek an organization's or media publication’s closure . In Russia.
 All of this coincides with a change to the ‘LPR constitution’ allowing for individuals to be detained for up to 30 days without a court order . This coincides with the change of the 'LPR Constitution' allowing for people to be held without court orders .
At one level, it is difficult to see how the measures introduced differ from what has long been the case . At one level it is hard to see if the measures are different .
 Most of the people seized and held hostage in the self-proclaimed ‘Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republic’ simply disappeared, with few, if any, normal procedural requirements observed . The self- proclaimed ‘luhansk, Donetsk people's
 The head of the Polish state noted that changes to the law on INP have recently led to a broad debate in the public and political space .
 Duda drew attention to the fact that this topic can be heard in the relations between Poland and Israel, Poles and Jews, as well as in the space of Polish-American relations .
 Duda said that the Israeli reservation was about possible restrictions on scientific and artistic activities . Duda says that the reservation is about possible restricted activities .
 The President of Poland noted that these special provisions in the updated law were introduced .
 The Polish Sejm supported an amendment to the law on the Institute of National Remembrance .
 The punishment provides for a fine or imprisonment for a term up to three years . The punishment is up to two years.
 The prime minister, the president, ministers and deputies of the knesset from the coalition and the opposition. Against him were the prime minister and the president and the deputy president .
 The President of Poland Andrzej Duda has promised to thoroughly analyze this law . Duda is expected to review the law.
 The number of objects on our side has been formed, the minister said . "We are in the negotiation process with the Chinese side," he said .
 He also said that in the summer of this year his visit to China will take place . He plans to discuss this project in more detail with Chinese partners .
 Ukraine, together with Italian company Italferr, will develop technical and economic documentation of the Euro zone . Ukraine, along with the Italian company italferr. Ukraine and Italy will also work together to develop technical documentation of Euro zone.
 In Russia, during the time of the presidency of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin's prestige of the FSB rose sharply . Putin's power in Russia rose sharply.
 Russia has deployed its nuclear-capable Iskander missile system permanently in its exclave of Kaliningrad . Lithuania’s president and defence minister claims the system could bring much of the EU and Nato within range .
 Lithuania celebrated the first anniversary of the arrival of a Nato battle group on its soil . Lithuania's president said the missiles were being stationed in the exclave between Poland and Lithuania .
 There is unease in the Baltics as to Russia’s intentions following the annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 . Some believe Russia has rehearsed an attack on Nato .