 The NPS Institutional Archive. Theses and Dissertations 1.1. The N PS Institutional archive is the largest archive in the world .
 The Naval Postgraduate School's public access digital repository for research mate rials and institutiional publicatkios created by the NPS community . Calhoun DUDLEY KNOX LIBRARY Caflwuo is the Naval Post Graduate School's digital repository .
 Calhoun is named for Professor of Mathematics Guy K Caftiouo, NPS's first appointed — and published — author . NPS is first appointed Professor of mathematics Guy KCaftiOUo . Calhoun was appointed by NPS in 2010 .
 TITLE and SUB TITLE: The RATIONALES BEHIND RUSSIA’s INTERVENTION in UKRAINE .
 This thesis examines the rationales behind Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to intervene in Ukraine through the lenses of neoclassical realism and prospect theory .
 The risk-acceptant decision to employ hybrid warfare in Crimea was fundamentally due to Putin’s loss aversion .
 Putin frames his political decision-making reference point in the realm of losses . He sought to prevent the imminent losses of Ukraine’s Russian-oriented government, Russia's influence in Ukraine, and Putin's own political power .
 It also sought to recover from the “catastrophic loss of the Soviet Union’s territorial possessions, population, and status . The Soviet Union's territorial possessions and population were lost .
 Putin exploited Western leaders’ naivete and vulnerabilities to prepare a geopolitical landscape wherein Russia could act without incurring excessive costs . Putin exploited the West’s naivete, vulnerabilities and vulnerabilities.
 Putin correctly anticipated a limited economic sanctions response and a negligible military response from the West. Emboldened by Russia's large financial reserves and backed by Russia’s threats of cutting off essential European gas supplies and launching nuclear attacks .
 Putin's decision furthered Russia's interests by acquiring Crimea, the strategically indispensable port of Sevastopol, and vast Black Sea resources .
 Putin's domestic approval ratings have risen to an unprecedented level . Such action also thwarted the expansion of Western institutions in Ukraine .
 Black Sea Eleet, oil and gas resources, Putin, Russian nationalism, domestic politics, color revolutions, Gazprom, gas wars, European gas wars and nuclear messaging, foreign reserves, economic sanctions 17.
 SECURITY CLASSIEICATION: Unclassified Unclassified unclassified 12b. Classified 12b .
Distribution is unlimited 7.3 million people. Distribution is unlimited .
 This thesis examines the rationales behind Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to intervene in Ukraine through the lenses of neoclassical realism and prospect theory .
 Russia's Preferred Man Elected and Russian Black Sea Fleet Lease Extended . Russia’s Preferred Man elected and Russia”s preferred man Elected .
 The Ruble and Putin’s Approval Rating during his Time in Power .
 Gas Price Disparities between Belarus, Ukraine, and the Rest of Europe .
 EU Member State Energy Security and Vulnerability to Russian Natural Gas . EU member state energy security and vulnerability to Russian natural gas .
 ABM CEO EEU EU ESB KGB ENG NATO OSCE UN anti-ballistic missile chief executive officer Eurasian Economic Union . Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezaposnosti liquefied natural gas North Atlantic Treaty Organization for Security and Cooperation
 Without the invaluable contributions of many, this thesis would not have been possible . The thesis would have been impossible .
 "I gratefully acknowledge the abundant blessings and tender mercies of Him, the Creator who reigns supreme over all things"
 The U.S. Air Force has afforded me with several amazing opportunities, many dream of receiving, but few actually do .
 The chance to study full-time at a top-notch school while living in one of the most beautiful places on earth has truly been without parallel . The opportunity to study in a beautiful place has never been without a parallel .
 The Naval Postgraduate School faculty members are dedicated to and enthusiasm for student learning . "I express my gratitude to the distinguished faculty members," he says .
Security experts' work laid the foundation for this work. Their invaluable instruction of security-related concepts and promotion of critical thought laid the foundations for the work .
 Dr. John Sutter says he is thankful for the excellent instructional contributions of the following . Dr. Sutter: "I am thankful for  excellent instructional contributions"
 Dr. John Sutter expresses his gratitude and appreciation to Dr. Sutter . Sutter: "I express my heartfelt gratitude"
 David Yost's insight, exceptional attentiveness, invaluable feedback, and genuine personal concern were prolific during the advising of this thesis . Yost, whose intriguing insight, special attention and personal concern, was prolific during this thesis.
 The conveyance of his expert knowledge on NATO and Western European government and security was tremendously advantageous . His knowledge of NATO and European government was extremely advantageous .
 Mikhail Tsypkin's grasp of tsarist, Soviet, and post-Soviet Russian history and politics greatly enhanced his contextual understanding of issues relevant to this thesis .
 Zachary Shore’s inspirational instmction in strategic empathy was extremely beneficial on the academic level and unforgettable on the personal level . Zachary's instmition in strategic empathity was very beneficial on academic level.
 The insight of Colonel Peter Frank of the German Army concerning XV international relations internal and external to the European Union was very engaging and valuable . Frank's insight on XV's relations with the EU was valuable and engaging .
 I would be quite negligent if I did not aeknowledge the efforts of those who mean the most to me—my family . I would have been quite negligent, he says .
 Timothy Thomas is a father-of-two. Timothy Thomas has been a mentor for more than 20 years . Timothy Thomas was a mentor to his daughter and son-in-law . Timothy has been an inspiration for his daughter's career .
 The late Karen Thomas cultivated her love for learning from an early age . She also cultivated the crucial efforts of her mother, Karen Thomas, who cultivated the love of her .
April, Landon, Brigham, Hyrum, and Halle were quite patient with my many studies . They made the effort of this thesis worth it, she says .
 "I extend my deepest and sincerest gratitude to my wife, Christina, for enabling me to complete this thesis," he says . "Most importantly, and most importantly, I extend his deepest and afterrest gratitude" to Christina .
 She has been tireless in her support, love, encouragement, understanding, and patience . She has truly been tirelessly in her love, support, and support .
 Halle bore our fifth child, Halle, during thesis crunch time . She readily bear the load of caring for our five children and keeping our home in tip-top shape .
 The exemplary sacrifice of her time and energy has been immense, and I am truly indebted to her . She has been an exemplary sacrifice, and she has been a model for many years .
I am extremely fortunate and grateful for her willingness to pursue challenging but rewarding opportunities by her side . I am extremely lucky and grateful to her. I am also grateful for the opportunity to pursue challenges by my side .
 Russia's 2014 military intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea eonstituted a watershed in the post-Cold War European seeurity order . Russia’s 2014 military Intervention in Ukraine. Crimea annexation and Crimea annexation eonStituting a watershed.
 In 1994, Russia gave Ukraine seeurity assuranees in return for Ukraine's transfer of its Soviet-made nuelear weapons to Russia . Ukraine’s aeeession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuelear Weapons as a non-n
 Russia eompletely disregarded these assuranees in its annexation of Crimea and eontinuing intervention in Ukraine . Russia also disregarded the Crimea annexation and its intervention in the Ukraine .
 Russia has faeed signifieant international eeonomie and diplomatie blowbaek . As a result of its aetions, Russia has been criticised for its lack of international e-onomie .
 Understanding the Russian government’s motives and deeision making is important for U.S., European Union and NATO poliey makers .
 Central and Eastern European NATO member eountries are justifiably eoneerned about Russia’s aetions in Ukraine . Some of them host sizable ethnie Russian minority populations .
 The Allies have reeognized the threat posed by an aggressive and emboldened revisionist Russia . The Allies say they are now aware of the threats posed by Russia .
 It surveys the relevant international relations theory literature . It also surveys the relevance of international relations literature .
 The thesis foeuses on explanations for Russia’s decision to intervene at different levels of analysis . But concentrates on the actor responsible for the decision .
 It assesses the extent of the actor’s rationality. It also assesses a major assumption of rational choice theory . The actor's rationality is also assessed by the study .
 It weighs the applicability of rational choice theory and an alternative psychological model known as prospect theory . Finally, it weighs the Applicability ofrational choice theory .
 The EU and Russia attempted to pull Ukraine from its precarious balancing perch into their own orbits .
 Ukraine continues to rely on both for its foreign trade and for its own foreign trade .
 In 2012, the EU and Russia received 25% and 26% of Ukraine’s $68 billion exports . Russia provided 31% and 32%, respectively, of Ukraine's $84. billion imports .
 Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych reversed a decision to sign an association agreement with the EU . The move effectively moves Ukraine closer to Russia and away from the EU and the West .
 Several hundred pro-EU protesters gather at downtown Kiev’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 Yanukovych was initially unconcerned about the demonstration, but when it failed to fizzle out, he employed repressive tactics . He dispatches riot police to clear the square .
 Such action only fueled the fire of the opposition, causing it to grow rapidly . The opposition has grown rapidly in recent years .
 Moscow employed elements of information warfare, including cyber attacks and propaganda, and economic coercion . Additionally, Moscow used elements of cyber attacks, including economic coercion, as well .
 On March 16, 2014, pro-Russian advocates in Crimea hastily organized a referendum for Crimea to secede from Ukraine and to join Russia . The Crimea referendum was held in Crimea in March 2014 .
 The referendum passes with a reported overwhelming Russianoriented majority . The referendum passed with an overwhelming majority .
 Russia formalized Crimea’s annexation into the Russian Federation on March 18, 2014 .
 Russia has also clandestinely supported separatists in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine in their efforts to follow suit . Russia also has also secretly supported separatists.
 Crimean neighbors have not succeeded and the conflict in the Donbas continues to the present . Unlike their Crimean neighbors, the conflict has not succeeded .
 For the classical realist, understanding human nature and the world of competing interests is essential in attempting to answer such a question . The question is important for the realist.
 Thucydides, “The Melian Dialogue,’ in Conflict After the Cold War, ed. The Melian dialogue, was written in the 17th century .
Fear is not an unreasoning emotion, but a rational apprehension of future evil, says author . "This is the prime motive of international politics," he says . "By fear we mean, not an unreasonable emotion," he writes .
 For all powers at all times are concerned primarily with their security . Most powers at most times find their security threatened .
 Neorealism and Neoclassical Realism seek to explain the same outcomes by focusing on the anarchic structure of state relations and how states seek to survive .
 A major critique of neorealism is that it cannot predict the behavior of individual states because its main unit of analysis is the system itself .
 Offensive Realism and the Expansion of War Aims,’s Security Studies 6,” Security Studies.
 Defensive Realism holds that states seek survival and maximize their security by maintaining the status quo. Defensive realism holds that state seeks survival and maximizing their security .
 The anarchic international system provides little incentive for states to expand except when such actions address specific threats that undermine status quo .
 Robert Jervis describes how security dilemmas often develop when one state’s increase in security leads to a decrease in the security of others . 21 Taliaferro explains that “pairs of states may pursue security-seeking strategies but inadvertently generate spirals of mutual
 A criticism of neorealism is that defensive and offensive realists have difficulty explaining why some states tend to maintain the status quo . Others tend to maximize relative power while others tend to minimize relative power .
 Randall Schweller’s balance of interests theory attempts to do just that by bridging the theoretical divide between offensive and defensive realists . He traverses the continuum between neorealism and neoclassical realism .
 The theory attributes revisionist and status quo interests to unit-level variables . The theory is based on the relationship between the two parties .
 status quo states seek to maximize their security and preserve the resources they control, Schweller says . revisionist states, on the other hand, “seek to undermine the established order for the purpose of increasing their power and prestige in the system, he says .
 Tripolarity and Hitler’s Strategy of World Conquest, 24. 6 the types of behavior states exhibit based on their eapability and interests, whieh range from unlimited aims to strongly supporting the status quo .
 Wolves, foxes, and jaekals represent states with varying degrees of revisionist aims . While lions, owls, and hawks strongly support the status quo.
 States that feel humiliated, hampered, and oppressed by the status quo seek as naturally to modify it . States which feel humiliated and hampered by thestatus quo seek to change it .
 They demand “security,’ for they are content with the equilibrium which peace and security will perpetuate, they say . They demand security for they're content with that equilibrium .
 Unsatiated states demand changes, rectifications of frontiers, revision of treaties, redistribution of territory and power . Unsatisatiated countries demand changes.
In so far, such states appear to be “aggressive’ and lacking in enthusiasm for peace, says John Sutter . Sutter: In so far the fulfillment of these demands is resisted by status quo states .
 Contemporary Realist Arguments. A survey of the contemporary neorealist thought pertaining to the Ukraine crisis provides answers .
 Defensive realist Stephen Walt argues that “major powers care a lot about security and are often ruthless in defending vital interests’
 U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria Nuland handed out pastries to anti-government protesters in Kiev .
 The Euromaidan visit by U.S. Senators John McCain and Chris Murphy provides further credence to the claim of Western interference . McCain told an antigovernment crowd that he was there to support their “just cause”
 Putin himself emphasized that the Russian intervention was intended to increase Russia’s security .
 He said that the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO ‘meant that NATO’s navy would be right there in this city of Russia's military glory. This would create not an illusory but a perfectly real threat to the whole of southern Russia.’
 John Mearsheimer argues that NATO enlargement, EU expansion, and the West’s support for the prodemocracy Euromaidan movement were critical elements for provoking Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 Obama Gambled that U.S. Power Would Trump Russia’s Interest in Ukraine would be Trump's interest in Ukraine .
 Understanding United States values and psychology are not his strong suits, he says . He says .
 Nor has understanding Russian history and psychology has been a strong point of U.S. policymakers .
 Russia has been no stranger to spheres of influence. Spheres of Interest throughout tsarist and Soviet history .
 The Russian empire engaged in a competition known as the Great Game against its rival, the British Empire, in the Caucasus, Persia, and Central Asia .
 In the 1860s, the Russian empire expanded into Turkestan, encroaching upon the British Empire's crown jewel colony of India .
 Palmer, Joel Colton, and Lloyd Kramer, A History of the Modern World, 9th ed. Palmer and Kramer are co-authors of the book .
 Russia's ambition is to beeome a full-fledged world power, says Dmitri Trenin . Russia is one of a handful of more or less equal key players in the twenty-first century global system, he says .
 The Russian concept includes specific economic, politico-military, and cultural domains within the states of its near neighborhood .
 Critiques of Realist Arguments Reeognizing Russia’s insistenee on maintaining its interests from both stmetural and state perspectives do not completely explain its expansionist motivation .
 A key critique of realism is that it fails to address the inner workings of states, says the author .
Stmetural considerations provide a useful point from which to begin the analysis of international politics rather than a place at which to end it .
 The Ukraine crisis has revealed a different style of decision-making . But the Ukraine crisis is not the first time the crisis has taken place in the country .
 Putin made impulsive decisions that subordinated Russia’s national interest to his own political motives . Putin made decisions that subordinate Russia's national interest.
 Simon and Schuster, 37, were more violent than that of Czechoslovakia . But they were far less bloody than those of Yugoslavia .
 Many scholars assume Putin to be the sole decision-maker for the Russian state . But some contend that such a view represents an inaccurate impression of how Russia is truly govemed .
 Russia has often been led by authoritarian leaders who have exercised patrimonialism . Putin’s regime has become increasingly authoritarian .
 Petersburg in 1996 to appointment as Federal Security Service Director, Prime Minister, and acting President by the resigning President Boris Yeltsin in 1999 .
 Some compare the struggles for influence between the Kremlin's factions to the “bulldog fight under the ^9 Huntington, “Clash of Civilizations,’s” 37.9 Huntington . ‘Clash Of Civilizations’ is �
 The siloviki include the intelligence, military, and security organs of the state . It is the word for Russia’s foree struetures .
 The term is somewhat misleading, however, as it can represent either the cohort of uniformed force structure officials or the clan of top officials in the Kremlin .
 Petersburg and the intelligence apparatus, a significant number of his political appointees are acquaintances and contacts from his two backgrounds . Many of the siloviki.
 The Russian Orthodoxy has a strong state that plays a decisive role in the eeonomy and nationalized strategic sectors . It has also endorsed the nationalistie views of the Russian Orthodoxi .
 The siloviki seek to restore Russia’s international greatness by regaining the respeet that the Soviet Union previously commanded, reintegrating economically and politically with the other former Soviet states as mueh as possible, and guarding Russia against the perceived U.
 The siloviki are intent on maintaining their influenee and proaetive in pursuing their collective interests . Russia's lack of conventional power-projection capability limits the range of the Russian leadership’s foreign poliey and security options, says Pavel Baev .
 A major assumption of realist thought is that state decision-makers act rationally . The rationalists believe that state decisions are made rationally.
 actors seek to achieve the outcome that yields the greatest expected benefits according to their preferences . In other words, when presented with a number of alternative courses to pursue, actors seek the best possible outcome .
 The literature concerning the rationality of Putin’s decision-making is varied . The literature about Putin's decision- making is varied.
 Walt observes that “in security studies, formal rational choice theory usually means the use of game theory’s game theory .
 U.S. and Western leaders would love to know what Putin's ‘endgame’ is .
 The term comes from chess, where the goal is to trap one’s opponent into checkmate after a long series of moves requiring strategic vision .
 A judoka sizes up the opponent, probes for their weaknesses, and tips the other off-balance in a flash . The judoka uses his own weight to help his opponent fall from their own weight .
 Putin’s decision to intervene in Ukraine was neither an act of strategic calculation or pragmatic opportunism but one of dilemmatic desperation . The victor in a judo match doesn’t have to be bigger or stronger than the opponent, just quicker and shrewder.
 The diffieulty of determining all possible deeision outeomes and their eorresponding probabilities. Satisfieing is assoeiated with the eoneept of bounded rationality, whieh.
 Russia, Crimea, and the Minimal Aetion SyiaceQ European Security 24, no. 1 .
 If you compress the spring all the way to its limit, it will snap back hard, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Avoiding losses and loss of face appeared to have been more important than making gains . The impetus to avoid losses resembles a psychological decision-making model that serves as an alternative to rational choice theory .
 Prospect Theory Psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky developed prospect theory in 1979 . 60% of subjects did not behave according to the expected-utility theory’s assumptions and predictions of rationality .
 An individual’s reference point usually reflects the status quo, but sometimes it can represent a non-status quo expectation .
Jack S Levy, “Loss Aversion, Framing Effects, and International Conflict,’s ‘m Handbook of War Studies 11.67-9221.00368.x/abstract .
 Putin and siloviki seemed more risk-acceptant as they faeed pereeived losses in terms of their geopolitieal and eeonomie interests in Ukraine . Putin and his silovki seemed morerisk-accepting as they feed pereived losses .
 Russians viewed Crimea from the referenee point that it still belonged to Russia . Putin and other Russian leaders often lament the loss of Russia's prestige and status as a global superpower .
 This thesis focuses on the Russian government’s decision to intervene in Ukraine . This thesis is based on the Russia's intervention in the Ukraine .
 The research examines the anticipated and actual benefits and costs through the lenses of neoclassical realism, rational choice theory, and prospect theory .
 The main potential explanation is that Russian motivations consisted of gaining economic and strategic advantages, and preventing the loss of the regime’s hold on power .
 Russia's economic and strategic advantages for Russia include protecting its post-Soviet sphere of interests in Ukraine . Russia has also acquired oil and natural gas reserves in the Black Sea, and obtained exclusive rights to Black Sea port of Sevastopol .
 The means of preventing the loss of the regime’s hold on power include advocating the Russian version of authoritarian “democracy,” according to Taliaferro, ‘Power Polities,’187.187 .
 Putin, “Address by President,’s March 18, 2014. 18 public support and prevent a pro-demoeraey ‘eolor revolution’ from enveloping Russia .
 Russia’s buildup of foreign eurreney reserves faeilitated Russian leaders’ projeetion that it eould withstand presumable repereussive eeonomic sanctions . Russia's build-up of foreign Eurreneys reserves faiilitated Russia
 Russian leaders also antieipated that the threat of risking an eoonomieally destructive gas war with Europe would dampen the severity of sueh sanctions .
Russia’s willingness to engage in nuelear war to protect its gains in Ukraine would inhibit a Western military response . Russia also reekoned that another seemingly irrational threat, which would inhibit the Western response .
Pro-democracy movements in some former Soviet states culminated in the transfer of political power . Pro-democracy movement in some ex-Soviet states led to the transition of power .
 Georgia's Rose Revolution in 2003, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution in 2004, and Kyrgyzstan's Tulip Revolution in 2005, came to be known as color revolutions .
 Sevastopol is the eity of Russian glory . It is . . outside Russian territory .
 The loss of the Soviet Union was the loss of strategic possessions, including lands previously controlled by the tsarist Russian empire .
 Russian leaders have maintained that Crimea and its access to the Black Sea belong to Russia . Many Russian leaders maintain that these lost possessions, including Crimea, rightfully belong to the country .
 Putin demonstrated such thinking during his triumphant speech proclaiming Russia’s formal annexation of Crimea .
 Putin sorrowfully recounted, “Unfortunately, what seemed impossible became a reality’s Putin .
 The failed Soviet political union presented issues of determining child custody and dividing property . Issues of determining custody of the strategic and tactical nuclear forces and facilities found in Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine .
 The former Soviet states had no mediating authority to mete out equitable divisions of assets in the anarchical international system .
 Instead, they relied on negotiation, mutual assurances, and good faith . They relied on negotiations and mutual assurances .
 Ukraine found itself the possessor of the world’s third largest arsenal of nuclear arms, after Russia and the United States .
 The Friendship Treaty assuaged Ukrainian fears of Russia’s revanchist claims over Crimea . Both states “shall build their mutual relations on the basis of the principles of mutual respect for their sovereign equality, territorial integrity, inviolability of borders, peaceful resolution
Black Sea Fleet Accords would divide fleet's assets 50/50 but allow Russia to buy back some of Ukraine's apportionment . Russian fleet asset ratio advantage resulted in 82/18 fleet assets advantage for Russia .
 The lease would allow Russia to build up its own naval port facilities on the Black Sea at Novorossiysk . Russia would eventually remove its naval assets completely out of Ukraine’s territory .
 Yushchenko offered liberal ideas of European integration among other political and economic reforms . He was from the western and predominantly Ukrainian-speaking part of the country .
 Yanukovych, in contrast, was from the eastern and predominantly Russian-speaking part of the country, which favored closer ties with Russia .
 Ukrainians voted based on their preferences for domestic policy issues rather than foreign policy . Many in both the West and Russia tend to overestimate the significance that international politics had on Ukraine’s 2004 election .
 Russia threw its support behind Yanukovych and sought to achieve his election by applying the same strategies that had worked in achieving desired electoral outcomes in Russia . Russia, for its part, threw its supporting behind Yanukovych.
 Moscow provided the Yanukovych campaign with political advisers, funding, and Russian media support that conveyed a pro-Yanukovych message . Moscow also provided political advisers and funding .
An imperial-minded president resolved to intervene aggressively in a strategic country with a fragile democracy to ensure the election of a favored client .
 Viktor Yanukovych, prime minister and presidential candidate in Ukraine, has humbly welcomed all this and more from Russian president Vladimir Putin . Western governments have responded with a studied silence .
 Exit polls from the second round revealed an eight percent lead for Yushchenko . Preliminary results released by the Central Election Commission indicated a Yanukovych victory .
 Yanukovych and Yushchenko received 49.46% and 46.61% of the vote, respectively . The official results of the second round of voting were reported by the Central Election Commission on November 24, 2004 .
 At the time, many Ukrainians did not regard the inauguration of Yushehenko’s presideney as absurd . It was absurd and a moekery of the constitution, it was absurd .
 Yushchenko's posturing may have appealed to the Ukrainian nationalists in western Ukraine . But it also galvanized his opposition in the predominantly ethnic Russian and Russian-speaking regions .
 His time in office was racked from the onset by economic crises and gas disputes with Russia . Moscow frequently raised prices and cut off supplies to penalize the West-leaning government .
 Yulia Timoshenko played a role in the Orange Revolution . He also had a political falling-out with his prime minister, YuliaTimoshenko .
 She later tempered her anti-Russian rhetoric and adopted a more Russian-friendly approach . She later forged a pragmatic relationship with Cooley and Dubovyk .
 Russia's Preferred Man Elected and Russian Black Sea Fleet Lease Extended Yanukovych went on to win the second round on February 7, 2010 . Russia’s Preferred Man elected and Russia's preferred man Elected was elected in 2010 .
 Russia's Black Sea Fleet has a home in Crimea until 2042 . The renewed lease would provide Russia’s Black sea Fleet with a home until 20 42 .
 Ukraine is now back under Russia's influence following Yanukovych's victory in February’s presidential elections . Journalist Luke Harding in April 2010 described the lease extension as “the most concrete sign yet that Ukraine is back under Russian influence.
 The Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol for the next three decades was never really in jeopardy . Russia invaded and annexed Crimea in early 2014 . The status of the Black Sea fleet was never in jeopardy.
 Putin had personally gone to great lengths to install and maintain a Ukrainian leader compliant with Russian interests . The transfer of Ukrainian power from proRussian Yanukovych to a pro-Western type of government represented a stinging loss for Putin .
 Putin perceived the end of Yanukovych’s pro-Russian regime in Kiev in zero-sum terms . His overvaluing of this loss contributed to the risk-acceptant decision to intervene in Crimea .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea secured several strategic military benefits for Russia . Russia’s annexation of Ukraine secured several significant military benefits .
 Russia's Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, Russia, has been in the Black Sea for more than a decade . It is the first and foremost, it put the future status of the fleet to rest .
 The action relieved Russia of the obligation of having to pay rent, either in monetary or gas-discount form, to Ukraine for the length of the lease . Ukraine has savings of over $39 billion to say nothing of rent beyond the term of a lease .
Before annexation, the type and number of Russian ships in Sevastopol were subject to Ukrainian consent, thus hampering Russia’s plans to moderni z e its Black Sea Fleet .
 Russia planned to upgrade the port infrastructure at its other major Black Sea Fleet naval base in Novorossiysk . It included adding 15 piers to accommodate 30 ships at a cost of $1 billion .
 Novorossiysk’s Tsemes Bay is prone to 70 to 90 mile-per-hour bora, or northeasterly, winds that occur 30 to 40 days a year .
 The bora winds are capable of inflicting catastrophic damage to ships and buildings . Ships are forced to sail away from the harbor to prevent damage and avoid accidents .
 Russian engineering plans to construct hightech barriers as part of building up Novorossiysk’s naval infrastructure . Such inhospitable natural conditions necessitated complex and costly engineering plans .
 By annexing Crimea, Russia became free to upgrade its aging Sevastopol fleet with newer ships . Russia also added ships in accordance with its Black Sea Fleet modernization plans .
 Russia annexing Crimea, Crimea, obtained freedom of action in the peninsula . Russia's annexation of Crimea is a violation of international law .
 The Russian navy can freely increase its power projection capability beyond the Black Sea into the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean . Subsequently, the Russian navy, as it modernizes and adds to its fleet based in Sevastopol, can freely expand its capability .
Russia’s annexation of Crimea also precludes the possibility of NATO sailors in Sevastopol . Russia's newfound freedom of action in Crimea allows for the deployment of nuclear arms to the peninsula .
 U.S. ship to Sevastopol truly is unimaginable in the wake of Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea . Such a visit now by a United States ship is unimaginable.
 The incorporation of Sevastopol and the Crimean peninsula into the Russian Federation has garnered much attention in the aftermath of the Russian intervention . The incorporation has received much attention since the Russian military intervention .
 Russia is a major portion of the Black Sea itself and its trove of undeveloped natural resources . Much less attention has been given to one of the major economic inducements .
 Of the approximately 36,000 square miles of Crimean territorial waters in the Black Sea, Ukraine estimates there are 2. million tons of oil reserves worth $300 billion . Other estimates put the potential value in the trillions .
 The Geopolitics of Russia’s Annexation of Crimea: Narratives, Identity, Silences, and Energy . John Biersack and Shannon O’Lear wrote a book on Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 Russia’s seizure of the Black Sea energy resources severely tightened the vice on Ukraine's dependence on energy imported from Russia . Experts say the annexation of Crimea makes Ukraine more vulnerable to Russian pressure .
 Russia did what it could while Ukraine suffered what it must in the zero-sum but high-stakes game for state economic lifeblood — oil and gas .
 Putin's decision to “return Crimea’s’ Crimea to Ukraine also furthered Moscow's interest in reducing any prospect of NATO membership extension to Ukraine . The action furthered Russia's interest.
 See Thueydides, “The Melian Dialogue,’ in Conflict After the Cold War, ed. The Melian dialogue is based on a book written by Thuedides .
 Several allies were reluetant to take on and provide collective defense for a prospective member state with significant security issues . Several allies had been reluetsant to provide collective defence for a potential member state .
 Russia’s freezing of the South Ossetian and Abkhazian conflicts in Georgia has perpetuated the security uncertainty and state of political limbo .
 Russia does not seem intent on freezing the conflict in eastern Ukraine . There is no appetite in the Alliance to accept Ukraine as a member or offer a membership action plan .
 The situation in the Donbas is still unfolding, it seems that the Russian objectives in the area have changed since the onset of the confiiet .
 Russia's initial covert support for the Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, mainly in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, aimed to establish a widespread movement against Kiev’s new trajeetory toward the West .
 The Russian leadership elite have not changed since the final scene of the grand 74year Soviet experiment in 1991 . Many things have changed in the minds of the leadership elite .
 Crimea, Sevastopol, and a major portion of the Black Sea and its resources rightfully belong to Russia . The Crimea, Crimea, and Crimea, are the reference point to Russia's claim that Russia's resources belong to Crimea .
 Ukraine is an extension of Russia proper, to be influenced and controlled by Russia’s leaders . This reference point, frozen in place as it has been since the end of the Cold War, also holds that Ukraine is a Russian extension to Russia proper .
 Ukraine can never be allowed to be party to a military alliance or other organization perceived as hostile to Russian interests . In their view, Ukraine can not be part of an alliance that is hostile to Russia .
 The coming years will be decisive for the entire world as it enters a period of transition and possibly even shocks, says Vladimir Putin .
 The leaders of EU and NATO member states had wholeheartedly subscribed to the notion of an enduring peace and security order in Europe . The U.S. president, Barack Obama, was the first to join the effort .
 With the end of the Cold War, they viewed Europe as finally free from the incessant power politics and wars that had ravaged the continent for centuries .
 Many in Europe saw the end of the Cold War as the ushering in a widespread peace and prosperity rooted in democratic-, rule-of-law-based liberal values .
 Russia's annexation of a sovereign European state’s territory and the rearranging of borders in Europe on March 18, 2014. Shocking to this liberal mindset were Russia's brazen annexation of the sovereign state's territory .
 Russia was partly motivated by a desire to assert itself as an independent actor on the world stage while securing its national interests .
 The Russians asserted that they were acting much like the U.S. had done around the world . The Russians said they had acted like the United States had done.
 This chapter explores the political context of Obama's and Putin’s understanding of each other from their first meeting in the wake of the 2008 Russo-Georgian war . This chapter also explores the politics of Obama and Putin .
 This chapter discusses how this context contributed to Putin’s decision to intervene in Ukraine and annex Crimea . This chapter also discusses how Putin's decision to annex Crimea contributed to the decision .
 Russia’s actions also revealed the extent to which Obama had misunderstood Putin . Obama's actions also reveal the extent of which Putin had misunderstood Obama .
 Obama is running for reelection against Mitt Romney in 2012 . Romney is the Republican nominee for the White House .
 Obama met with Russian president Dmitri Medvedev at a conference in South Korea in March 2012 .
I'm not going to wear rose-colored glasses when it comes to Russia, or Mr Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . i54 1.54: ‘I’m not going. to wearrose-colored sunglasses when it come to Russia.’
 Obama calls on Russia to cease its aggression and for the U.S. to continue to push for a U.N. Security Council Resolution calling for an immediate end to the violence . Russia’s status as a permanent member of the council with veto power.
 Dmitry Medvedev was the president of Russia at the time of Georgia invasion in 2008 . He entered ofliee only a few months earlier in May .
 Putin, who had already served two presidential terms, was forbidden from serving an additional consecutive term . He was instead serving as Russia’s prime minister .
President Obama and Russian Prime Minister Putin have been known as the tandem of Russian power sharing . Obama has a real mantle of power and authority of action to Putin, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 In April 2009, Obama met with Medvedev in London, and in July he met with Putin for the first time while in Moscow .
 If anything, the “reset in relations got off to a shaky start. Pressing the Overburden Button is a good way to get a good start .
 In March 2009, Obama had dispatched his seeretary of state, Hillary Clinton, to literally press the reset button on relations with Russia .
 The red button had the Russian word perezagruzka, which means overcharge, overload, or overburden . The Russian word for reset is the Russian term for reset .
 Putin responded to Obama’s criticism. “We are standing firmly on both feet and always look to the future," he said .
 Edward Snowden would impede Obama’s hoped-for reset, and the Ukraine crisis would culminate its failure, 3.5 years later . Syria, Iran, ballistie missile defense, nuelear arms treaties, and Edward Snowden.
 Obama later met with Putin for a twohour breakfast . Obama and Putin met for the first time the week before their first encounter .
 Putin expressed hope for positive relations with Russia after reealling history between the two states .
 Both leaders used the opportunity to explain their views and assess the other in person . There were periods when our relations flourished quite a bit .
 Obama found Putin to be tough, smart, shrewd, very unsentimental, very pragmatie . Obama found him to be "tough, smart and shrewd"
 In June 2001, President George W Bush first met Putin in Slovenia during discussions on the Anti-Ballistie Missile Treaty .
 Putin has perceived his domain as a realm of losses. In prospect theory, domain describes the realm in which decisions are made and whether that realm is perceived by an actor as characterized by gains or losses .
 Vice President Biden highlighted Russia’s difficulty in dealing with the loss of its empire, its shrinking population, and its withering economy .
 I found him to be very straightforward and trustworthy and we had a very good dialogue . I found he was very straightforward, trustworthy and had a good dialogue with him . He was also very straightforward.
 Biden's assessment of Russia's eonditions was aecurate, Biden's and Obama's . Obama's eonclusion that Moseow would be more inelined to eooperate with Washington beeause the Russians pereeived the interests of both as eonver
Until “little green men” appeared in Crimea, Obama and his administration had been caught in the cognitive trap of mirror imaging .
 As Shore suggests, “It takes a good deal of empathy to break the mirror of mirror imaging and sense what others are thinking and feeling. As Shore says, ‘It take a good deals of empathy.’
 It takes an inordinate amount of empathy and a colossal imaginative leap for an American politician to understand the thinking of a former KGB operative .
 The Brookings Institution's Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddy view Putin’s background working for the KGB as pivotal in guiding his decisions and actions as the leader of Russia .
 Operative in the Kremlin ascribes Putin’s modus operandi to the sum of his life experiences .
 He trained for the KGB and served as a KGB operative in Dresden, East Germany . He was secluded from the wholesale changes of Gorbachev’s reforms .
 Russia's acting president on the last day of 1999 . He went to Moscow in 1996 at the beginning of his meteoric rise that would make him Russian president .
 The identities that he formed from each experience shaped Putin into the actor he is today . Putin's identity was shaped by each experience, he says .
 Operative in the Kremlin, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 2013, is 14.
 Of the six, Putin’s identity as a case officer, or an operative, is perhaps the most important in understanding Putin .
 Conversations with Vladimir Putin were based largely on personal interviews with Putin and his close associates . The Russian public sought to provide a sense of who their new president was .
 Sergei Roldugin is a close and long-time friend of Putin . He recounted how Putin told him that he worked for the KGB but did not give any details about what he did .
 Putin used the phrase spetsialist po obshcheniyu s lyu’dmi, which means a specialist in communicating or working with people . Hill and Gaddy describe the phrase that Putin used .
 For the case officer, this is also a necessary step in recruiting and running an individual agent . For the cases officer, it is a step in recruitment and running a individual agent.
 It means studying the minds of the targets, finding their vulnerabilities, and figuring out how to use them . It means study the targets' minds and finding out their vulnerabilities .
 Putin has refrained from providing details about how he views Obama . In contrast with Obama’s openness in sharing his assessment of Putin .
 Putin indicated during a press conference after the appearance of uniformed but unidentified troops in Crimea . He understands the importance of reticence and disguising one’s thoughts when occasion requires .
 Putin posed his own question to a reporter, whose response prompted a glimpse into Putin’s often-concealed inner thinking .
 Putin operates in the same fashion with other state leaders. He allowed people to underestimate him as he maneuvered himself into influential positions and quietly accumulated power .
 The turbulent Syrian political landscape in the midst of the Arab spring and Obama's reactions to it granted Putin an opportunity to capitalize on Obama’s perceived weakness as an international arbiter .
 Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, responded to anti-government protests with draconian measures in April 2011 . The United States and many other Western nations condemned Assad’s regime .
 Washington and the EU applied several rounds of sanctions in the following months .
 Russia and China vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution that would have imposed sanctions on Syria . Similar efforts at the United Nations were not unanimous, however, as both countries vetoed the resolution .
 In August 2011 Obama called for Assad’s resignation, and in February 2012, Washington withdrew its ambassador to Syria . Washington closed its embassy in Damascus and closed its Embassy in Damascus .
 A debate developed among Obama’s national security team concerning how to further respond to the situation . The debate was part of a debate on how to respond.
 Earlier in 2011, the United States and some NATO allies and partners used military force to remove another Middle Eastern dictator, Muammar alQaddafi .
 Libyan rebels supported Libyan rebels with an extended aerial bombardment campaign against Qaddafi’s forces .
 Leon Panetta and Jim Newton, Worthy Fights, 448. 50 include providing training for moderate Syrian rebels .
 One of the faetors that partieularly concerned Obama was the eache of chemical weapons in Syria .
Obama thus drew a red line for Assad. That would change my calculations significantly, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Assad's regime used chemical weapons against its own people, Obama warned . One year and one day after Obama's warning against Assad's use of chemical weapons .
 Obama took a lot of criticism from his political opponents and within his own administration . For his ostensible display of weakness, Obama was criticized for his performance .
 When the president as commander in ehief draws a red line, it is eritieal that he aet if the line is crossed .
 The power of the United States rests on its word, and clear signals are important both to deter adventurism and to reassure allies that we ean be eounted on .
 Assad's aetion elearly defied President Obama’s warning by failing to respond, he says . Obama's warning: "It sent the wrong message to the world"
 Putin understood that under Obama’s leadership, the U.S. would not always act to deter or punish adventurism .
 Putin's role as a staunch patron of Assad developed from the special relationship between Moscow and Damascus that dates back decades to the Cold War era . Putin’s role as an Assad patron developed from a special relationship.
 Russia had propped up Assad's regime since the beginning of Syria’s civil war . Russia has maintained a naval base at Tartus in Syria and served as the Syrian government's top arms supplier . Russia is one of several obstacles that stood in the way of a true reset in
 Putin offered a plan to transfer possession of Syria’s chemical weapons to the international community . Putin's political rescue of Obama came as a surprise .
 The White House, not Assad, was disarmed, and yet Obama seemed to accept Putin’s plan “with almost embarrassing eagerness.”
 Putin bested Obama's red line on Syria’s use of ehemieal weapons by preventing the use of force and opting instead for a peaceful means of resolution .
 Putin was later nominated for the Nobel Peace prize for his efforts . Obama won the prize in 2009 after assuming the presidency .
 Barack Obama has the title of Nobel Prize winner . He initiated and approved such aggressive actions on the part of the U.S. as in Iraq, Afghanistan, some others .
 I think our president, who is trying to stop the bloodshed, deserves this title more . I think we should have a president who wants to help resolve this conflict through diplomatic language, I say .
 Putin has not won the prize to date, Kobzon says . Kobzon: The view touched on a larger theme of perceived American hypocrisy and arrogance .
 The Russian president has often asserted that the American exceptionalism that has prompted U.S. interventions in sovereign states has resulted in a destabilized world .
 The March 18, 2014, Crimean annexation speech afforded Putin yet another opportunity to denounce what he perceives as American hypocrisy . Putin has been accused of being hypocritical in the past .
 Putin regretted Russia's abstention from the Seeurity Couneil vote on the resolution that authorized the NATO-led intervention in Libya . He speeifieally referred to the nonUnited Nations sanetioned NATO bombing of Serbia in 1999 and the overstep of the 2011 United Nations
 Putin resents Ameriean arroganee and has aeeused Washington of trying to keep Russia down by not respeeting its sovereignty and interests .
Eomments made by former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbaehev provide understanding of Putin’s viewpoint . Putin's thinking is earned over from that of Soviet leaders during Cold War .
 NATO allies bombed Bosnian Serb targets as part of Operation Deliberate Foree . In August and September 1995, NATO allies attacked BosnianSerb targets .
 NATO allies informed Russian president Boris Yeltsin about their intentions only after the deeision to eonduet the bombings had already been made . In September 1995, former Soviet president Gorbaehev eommented that Russia’s weakness following the eollapse of
 Putin echoed Gorbachev’s sentiments during his Crimean annexation speech . They are constantly trying to sweep us into a corner, he said .
 Ukraine has crossed the line, playing the bear and acting irresponsibly and unprofessionally. And with Ukraine, our western partners have crossed the lines, our Western partners have played the bear .
 Putin framed the issue in Ukraine as one where an untrammeled Russia was acting to secure its national interests . U.S. had acted on multiple occasions in the years leading up to the Russian invasion of Crimea .
 Attempts by the United States to condemn Russian actions were promptly met with accusations of hypocrisy .
 The hybrid means of Russia's military action flew beneath the radar of the U.S. and NATO’s set reaction patterns . Putin's risk-acceptant decision to return Crimea to Russia may have been due in great part to opportunism .
 Putin’s assessment on how far Russia could go without triggering a major U.S. and Western military response was correct . The invasion of Crimea did not turn the post-Soviet “cold peace,’ as described by Boris Yeltsin, into a hot war .
Hard questions for both state leaders have remained in the time since Crimea's formal annexation .
 Obama's vice president, Joe Biden, provided initial promise in answering this question by offering some enlightened wisdom .
 Putin says the U.S. did what Russia did when it interfered in Kiev's internal politics . Obama's statements and actions include his first meetings and assessments of Putin, the attempted reset in relations, the red line in Syria .
 Ukraine is my Homeland. BOOSTING DOMESTIC SUPPORT and FORGING A NATIONAL IDENTITY Ukraine is the country's Homeland .
 A glistening titanium arch frames a massive bronze statue of two Soviet workers beneath its span . Pushkin, not Putin, is not Putin .
 The two nations share many historical and cultural ties to their ancestral state of Kievan Rus . The two countries share many cultural and historical ties to each other .
 The monument stands as an anachronistic relic of a bygone era, however . The monument was built in the 1930s and is located in the city of San Francisco .
 Time has withered the former Soviet friendship to its present post-Soviet adversarial relationship . Time, with the assistance of Vladimir Putin, has woken the formerSoviet friendship .
 At the root of such a deterioration in relations lies the complex and ever-present issue of both Ukrainian and Russian national identity .
 For many, the collapse of the Soviet Union was a traumatic life event . For many who comprise the older Russian generations, it was a tragic life event. For many of the older Russians, it is a traumatic event .
 The Soviet Union, the world military and technological superpower that boasted the grand achievements of defeating Nazi Germany in the Great Patriotic War and reaching the cosmos, disintegrated into oblivion .
 The entire Soviet system of principles and norms vanished in an instant . The only system people had known their entire lives was the Soviet system .
 Along with the loss of their Soviet identity, their stateplanned economy and communist government disappeared .
 Chaos reigned during the years following the USSR's collapse as the new Russian state’s leadership struggled to fill the immense void .
 Before its demise, the Soviet Union was a highly industrialized state . Many of its productive sectors were localized among its fifteen republics .
 The former Soviet eitizenry was all novel eoneepts to the former Soviet Eitizenry .
 At the time of Russia's eeonomie transition, Russia's fledgling government struggled to establish its footing . Russia’s fledgling government battled its own weaknesses and seeking to enaet demoeratic reforms .
 In the ensuing turmoil, people witnessed unrestrained fluetuations of eurreney value . People saw their entire life savings obliterated by hyperinflation .
 Lawlessness prevailed as rampant violence, aleoholism, drug abuse, theft, and eorruption cast their dark shadows over society .
 Pensioners reeeived no pension payments, and wage earners reeeive no wages . Pensioners were paid no pensions, and wages were not.
 Russians saw a 40% deeline in the eountry’s eeonomy and a eomplete finaneial eollapse in 1998 . It was an emotional, distressful period never to be forgotten .
 Russian leader promised to strengthen the state and forge a new Russian identity while preventing a slide baek .
 In the process, he would take measures to accumulate great power at the expense of those who eleeted him through ostensibly demoeratic means .
 The extent of the power and control he aequired was so vast that he would go to great lengths to preserve it . He would go great lengths.
 Vladimir Putin's domestie support waned due to inereasing levels of politieal diseontent and opposition . He opportunistieally used the political uneertainty in Ukraine to shore up his popularity .
 Putin’s decision boosted his domestie support while reinforcing the concept of a Russian ethnie identity . This ehapter explains how the Russian military to its hybrid intervention in Ukraine.
 It reviews the baekground behind Putin’s social contract of providing stability in exchange for political indifference . It elarifies how Putin reinforeed Russia's hybrid demoeraey.
 Many Russians consider Putin a strong leader who saved Russia from the chaos of the 1990s and brought stability . Putin often stresses a point he himself often stresses .
 Putin declared, “Decades of difficult and unstable life are a long enough time to demand real changes for the better. 1 am certain that we have enough sense and will,’ he said .
 Putin pledged to stabilize and improve living standards through stronger economy . Russia will have success and prosperity, he said .
 The Russian economy experienced growth rates unseen in almost 30 years in 2000 . People are finally being paid their wages and pensions on time for the first time in years .
 Putin would never admit this assessment, as doing so would undermine his main claim to why he should continue leading Russia . Some argue that based on rising commodity prices, Russia would have still seen rapid economic progress .
 Putin promised stability, predictability, and increased standards of living in return for Russian citizens’ continued apathy towards and non-participation in politics .221 Russian history and culture explain why Russians have agreed to such a contract for stability .
 As Yale Richmond observes, Russians are “likely to be defenders of the status quo’s status quo.’
 Russians value stability, security, social order, and predictability, and to avoid risk . Their cruel climate, harsh history, and skeptical outlook on life have caused them to value stability and security .
’222 xhis concept, aided by Russia’s tumultuous tsarist and communist history, has habituated the Russian people to authoritarian rule .
 Richmond concludes that “the result has been a usually submissive citizenry, accustomed to being told what to do and what to think’s Richmond . Richmond: “The result has be a Usually submissive Citizenry.
 Forms of government and the habits of governments tend to reflect the understandings and expectations of their peoples .
 The Russian people have never known democracy as we understand it, says the author . "The Russian people, like a number of other peoples of the Soviet Union, have never been aware of democracy"
 The UK's political culture has evolved next to nothing of the centuries-long development of the discipline of self-government .
 Understanding the Russians (Yamiouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1992), 39, is a Russian language .
 Maintaining a hybrid regime that portrays a democracy is useful to Russia’s leadership, says the Russian president . Russia's leader says it is useful for Russia's leadership .
 The pseudo-democratic system allows the ruling elite to pursue the regime's interests while professing to serve society’s interests .228 while many attribute the rise of the Russian hybrid regime to President Putin .
 The first major event resulted in the somewhat weak presidential powers being greatly expanded . It was the first major presidential event in the world .
 Yeltsin dissolved the parliament on September 21, 1993 . The parliament has struggled for power with the Russian parliament since the presidency .
 Following a 10-day standoff and eonfrontation, Yeltsin emerged vietorious on October 4, 1993 . The Russian-born Yelts in 1993.
 In the months following the crisis, the Russian Constituent Assembly passed a new eonstitution . The new legislature has two houses, the Federation Council and the State Duma .
 It dissolved the regional legislatures and dramatically shifted political power to the exeeutive braneh . Additionally, it dissolved the region's regional legislatures .
 Yeltsin eommented, “Russia needs strong power.’s need strong power, he said .
 The second major event was the 1996 presidential election, which served as a people’s referendum . It pitted support for Yeltsin's reform policies against the desire to move back towards communism .
 Yeltsin turned to the oligarchs and their television channels to flood the airwaves with pro-Yeltsin messages .
 Undemocratic Succession Yeltsin used the guise of democracy to transfer power to his chosen successor, Vladimir Putin . Putin was chosen as Putin's chosen successor .
 Petersburg mayor Anatoly Sobchak hopes to be afforded the same after leaving office . Yeltsin completed Putin's meteoric rise from obscurity to preeminence .
 Yeltsin resigned his presidency in 1999, causing Putin to become the acting president . First appointing him as head of the Federal Security Service and then as Prime Minister, he was then Prime Minister . Putin became acting president in 1999 .
 Putin pardoned Yeltsin for any infractions he may have committed and granted him immunity from any future prosecution . On his first day in office, he was pardoned for all infractions .
 Putin set to work molding the hybrid regime where Yeltsin left off . He created seven federal administrative districts to “realize the constitutional authority of the President of the Russian Federation.
 Some Remarks on the Course of the Russian Transformation, Social Sciences 34, no. 25 .
 Putin also instituted a party system wherein one party would dominate all others in elections and subjugate both the Federation Council and the State Duma . Putin's party system would also dominate all other parties in elections .
 Unity political party had been the key to almost every winning coalition in the Duma during Putin’s first few years in office .
 Putin's parliamentary managers engineered Unity’s conglomeration with the Fatherland/All Russia party to establish the new dominant party, United Russia . United Russia was the first party to form the United Russia party .
 Putin's control of the United Russia party allowed him to control the Duma . Party parliament members relied on the Kremlin to remain on the party list and maintain their seats .
 Putin succeeded in overhauling the process whereby Council members are chosen . Instead of the regional chief executives and legislative officials fill the seats .
 Putin also moved to consolidate control over the large energy companies . Harnessing the Energy Champions Putin moved to consolidate control of large energy firms .
 He seized the opportunity to rid himself of oligarchs and political foes who threatened the totality of his power . He also seized the chance to remove himself from the political sphere .
 Boris Berezovsky sold his shares of his company, Sibneft, at a fraction of their worth to fellow oligarch Roman Abramovich . Abramovich, in turn, sold the shares to the Russian state . In October 2003, state authorities arrested Mikhail Khodorkovsky,
 State-owned Gazprom acquired Berezovsky’s Sibneft while state-owned Rosneft acquired Khodorkovsky's Yukos assets . State- owned Gazprom bought Berezovski's Sibnaft and state- owned Rosnef acquired K
 Putin also moved swiftly to claim the privatelyowned media assets through state-owned company takeovers . In addition to the energy giants, Putin also claimed private media assets .
 Vladimir Gusinsky sold his NTV television channel to Gazprom in 2001 . The first privately-owned network was the first privately owned network .
 Russia's three main television networks and multiple other forms of mass media are controlled by the state . A few independent media sources have been allowed to operate .
 Putin’s regime has used them to lessen the perception that freedom of expression is restricted . Instead of snuffing them out, Putin's regime has been using them to ease the perception of restrictions .
 The benefits of independent journalism are marginalized by the lack of political competition and the bending of the judicial system towards the Kremlin . Despite the important issues that the free and independent news outlets bring up, the benefits of free andindependent news outlets are marginalized .
 The state’s manipulation of the media markets results in most of the population getting their information from the statecontrolled media . The state also manipulates media markets and manipulates the media market .
 In 2008, 88% of Russian citizens reported watching the news on stateowned Channel 1, whereas only 22% watched news on independently owned RENTV . Most Russians are fed with Kremlin-sponsored propaganda that tells them how the state is actively providing stability, strong leadership, economic growth,
 Putin’s hybrid regime also uses the Russian legal system as an instrument to pursue its political will .
 Some describe the judicial process in Putin’s era as a dictatorship of law . Some describe it as a dictator of law.
 Russia's rulers today use the law to control society rather than use it as a mechanism for the state and society to mutually limit each other's behavior .
 A 2005 Non-Govemmental Organization law made NGO registration requirements vague, thereby creating an effective way to dispense with the NGOs disagreeable to the govemment .
 Laws on embezzlement, fraud, tax evasion, and money laundering are convenient tools for the ruling elite to usurp the power and wealth of unfavorable oligarchs and political enemies .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky is perhaps the best-known example of Putin's use of the legal system to rule by law rather than adhere to the rule of law .
 Putin's success has been the centralization of executive power since assuming the presidency . Putin's reforms have been his overarching success .
 The Russian mass media has portrayed Putin as a strong leader responsible for the stability of society . The media has attributed much of Russia's success to his personality .
 The siloviki is a group of crony oligarchs, political technocrats, some market liberals, and thesiloviki . His power structure is at the highest echelon, though, it actually consists of the group of elite loyalists .
 A social pact with the populace can only be maintained as long as the economy is producing the desired results . A Stagnant Economy is a result of a social pact between Mikhail Gorbachev and the populace .
 Putin's over-reliance on Russia’s petroleum resources has obscured the necessity of real-not illusory economic reform .
 The result has been a stagnating economy with little genuine effort by the state at diversification . The result is a stagnated economy with no genuine effort to diversification.
 In the long term, Russia’s economic vitality is dependent upon high global petroleum demand and prices . In the short term, the Russian economy is dependent on high global oil prices and demand .
 Russia has been able to weather periods of low petroleum prices and other economic downturns due to the impressive foreign capital financial reserves it amassed during the high oil and gas prices.
 Russia’s stockpiling strategy, which boosted its financial reserves to a maximum of $537 billion in December 2012, has come at a cost, though .
 Recent years of declining oil prices have caused Russia to burn through its reserves quickly . Russia has been struggling to cope with the decline in oil prices .
 In December 2015, the country’s reserves were down to $368 billion, a net reduction of $169 billion in a mere three years . The country's reserves are now $368billion, down from $369 billion .
 Russia’s sociopolitical structure is prone to fissure. Even with short-term economic complacency, it is made possible by large but decreasing coffers of financial reserves .
 Putin maintained high levels of approval despite clamping down on democratic freedoms . He imposed increasing control over Russian political system, legal system, media, and economy .
 Russians who had been interested enough to follow and assess political developments were well-off enough that they did not need to buy into Putin’s social contract .
 Krastev refers to economist Albert Hirschman’s general observation that people, when presented with the deterioration of goods or services, have two main options: exit or voice .
 Krastev says over two million Russian democrats exited the country during the 2000s . He says Russia's demographic situation and weak national identity have made exit a natural option for those disappointed with the regime .
For them, leaving the country in which they live is easier than reforming it . For them, it's easier to leave than reforming the country, they say .
 The major reason why Russians are reluctant to protest is not fear, it is because the people who care most have already left the country or have resolved to do so in the near future .
 Russian citizens have exited or would rather exit the country than voice their dissatisfaction with it . A sizable opposition contingent has managed to exist, as was evident in the massive protests staged in Moscow from December 2011 to March 2012 .
 Tens of thousands of people opposed to 2011 Duma elections and the prearranged position switching in 2012 by Putin and Medvedev gathered in Moscow on multiple occasions .
 Opposition leader and blogger Aleksei Navalny must have stmck a nerve with his political dissonance . He was regarded by the Kremlin as largely responsible for planning and coordinating the protests .
 Navalny was subsequently jailed on a spurious charge for a 15-day period that spanned the protest on December 10, 2011 . He told the gathered crowd that he saw that there were enough people to take over the Kremlin .
 The 2003 Rose Revolution in Georgia, the 2004 Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the 2005 Tulip and 2010 Revolutions in Kyrgyzstan are vivid reminders to Putin of what may happen to governments when public discontent reaches a boiling point .
 Putin has eaused Putin to view his hybrid system as forming the rightful epitome of Russian presidential power . All of his efforts to eentralize his personal executive power and fortify his authoritarian system have e aused Putin .
 Putin's perceived loss of the status quo would be more painful than any pleasure he eould derive from any gain, espeeially considering his vast aecumulation of personal wealth .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has created the hooks and levers that eompromise the central players and keep them in plaee . Putin has been a key figure in Russian politics for decades .
 Putin did not solve the unresolved issues of the Russian and Soviet past that surfaced in the 1980s and 1990s . Putin didn't solve the issues of Russian andSoviet past.
 He merely suppressed them and papered them over with a pastiehe of recycled Russian ideas . He simply suppressed them.
 Putin ramped up his efforts to retain power after Gorbaehev's 2012 reeleetion .
 Putin propagated the rehashed narrative that the West, led by the United States, was responsible for inciting the political opposition .
 The Kremlin employed a hand in choosing Putin’s opponents while barring any candidate that had a moderate chance of success . In the months leading up to the March 2012 presidential election, the Kremlin chose Putin's opponents .
 The March 4, 2012, election result was a Putin victory in the first round with 63% of the vote . independent sources claim that he actually garnered only 46%.288%. On the eve and day of Putin’s re-inauguration as president on May 7, 2012
 The legislation was merely a cosmetic remedy designed to assuage the growing political discord . The legislation had no mitigating effect on the hybrid government’s power .
 The mass demonstrations in Moscow showed Putin how fragile his domestic political support was .
 The ongoing competition between Russian and EU economic initiatives in Ukraine set the scene . Russia and the EU are competing in Ukraine's economic initiatives .
 The Euromaidan movement and Yanukovych’s subsequent flight from office comprised the moment . The Euromsaidan Movement and Yanukovych's subsequent flight.
 The new Ukrainian government with its American and European backers, in Putin’s narrative, played the role of enemy . The U.S. and European backing of the Ukrainian government played a role in Putin's narrative .
 Putin renewed his efforts to forge a new Russian identity by awakening nationalistic sentiment . Putin not only extended his grip on his personalized political power, but renewed his effort to forge new Russia .
 The Russian identity was inextricably linked with the Soviet identity . For most of the 20th century, the Russian name was linked to the Soviet name .
Boris Yeltsin struggled to find an identity for Russia to replace its Soviet predecessor . The Russian Federation does not constitute an ethnically homogenous nation-state .
 Post-Soviet Affairs 31, no. 31, is Russia's post-Soviet affairs . "Post- Soviet Affairs" is the country's second-highest-ranking official .
 The Russian experience with the Islamic Chechen republic is a threat to Russia’s federal integrity .
 Yeltsin promoted the Russian civic identity as embodied by the adjective Rossiysskiy . It connotes the Russian state, as opposed to a Russkiy national identity .
 When Putin took over after Yeltsin, the national question remained unanswered . When Putin became president, the question was unanswered .
 Putin rejected the idea of a state ideology but presented his form of the Russian idea that would produce unity . In an address known as the millennium message that he made shortly before assuming the presidency in 1999, Putin made the speech .
 He defined the pillars of his idea as economic and social stability, traditional Russian values, and a strong state . He defined his idea of Russia's greatness as the greatness of a powerful Russia .
 During his first few years in office, Putin remained notoriously ambiguous in terms of defining Russia's identity . He said it was comprised of “feeling pride in one’s country, its history and accomplishments’
 Putin relied heavily on nostalgic elements from tsarist and Soviet history . He revamped the Soviet anthem with updated lyrics to serve as the Russian national anthem .
 Putin addressed the diametric civic and ethnic national issue in January 2012 . Putin is preparing for his reelection campaign in 2012 .
 The participation of Russian nationalists in the 2011-2012 protests against the government catalyzed Putin to abandon his ambiguous stanee on Russian national identity . Putin's decision to leave the country was made after a series of protests against him .
 Ukraine's political instability in late 2013 granted Putin the opportunity to move forward with building a new Russian identity with a partieular emphasis on Russian ethnonationalism .
 Previously, the Kremlin promoted the greatness of the state as the focus of an all-Russian identity .
The Kremlin has reinvented itself as an active and initiating player in the nationalism field . The Kremlin has been active in the national football field for years .
 The narratives have also celebrated the success of the Russian military in reclaiming Crimea and Sevastopol . The stories have also been celebrated by the military in the past . The narratives are also celebrated by Russian military.
 The narratives have promoted the restoration of Russian greatness and the triumph of Russian values over their decadent Western counterparts .
 The domestic reception of Russia’s actions in Ukraine was significant. The Crimea Effect was significant, according to the Russian media .
 Russia experienced a tidal wave of nationalism that boosted Putin’s popularity to unprecedented levels . Russia's intervention in and annexation of Crimea was to ostensibly protect ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers against a hostile enemy .
 Putin made the risk-laden decision to intervene in Ukraine even though such action would likely burden the Russian state and its populace with significant international political and economic costs .
Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin worked together on the Sochi Winter Olympics . Putin and Putin have had fierce debates on economic matters .
 Sochi's selection as the host city designed to foster international peace was paradoxical . Only a few months earlier, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution that described the purpose of the games as an effort to build “a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal.
 Less than 20 miles from Sochi stretches the border between Russia and Abkhazia . The Russian-backed separatist region has been locked in frozen conflict with Georgia .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin used hybrid warfare to invade and annex Crimea . Putin made the decision at Sochi games that were intended to promote peace .
 Russia's foreign currency reserves would help Moscow withstand predictable Western sanctions . Several factors emboldened Putin to undertake such a risk-laden action, including the high level of Russia's currency reserves .
 This chapter explores the contextual background of Russia’s international relations during the 2014 Winter Olympics . It also explores its energy and economic relations with its European neighbors and its strategic nuclear messaging during the Ukraine crisis .
 51 billion U.S. dollars spent on Olympic construction projects . It's the largest sum ever spent on a set of games . The United States poured 51 billion United States dollars into Olympic projects .
 The exorbitant construction expenses were not without critics, however, however . The construction expenses are not without criticism .
 Russian opposition leaders Boris Nemtsov and Leonid Martynyuk lambasted the corruption in the Russian government’s preparation efforts .
 He believed that the Olympic Games will be his triumph and . . . a recognition of his indisputable leadership, they wrote . They wrote .
 Putin instead received the cold shoulder from several of the world's heads of state and government .
 French president Francois Hollande, German chancellor Angela Merkel, U.K. prime minister David Cameron, and U.S. president Barack Obama were absent from the opening ceremony of the games .
Political disagreements over an array of Moscow’s policies were undoubtedly the cause of skipping the ceremony .
 British, French, German, and U.S. leaders were absent from the United States . Many other leaders managed to attend .
 Chinese president Xi Jinping, Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe, Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbayev, and Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko were present . Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, who was embroiled at home with the Euromaidan protests, was present .
 Putin played up the event as an opportunity to engage in constructive dialogue with those leaders present . Putin resented the snubbing he received from key Western leaders .
320 xhe presence of Ban Ki-moon added to the air of international cooperation .
 Putin focused his attention on Ukraine and Crimea during the Olympics . The world focused its attention on Sochi during the Games .
 Putin made an economic inquiry that would shape the decision he would soon make regarding Ukraine . Putin met with his advisors in Sochi, Russia, to discuss Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin convened a secret meeting with his Security Council in Sochi on February 22, 2014 . The meeting continued until seven the next morning, the day of the Olympics' closing ceremony .
 The group scrutinized possible Russian recourses, weighing the prospective costs and benefits of the available options . The group also examined the potential costs of the Russian government's Russian government .
 Former British ambassador to Russia Tony Brenton says level of Russia's financial reserves has served “as a proxy for Russian strength’s foreign policy .
 The Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Fed, was released on Monday .
 Russian leadership’s assessment of the extent of the influence Russia wields among many European states because of its role as a major energy exporter . RUSSIA’S GEOPOLITOLITICAL INFLUENCE was the Russian leadership's assessment.
Russia enjoys vast energy and mineral resources which serve as a base to develop its economy . In 2009, Prime Minister Putin commented that Russia enjoys vastEnergy and Mineral resources .
The role of the country on international energy markets determines, in many ways, its geopolitical influence . The role of a nation on international markets determines its role in the global energy markets .
 In 2013, Russia grossed $356 billion in oil and natural gas revenue, which constituted 68% of its total export revenues . Russia's total oil and gas revenue was $356billion, which was 68% in 2013 .
 Customs duties on oil and gas exports, combined with taxes on mineral extraction, produced 50.2% of Russia’s 13 trillion ruble (approximately $406 billion) federal budget revenue in 2013 . Crude oil accounted for $174 billion, or 33%, of Russia's total
 Russia has displayed a vested interest in sustained high oil prices . Most of its federal budget comes from the sale of crude oil and other petroleum products .
 Russia has been part of an effort to keep oil prices high by maintaining a destabilized Middle East . Some have even suggested that Russia’s support for and export of arms to Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, and Syria over the past decade .
 Gazprom's Ultimate Geopolitical Tool Europe has been the main importer of Russia’s energy resources . Gazprom is Russia's biggest energy importer .
 In 2013, Russia provided 29% of the EU’s oil imports and 22% of its total oil consumption . In the same year, Russia raked in $283 billion of crude oil sales, 70% of which went to Europe .
90% of Russia’s natural gas export of natural gas abroad went to Europe . Russia provided only $73 billion in export revenue, according to the Russian government .
Natural gas for much of Europe is provided by only one supplier, Russia . Russia has provided Europe with more flexibility in choosing energy trade partners .
 The Gazprom behemoth maintains 72% of Russia's and 17% of the world's natural gas reserves . It produces 72% and 12% of world’s gas output .
 Putin celebrated Gazprom’s 10th anniversary at a reception in 2003 . In 2003, he dismissed speculation about breaking up the energy giant .
Natural gas must either be pumped through a pipeline or shipped in liquefied form at an approximate temperature of -160 degrees Celsius . Oil ean must be moved via pipeline, ship, train, or tmek .
 The latter is a teehnologieally ehallenging method that requires extensive port infrastrueture to aeeommodate ENG ships and results in gas that is roughly twiee as expensive as that sent via a pipeline . The second is a
 States such as Georgia, Ukraine and the Baltic States have been punished with supply interruptions and higher prices after their governments turned toward the West .
 Abkhazia . . . and Transdniestria have been granted ample oil and gas at subsidized prices . The region has been granted plenty of gas and oil .
 The Nord Stream pipeline through the Baltic Sea and the Blue Stream through the Black Sea carry Russian gas directly to Germany and Turkey . The Blue Stream pipeline also carries Russian gas to Turkey and Germany .
 The Yamal pipeline traverses Belarus and Poland while the Soyuz and Bratstvo pipelines traverse Ukraine . In contrast, the Trans-Balkan pipelines traverses Ukraine .
 Russia has used its ironically named gas pipelines as levers to influence its former Soviet brother states of Belarus and Ukraine . The latter states have some influence of their own .
 Russian gas that flows through the transit states is susceptible to their physical control . The pipelines he exposed across the transit state’s land are vulnerable to their control .
 The result has been a double-edged sword for Gazprom and the Kremlin . The transit state will retaliate by cutting off or siphoning from the flow of gas to customers downstream .
 Such was the case during multiple wintry occasions referred to as the “gas wars’ of 2006 and 2009 . Such was a case during the ‘gas wars of 2006-2009.
 Russia’s Energy Resourees as a Foreign Poliey Tool’.
 Gazprom cut off the supply of gas to Ukraine after it raised the price of gas from $50 per 1,000 cubic meters to $230 . Ukraine refused to pay the price increase .
 Ukraine was experiencing a record level of gas consumption due to an unusually severe winter with temperatures below 30 degrees Celsius . Some of the gas being pumped downstream to other European states for its own use to cope with the extreme cold .
 Austria, France, Hungary, Hungary and Italy, Italy, Slovakia, and Romania each experienced decreases of 25% in their Russian gas supplies . Gazprom restored the flow to Ukraine two days later .
 Russia and Ukraine resolved the price dispute by agreeing on a price of $95 per 1,000 cubic meters of gas for the next several months . The price of gas will be $95 a 1,00 cubic meters for a year .
 The second gas war would damage both Russia and Ukraine economically . The rest of Europe would haplessly suffer collateral damage .
 Simon Parini, “Russo-Ukrainian Gas Wars and the Call on Transit Governance,’s in Dynamics of Energy Governance in Europe and Russia, ed.
 On January 1, 2009, Gazprom again cut Ukraine’s supply share of gas in response to another row over gas prices and Ukrainian gas debt . Three years after the first gas war, Ukraine's supply share was cut by Gazprom .
 Ukraine paid $1.52 billion in gas arrears to Russia, but only part of its $2 billion debt and fines according to Russia . Ukraine paid all of its debt to Russia.
 Gazprom reduced the gas pressure intended for the rest of Europe by a compensatory amount commensurate with how much it alleged Ukraine had stolen . Gazprom shut off the gas flow completely .
 Ukraine's state-owned gas company, Naftogaz Ukrainy, operated the pipeline in reverse . It closed off its pipelines between Ukraine and Russia to supply its major population centers in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 As the standoff continued, the urgency for the EU to help resolve the crisis grew dramatically . The crisis adversely affected the inhabitants and economies of 18 European states .
Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Moldova sent their own delegations to Moscow . Some of the most severely affected countries in Europe have sent their delegations.
 The flow of gas to Europe was not restored after the accord . Despite the accord, much to the European Union’s consternation, the flow of water to Europe is not restored .
 Caroline Kuzemko, Andrei V Belyi, Andreas Goldthau, and Miehael F Keating are among those who have been involved .
 The European Commission was unable to verily the validity of either party’s allegations . EU observers had not been granted access to gas supply control centers in either country .
 Jose Manuel Barroso expressed his frustration with both countries’ prime ministers in separate phone conversations . The president of the European Commission said he was frustrated with both governments .
After a “robust’s discussion with Putin, Barroso commented that the situation was “getting close to a breaking point’ The situation is getting close to the breaking point, he said .
 The EU had its opportunity at an emergency international gas meeting in Moscow called for by Russian president Dmitry Medvedev . The EU was called for an emergency gas meeting by the president .
 Russia originally intended the meeting to be a summit for the EU state leaders . But those leaders declined to attend due to a Czech EU presidency request .
 Czech Republic wanted EU to speak with one voice by sending only the EU's selected delegation . Czech Republic held rotating presidency of Council of the European Union .
 Despite the EU's best efforts, no definitive outcome was reached during the talks on January 17, 2009 .
 Ukraine would continue to charge Russia the same transit price for gas destined for Europe as it had in 2008 . Meanwhile, Ukraine would still charge Russia same price as it did in 2008 for gas bound for Europe .
 Russia and Ukraine fully restored the flow of gas to Europe on January 21, 2009 . Two weeks after the gas war began, the flow to Europe had been cut off and 20 days after the war began .
 The 2009 gas crisis had grave implications for Ukraine and the rest of Europe . European Energy Vulnerability The 2009 Gas crisis was the biggest crisis in Europe .
 Some experts estimated that the episode cost Gazprom between $1. and $2 billion . The cost to Ukraine was at least $100 million in lost transit fee revenue .
 Ukraine lost much less than Russia in absolute financial terms, but the relative economic and political costs to Ukraine were much higher than Russia .
 Yushchenko criticized the terms as a defeat wherein the price Ukraine agreed to pay for gas was too high . The price agreed to charge Russia for gas transit was too low, he said .
 The gas deal drove the wedge in the two former Orange Revolution allies’ relationship even deeper . The two former allies' relationship is now at a low level .
 increased gas prices would prove to be unsustainable for Ukraine’s flailing economy in recession .
 Poor economic performance and political discord contributed to a decline in support for the Orange government and a victory for the Russian-leaning Viktor Yanukovych in the Eebruary 2010 presidential election .
 European Commission president Barroso enumerated the EU’s lessons learned . He said action must be taken to avoid similar occurrences in the future .
 The motives behind building and operating the Nord Stream pipeline have been questioned . The pipeline carries gas directly from Vyborg, Russia to Greifswald, Germany under the Baltic Sea .
 Gazprom's CEO Alexei Miller claimed that the “new export route . . will increase Europe’s energy security . Miller said that the new export route will increase the energy security of Europe .
 Timoshenko sentenced to seven years in prison . Naftogaz Ukrainy claimed it lost $186 million because of the deal . Timoshenko was sentenced to 7 years in jail .
 One of the EU's stipulations for signing the association agreement with Ukraine was the release of Timoshenko and other political prisoners .
Timoshenko asked the EU to forego demanding her release if it meant the association agreement would be signed . Timoshenko asked for her release from the EU.
 The post-Euromaidan Verkhovna Rad voted on February 22, 2014, the same day as Yanukovych's flight and Putin's decisive meeting . Rad voted to release her.
 She ran for president and lost to Peter Poroshenko (12.8% to 54.7%) during the first round of voting in the May 2014 presidential election .
 Russia became more flexible in its capacity to use its petro-sticks against its former Soviet neighbors . When the pipeline commenced operating in September 2011, Russia was more flexible .
 Germany also wished to reduce its dependence on the gas transit states and prevent future disruptions in supply . Germany, for its part, also wishes to reduce the dependence on gas transport states .
Germany increased its dependence on Russia as the gas supplier . In so doing, Germany increased its reliance on Russia .
 Germany chose the Nord Stream pipeline instead of Nord Stream . The pipeline would allow Russia to promote its geo-economic interests . Germany's liberal political values are at risk of being held accountable for its energy blackmail tactics .
 Berlin disregarded Moscow’s reputation as an unreliable partner during the 2009 gas crisis . It was given the label it was given during the gas crisis and its manipulative behavior .
 The German energy conglomerates involved in the Nord Stream consortium aremotivated primarily by the economic aspects of the pipeline . They have complete disregard for the political consequences of the project .
Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder was a Gazprom representative on the Nord Stream Board of Directors . Schroeder made his preferences to Russia clear . The German government secured financing for the Gazprom joint venture .
 The display underscored how Germany’s foreign policy and economic decisions tend to favor amiable relations with Russia .
 Germany’s approach to Russia seems voluntary, but a closer inspection reveals how necessity is actually the driving force .
 Russian gas imports comprised 45.8% of Germany’s total gas consumption in 2013 . In 2013, Russia's gas imports were 45.9% of the country's total consumption .
 Mr Putin lambasted the European Union at a business forum in Berlin . He said Brussels should consult Moscow over planned energy legislation .
 At one stage, he mocked the Europeans, saying if they did not want gas or nuclear energy, then they would have to rely on Russian firewood . He also said if they didn't want gas, they would need to use firewood.
 Many Germans dismiss the idea that Russia would engage Germany and the EU in a gas war . Many Germans also dismiss the notion that Russia will engage Germany in a war .
 Russia's economy is just as dependent on energy export revenues as are the European economies on Russia’s energy imports . Moscow taking such action would be tantamount to Russia's economic self-destruction, say analysts .
 Germany’s energy security vis-a-vis Russia is moderately vulnerable compared to other European states . Russia is more vulnerable than other European countries .
 Germany receives a large portion of the gas it consumes from Russia . Germany also has a modest gas storage capability that would allow it to survive a disruption of Russian gas for months .
 Austria, France, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Slovenia, and Romania . Romania, France and Greece are among the countries in the world .
 Most West European states import little to no gas from Russia and are much more energy secure . The United Kingdom, Croatia, Denmark, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom are among the most secure states .
Estonia and Finland receive all of their gas from Russia . Two states do not have any gas storage capability .
 Lithuania has taken steps to diversify its import sources . Until recently, Lithuania had a similar complete gas dependency on Russia .
 Lithuania now imports 20% of its gas from Norway and plans to import gas from the U.S. Lithuania has opened an ENG terminal at the end of 2014 .
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, and Slovakia import between 85% and 100% of the gas they consume from Russia . Other Eastern European countries have some gas storage capacity, but still import some .
 Russia's leaders understand the various levels of energy security among EU member states . Russia’s leaders also understand the different levels of power security among member states.
 Russia has sought to develop Russia's bilateral energy relationships to undermine the cohesiveness and strength of EU energy policy and the European Union as a whole .
 The EU conducted a hypothetical stress test in October 2014 to gauge how prepared it was in the event such a worst-case scenario came to fruition . Despite claims that a scenario wherein Russia cuts its supply of gas to Europe is unlikely, it is unlikely .
 Germany would likely prioritize the needs of its protected customers, over industry . Russia cut off its gas supply in the event of a cut off .
 Industry would lose much of its electricity as power plants that aren’t deemed indispensable would have to shut down . Power plants that are deemed indispensable could have to close.
 Russia could lay waste to Germany’s industrial power, at least for a while, and it would wreak havoc that would then ricochet around the world .
 The use of harmful threats and actions to attain foreign policy goals of Russia’s leaders was clearly demonstrated in the gas wars . The tactic of intimidating and exploiting fears extends to the personal interactions of Russia's leaders with their foreign counterparts .
 Angela Merkel met with Putin at his residence in Sochi in 2007 to discuss energy trade matters . In 2007, German chancellor Angela Merkel discussed energy trade with Putin .
 Europe has also been uneasy over the uncertainty of Putin’s level of restraint and the rationality of his actions .
 Putin's political objectives in Ukraine were to him, but it also revealed to the rest of Europe and the world just how irrational he could be .
 Russia showed that it was willing to bear the cost of ruining its reputation as a reliable trade partner and lose billions of dollars in gas revenue over a price dispute with Ukraine .
 The threat that Russia could and would be willing to do so again was even articulated by Putin himself in Eebruary 2015 . The threat was made by Putin in the same year as the threat he made in 2013 .
 Putin warns gas supplies to Ukraine could be suspended if it fails to prepay for its contracted gas . Putin warns that this may create a threat to transit to Europe, to European partners .
 The theory of “rational’s strategic decision in situations of mixed conflict and common interest is one of the advantages of the theory . It can display how sound and rational some of the tactics are practiced by the untutored and the infirm .
 Putin's clear willingness to sustain selfdamaging economic costs when threatening Europe's energy security has served as a useful deterrent against the West . The messaging of Putin’s irrationality has been used as a deterrent against some of its more severe economic response options .
 Putin was aware of this, and it factored into his decision making regarding intervention in Ukraine . Putin was also aware of his decision to intervene in the Ukraine .
 The threat to deter the West's military response options during Russia's Crimean intervention also factored into Putin’s calculations . In a like manner, another irrational threat was intended to deter West’S military action options .
 The threat would overshadow the entire crisis in Ukraine . Russia's possession of and willingness to use its arsenal of nuclear weapons to defend its hybrid military actions .
 Putin: ‘We are sliding into the times when, instead of the balance of interests and mutual guarantees, it is fear and balance of mutual destruction that prevent nations from engaging in direct conflict’
 President Putin's admission that he considered putting Russia’s nuclear forces on alert while Russia was annexing Crimea is one example .
 Russia has also significantly increased the number and range of provocative flights by nuclear-capable bombers across much of the globe .
 Russian officials announced plans to base modem nuclear-capable missile systems in Kaliningrad . Russian officials said they would base modem missile systems.
 Russia has the right to deploy nuclear forces to Crimea, they say . And they claim that Russia can deploy nuclear force to Crimea .
 We learned during the Cold War that when it comes to nuclear weapons, caution, predictability and transparency are vital . We learned that in the cold war, caution and predictability are vital.
 Russia’s nuclear sabre-rattling is unjustified, destabilizing and dangerous, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's nuclear weapons are a dangerous weapon, he says .
 The EU and the U.S. responded to Russia’s actions in Crimea with varying levels of diplomatic and economic sanctions . The United States and the EU responded to the Crimea actions with different levels of sanctions .
 Diplomatic measures included cancelling the EU-Russia summit and isolating Russia from the G8 summit that was scheduled to have been held in Sochi in June 2014 but was held instead as a G7 meeting in Bmssels . The G7 summit was held as a
 Other sanctions ranged from travel bans and freezing the assets of targeted individuals . The sanctions include travel bans, freezing assets of individuals deemed responsible for violating Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 Franee had planned to sell two amphibious assault ships to Russia for $1. billion . The deal would have been the first major arms import deal for Russia since the end of the Cold War .
 The ships, named Vladivostok and Sevastopol, were designed to deliver soldiers, armored vehicles, and tanks from littoral waters to shore . The four landing barges and 16 helicopters each can carry .
 The former Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Navy, Admiral Vladimir Vysotsky, commented once that the Russo-Georgian war would have been over in “40 minutes instead of 26 hours’ had the Russian navy possessed one of the Mistral ships.
 Putin's decision to engage in operations that “reacquired’s port city of Sevastopol came at the cost of never acquiring the Mistral ship Sevstopol and its sister .
 Russia's economy has floundered as the ruble has greatly depreciated against the dollar . Since June 2014, Russia’s economy has been in decline against thedollar .
 The effect that EU and U.S. sanctions have had on Russia’s economy is subject to debate . EU and United States sanctions are designed to alter Russia's policies and behavior in Crimea and Ukraine .
 Putin has remained defiant over Russia’s actions concerning Crimea and the rest of Ukraine . The bulk of the depreciation is caused by the decline of oil prices, a study found .
 In an interview with a Serbian newspaper in October 2014, he even doubled down on them . In the interview with the Serbian newspaper, he said he had no idea what he was doing .
 Putin postulated that the twin threats of economic and nuclear destruction against the EU and NATO would have the desired effect . Putin met with his security council in Sochi on February 22, 2014 .
 The EEl’s collective energy security vulnerability due to its dependence on Russian gas would temper the severity of sanctions leveled against Russia . Russia would be able to withstand the lesser sanctions with its billions in foreign capital reserves .
 Putin made a risk-laden decision that he was willing to take because of his aversion to a pro-Russian government in Kiev, among other reasons . Putin made the decision because he was unwilling to take a risk, he says .
 The gamble in Elkraine to achieve his goals seems to have paid off in the short term . But the long-term sagacity of such a gamble remains to be seen .
 The foregoing analysis explored the rationales behind the deeision by Russia’s political leaders to breach the territorial integrity of a sovereign state .
 Russia's actions elicited strong condemnation from Western governments . Russia’s isolation from the West and economic sanctions were designed to penalize Russia's government .
When the decision to invade Crimea was made, Russia's leaders were willing to bear . The costs that Russia’s leaders had to bear were determined to be outweighed by the benefits Russia stood to gain through its actions .
 Russia's annexation of part of a modern European state seemed unfathomable to many Western leaders . Russia engaged in its shocking hybrid warfare in Crimea in Crimea .
 Russia's actions resurrected the idea of international political realism in the West . Many deemed to have been dormant since the dismantling of the Berlin wall in 1989 and the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Ukraine remains fixed between the two competing strains of Western liberalism and Russian despotism .
 The jockeying between the West and Russia in fostering a favorably oriented Ukrainian government, as well as the attempts by both to include Ukraine in their respective institutional spheres, placed Ukraine in a precarious position .
 The application of neoclassical realism is useful in explaining Russia’s reasoning for its Ukrainian intervention .
 A more plausible exposition of the rationales influencing Russia's leaders can be obtained by combining the lens of neoclassical realism with that of prospect theory .
 His inability to make psychological peace with its end has caused him to perceive Russia's current domain as one of losses .
 The neoclassical realist paradigm aligns with his foreign policy but also the extent to which he is consumed by get-evenitis .
 Those who are less fixated on the world that is, are prone to give more weight to counterfactual worlds that could or should have been . Those more sympathetic to redistributive claims on behalf of have-nots are predisposed to be more sympathetic.
 Rather than viewing such claims as illegitimate, greedy, and self-serving bids for gain, they see them as just attempts to undo losses imposed by exploitative . . nations .
 Putin has a way to recover, from the loss of the Soviet Union and to reconcile, to a certain degree, he says . The world that is and the world that he thinks should have been, in his mind, should be .
 Putin’s frame of reference and loss aversion caused him to be more risk-acceptant in undertaking military action in Crimea .
 Putin correctly anticipated a limited economic sanctions response and a negligible military response from the West . Backed by Russia’s seemingly irrational threats to cut essential gas supplies to Europe and to launch nuclear attacks .
 Russia's large sum of financial reserves. Emboldened by Russia’s large sum, he reckoned Russia would be able to withstand sanctions .
 Putin furthered Russia’s interests in acquiring Crimea, Sevastopol and the vast natural resources in the Black Sea region . By annexing Crimea, Russia furthered its interests in the region .
 Such action also prevented the expansion of Western institutions and influence in Ukraine . Such action has also prevented Western institutions from expanding in Ukraine.
 The resulting level of Putin’s domestic approval was unprecedented . It was a perplexing development given the massive political protests that were held against him in Moscow in 2011-2012 .
 The West isolated Russia and applied sanctions in response to its military actions in Ukraine . Putin would not wait long before thrusting Russia into another military exploit abroad .
 Russia’s rationales for intervening in Ukraine, as argued in this thesis, are likely to be related to Russia's decision to intervene in Syria . A full understanding of Russia's rationales requires further analysis .
 Possible explanations include exploiting the opportunity to divert negative global attention from the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine . The West may be forcing the West to cooperate in deconfiicting military efforts in Syria .
 Domestic considerations also likely to have faetored into Putin’s ealculus .
 Russia’s aetions in Syria allowed Putin to appear tough on terrorism, provided a new enemy for Russian nationalism to be kindled against, and maintained Putin's high approval ratings .
 This thesis has demonstrated the explanatory power that neoelassieal realism, supplemented by prospeet theory, has in analyzing Russia’s rationales for intervening in Ukraine . This thesis is based on the theory of Russia's rationales.
 The eombined analytieal framework is also apposite for interpreting Russia’s aetions in Syria . It is alsoapposite to interpret Russia's aetion in Syria.
 Western policy makers are likely to seek to weaken the West, as long as Putin remains in power, by undermining its strength, solidarity and eredibility .
 Sueh probable opportunistie aetion is not limited to the terrestrial domains of Ukraine, Syria, and other eountries and areas replete with Russian interests .
 It ineludes the dynamic political, economic, maritime, and cyber domains of the former Soviet Union and the West . It also inelude the dynamic economic, political, maritime and maritime, eelestial, and Cyber domains of former Soviet and West .
 Dreger, Christian, Konstantin A Kholodilin, Dirk Ulbricht, Jarko Fidrmuc. Dreger and Christian are among those who have been named in the group .
 Samuel P. Huntington, Samuel P The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order are all about the world .
 Past Imperfect, Euture Uncertain, 5th ed., edited by Stephen K Wegren, 125145.
 An Astonishingly Frank Self-portrait by Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 The International Security 23, no. 5-48, is the world's most comprehensive security study . The study is based on the book "Rational Choice and Security Studies"