 President Petro Poroshenko may be the most Moscow-hated Ukrainian politician today .
 The Russian state-run propaganda machine has been lambasting Poroshenko for months ahead of the March 31 presidential election . Top officials publicly joined in on the campaign .
 Russia's Security Council secretary says Ukraine is ruled by Americans from Washington who support Poroshenko because he is their pawn .
 Ukraine is seen in Moscow and in the Kremlin as a critical battleground in the global standoff between Russia and the U.S. Ukraine has been seen as a key battleground in Russia and United States .
 Massive protests in Kyiv against alleged systemic vote rigging prevented the election of Moscow-friendly president Viktor Yanukovych . It all began in 2004 with the so-called “Orange Revolution,” when massive protests against alleged vote rigging .
 After the Orange Revolution, President Vladimir Putin and the ruling Russian elite dramatically changed Moscow’s strategic direction from cooperation and partnership with the West to rivalry and confrontation .
 The ouster of Yanukovych in 2014 was followed by the occupation and annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea and the military conflict in eastern Donbas .
 Poroshenko was elected in May 2014 with over 50 percent of the popular vote . Poroshenko has been elected since May 2014 .
 By 2018, he lost most of his support, which is typical for Ukraine . But by 2018, his support had fallen by more than a quarter .
 Poroshenko managed to make it into the runoff election, scheduled for April 21, by obtaining almost 16 percent of the vote . Poroshenko ran a well-organized campaign .
 Volodymyr Zelensky was born to a Jewish family in the predominantly Russian-speaking city of Kryvyi Rih, in central Ukraine . He came in second place to political satirist/comedian Volody myr Zelenky .
 Zelensky has played the role of high school professor Vasyl Holoborodko in the popular television show Servant of the People . The show runs on the Ukrainian channel 1+1 and is distributed internationally .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi, a powerful Jewish-Ukrainian oligarch, is now in self-imposed exile in Switzerland . He was initially an ally of Poroshenko, but bitterly broke with him in 2015 and is now a self- imposed exile .
 Kolomoyskyi told journalists Zelensky could run and win the presidency despite lacking previous political/administrative experience . In June 2018, Kolomoysskyi said he could run for the presidency .
 On March 31, Zelensky won over 30 percent of the popular vote, twice as much as Poroshenko . The vote is seen in Moscow as a positive development, which is seen as a good development .
 The next Rada elections are scheduled for fall 2019 . Zelensky has formed a “Servant of the People’s party, apparently hoping to win enough votes to form a stable coalition .
 Russian experts interpret Zelensky's election success as a protest vote . Similar to Donald Trump’s victory in 2016 or the electoral successes of Eurosceptics in Italy and other EU countries .
 Kolomoyskyi, Zelensky and Putin were bitter personal enemies in 2014-2015 . In their mutual desire to oust Poroshenko, they have become circumstantial allies .
 The Kremlin could eventually decide to declare the Ukrainian elections fraudulent and illegitimate . If it does not like their end result, the Kremlin could declare them fraudulent .
 Russian experts believe Poroshenko, together with his purported United States masters and their North Atlantic Alliance minions, might provoke a military confrontation with Russia . A convoy of three Ukrainian naval ships attempted to cross from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov .
 Tension is building up in and around Ukraine, with election day less than three weeks away .