 Putin made a geopolitical mistake in putting an end to “the Russian spring’s Russian spring in 2014, Putin says .
 Putin took a set of absolutely correct and fatal steps in foreign policy, returned almost completely lost sovereignty to Russia . Nobody belittles his enormous merits, and nobody belittled his merits .
 If we consider Putin's actions a "cunning plan" or we extol Putin's mistake as "strategic wisdom" We are not showing our fidelity, but actually endangering his real authority .
 If we praise the governor equally for his achievements and his mistakes, it means we scoff at him, exposing him as a vainglorious idiot .
 Kiev junta has the chance to restart the escalation in Eastern Ukraine with new force . The curtailing of the Russian Spring and refusal to protect the “Russian world during the long and senseless process of the Minsk talks gave the Kiev Junta a chance to rearrange .
 Moscow predetermined future conflicts in Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has abandoned huge part of the Russian world to Kiev .
 Kiev was able to begin escalation or war as they pleased . Since that time, Kiev has been able to start escalation and war as it pleased .
 Kiev made the first attempt to change the status quo in Debaltsevo, but direct pressure proved ineffective . Kiev tried to make a change of status quo.
 Junta abandoned their efforts, they simply began to search for other methods . This does not mean that Junta Abandoned their efforts .
 The recognition of Ukraine as a territory of the Constantinople patriarchate led to a split between the Russian Orthodox Church and Constantinople . The following step was the recognition of the territory of Ukraine.
 Moscow is forced to answer Poroshenko’s provocations . This gave to Poroshenko another lever of influence on Moscow .
 Poroshenko consciously directed the ships understand what the reaction would be from the Russian side, leading to a firefight and arrest of the Ukrainian sailors .
 Poroshenko considers Crimea a territory of Ukraine . He didn't have to warn anybody about Crimea .
 He well perfectly understood what he was doing, and what will be consequences would be, and then he declared martial law . He well well understood what was doing and what would be the consequences .
 Moscow, besides having restored unity with Crimea and not having completely thrown the Donbass aside, took a passive position in every other regard . Moscow also had a passive role in the Crimea crisis .
 Poroshenko prepared a response, and the timing depended on his initiative . Poroshenko's response depended on the timing of the initiative .
 Poroshenko will rattle his saber, postpone the elections, present himself as the "savior of the fatherland" and will again be elected as the president, and everything will remain as it was .
 If we count on this happening, Russia doesn't have to do anything in response, says Putin . Russia doesn’t have to respond, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It seems possible to continue to scoff at Poroshenko who simply got into a mess again . So far, it seems possible.
 This is the official perspective of Moscow and the main thesis of the Russian propaganda machine . This is a view of Moscow's official view of Russia and the Russian government .
 It is impossible to exclude that this might actually be the case . It is, nonetheless, impossible to excluded that this may actually be.
 Poroshenko says everything will not go according to plan, and instead, he begins a war with Russia in earnest . Let's say however, that everything will be going according to plans .
 Many lazy analysts answer that it couldn’t, the gun hung up on a wall of the stage will never shoot .
 America's current president is likely not Ukraine's strongest ally. For this purpose, America’s current president isn't likely to be Ukraine's strong ally .
 There is also the American Deep State, neocons, strategic planning by the Pentagon, and critical problems in the European Union . There are also the U.S. Deep State and neocons .
 War with Russia – not nuclear, but local, made at others expense is an exit . War with Russian is not nuclear but local .
 Ukraine is dismembered again, each shot from Russia will be a blessing for the globalists . To the West, it is unimportant if Ukraine isdismembered.
 The Kremlin perfectly understands all of this, and therefore they will try to evade it as much as possible . The Kremlin is trying to evade this, as well as possible.
 Having begun a conflict which Russia will evade, it is possible to achieve something without real consequence . Russia has begun a war which it will evade.
 If Russia evades a little too intensely, it will also be a kind of "victory" for Poroshenko, says the Russian president .
 Poroshenko has almost nothing to lose in a political sense, he is extremely unpopular in Ukraine . The risk seems justified .
 At the same time, if it is possible to involve NATO in the conflict even symbolically, it will be enough . If not geopolitical, then moral and electoral dividends will be paid .
The transforming of the current conflict into a full scale war is possible, or, at least, cannot be excluded . The transforming of a full-scale war can be seen as possible .
 Poroshenko has held consultations with influential forces of the West . He most likely got serious support for his actions .
 The West is taking steps to limit Moscow's options. It is clear that Putin will evade and hold out to the last before allowing war to break out .
 If Kiev and the West consider that now is the time the Russian-Ukrainian war, they have all levers in place to put this plan in action . If Kiev wants to put it in action, it would be the time to put the plan in place .
 "Now, the time of war is upon us, and we cannot choose its starting conditions," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We cannot choose our starting conditions"
 It is impossible to be sure that it will begin now, but it is very precipitate to consider that nothing happens and nothing at all ever will happen .