 The Naval Postgraduate School's public access digital repository for research mate rials and institutiional publicatkins created by the NPS community .
 Calhoun is named for Professor of Mathematics Guy K Caftiouo, NPS's first appointed — and published — author . NPS is first appointed - and published - schofaily author .
Naval Postgraduate School Monterey, CA 93943-5000 9.9. PEREORMING ORGANIZATION NAME and ADDRESS Naval Postgraduate school Monterey .
 The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005, played a significant role in Russia’s relationship with the West .
 This thesis examines Russia’s reaction to the color revolutions as they fit within this narrative of anti-Westemism . It also examines Russia's reaction to color revolutions in the past .
 Russian officials saw the West as the cause of the color revolutions . They claimed that Western-funded NGOs were deliberately working to undermine the regimes of thecolor revolution countries .
 The color revolutions added to the feeling of Western encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence and contributed to Western involvement in the post-Communist domain . NATO and EU expansions in post-Soviet nations and United States’ deals for basing rights in post/Soviet Central Asia
 Russia feared the results of Western democracy-promotion and election-monitoring . Officials attempted to thwart both activities and developed the narrative of sovereign democracy as a means of justifying their actions .
 Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Ukraine and Georgia have been involved in color revolutions . Russia and Ukraine have had a history of color revolutions, including the Orange Revolution .
 The Daily Mail's weekly Newsquiz tests readers' knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com and Twitter .
 The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005, played a significant role in the development of Russia’s relationship with the West .
 This thesis examines Russia’s reaction to the color revolutions as they fit within this narrative of anti-Westernism . The thesis examines the Russia's reaction to color revolutions.
 The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005, played a significant role in the development of Russia's relationship with the West .
Pro-democracy, pro-reform movements sweeping through states of the former Soviet Union . These movements were a signal, to both Russia and the West, that corrupt, proRussian regimes would not be tolerated .
 The narrative they created had a significant impact on Russia . Many of the gains of the color revolutions were later reversed, but many of them later reversed .
 The fears engendered in Russia by the color revolutions contributed to the development of the anti-Western foreign policy that drove Russian interventions . Russia’s subsequent decision to blame the color revolution on Western instigation contributed to Russian interventions, says the author .
 This thesis examines the ways in which Russia’s political institutions and its historical narrative of anti-Western paranoia has driven its response to the color revolutions . The thesis examines how Russia's political institutions have reacted to the revolutions .
 This thesis examines the ways in which Russia has shaped its foreign policies to counter the Western countries that Russia perceives as being the instigators of the color revolutions . This thesis also examines how Russia has shape its foreign policy to counter Western countries .
 It concludes with an evaluation of the effect of Russia’s strategies to counter the color revolutions and their potential for future use .
 In the past decade, Russia has reentered the international stage with an aggressive foreign policy of considerable concern to the U.S. Russia has been aggressive in recent years .
 Russia intervened in I Georgia to support separatists in the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia in 2008 .
 In 2014, Russia annexed the Crimean region of Ukraine and provided support to separatists in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 The 2015 U.S. National Security Strategy named Russia as a major threat to international security . The United States is seeking to counter through diplomacy and military presence . i Russian foreign policy has become important to the security interests of the United States .
 An examination of the contributing factors that have influenced Russian policy may help to guide the United States’ response to Russia’s increased international aggression . The U.S. response to Russian aggression may help guide the U.N. response.
 The color revolutions have affected Russia's relationship with the United States, EU, and NATO . This thesis sheds some light on one of the possible underlying causes of Russia’s resurgent foreign policy decisions .
 Understanding Russia’s views of the color revolutions will also be a factor to consider . The United States and other Western partners continue their tradition of promoting democracy and encouraging non-governmental organization participation .
 examination will focus on expanding an area of where there has been limited research . The examination will also focus on expanded an area where there is limited research.
 There has been less mention of the effect of the color revolutions on the shaping of Russia’s foreign policy .
 This thesis works to bridge the gap between events of the color revolutions, and Russian foreign policy that has emerged in their aftermath . This thesis is based on a study of the history of Russia's foreign policy .
 Russia's anti-Western narrative can contribute to the larger body of work that has examined both the color revolutions and the Russian foreign policy of the last decade . In examining specifically the ways in which thecolor revolutions have influenced Russia’s anti- Western narrative, this thesis can contribute.
 The color revolutions in the former Soviet republics of Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan all happened within a brief, two-year period .
 The Russian government saw the color revolutions as a threat to its influence on its own regime . The color revolutions could also be a target for a color revolution, and to its relationship with the West .
 Russia needed to take action in order to counteract the effect of the color revolutions . Russia needed the action to counter the effects of color revolutions.
 This literature review will begin with the revolutions themselves, followed by a look at how Russia has altered policies in the wake of the color revolution .
 It will examine the trajectory of Russia’s policies in the aftermath of the color revolutions . It will also examine Russia's policies toward the countries in which the color revolution occurred .
 It will examine how Russia has altered its domestic policies in response to the threat of internal revolution . It will also look at how Russia's domestic policies have been altered in the past .
 In 2003, Georgia’s Rose Revolution toppled the government of Edouard Shevardnadze, a corrupt regime that had created massive economic problems within the country . The Color Revolutions in 2003 toppled the regime, despite a surplus of natural resources .
 The elections in 2003 had serious irregularities, suspicious of a rigged election . The elections were held in 2003, but the results were suspicious .
 The major opposition party declared victory, and was joined in protest by the other opposition groups . The main opposition party declares victory .
 Shevardnadze was replaced by Mikheil Saakashvili, whose government was much more opposed to Russian influence . ShevardNadze's government was more opposed than Russia's .
 According to Tristan Landry, the Georgians involved in the revolution did not act alone .
 Georgia’s attempts to Westernize have not had much success, and Georgia's new government continues to persecute its opposition . Georgia's attempts to westernize have been unsuccessful .
 Victor Yushchenko was a major supporter of the Orange Revolution . A new election, held after the demonstrations, saw the election of Victor YUSHchenko .
 The Orange Revolution was a bitter disappointment to Russia and to the eastern areas of Ukraine with large populations of ethnic Russians and Russophone Ukrainians, who had supported Yanukovych .
 Weaknesses in Ukraine's political culture and institutions prevented true reform from taking hold . Ukraine’s democratic movement was eventually reversed .
 Yanukovych was removed from power in the Euromaidan of 2013 . In 2013, Ukrainians again took to the streets in even larger numbers, and with better preparation than in 2004, to protest .
 Protesters in Kyrgyzstan ousted corrupt leader Askar Akayev and replaced him with Kurmanbek Bakiyev . The new regime promised a democratic, anti-corruption regime .
 Alexander Cooley argues that Bakiyev failed to live up to his promises . Instead he actually increased the level of governmental corruption, Cooley says .
 Russia’s close ties with Georgia and Ukraine continued after the color revolutions . Russia's policies toward the Nations of the Color Revolutions continue after the revolutions .
 Russia could use ties, economic, social, and physical, to put pressure on governments of Georgia and Ukraine .
 Russia had to resort to military intervention when soft power failed to achieve Russia’s goals . It did in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in 2014 .
 The Tulip Revolution did not lead to a pro-Western regime, according to Yasar Sari . In Kyrgyzstan, the Tulip revolution contributed to the perception of a “wave of color revolutions sweeping across the states of the former Soviet Union .
 Russia was able to resume its relationship with Kyrgyzstan without any need to try to redirect the course of the country .
 This section of the literature review will focus on Ukraine and Georgia .
 Russia’s economic linkages with Ukraine and Georgia mean that it can use economic leverage to pressure the countries, and to punish them when they deviate from Russia's wishes .
 Ukraine and Georgia trade with both Russia and the EU nations in similar amounts . Russia is highly dependent on Russia for energy supplies, which gives Russia a strategic advantage .
 The construction of the Nord Stream gas pipeline, which delivers gas from Russia to Europe via the Baltic Sea, greatly reduced Ukraine’s access to the lucrative pipeline .i3 Eurthermore, Ukraine and Georgia both send migrant workers to Russia .
 Ukraine and Georgia create ties to Russia through physical and social links . Russia is not a large part of the overall economy of the countries .
 Russia has contributed foreign direct investment to both countries . Russia has also contributed foreigndirect investment to the United States .
 Both Georgia and Ukraine have minority populations that can be used by Russia for strategic gain . This gives Russia a stake in Georgian and Ukrainian businesses, but also imports Russian business culture and values .
 In Georgia, the Abkhazians and the South Ossetians attempted to secede in the early 1990s and have remained unhappily a part of Georgia until 2008 . Russia supported those secessionist groups and occupied their territory .
 Putin used minority status of Ossetians and Abkhazians to justify intervening in Georgia for their protection . In Ukraine, Russia also supported the secessionist regions of Donetsk and Euhansk, along with the seizure of Crimea .
 Ukrainian media relies heavily on Russian media sources, which gives Russia major influence over Ukrainian journalism . Russian media has major influence on Ukrainian media .
 Georgia relies on Russian media as well, though to a lesser extent . In 2008 Russia moved beyond soft power and intervened in Georgia .
Georgian human rights violations were also added to justify assisting 14 Jonavicus, “Window of Opportunity’s” 27 .
 A significant portion of Ukraine's population, who voted for Yanukovych, disapproved of the revolution .
 These voters were primarily located in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . The voters were mostly located in eastern Ukraine.
 The Orange revolution was a stolen victory, leaving behind a voting bloc that could see Yanukovych return to power . For them, the Orange revolution is a stolen win, for them, for their supporters .
 Yanukovych shifted foreign policy to Russia in 2010, making deals to ensure stable gas prices . Russia was able to increase its soft power presence in the region .
 Ukraine under Yanukovych became less democratic, "backsliding" into authoritarianism by methods similar to those seen in Russia . Yanukovych's government has been criticized for its policies .
 The Soviet legacy, a split society and national identity, and rampant corruption all contribute to Ukraine’s failure to reform . Ukraine's failed to reform is blamed for the country's failure to change .
Future democratic revolutions in former-Soviet countries may still be avoided . Russia was unable to prevent the color revolutions of 2003-2005 .
 Putin and Belarussian leader Alyaksandr Lukashenka have cooperated in ways that protect Belarus from the onrush of democratic ideals . In Belarus, Putin and Belarus, the two leaders have worked to protect Belarus .
 Belarus still ties its identity to a Slavic ethnicity and the Orthodox religion, as does Russia . Russia and Belarus maintained close ties after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The United States, the EU, and other European organizations have attempted to encourage a democratic transition in Belarus . The U.S. and other countries have tried to encourage the transition through diplomatic, political, and economic incentives .
 Russia is available to provide support to Belarus, but the Western efforts have been stymied and democratization has not taken root . Russia is also available to support Belarus, although Russia is not providing support .
 Putin's regime had to be concerned that Russia might experience a color revolution of its own . In light of the spread of color revolutions in a brief span of time.
 The Russian government took steps to eliminate the danger of a domestic uprising .
 Finkel and Brudny argue that the Putin regime successfully prevented a Russian color revolution by coopting the democracy-promotion strategies and turning them to the benefit of the govemment . Finkel: Putin regime prevented a Russia color revolution.
 The policies that Russia used to counteract the threat of a color revolution include isolationist policies and anti-Western propaganda, according to the Russian government . Russia also increased media censorship, restrictions on NGOs, and the development of a pro-regime youth movement .
 Putin’s regime first had to develop ideological strategies of anti-Westernism and state sovereignty to counter the prodemocratic movements .
 Gleb Pavlovsky, a Kremlin consultant used print media and Internet to spread the message against the color revolutions .
 Regime change through protest was condemned as a Western plot to build anti-Russian states . It would threaten Russian sovereignty and destroy the region's culture .
 Putin and his allies in the Russian government claimed that a color revolution in Russia would be a return to Yeltsin’s era of a weak state and economy .
 Other officials claimed the color revolutions violated principles of national sovereignty . Other officials said it would better fit Russia that the Western conception of liberal democracy .
 The Russian government has begun a program to undermine foreign trade and investment . Despite joining the WTO in 2012, the Russian government continues to undermine the program .
 Russia has prevented foreign investment in major sectors of the economy . Starting as early as 2006, with a takeover of foreign investment.
 By 2012, Russia’s economy slowed as oil prices and productivity flattened out . By 2012 the economy slowed.
 Russia has increased its economic isolation by reducing foreign investment and imports . Instead of conducting reforms needed to energize the economy, Russia has continued to reduce foreign investment .
 Opposition media are unable to compete with state-controlled media for viewers and readers . Opposition media, small in number, are unable.
 The less trade and investment there is, and the less contact with the West, it is the easier it is to convince the public that the West is to blame for Russia’s hardships . The less contact and investment is the less contacts there is.
 Isolation protects the Russian government from the Western efforts to monitor and ensure free and fair elections . Isolation also protects the Russians from the West's efforts to ensure free elections .
 Russia enacted electoral reform in order to prevent genuine opposition parties to take part in elections that might trigger demonstrations . After the color revolutions, Russia enacted electoral reform.
 Legislation enacted in 2005-2006 raised the electoral threshold from 5 percent to 7 percent . Legislation passed in 2006 raised the threshold from five percent to seven percent .
 It also got rid of the electoral alliances and the single-member district system . It restricted party registration, party membership, and regional representation of opposition parties .48 These changes reduced the representation ofOpposition parties in the legislature down to only one .
 The government has also worked to eliminate domestic and international electoral monitoring . The government also has also been working to eliminate international and domestic monitoring .
 Russia has reduced its domestic election monitoring to a single NGO, which has little power and operates in less than half the electoral districts . The OSCE declined to send election monitoring teams to Russia, citing government restrictions .
 DeBardeleben writes, "The underlying argument is that the ‘colour revolutions’ that took place in other postcommunist countries since November 2003...offered a powerful impetus for Russian elites to ‘manage’ the 2007 Russian 46 Guriev, “
 Shortly after the Orange Revolution, the Russian Duma created a draft of a law designed to restrict the independence of the NGOs operating in Russia .
 The law was eventually softened, but it still placed substantial restrictions on the ability of NGOs .
 membership to the Civic Chamber was designed in such a way as to ensure that only authority-approved organizations were granted seats . The Civic Chamber's membership was designed to ensure authority- approved organizations were given seats .
 The Chamber would not challenge the government authority in NGO-related matters . Thus, the Chamber wouldn't challenge government authority.
 Youth movements were shown to play significant roles in the color revolutions . Youth movements played significant role in the revolutions .
 Kmara in Georgia and Pora in Ukraine underlined the importance of civil society activism in the promotion of the color revolutions .
 Nashi Youth members created a Voluntary Youth Militia . It was to assist police with patrols and guard public events .
 militia members were aecused of several instances of physieal violence against members of the opposition parties . These militia members had been aecuse of several times of violence against opposition members .
 This thesis assesses the ways in whieh Russian foreign policy toward the West ehanged in the aftermath of the color revolutions . The thesis is based on a study of Russia's relationship with the West .
 It first examines the eolor revolutions themselves, looking at the eauses of the demonstrations . The patterns that emerge from the ways in whieh the revolutions were condueted are shown .
 The thesis then examines the reaetions of the Russian government to the color revolutions themselves . The thesis also examines how those reactions led to policy changes .
The main thrust of this researeh is to examine the ties between the color revolutions and the Russian foreign policy that was created shortly thereafter . The main thrust is to look at the trajeetory of anti-Westernism that arose in the aftermath of color revolutions .
 The thesis draws a eonclusion about the effect of the color revolutions on the Russian government’s attitudes toward the West and the implications for Russia's future . The thesis is also about the impact of color revolutions.
 Chapter II examines how Russia apportioned blame to the West for the color revolutions . It also examines how Western involvement in NGOs, youth activism, and the color revolution demonstrations themselves .
 Chapter III examines Russia's historical narrative of the West’s broken promises regarding the perceived expansions of NATO and the EU eastward toward Russia .
 Chapter IV examines Russia’s increasing calls for national sovereignty in the aftermath of the color revolutions . The book also examines Russia's calls for sovereign democracy to counter Western democracy promotion .
 The thesis concludes with discussion of the findings of the previous chapters, implications for future relationships with Russia, and highlight areas for further research .
 Kimberly Marten argues that leaders in patrimonial regimes are required to signal strength to their rivals in order to maintain their power .
 Russia blames the color revolutions on Western funding and Western support for the activist groups that led the revolutions . Russia blames Western support and Western funding for the protests .
 Yulia Nikitina says the West's way of acting is through the financing of radical, nationalist, neofascist and fundamentalist forces, in the opinion of Vladimir Putin .
 Elections that take place after a coup are merely a cover for those who financed the overthrow of the government . Elections that took place after the coup are just a cover.
 Russian government has used the idea that the West caused the color revolutions as a pretext to justify its own interventions into countries that have had a “Western-sponsored’ regime change”
 Russian leaders focused their blame on the NGOs and youth movements that were involved in the color revolutions .
 Russia claimed that NGOs and youth movements were tools the West used to incite the demonstrations that lead to the color revolutions . Russia claimed the West was using them as tools to incite demonstrations .
 This chapter examines the role of NGOs and youth movements in the color revolutions . It also examines the extent of their ties to the United States and the West in general .
 It explores the actions Russia has taken to counter the influence of NGOs and youth movements at home and abroad . It also explores Russia's actions to counter influence of youth movements and NGOs .
 The Washington Quarterly 38, no. 194, is a book about Russian Foreign Poliey and Intervention .
 Western demoeracy-promoting NGOs first gained aecess to the former Soviet Union following its collapse in 1991 . They were mostly allowed freedom to operate as they wished within these countries during the following decade .
University enrollment increased through the 1990s . Students could be mobilized for pro-democratic protest . University enrollment increased in 1990s.
 NGO Activity During the Color Revolutions Western NGOs have played key roles in the color revolutions . NGO Activity during the color revolution has been key to the revolution .
 Some argue that the presence of the NGOs undercuts the idea of the revolutions as popularly run . Per Mohammad Soltanifar, Russia and some others argue that they are undercutting the idea.
 United States NGO activity during the Rose Revolution was largely focused on election monitoring and reporting .
 This evidence of electoral fraud played a major role in the lead-up to mass demonstrations that ended up overturning the election results in Georgia .
 USAID increased its funding for election monitoring activities during the elections that preceded the Rose Revolution .
 The National Democratic Institute, also contributed to the election monitoring process .
Freedom House, USAID, and NDI also monitored Ukraine's elections . In Ukraine, many of the same NGOs served to monitor free and fair elections .
Exit polling can be a critical tool in the hands of activists, who can use them as propaganda against the official vote count of the regime . Exit polling will appear first, prior to the official Soltanifar, “US—Russian Rivalry,’s
 After the eolor revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine, NGO participation in those countries did not end . NGO Activity After the Color Revolutions after the eol revolutions in Ukraine didn't end .
 In both eountries, election-monitoring NGOs continued to function impartially and draw attention to inconsistencies in later elections . In both cases, election monitoring continues to function.
 The United States assistance favored Shevardnadze’s ruling party. Instead of providing the same assistance to all the parties, the U.S. assistance favored the ruling party .
 United National Movement is giving it exclusive access to significant NGO aid . The group also gives it access to major NGO aid.
 Kyrgyzstan's new leader Bakiyev showed little interest in reaching out to the West . The new leader of KyrgyZstan showed no interest in the West.
 He looked to Russia and China to consolidate his power. Educated and trained in the Soviet Union, he looked to China to consolidate his power .
 Shortly after coming to power, he made a visit to Russia to confer with Putin . He reaffirm their relationship and their primacy .
 Russia and China could perhaps be more relied on to aid Bakiyev if he runs into trouble maintaining domestic power . Russia is close neighbors to China .
 The United States is signaling that it might not be a reliable ally to Central Asian regimes . The U.S. may not be an ally to the Central Asian countries .
 The U.S. signaled to Central Asian countries that democracy promotion would take precedence over maintaining relationships with regimes in power .
 The U.S. approval of the Tulip Revolution soured relations with other Central Asian countries . Uzbekistan feared for the stability of their own regimes .
 The price of democracy promotion left Washington more reliant on Kyrgyzstan to achieve its mission in Central Asia . The U.S. was prepared to sacrifice stability for the sake of democracy, a trade-off that was unpalatable to Central Asian leaders .
 In May 2005, Uzbek troops in Andijan fired on peaceful civilians protesting the trial of local businessmen who were charged with Islamic extremism .
 The U.S. government criticized Uzbekistan’s excessive use of force, which caused the deaths of hundreds of unarmed civilians . The United States government criticized the use of excessive force .
 The color revolutions were each aided by youth movements within their respective countries . They played a major role in driving enthusiasm for democracy and free elections .
In Georgia, there was the Kmaral movement, formed in February 2003 . These movements were dominated by university students, whose populations had been rising .
 Get Out the Vote concerts, publications, and protests against the government and the police . The government cracked down on the protests .
 Reports from Georgian media indicated that George Soros’s foundations had given $5 million in funding to the Kmaral movement .
 In Ukraine, the youth movement was known as Pora, emerging less than a year before the Orange Revolution . The youth movement is known as the Pora .
 Pora. Pora was a main concern for Pora's election campaign . Pora is one of the country's most popular cities .
 The Ukrainian youth movement was distinct in that it relied heavily on local businesses for funding for printing, communication, and transportation . It capitalized on the frustrations of business owners, who disliked the excessive regulatory bureaucracy of the current government .
 Members of Kelkel acknowledged that their organization was modeled after the youth movements of the previous color revolutions . Kelkel was poised to use the highly effective means of social mobilization used by its predecessors .
 Kelkel in Kyrgyzstan is also claimed to have received money from the Soros Foundation . The Soros Foundation is also said to have given money to Kelkel .
 Another youth group, called Birge, was also active during the Tulip Revolution, though to a lesser extent . The group was also known as Birge .
 Other informal youth movements in Kyrgyzstan played significant parts in the Tulip Revolution . The Tulip revolution took place in restive southern regions of the country .
 In southern Kyrgyzstan, it is relatively common to see informal youth groups develop that serve as self-help associations between peers .
 These groups, called jo’ralar, were able to be coopted by influential supporters of the Tulip Revolution . They were used to assist with the revolutionary demonstrations taking place outside the capital .
 These protests were not coordinated, but together, they were effective . They were effective, but not coordinated .
 Between State and Opposition, SAIS Review of International Ajfairs 26, no. 86-8 .
 Russia's reaction to the color revolutions is the worry over diffusion . Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan are among the countries that have spread the ideas that have infected Georgia and Ukraine .
 The Russian response to the color revolutions was to demobilize the same domestic groups that have the potential to create a color revolution in Russia .
 Within Russia, NGOs, and youth movements, along with other political and domestic groups, have been either repressed or co-opted .
 Both government offieials and aeademies have been quiek to paint foreign NGOs as regime-ehange agents of Western demoeraeies . Putin has introdueed laws in Russia that prevent formation and funding of foreign NGOs .
In 2004, Putin elaimed that NGOs were prioritizing funding from wealthy foreign donors over their primary missions . In 2004, he said that the focus was on funding from rich foreign donors .
 The Civie Chamber had the ostensible mission to serve as a mediator between NGOs, citizens of Russia, and state authorities . The eleetions for members of the Civic Chamber were eondueted in sueh a way as to ensure that membership eonsisted of only
 Russia is eountering Western NGOs through the ereation of its own international organizations to challenge Western demoeraey-promotion efforts . Russia is also eountersing Western NGO efforts through its own organizations .
 Russia established the Russian World Foundation, which funds Russian international NGOs and finances organizations that work with Russian communities abroad . Russia also established the Russia World Foundation .
 Russia perceives the risk of the youth movements in their capacity for diffusion from one country to another . Russia’s Reaction to Youth Movements Russia sees the risks of youth movements .
 The youth movements that Russia claims have been influenced by the West can continue to spread their ideas to other nations of the former Soviet Union, including Russia .
 He argues that the youth movements of the color revolutions have not arisen completely independently, but have grown and spread their messaging from each other .
 Kmaral movement in Georgia was trained in part by a previous youth movement, Otpor, from Serbia . Otpor was in turn trained and assisted by Western-associated NGOs .
 The diffusion of the youth movements then allows for their promotion of democratic reform . The training that they received from the NGOs, to be exported to foment uprising against other undemocratic regimes in the region .
 Nashi was organized to fight the enemies of Russia, which consisted of, in their minds, liberals, fascists . Nashi.
 Western sympathizers, international NGOs, and international terrorist groups united by their hatred of Putin and his leadership in Russia .
 NashVs goals were to fight these enemies and preserve Russian sovereignty . NashVs were to protect Russian sovereignty and preserve the sovereignty of Russia .
 A pro-democracy youth movement did briefly appear in Russia, but it failed to gain traction in the political realm .
 The police presence and arrests of prominent figures during the demonstrations were effeetive in diseouraging broader participation by the Russian publie . Previous demonstrations in Russia were small and posed little threat to the Putin regime .
 A popular revolution in Russia that suecessfully manages to topple the Russian government seemed unlikely . DeBardeleben writes, "The Russian leadership undermined this potential"
 The Russian government had worked to disarm and co-opt youth movements and public demonstrations .
 The tension of East versus West is a prominent theme of the eolor revolutions as seen from Russia . It is not the only issue, it is the issue of the East-West tension .
 Also at stake is a struggle over the constitution of Russian values and identity, and the coneeption of Russia as both a strong state actor and a democracy .
 Since Russia emerged from the Soviet Union in 1991, demoeracy has been a major aspeet of its identity . The new state has been differentiating from what eame before .
Russian national identity was tied to both the idea of Russia as a Great Power and a demoeracy . The color revolutions ehallenged the notion of Russian democracy .
 The color revolutions were further portrayed by the Russian government as illegal coups d’etat, Ortmann writes .
 Russian officials accuse the U.S. and its allies of circumventing the normal democratic process in these countries . They say they are facilitating revolution instead of working within the existing government .
 The U.S. was involved in conducting regime changes in order to facilitate its goals of spreading democracy and United States influence . It also served as further “evidenee’s” that the United States was involved with conducting regime change .
 Russia has succeeded in convincing its public that the color revolutions were unsuccessful . Russia's government has been trying to convince the public that they are unsuccessful .
 A mere 3 percent of Russians believe that life improved in Georgia and Kyrgyzstan following their revolutions . Only 6 percent believe the same about the Ukrainian revolution . 72 percent are opposed to any version of the democratic movements of the color revolutions .
 Russia needed to take steps to prevent the further spread of the color revolutions, Russia says . In order to show strength in the wake of the revolution, Russia took steps to stop the spread of color revolutions .
 Koesel and Bunce argue that both Russia and China used negative framing of color revolutions to distance their own regimes from the events of the color revolutions . They say both countries used negative frames to distance themselves from their regimes .
 Moscow and Beijing argue that negative framing helped the regimes to provide further legitimacy . They also argue that the negative framing helps the regimes in Russia and Beijing to provide legitimacy .
 Sharon Wolchik argues that Russia errs in blaming the U.S. for the color revolutions . She says that Russia is blaming the United States for the Color revolutions .
 She writes, “It is clear that the successful removal of semi-authoritarian 1411 Ortmann, ‘Diffusion as Discourse of Danger,’ is clear, she writes . She writes .
 The domestic actors did not work alone, says i5i . It was they who did the tedious, difficult, and at times dangerous work of implementing this model .
 They did receive funding and training from NGOs, and were able to capitalize on the experience granted by previous successful demonstrations . They did not receive funding, training and funding from NGOs .
 Domestic activists were taught Western techniques for their campaigns against the regimes .
 Western election monitors were brought in to monitor the disputed elections .
 In Georgia and Ukraine, domestic activists could advance the possibility of achieving membership in NATO or the EU as a way to encourage support for democratic electoral reform . In Georgia, activists could also advance possibility of joining NATO or EU .
In no case did external actors work alone, Wolchik says . "They always acted as part of transnational coalitions," he says .
 Russian blame for the color revolutions lies squarely on the West, however, according to the Russian media .
 Moscow used this blame to frame the color revolutions as illegitimate Western-sponsored coups . The majority of the Russian population views the color revolution negatively .
 Leaders used the same tools of the color revolutions to prevent the occurrence of domestic unrest .
 Blaming the West for the color revolutions also allows Russian officials to justify any interventions in these and neighboring countries . Russia’s sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space, and countering expanding Western democracy promotion .
 The wave of “eolored revolutions’ that swept Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan. The eritieism of the post-Soviet regimes for the absenee of demoeraey or for violations of human rights . Washington’s plan to drive
 Russia has reacted to perceived Western encroachment by first attempting to counter Western influence through economic and cultural means, and then ultimately by military intervention in Georgia and Ukraine . Russia has also reacted to this perceived Western influence by first trying to counter it through economic, cultural means .
 This chapter examines Russia's reaction to the perceived encroachment of the West into Russia’s sphere of influence . This chapter includes Russia's response to Russia's perceived encroaching on the West .
 This chapter examines the Russian reaction to Western involvement in the color revolutions . This chapter also examines Russian involvement in Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine .
 Russian fears of Western encroachment have a long history. HISTORICAL CONTENT of the FEAR of ENCROACHMENT Russian fears.
 Russia viewed the eastward expansion of NATO as a security threat . The closer NATO approached to the former constituent republics of the Soviet Union, Russia .
 If Ukraine and Georgia joined NATO, no “buffer zone’ would lie between Russia and the Western powers . No “ buffer zone” would lie.
 From 2002 to 2010, Ukraine's government had been moving toward the possibility of NATO membership .
 In 2003, Kuehma sent Ukrainian forees to partieipate in the U.S.-led eoalition in Iraq, despite strong publie opinion against the war in Ukraine . Also in 2003, he sent Ukrainian Forees to partsieip
 Yanukovych government in Ukraine engaged in pro-European rhetoric . But its foreign policy was moving toward Russia and away from the West .
 NATO is expanding toward Russia, which fed into Russian fears of encroachment by the West . Georgia and Ukraine might not have a quick path to NATO membership, it seemed likely .
 The Kosovo Conflict of 1999 was a result of its non-aligned status during the Cold War . The region of the Balkans has been of interest to both NATO and Russia .
 After the Cold War ended, Russia still felt that the former Soviet Union nations fell under its sphere of influence .
 NATO’s interest in the Balkans left Russia feeling vulnerable to NATO encroachment . Russia feels vulnerable to the encroachment.
 In 1998, NATO began an intervention against Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic’s regime . Despite the lack of official sanction from the UN Security Council, it was not formally sanctioned .
 Russia, while indicating their willingness to veto a UN resolution in support of the NATO campaign, was not willing to openly support the Serbian regime . Russia, however, is not openly supporting Serbian regime.
 The Legaey of Operation Allied Foree in Russia’s Relations with the West is no. 577 . International Affairs 85, no. 1 .
 NATO and Russian peacekeepers were part of the UN Kosovo Force . Relations between NATO and Russia over the Kosovo conflict have been fraught .
 Both NATO and Russia claim the Balkans as an area of interest . Both countries claim the region as an areas of interest.
 NATO's intervention, without UN sanction, was seen by Russia as an attempt to bring Kosovo under NATO control . NATO’s intervention was seen as an effort to bring the country under NATO Control .
 Russia did not want NATO establishing footholds in a formerly neutral region near Russia’s own border .
 NATO's own explanations of Operation Allied Force did not help ease Moscow's misgivings . NATO’s own explanations were not enough to ease Moscow’Sloan's misGives .
 NATO was grappling with two contradictory principles: state sovereignty versus human rights . NATO had to make the determination when the latter might override the former .
 The international law was not clear in this area, and NATO did attempt to resolve the contradiction . NATO did try to resolve it .
 Russia's reactions to the Kosovo conflict were markedly different from NATO’s . Russia's reaction to the conflict was markedly different than NATO's .
 Russia was concerned with this potential change in international law, which had negative implications for its own national sovereignty . Russia was worried about the potential change of international law .
 Russia came away with the perception that NATO, in intervening without the sanction of the FTN Security Council, was defying traditional norms of state sovereignty and promoting its own interests .
 NATO justified the intervention in Kosovo as a matter of humanitarian rights, using the Responsibility to Protect Doctrine . NATO justified its intervention in the Kosovo as an issue of human rights .
 Russia intervened in South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russia used the same justifications for its violation of a sovereign state .
 Russia appeared more amenable to violating a nation's sovereignty in the name of human rights when it worked in Russia’s favor . In Russia's 2008 invasion of Georgia, Russia appeared to be more amable to violate a nation’'s sovereignty .
 The ongoing separatist conflict in the Russian territory of Chechnya had begun in the 1990s and experienced a violent resurgence from 1999 to 2006 . The violence exacerbated Russia’s territorial insecurity .
 The breakup of the Soviet Union had left Russia fearful that further breakup would occur within Russia . Russia feared further breakup could occur within the country .
There are still many ethnicities left in the Russian republics . Perhaps one of those might start its own liberation force and seek independence from Russia .
 36 region in Russia had declared independence from Russia in the aftermath of the Soviet collapse . Russia’s sending a military force into the area had conducted an insurgency campaign against the Russians .
 Russia’s military, historically trained for conventional war against European adversaries, was ill-suited for countering the Chechnyan insurgency .
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Islamic fundamentalist groups had combined with the Chechnyan separatist movement to try to break away from Moscow . The Chechen separatist movement tried to establish both Chechen independence and spread Islamic fundamentalism .
 If the Chechnyan conflict worsened, it could force international involvement in the ongoing crisis . The Putin regime could imagine NATO forces entering Chechnya to counter human rights violations, at the expense of Russia's territorial sovereignty .
Violenee in the North Caueuses also has the potential to link up with the separatist movement taking plaee in Armenia and Azerbaijan . Russia fears that militant Islam eould spread further into Russia itself, espeeially into Tatarstan and Bashkortostan .
 Terrorist disruptions in Tatarstan or Bas hk ortostan could cause major disruptions to the Russian state . The threat of domestie terrorism is still very present in Russia, says CNN .
 Russian response to the eolor revolutions was to work to ensure that the eountries involved would stay eoonomieally dependent on Russia . Another area in whieh Russia eould exert its influenee over the region .
 The eeonomie vulnerabilities also eontributed to the fragility of their governments in the faee of the eolor revolution uprisings .
 Russia has used eeonomie means to inerease its soft power in the region . Russia has been using eeonomicie for years. Russia has also used it to help inereas itssoft power in region .
 Russia has inereased its soft power in the former Soviet states through its role as the largest migrant-reeeiving eountry in the world . Russia has also inerease its softPower in the Former Soviet states .
 This further strengthens ties between nonEU member nations of the former Soviet Elnion and Russia . This further strengthen ties between the two countries .
 Russia used economic pressure on Ukraine as a means of influencing Ukrainian policy toward greater cooperation with Russia . After the Orange Revolution after the Orange revolution, Russia tried to influence Ukraine's policy toward cooperation .
 Ukraine and Georgia are very interrelated with Russia due to common soviet history .
 Russia's trade balance is almost equally distributed between Russia and the EU . The relationship is clearly more beneficial for Russia than the European Union .
 Ukraine relies on Russia for energy, and also relies on it for exports . Russia is a key consumer for Ukrainian exports .
 Russia has the ability to sell energy to other states and make up for the loss of Ukrainian trade . Russia, on the other hand, has the power to sell power to other countries and sell energy .
 After the Orange Revolution, Russia enacted a major shift in its energy policy toward Ukraine . Russia's energy policy was changed after the Orange revolution .
 Ukraine has an economy that is a major consumer of energy . Three times that of Germany’s energy consumption per unit of GDP . Russia is the supplier of that energy in natural gas and oil .
 Gazprom and the other Russian energy eompanies threatened to reseind their deals with Ukraine . The eountry did not pay the new higher prices .
 Gazprom followed through on its threat to cut off energy supplies to Ukraine for several days, convincing Ukraine to resolve the dispute in Russia’s favor . The dispute went on until 2006, when Gazprom decided to end it.
 Gazprom also received control over all of Ukraine's imports of natural gas via a shell company . Russian energy companies receive payments on their higher prices .
 Russian energy companies have been using their profits to purchase equity stakes in Ukrainian companies that control large sectors of the country’s economy .
 Yanukovych government was able to reverse the higher prices in exchange for greater cooperation with Russia . The Yanukovych government has been in power for years .
 In 2010, Ukraine and Russia signed a deal in which Russia would reduce the price of gas for Ukraine by one-third . In exchange for a 25-year extension on the lease to the naval base in Sevastopol, despite the fact that hosting foreign troops permanently on Ukrainian soil violates
 Russia’s willingness to use energy prices as a bargaining chip for greater influence in Ukraine seemed largely successful even in the wake of the Orange Revolution . Russia's willingness to take advantage of energy prices was largely successful in Ukraine .
 After the Tulip Revolution, Russia used economic means to secure further influence in Kyrgyzstan . The Russia-friendly Bakiyev regime was happy to accept that the Russia- friendly Bakiyeva regime.
 Russia has taken advantage of the massive corruption present in Kyrgyzstan’s energy sector . Russia has been taking advantage of massive corruption in the energy sector.
 Bakiyev, perhaps confident of his power consolidation, turned toward the U.S. after the 2009 elections . He was seen as a leader in Russia and the United States .
i5 Russia was unhappy with change, and Putin accused Kyrgyzstan leaders of failing to keep promises to Russia . Once Bakiyev changed course and signed a new deal with the United States for the Manas Transit Center, Russia rescinded the emergency relief .
 This had a severe impact on the country’s economy and political instability . This has a severe effect on the economy and the political instability.
 The threat of the color revolutions has contributed to the Russian fears of regional instability . The threat has been attributed to the threat of color revolutions .
 Putin alluded to the perceived fear of instability caused by the color revolutions and other mass uprisings . “We continue to see new areas of instability and deliberately managed chaos.’
 The events of the Orange Revolution upset Russia’s own intervention in Ukrainian politics . The events upset Russia's own intervention.
 The Putin regime was involved in the 2004 elections in Ukraine that lead to the Orange Revolution . Putin regime involved in 2004 elections.
 In 2007, a majority of Ukrainians held favorable views of the United States, despite a drop in favorability . A deeline in support for NATO after the Kosovo oonflict was in 2007 .
 Ukrainian perceptions of Russia were even better in 2007, with 81 percent of Ukrainians expressing a favorable view of Russia . In 2007, Ukraine's perception of Russia was even better than in 2007 .
 Russia viewed the possibility as dangerous enough to provoke a response . Whether or not the EU would have accepted the membership of Ukraine, Russia viewed it as dangerous .
 In 2010, pro-Russian Vietor Yanukovyeh was elected to the presidency of Ukraine . He was willing to enact closer ties with Russia in exchange for financial incentives from Russia .
 Russian fears that Ukraine would choose to partner with the West instead of with Russia .
 The United States increased its influence in Georgia after the Rose Revolution . The U.S. increased its presence in Georgia.
 The battle for influence in the region is fiercest between Russia and the U.S. The United States is trying to influence Russia in the Middle East .
 Russia is seeking to foster its longtime political, economic and military domination of the Caucasus . The United States has invested in the Caucasian energy sector and developed military cooperation with Caucasian countries .
 The U.S. policy toward the Caucasus is to encourage national independence of the former Soviet republics . In 2005, the United States said it would prevent the increase of Russian, Iranian, or Chinese influence over those nations .
i Washington was encouraging the idea of NATO expansion into the Caucasus region . Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan were also encouraged to join NATO . They also sought to increase access to energy resources, continue democracy promotion activities .
 United States democracy promotion in Georgia also benefits U.S. national security interests in the region .
 With U.S. backing and funding Russia cannot use economic incentives and punishments as leverage to control these nations . With United States backing, Russia can't use financial incentives or punishments to control them .
 Russian influence does not have the same strength in Georgia as it does in Ukraine . Russian influence is not the same strong as it is in Ukraine, according to the Georgia government .
 Georgia is not as dependent on Russian energy, but has a smaller population of ethnic Russians . Georgia is less connected to Russian sources of media, and is less linked to media .
 Jonavicus hypothesizes that the relative lack of Russian influence in Georgia was a contributing factor to Russia’s decision to undertake military intervention in Georgia in 2008 .
After the September 11 attacks, the United States turned its attention to Central Asia . The U.S. is in need of transport routes into Afghanistan .
After 2001 the United States presence in Kyrgyzstan was focused not on democracy promotion, but on the maintenance of the Manas Transit Center . The United States used to transport troops and material to Afghanistan .
 Russia initially approved of U.S. presence in the region due to a shared fear of the danger of al-Qaida and the spread of militant Islam .
 This initial friendliness would not last after the events of the Tulip Revolution . The Tulip revolution was the first time people had seen each other .
 Kyrgyzstan’s relations with the United States worsened after the Tulip Revolution . The United States support for the revolution and the desire for democratic reforms that it represented .
 Edueated and trained in the Soviet Union, he looked to Russia and China to eonsolidate his power . He was trained in Russia and looked to China to build his power.
 Shortly after becoming power, he made a visit to Russia to eonfer with Putin . He reaffirm their relationship and the primacy of their influence.
 The KarshiKhanabad airbase in Uzbekistan was closed in 2005 . It was the only other facility available for transport of U.S. troops and supplies in the region .
 This occurred after long-deteriorating relations between the United States and Uzbekistan finally collapsed . U.S. reaction to Uzbekistan’s handling of the Andijan crisis was critical .
 The closure of K2 leaves the Manas Transit Center as the only transport facility for the United States in Central Asia . K2 is a vital staging area for U.S. forces operating in Afghanistan .
 The United States needed to remain on good terms with Kyrgyzstan to keep the base open . The U.S. needed to stay in good terms.
 Russia feared that the U.S. would use its military presence to establish a permanent presence in Kyrgyzstan . After 2005, Russia worked to counter the United States influence .
 The U.S. won the right to use the Manas Transit Center in Kyrgyzstan . Russia, too, negotiated for military basing rights in the country .
 The Kant air base officially falls under the auspices of the CSTO . It provides Russian air support for counterterrorism operations and air control of the Central Asian region .
 Russia’s emphasis on creating bases in the Central Asian region reflects on their interest in maintaining a political and military presence in the region .
 Under Bakiyev, the Manas Transit Center was threatened with elosure several times . The center was threatened by elosure many times .
 Kyrgyzstan made a deelaration ealling for the closure of the Manas air base to the U.S. In the 2005 SCO summit, shortly after the Tulip revolution, KyrgyZstan.
 Donald Rumsfeld was sent to Kyrgyzstan to negotiate, and the base remained open . The base remains open .
 The Bakiyev government raised the rent on Manas for the Amerieans from $2 million to $200 million in 2006 . It threatened to close the base to the U.S. if the new rent were not paid .
 Kyrgyzstan’s leaders settled for a $17 million rent instead of a $18 million rent . The deal was reached after further negotiation .
 The Manas Transit Center was closed in 2009 after Bakiyev called for it to be closed . In 2009, he called for a major finaneial deal with the Russian government, and shortly before the presidential election .
 The U.S. eontinue base has been allowed to operate in the United States . After the eleetion, the base was allowed to continue its operations . The base was also allowed to rent inerease .
 Russian leaders took more direet interventions to prevent the spread of Western influenee . Russia was unable to eounter Western influence through eeonomie and eulturally means .
 Russian leaders aeted to prevent a eolor revolution in Belarus using non-military means . Russian leaders wanted to stop a revolution in the country from being used by non- military means .
 Russia was willing to engage in military intervention in order to reassert its power in the region . In Georgia and Ukraine, Russia has previously tried softer methods of influenee .
 Belarus was seen as a prime candidate for a eolor revolution of its own . After the eolor revolutions of its fellow former Soviet states, Belarus was considered a leader in the country .
There had been many protests against its authoritarian president, Alyaksandr Lukashenka, resulting in severe poliee eraekdown . There had been numerous protests against the president .
 Belarus is a notable case wherein Russian influence worked to counter the possibility of a color revolution . Several former-Soviet countries failed to be affected by democracy promotion and color revolutions .
 Russia and Belarus insulated Belarus from Western efforts to promote democracy there and disincentivized democratization for the people of Belarus . Thomas Ambrosio argues that the close relationship between the two countries is an alternative to greater integration with Europe .
 Belarus has been closely tied to Russia, as a part of the historic Russian empire . Belarus has a history of close ties to Russia .
 Belarus claims only a weak national identity, and support for integration with Russia is high . Eurthermore: Because of the elimination of the Belarusian cultural elite under Stalin, and the subsequent russification of Belarus under Communism.
 Russia has supported Belarus in a variety of ways in order to achieve its goal of protecting Belarus from the West . Russia has been in support of Belarus in the past.
 Russian trade policies and subsidies to Belarus have propped up Belarus’s economic system . Belarus has been protected from Western trade sanctions .
 A Russia-Belarus alliance has prevented military isolation and provided the Eukashenka regime an alternative to seeking EU membership . It would require significant democratic reform, which would likely lead to the end of the regime .
 Russian media had portrayed the Eukashenka government in a positive light . Russian officials had shown their support for his regime, according to reports .
 Russian influenee on Belarus eulminated in the sueeess of the Belarussian eleetions in 2006 . Belarus is the first country in Belarus to hold an election .
 Russia had provided politieal eover for earlier eleetions in 2000/2001 and 2004 . Lukashenka's power and inereased Belarus’s isolation from the West has been blamed .
 Russia's influence in Belarus's 2006 eleetions were essential for heading off another eolor revolution . Russia’s influence in the Belarus’'s 2006 Eleetions was essential to heading off a revolution .
 The eleetion was widely critieized by Western international observers for failing to meet the demoeratie requirements of a free and fair eleetions . The Eleetion has been criticized by Western observers for not meeting the requirements of the free, fair and
 Russia and other CIS states denied the allegation of irregularities in the eleetions . Western observers said the election was fair . The eleetion was fair, according to Russian observers .
 Russian media, also carried in Belarus, carried out the aceusations of eleetoral malfeasance . Russian media also carried out in Belarus .
 The media also earned stories that eharged Ukraine, Georgia, and the West with interfering in the Belarusian eleetion and other internal affairs .
 Pavel Borodin, state seeretary of the union of Russia and Belarus, praised Lukashenka and deelared him a great leader . Leonid Kuehma, Askar Akayev, and Eduard Shevardnadze.
 Akayev, Shevardnadze, and Kuehma’s sueeessor Yanukovych are the leaders ousted by the eolor revolutions . The three leaders are ousted by a series of revolutions .
 The Russian government supported the separatists from the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia in their fight for independence . The Russian-Georgia conflict of 2008 led to the 2008 Russia-Georgia War .
 South Ossetia is a region of Georgia composed of both ethnic Georgians and ethnic Ossetians . It has been a source of conflict ever since, including the presence of a Russian peacekeeping force in the region .
 Abkhazia, another multiethnic region in Georgia with nationalist leanings, has experienced conflict and allegations of ethnic cleansing . The region is also known for its ethnic cleansing claims .
 In 2008, Russia engaged in conflict with Georgia in alleged support of these two regions . In 2010, Russia was accused of supporting Georgia in an alleged conflict .
 Russia used language justifying their actions that was similar to NATO’s in Kosovo . Russia's actions were similar to that of NATO's in Kosovo, highlighting the importance of intervening .
 U.S., EU, EU, and NATO were not willing to confront Russia over the fate of the nonNATO-member post-Soviet states . They realized that, despite verbal support from the United States, the EU and NATO, these organizations were not ready to
 Russia demonstrated their commitment to maintaining their influence in these states, and their willingness to use force to do so . Russia, in turn, showed their commitment.
 Russia also showed that, for these states, attempting to gain NATO membership was viewed by Russia as a threat . Russia would threaten their sovereignty in order to prevent its loss of influence .
 In 2014, Ukraine again experienced a popular uprising against Russian-aligned Victor Yanukovych . Yanukovych had defeated the remnants of the Orange Revolution coalition in the 2010 presidential election .
 This uprising, referred to as the Euromaidan, resulted in the exile of Yanukovych and a change of government . The uprising, called the Eurmaidan.
 Russian officials have referred to the 2014 Euromaidan in Ukraine as a coup d’etat, instead of a mere shift in the governing party .
 The three nations were given security assurances of political independence and territorial integrity from Russia and the U.S. In return, the three countries were given assurances of independence .
 Russian officials argue that, just as the West recognizes the results of the Euromaidan uprising as a lawful expression of popular self-determination, so should they recognize the Crimean referendum to join Russia, they say . The Crimean referendum occurred shortly after Russian intervention in the region.
 Putin justified the annexation of Crimea as a defense of Russia’s national interests . Crimea is a plaee of national and religious heritage that must be proteeted .
 Ukraine played a central role in Russia’s eonception of its own great power identity dating baek to the time of Catherine the Great . Ukraine's Crimea and the southeastern regions of the eountry played a key role in its eonceptions .
 Her expansion of the Russian empire into ‘Novorossiya’ in the late 18**' century marked the true emergenee of Russia as a foree to be reekoned with on European stage .
 Marten argues that it was not politieally possible for Putin to be seen as giving in to Western pressure regarding Ukraine .
 Putin’s politieal patron-elient network requires him to signal strength frequently to both the public and his network members .
 West has been disrespected by Western leaders over the course of his terms in offiee . After reaching out to the West early in his presideney, he came to feel disrespected .
 His feelings of being disrespeeted by the West over presumed Western interventions into the color revolutions, and in the Russian elections of 2011, left him no longer willing to eompromise with the West .
 Matsaberidze argues that despite interventions in Georgia and Ukraine, Russia has no wish to eonquer those nations . He says that despite the interventions, despite those interventions, Russia is not interested in eonquering those nations.
 Russia is fighting a proxy war against the West, using those eountries as leverage . Instead, Russia is using them as leverage, using them to gain leverage .
 Russian leaders fear the U.S. is not only guiding the color revolutions in order to encircle Russia . Russia's “besieged fortress’ mentality sees sinister Western encroachment from all directions .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union allowed the U.S. and other Western powers to assert their authority in the former Soviet sphere in the 1990s and 2000s .
 It has also seen U.S. intrusion into the Central Asian states of the former Soviet Union . It also has seen United States intrusion into Central Asia .
 Russia has used its influence to preserve its influence in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan . Russia has also used its control of vast energy resources in Georgia and Ukraine . Russia is also trying to preserve influence in other former-Soviet nations .
 Russia’s fears of encroachment have shown no signs of abating . However, Russia's fears of encouraging fears of abating have shown no sign of fear of encroachment .
 Vladimir Putin was asked about the consequences of the color revolutions in the former Soviet sphere . Putin was interviewed in 2005 .
 "My greatest concern is not that dramatic events are taking place there, but that they are going outside the framework of the existing legislation and constitution," he said . He responded, “ my greatest concern was not that Dramatic events are take place there.
 This chapter explores the Russian government’s efforts to develop sovereign democracy in the wake of the color revolutions . This chapter also explores the government's efforts to developing sovereign democracy .
 The concept of sovereign democracy emerged from Russia’s emphasis on national sovereignty and opposition to the democracy promotion and election-monitoring activities of Western NGOs .
 Sovereign democracy holds that state sovereignty is the foundation of international law . Nonintervention in the affairs of sovereign states takes priority over interventions in the name of human rights violations .
 It includes the idea that nations whose sovereignty is violated, for any reason, have the authority to defend their sovereignty through military means .
Russian democracy was deployed in the Russian reaction to the Tulip Revolution, as part of a campaign to discredit the revolution as undemocratic .
 Russia needed an alternate ideology that would stand in opposition to its view of Western-style democracy . Russia could use to justify its rejection of the practices of democracy promotion that the Western states were advocating .
 RUSSIA’S EVOLVING NARRATIVE on the MEANING of DEMOCRACY Sovereign democracy evolved from Russia’s desire to promote national sovereignty .
 The development of a Russian ideology of sovereignty and a strong state needed to continue to be seen as democratic, according to the author . The state was influenced by authoritarian ideals.
 The combination of strong state and respect for sovereignty without completely turning away from democracy was turned into the concept of sovereign democracy by Russian thinkers and officials .
 The concept of sovereign democracy was introduced in 2005, shortly after the last of the color revolutions, the Tulip Revolution .
 Sovereign demoeracy emerged as a eounter to the color revolutions, and especially to the notion that the color revolution was driven by Western sponsorship . Sovereign demoers emerged as an eounter.
 Ortmann argues that sovereign democracy is not in direct competition with Western-style democracy . Ortmann says sovereign democracy does not compete with Western democracy .
 Russian insecurity is an expression of Russian insecurity over the stability of the Russian state . Instead, it is a fear of disorder that might threaten its viability .
 Sovereign democracy allowed the Putin regime to create a political and ideological slogan around which it can formulate policy . The Putin regime has been accused of using the slogan as a political slogan .
 The goal of sovereign democracy was to provide ideological legitimacy for the ruling party . The goal was to give the party the initiative to control the ideological narrative .
 The sovereign democracy ideology laid out Putin’s goals for Russia and for Russian foreign policy . It gave the Putin regime additional authority in domestic politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russian democracy became tied to its identity as a Great Power . The independence and sovereignty that Great Power status could bring could bring, says the Russian president .
Sovereignty then became associated to democracy, as it was sovereignty that guaranteed freedom and self-determination . Ortmann, “Diffusion as Discourse of Danger,’s ‘Diffusion of Danger’ was 367.
 The U.S. was undermining the sovereign independence of states through the promotion of democracy abroad, Ortmann writes . Ortmann: "Sovereign democracy’ was put in the context of a narrative, in which the United States was undermining sovereignty .’
 Putin claims to be pro-democracy, but his sovereign democracy has cast doubt on democratic movements . Putin's sovereign democracy casts doubt on democracy in Russia .
 Any domestic movement associated with foreign actors violates that sovereignty and is therefore illegitimate . By emphasizing the rights of national sovereignty, he can then conclude that any domestic movement that is associated withforeign actors violates sovereignty .
 To the West, the color revolutions are legitimate democratic movements, the West says . To the west, the revolution is legitimate, according to the West .
 Russian leaders disagree on the concept of sovereign democracy . They use the concept to illustrate their position on the undemocratic nature of the color revolutions .
 sovereignty has been violated and therefore they cannot be democratic. Because the color revolutions contained outside influence, sovereignty is violated, says author .
 Instead they portray the color revolutions as leading to a regime dominated by foreign actors . Instead of the color revolution, they portray them as being dominated by foreigners .
 United Russia, considered nonideological candidates, adhering not to any specific political agenda other than a generic label of conservativeness . United Russia was considered non-political candidates .
 Putin maintained the legitimacy of his regime without linking his government to any specific political ideology . The color revolutions, however, changed the political elite's taste for non-ideology .
 Russian leaders unhappy with role democracy promotion played in the color revolutions . Russian leaders were unhappy with the role of NGOs, youth activism and election monitoring .
 Putin regime wanted to denounce those activities while still proclaiming support for democracy in general . The Putin regime wants to denounce the activities of those activities .
 Putin sought to redefine democracy in such a way as to make it compatible with his anti-democratic goals . Instead, he sought to change the way democracy was designed .
 A Russian conception of democracy emphasized the importance of a strong state, national sovereignty, and maintaining domestic order . A strong state and national sovereignty are important in Russia, says the author .
 Other democratic ideals, such as freedom of the press, freedom of association, and minority rights, were disregarded and subject to attack by the Putin regime .
 Putin had to distinguish his party from both the Communist party and various nationalist movements . Putin had been advocating for creating authoritarian governments in Russia for the past decade .
 In creating its new ideology, the Putin regime had a fine line to walk . The Putin regime has a fineline to walk.
 Putin needed a to redefine democracy in a way that could be seen by the public as distinct from both the West and from authoritarian movements within Russia . Putin's government has been accused of being authoritarian in Russia .
 Russian leaders used widespread internet and print media stories to spread delegitimizing messages about the color revolutions . Finkel and Brudny show that Russian leaders use widespread internet, print media to spread messages .
 Russian officials specifically blamed Western NGOs for financing activists in the color revolution countries and using democracy promotion efforts and election monitoring .
 The first emergence of a new ideology to counter the Western efforts at democracy promotion was an article by Valery Zorkin, the Chief Justice of the Russian Constitutional Court .
 The principles of state sovereignty and self-determination were first established during the treaties of the Westphalian peace in 1648 . Western organization insistent on enforcing human rights at the expense of national sovereignty .
 First, principles of state sovereignty and territorial integrity are being placed in opposition to human rights and nations’ right to selfdetermination . First, the principles of states' sovereignty, territorial integrity and sovereignty are being put in opposition.
 Second, nation states are being blamed for their inability to ensure effective governance under conditions of globalization . Second, nations are being blame for their lack of effective governance in globalization .
 To Zorkin, human rights and self-determination for minority groups are a threat to Russian national security . To Zorksin, Human Rights and Self-determination is a risk to Russia's security .
 He argues that the greatest threat to the Russian Federation is the success of a minority nationalist independence movement . He argues the idea of state sovereignty being overridden in favor of human rights and nationalistic selfdetermination caused the collapse of both Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union .
Nationalistic and human rights movements within a multinational state can pose a threat to the security and territorial integrity of that state, says the author .
 Zorkin claims that any attempt to divide the sovereignty of a state will inevitably lead to violence and human rights violations . He claims that ethnic violence in Bosnia and Kosovo arose from the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s .
Since September 11, 2001, many states have used the threat of terrorism to attack the idea of national sovereignty, he says . He also claims that many countries have used terrorism to create laws that override human rights .
 This claim aims to point out the hypocrisy of the U.S. and its coalition partners, which have participated in interventions against nations that violate human rights, as in Kosovo and Iraq .
 Zorkin uses this argument to undermine the position of the U.S. and NATO as advocates of human rights in the international arena .
 The states will disregard Russia’s territorial sovereignty in order to reetify these violations, just as NATO has done in previous eonfliots .
 The Russian publie is not averse to the re-defining of demoeraey away from the western ideal .
 Surveys of Russian public opinion of various concepts assoeiated with demoeraey emphasize achieving a high standard of living .
 Russian public opinion ranks support for free press, pluralism, and minority rights mueh lower .
 The Russian publie seems to have some sympathy for the view that western variants of demoeraey may have limited applieability in Russia .
 Russian publie is willing to follow the Putin government as it ereates an ideology distinet from its eonception of the liberal demoeraey of the West .
 Arguments Against Western-Style Democracy Russia takes exeeption to what it sees as the West’s fomenting of revolutions and regime changes .
 Russia argues that the imposition of what it sees as Western-style demoeraey is not eompatible with the eulture and traditions of these post-Soviet nations . Russia argues the imposition is not the same as those post- Soviet nations .
 Instead of stable demoeraey, these attempts to impose Western standards lead to ehaos, violenee, an unstable government, and further regime ehanges as the governmental system fails .
 Russian offieials have pointed to the struggles of the post-eolor revolution regimes in Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan . The leaders of those nations were both ousted in 2010 after failing to address the eorruption that drove the original demonstrations .
 Western forees are willing to undertake revolutions even in states where leadership is attempting to eoneiliate with the opposition or maintain Western relationships, as Shevardnadze was doing prior to the Rose Revolution .
 Russia believes Western leaders will eonduet regime ehange without regard to loyalty . Russia believes that supporting the West will not guarantee proteetion from Western-sponsored regime. Thus, Russia believes.
 Russia has also been eritieal of what it eonsiders the Western overemphasis on human rights . Russia also has been eonsidering the West's overemphasising the human rights.
 Putin argued in 2012 that overriding state sovereignty for human rights eoneerns was not always a good thing . In a 2012 artiele, Putin argued that overriding the state's sovereignty for e oneerns wasn't always good .
 Putin's view: U.S. and its allies are aeting not out of an ethieal imperative when intervening in human rights violations . He further aeeuses the United States of using these humanitarian interventions as a way of seeking the seeurity of absolute inv
 Putin also eriticizes what he refers to as the privatization of the human rights agenda by Western nations that eontrol human rights monitoring proeess .
 He elaims that Western states use the agenda of human rights as a means to exert pressure on Russia and other states . He says the Putin regime has undeserved eritieism of its governing praetiees .
 Russia has responded to the perceived Western criticisms by withdrawing from Western democracy promotion efforts . Russia has also begun to undermine these efforts in its neighboring countries .
 Russia’s Opposition to Western Election Monitoring Russian leaders had opposed international election monitoring before the color revolutions . They resisted even more after the Orange Revolution in Ukraine . Russia's opposition to Western election monitoring of Russia's neighboring states had opposed it .
 Russia and other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States formed their own election monitoring program . Russia adopted the Convention on Election Standards, Electoral Rights and Ereedoms in 2002 .
 The CIS eleetion monitoring was first used during the 2003 Duma eleetions in Russia . OSCE and the Couneil of Europe both disagreed .
 Russia, along with other members of the CIS, protested the aetions of Western eleetion observers . They argued that they inaeeurately portray the results of eleetions in the CIS region .
 In 2004, Russia and eight other CIS members aeeused the OSCE of using its eleetion monitors, and its aeeusations of unfair eleetions, to impinge on sovereignty of the CIS states .
 The CIS doeument aeeused the OSCE of foeusing too mueh on human rights and demoeraey in the CIS eleetions . Not enough foeus on seeurity issues.
 Russian offieials aeeused the OSCE’s Offiee for Demoeratie Institutions and Human Rights . Eontains the eleetion monitoring program of interfering with the Ukrainian eleetions .
 The Russian ehallenge to demoeratie norms was gradually beeoming more explieit than it had been before . These eomments were the first signs that the Russian e hallenge was gradually becoming moreexplieit .
 The Georgian Rose Revolution in 2003 and the European pereeptions of Russia’s eleetions in Deeember 2003 and Mareh 2004 annoyed Russia . It was only after the Orange Revolution that Russia took the ehallenge to another .
 Russian Eoreign Minister Sergei Eavrov argued that outside eleetion monitoring eould be used as a tool to manipulate eleetions and to inerease destabilization in vulnerable eountries . This had oeeurred in Ukraine’s and subsequent Orange Revolution .
 Moscow argues European elections should be held to a significantly lower standard than they are currently required to achieve free and fair status . Moscow argues that European elections must be held in a lower standard .
 Some newly democratized states, they argue, cannot realistically achieve such high standards, given the limitations of their governmental institutions .
 These states should have a lower bar to clear in order for their elections to be deemed free and fair . The states should be able to make their elections free, fair and free .
 Russia says it is trying to remove politics from the election monitoring process . The Permanent Council would have the opposite effect, creating opportunity for vastly increased politicization .
 By reducing the numbers of election observers, the proposal would also leave fewer unbiased reporters to witness the actual election processes .
 Russia's proposal from Russia and its allies met with little approval from the Western members of the OSCE and ODIHR officials .
 Russia would like to see less election monitoring and a relaxation of the standards of free and fair elections . These proposals for changing the process of election monitoring illustrate how Russia would want less monitoring .
 Russia’s goals with these proposals do not seem designed to convince the West that they have merit . Russia's goals are not designed to convinced the West they are merit.
 The OSCE's verdiet of unfair eleetions are biased or politieally motivated, Saari writes . Saari: "This kind of ‘forum-shopping’ is beeoming an established praetiee in the semi-authoritarian states of the
 Russia then went a step further by making eonditions unfavorable enough to prevent the OSCE from even observing Russia’s eleetions . The OSCE also went a further step further.
 Russian offieials delayed the entry of the ODIHR observers during the Russian eleetions of 2007 and 2008 . ODIH would be allowed to observe the eleetion .
 The ODIHR refused to observe the eleetions, eiting the delays and restrietions as politieal maneuvers to prevent fair monitoring of the eleetsions . Ultimately, the ODIH refused to watch.
 Russia eould eonduet eleetions, and eertify them free and fair, without any dissenting report from outside observers . Thus, Russia eud euduet Eleetions are free, fair, and free, according to the Russian government .
 Russia’s reemergenee as a rising power in the 2000s neeessitated a new international role, no longer the Cold War superpower or the failing state of the 1990s . Russia's role in the International Arena Russia's reemergergenee
 Russian polieymakers have sought to aseend to the ranks of the major international polies . They play key roles in resolving international issues and resolving international problems .
 Russia needs to put more effort into its own international coalitions, says Putin . Russia is trying to balance the Western international presence with its own coalitions .
 The CSTO is also concerned with order and sovereignty, providing political support to the regimes of its member nations in order to avoid color revolutions and similar political uprisings .
 Russia can use these international organizations to increase its regional influence and spread Russia’s narrative of sovereignty . Russia can also use these organizations to both increase its international influence .
 Russia sought to balance against the U.S. and EU in the international arena through increased military power . Russia seeks to balance with the United States and the EU in international arena .
 Russia embarked on an expansive program of military modernization beginning in 2008 . The program is aimed at modernizing its aging military .
 The ideology was deployed in the aftermath of the Tulip Revolution to portray the revolution in a negative light . Shortly after the TULIP REVOLUTION, the ideology was used in the development of sovereign democracy .
 For Kyrgyzstan's Tulip Revolution, Moscow made an even stronger case about color revolutions creating disorder instead of democracy . Moscow made a stronger case for the Tulip revolution .
 The Tulip Revolution was followed shortly after the Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan . The Andijans massacre was followed by the Tulip revolution in the country .
 Russia allowed Russia to tie together the fear of disorder from the color revolutions and the threat of Islamic extremism in Central Asia . The Tulip Revolution as causing disorder also ties into the narrative that the United States involvement in regime change in that region of the world brings increased terrorism threats .
 Russian officials went so far as to call the Andijan uprising a failed color revolution, and to tie it to U.S. democracy promotion efforts .
 Moscow attempted to tie together the color revolutions and U.S. democracy promotion with Islamic fundamentalist terrorism, to portray them as chaotic and dangerous .
 By the time the Tulip Revolution occurred in Kyrgyzstan, the concepts of sovereign democracy were used by Russia to counter the narrative of democratic reform .
 Russia blames U.S. for inciting domestic unrest . Russia blames the United States.
 If Western influence instigated the Tulip Revolution, then it lacked the selfdetermination component required for it to be truly democratic, says the author .
 Russia framed the Tulip Revolution as creating disorder, not democracy . Instead, Russia framed it as creating Disorder, not Democracy, not disorder .
 Russia could oppose it while still claiming to be a democratic country and to value democracy elsewhere . Thus, Russia could opposition it and tovalue democracy elsewhere.
 Kremlin PR consultant Gleb Pavlovsky blamed the United States for testing a “technology of a loss of national sovereignty’ during the Tulip Revolution . He said the perceived actions of the U.S. in Kyrgyzstan were undermining the democratic elections .
 Russian political commentator Andrannik Migrainian blamed the United States’ involvement in the Tulip Revolution for increasing destabilization in Central Asia .
 He argued that Central Asian leaders no longer view the U.S. as bringing peace to the region, but instead as causing more problems than they solve .
 Russia’s reframing of the Tulip Revolution was also the creation of a narrative for the previous color revolutions as a ‘wave of revolutions’ that were destabilizing instead of democratic .
 The United States and its coalition partners set a timeline for removing troops from temporary basing in Central Asia . In the 2005 Astana Deelaration, the member states of the SCO requested the United States.
 U.S. forces expelled from the K2 airbase they had been using to stage troops entering the Afghanistan theater . They entered into new, friendly agreements with Russia and the CSTO in lieu of United States aid .
 The Kyrgyz leadership brought into power by the Tulip Revolution also sought closer ties with Russia . The KyrGYz leadership also moved away from the democratic ideal espoused by their movement .
 Kyrgyzstan repeatedly threatened closure of the Manas facility in the years following the Tulip Revolution . KyrgyZstan’s relations with the U.S. soured as the country's relationship with the United States soured .
 Russia has reengaged with Kyrgyzstan through investments, largely in their energy sector . The energy sector has now fallen almost completely under Russian control .
 Russia’s success in Central Asia may strengthen its image of itself as a Great Power . Russia is able to influence and project power within its sphere of influence .
Jonavicus looks at the outcomes of the Rose and Orange Revolutions in 2009 . ‘Euphoria of the coloured revolutions hasn’t been sufficient to build genuine ‘western-style’ democracy, he writes .
 Russia has managed to form new political regimes in Georgia and Ukraine after its own ‘sovereign democracy’ model . The more recent events of the Arab Spring showed Russia that pro-democracy uprising had not come to an end .
 Putin claimed that soft power was used to provoke both the color revolutions and the Arab Spring, and to manipulate the domestic politics within the affected nations . Putin also claimed that this soft power had been used to manipulate domestic politics .
 He goes on to eritieize “pseudo-NGOs,’ who are funded by outside groups and work, not in the interest of the loeal people, but instead try to destabilize governments for the gain of their home nations .
 By 2012, sovereign demoeraey had fallen out of favor in Russia . Russian offieials eontinue to appeal to sovereignty when arguing against Western influenee in more reeent popular uprisings .
 Its replaeement appears to be a rising ideology of nationalism and eonservatism . The fate of whieh remains to be seen .
 The color revolutions failed to produce lasting democratic reform, especially in Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan . Each of these countries experienced further uprisings in the decade following the revolutions .
 The color revolutions changed the parties in power, but did little to address institutional and cultural issues that encouraged corrupt practices .
 Shafee writes, “The latest trend shows that post-Soviet countries cannot be reformed quickly, and a change is not simply about the removal of one leader for the sake of another .
 Russia encouraged dependence of these nations through trade and energy deals, aid, and shared media and culture . Russia also encouraged dependence on these nations by sharing media, shared media.
 Western-funded NGOs, especially those involved in democracy promotion and election monitoring, claim they were working deliberately to undermine the regimes of the color revolution countries . They claim that Western- funded NGOs are working to undermine those regimes .
 Blaming the West for the color revolutions did not gain much traction in the international arena . But it did provide fodder for the anti-Western domestic narrative in Russia .
 This discourse could then be used to foment popular opinion against the West within Russia . It could also lay the groundwork for Russian intervention within those very same countries .
 The color revolutions added to the feeling of Western encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence since the collapse of Soviet Union .
 The U.S. deals for basing rights in post-Soviet Central Asia to aid in the United States and NATO military action in Afghanistan . They seem to fit within a pattern of Western involvement in the post-Communist sphere .
 Russia was also threatened by the evolution of human rights interventions into sovereign nations, including the NATO interventions in the Balkans, and the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq to fight terrorism .
 Russia's actions caused Russia to fear intervention into its own fight against Chechen separatists . These actions included both acts of terror and alleged human rights violation .
 Russian fear of encirclement by the West served as a contributing factor to the decision to take more active measures to prevent further spread by intervening politically, economically, in color revolution countries .
 Russia worked with the other states of the CIS to thwart Western election monitoring activities in their region . Russia also worked with other states to thwart West election monitoring.
 Russia also enacted domestic reforms by restricting NGO activity, tightening electoral party qualifications, and coopting a youth movement . Proposing an alternative to Western-style democracy promotion allowed the Russian government to create a narrative that would enable it to inhibit democracy promotion and fair elections .
 In more recent years, Russia has continued to accuse the West of inciting regime change and color revolutions .
 Russia may intervene in other nations to help them defend against Western-backed movements . There has been a shift toward formalizing these concerns in Russian national security documents and military doctrine .
 Russian initiatives to upgrade and modernize the military forces show that Russia is gaining the capability to carry out possible interventions . Russian initiatives show that Russian initiatives are being taken to improve the military .
 Russian economy has declined in the face of falling oil revenue . Russian government has turned to other means to secure its popularity .
 The Russian government has been working to convince its people that the causes of Russia's economic woes can be blamed on the West . The solution is not to work on reducing Western sanctions, but to establish even further economic isolation .
 The annexation of Crimea in 2014 showed the efficacy of hybrid warfare as a means of intervention . It did not prompt military retaliation from the West .
 Russia has expanded its military reach beyond the post-Soviet borders with its engagement in Syria on behalf of the Assad regime . Russia has been involved in the conflict in Syria for years .
 Russia was also able to claim that it was standing up for national sovereignty over the accusations of human rights violations by the Assad regime that lead the United States to provide support for anti-Assad rebels .
 Engaging in Syria also gives Russia the appearance of being or remaining a Great Power . Russia can intervene and direct the affairs of other nations on the world stage .
 Russian involvement has required that the U.S. and other nations recognize Russia as a key player in the Middle East . The United States and other countries need to recognize Russia's involvement in the region .
 The Russian aircraft carrier Kuznetsov made a stop in Eibya to welcome a leader of one of the factions opposing the current UN-backed government . Russia may continue to undertake military intervention abroad in order to increase its role in the international arena .
 Russia could use public opinion, by blaming Western incitement of the color revolutions, by attempting to show a pattern of Western encroachment into the post-Soviet region . Russia could also advocate for alternative approaches to democracy and national sovereignty .
 Russia has shown its willingness to intervene in the nations threatened by revolution, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Russia's use of soft power and use of military force is an example of Russia's willingness to act on its own . Russia has also shown willingness
 Nicolas Bouchet writes, "The key issue here is not whether Russia’s leaders believe their rhetoric about color revolutions or whether they would use this as an excuse for intervening abroad"
 Global Politics and Strategy 57, no. 10.1080/00396338. 2015 .