 In spring of 2014, some anti-Maidan protestors in southeast Ukraine, in alliance with activists from Russia, agitated for the creation of a large separatist entity on Ukrainian territory .
 Novorossiya is a historic region on the northern shores of the Black Sea that was created by Russian imperial colonizers . The region was created in the late 1800s by Russian Imperial colonizers.
 Anti-Maidan agitation in Ukraine gave way to outright secession in April 2014 . Armed rebel groups established the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhans'k People’s Republic on parts of the Ukrainian oblasts .
 Rebel leaders aspired to create a renewed Novorossiya that incorporated all of eastern and southern Ukraine from Kharkiv to Odesa oblasts .
 Novorossiya project had minority support, between 20 and 25% of the population, poll found .
 The Novorossiya project had significant support for ethnic Russians, residents of Kharkiv and Odesa, for older and poorer residents .
 Its recent revival emerged in late Soviet Ukraine and within a coalition of “national-patriot’s” Russians . Russians viewed the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union as a tragic fragmentation of the Russian nation .
 Ukraine's reemergence as an alternative territorial vision of Ukraine in 2014 took many by surprise . Ukraine's territorial vision was an alternative vision of the country's future .
 A geopolitical imaginary is a geographic signifier that helps organize and anchor geopolitical discourse . The geopolitical imaginary can be used to help organize, anchor and organize geopolitical discourse.
 Most are meta-geographical abstractions, like ‘the West’ and “the East,’ which are put to use in multiple ways by political entrepreneurs, party organizations, and state elites .
 Some are mobilizational images, symbols and slogans for political movements . Others are mobilizing images, slogans and slogans .
 A few are the rallying cries of secessionist projects expressing alternative political geographies amidst crises of the existing territorial order . "Republika Srpska" after Bosnia-Herzegovina’s parliament moved towards independence in 1991–92, “Alania�
 Novorossiya did not begin life as a secessionist imaginary but as an aspirational regional identity . The parliament of Soviet Ukraine proclaimed itself sovereign in the summer of 1990 .
 Only a few marginal groups within Ukraine and Russia clung to the idea of Novorossiya as a primordial imperial region .
 The idea persisted on the political margins within both states until the spring of 2014 . The idea continued to be debated for years before the election .
 The governance crisis precipitated by the Euromaidan protests created a moment of opportunity for a cross-border network of pro-Russia activists to seize power in the Donbas .
 Novorossiya is an alternative political geography for southeast Ukraine . It should be conjoined to and follow the path of Crimea towards “self-determination’ and “rejoining’s Russia.
 The People's Republic of Donetsk (DPR) and the People’s Republic of Luhans'k (PPR) declared themselves sovereign . Novorossiya announced the creation of a confederal Union of People'sRepublics in June 2014 .
 Novorossiya was resurrected but only to live for two months as a live secessionist geopolitical project . NovorOSSiya was thus resurrected but was only resurrected by the Russian government .
 This paper is divided into two major parts and a series of subsections . The paper is split into two main parts and one major part of the subsections .
 Six of the eight oblasts that are claimed to represent Novorossiya were caught up in the war . The exceptions are the Donetk and Luhans’k oblast. The survey was conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology .
 It was the name of a new Russian province created on the lightly populated steppe territories north of the Black Sea . It was controlled by the Zaporog Cossacks and partly by the Crimean khanate that was backed by the Ottoman Empire .
 It was “securitized’ by annexation to the Russian Empire as a result of a number of wars with the Ottomans . It was approved by Empress Catherine II in 1764 .
 The guberniya was subdivided into three provinces and consisted of Cossack regiments, the military, and administrative structures formed around military units raised from the local population .
 Later the regiments were transformed into regular territorial units,uyezds. Later the units were turned into regular units .
 The territory of Novorossiyskaya Guberniya was constantly growing, expanding to include Russia's newly acquired lands around the Azov Sea .
 In 1803, Novorossiya was split into three smaller guberniyas but, until 1874, they were integrated within NovorOSSiya’s general governorship .
 Novorossiya as part of either Russia or Ukraine before the twentieth century is presentist (i.e.e., an anachronistic use of present-day concepts to interpret the past) because distinct polities with these names did not exist .
 In many territories such as Slobozhanshchina now divided between Russia and Ukraine in the Kharkiv-Belgorod area, the population was ethnically mixed . Ukrainian-speakers were generally dominant in rural areas .
 In the early twentieth century, geographers and historians delimited historical Novorossiya in different ways . Some not even including the Crimean Peninsula or the Kuban’s and Stavropol' territories on the east side of the Black Sea .
 Bessarabskaya, Khersonskaya, Tavricheskaya, Yekaterinoslavskaya, the Region of the Don Army, and Stavropol’skaya .
 In Soviet times, the word "Novorossiya" was associated with the imperial past . It was used only in specialized books or in historical novels .
 Its connotations were with imperial adventure, glorious victories of Russian troops over the Ottoman Empire . The 3 deeds of famous generals, such as Alexander Suvorov and Mikhail Kutuzov, were among them .
 None of the political and administrative boundaries drawn during Communist rule corresponded to historical Novorossiya .
 The declaration of sovereignty by Soviet Ukraine’s newly elected parliament in July 1990 spurred the creation of movements opposed to the prospect of Ukrainian independence .
 In August 1990, a political movement in Odessa sought to revive the imperial territory of Novorossiya .
 The inhabitants of southern Ukraine were a melting pot of settlers from 10 neighboring nations . They were ethnic Ukrainians with their own distinctive imperial history .
 Surylov became involved in the mobilization of residents of Transnistria against the prospect of Moldova “re-uniting’ with Romania . Suryov subsequently became involved.
The collapse of the Soviet Union precipitated a crisis of geographic and political belonging for many of its nations . The collapse of Soviet Union led to the collapse of many nations .
Within far right and far left political circles, the idea of restoring the Soviet Union had many supporters . However, within far left and far right political circles. The idea of creating a larger Russia that incorporated historic imperial lands had some supporters .
 A catalyzing event in geopolitical debate at the time was the conflict in Moldova over Transnistria .
 From March until July 1992, fighting there was in the headlines in Moscow .
 Some young Russians traveled to Tiraspol’ to join the separatist Transnistrian forces . They turned to the romantic idea of Novorossiya to justify and aggrandize their cause .
 Novorossiya was an appealing notion to some partisans of the PMR . It foregrounded the foundational role of the Russian empire in the region .
 The idea of the unification of Transnistria with southeast Ukraine gained no traction . The unification of the two countries was proposed .
 The Kremlin appears to have authorized the Russian security services to use their influence to create territorial governance problems for the new pro-Western government in Kyiv .
 Novorossiya was created as a “red orthodox’ project that mixed worker rights with the Orthodox religion and conservative morality . Others were imperial nationalist groups that sought to create NovorOSSiya as a "red orthodox" project .
 The opposition to the new government in Kyiv after February 2014. What united these different groups was their opposition to a new government .
 The initial figurehead of the Novorossiya movement in the Donbas was Pavel Gubarev, a businessman with a background in far right Russian nationalist politics .
 He was arrested soon afterwards and thus lost out to others within the Donetsk People’s Republic movement .
 Ukrainian Interior Ministry forces tried to dislodge them the next day . Heavy fighting broke out in the city and thereafter spread to the surrounding region .
 One of those who traveled from Crimea was Aleksandr Borodai, a Russian citizen born in Moscow .
 As a young man he fought in Transnistria in 1992, he later became a writer and editor under the guidance of Aleksandr Prokhanov at the ‘national-patriotic’ newspaper Zavtra .
 Donetsk and Luhans’k staged self-determination referendums on 11 May . Borodai served as the first Prime Minister of the Donetsk People's Republic until early August 2014 .
 The first defense minister of the DPR was Igor Strelkov, a friend of Borodai . He later fought in the Army of Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Chechnya .
 In Crimea, both Borodai and Strelkov played active roles in facilitating Russia's annexation by Russia .
 Activists attended the party’s founding congress from the eight oblasts of southeast Ukraine . It envisioned uniting into a separatist confederative state .
Both Alekaandr Prokanov and Aleksandr Dugin addressed delegates and promised their support . Both were key intellectuals of Russian revisionist nationalism .
 Oleg Tsarev was the only member of the Ukrainian Rada to defect to the rebels . He was one of the only members of the Rada.
 Tsarev subsequently became speaker of the putative federal parliament of Novorossiya in June 2014 . He was the first member of the parliament to become speaker .
 The dream of a united Novorossiya had withered in the face of widespread local resistance . The fragmentation of authority among the rebels among the rebel warlords jockeyed for the favor and patronage of Russia’s security services .
 How the Putin administration’s policy emerged and evolved is a subject for future historians to detail .
 Putin's public attitude in the key month of April 2014. What we do know is Putin’s public attitude. Putin's attitude in April 2014 is a key month for Putin .
 Putin first spoke publicly about Novorossiya. It was in this context that Putin first talked publicly about the country .
 Irina Khakamada asked if there was a possibility of a compromise solution in Ukraine with the United States . She indicated that the real money power, more so than the EU, in Kyiv, was the EU .
 Putin rejected her premise that outside powers can make a deal over Ukraine . Putin's response rejected her idea that outside power can make an agreement over Ukraine.
 The essential issue is how to ensure the legitimate rights and interests of ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers in the southeast of Ukraine .
Kharkov, Lugansk, Donetsk, Kherson, Nikolayev, and Odessa were not part of Ukraine back then . Novorossiya back in the tsarist days.
 Today, they live in Ukraine, and they should be full citizens of their country . Today, the Ukrainian people should live in their country, and should be fully citizens .
 Putin's storyline is the assumption that ‘ethnic Russians and Russianspeakers in the southeast of Ukraine’ are under threat, and in need of protection .
 The threat emerged in the wake of the “military coup’s overthrow of Ukraine's president . The president was forced to flee under threat of execution .
 In naming Novorossiya, Putin was giving public legitimacy to this geopolitical imaginary . In namingNovorossya, Putin gave public legitimacy.
 The notion that Ukraine was an "artificial state" is one that a number of radical Russian nationalists had held since the 1990s . A number of Russian nationalists have held since that time .
 The idea of such an entity was one of the “cards’ in the Russian playbook should its security interests be threatened . The idea is one of a number of ‘cards in theRussian playbook’ that should be threatened.
 Putin also held two not uncommon qualifications about Ukraine . Putin also took care to publicly articulate Russia's respect for the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Putin was doing more than providing a history lesson on Ukraine to his Direct Line audience on 17 April 2014 .
 He was highlighting what he saw as the historic Russian foundations of southeast Ukraine . He underscoring how the country was a set of distinctive regional pieces that had been assembled .
 This disposition echoes that taken toward Crimea’s transfer to Ukraine by Nikita Khrushchev in 1954, namely an ‘historic accident’ That should never have occurred, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: This disposition Echoes that took toward Crimea's transfer to
 Putin’s discussion boosted the public profile of Novorossiya at an important moment . Third, Putin's discussion boost the public profiles of the country .
 He reaffirmed the existing geopolitical order of border and citizenship . At the same time, he reaffirmed his position on the border .
 The passage is typical of a rhetorical style that legitimates provocations while ostensibly disavowing them . It's typical of the rhetorical style of legitimating provocations.
 Revisionist geopolitics is articulated as legitimate debate that is then reined in by expression of official state discourse .
 Putin's storyline on Ukraine relies on three presumptions of coherence. Taken together, Putin’s storyline on the Ukraine is based on three presumed assumptions .
 There is an ostensible post-Crimean annexation “Ukraine, with whom Russia wishes only to have friendly relations. And lastly, there is a post- Crimea annexation ‘Ukraine,’
 The Putin administration’s relations with the Ukrainian rebels were characterized by public ambivalence after April 2014 .
 elements within the Russian state were actively aiding the rebel forces, according to reports . It is clear that elements in the state were aiding the rebels, and distributing humanitarian aid .
 The Kremlin kept its distance from the rebel leaders in its public statements and actions . On the other, the Kremlin keeps its distance.
With revolt against 7 Kyiv consolidating itself in the Donbas rather than in other parts of southeast Ukraine, the Kremlin dropped discussion of Novorossiya completely .
 The Kremlin publicly requested that the rebels postpone referendums seeking independence from Ukraine . The rebels seek independence from the Ukraine.
 The most public faces in the leadership of the two people's republics were replaced with local faces . Borodai and Strelkov were replaced in August .
 Russian tanks near Horbatenko and Ilovaysk, southeast of the rebel stronghold of Donetsk . All attention was focused on the battlefield .
 The Ukrainian army defeat there was so significant that Kyiv agreed to a ceasefire with the separatists . A few days later, the Ukrainian army defeated the separatists.
 The term Novorossiya would likely have remained unused thereafter if Putin had not been asked directly about it by Neil Buckley at the Valdai conference meeting in October 2014 .
 Buckley challenged Putin on whether he believed Ukraine was a real country or not, and whether he thought Novorossiya was part of that country . Buckley directly challenged Putin about Ukraine .
 Putin placed the theme of historical contingency to the fore, stating that the Bolsheviks transferred this land from Russia to Ukraine for purely political ideological reasons .
 Khrushchev and the denial of Crimea's rights by Kyiv after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Tellingly, he then transitioned to the illegal transfer of Crimea to Ukraine .
 Novorossiya in a major Russian newspaper, we analyzed the archives of Nezavisimaya Gazeta . The newspaper is widely covering international events and foreign policy issues .
 The newspaper offers its pages to authors of different political orientations . The paper's editorial policy is mostly liberal, but not the most radical ones .
 The archive stretches from the beginning of the post-Soviet period to the end of 2014 . The archive spans from the start of the Soviet period to end of the 2014 period .
 A computer algorithm was used to detect the most probable combinations of words . More than 20,000 articles are in the database, and a computer algorithm is used.
 It defines the probability of a word in a given context and indicates the likelihood of other words in that context . The probability of words in a context is the same as that of others .
 Analysis can yield a number of words in order of probability for any key term . The analysis can thus yield anumber of words.
 Nezavisimaya combines critical materials, it also tries to maintain the image of a “quality newspaper’s image .
 The term ‘Novorossiya’ did not appear on the pages of the paper until 2013–2014 . The term was not used until 2014 .
 The term "Novorossiya" has little resonance except to describe the ongoing military and political actions in the war-affected oblasts of Donetsk and Luhans’k.
 The broader political project received little attention in the Russian media . While the militias in these oblasts used the language and symbols of Novorossiya that was then reflected in the news stories describing the war developments .
 The brief mention by President Putin of the historical legacy of Novorossiya was not followed by any sustained analysis of its implications for Ukraine or of Russian-Ukrainian relations .
 The project was abandoned in Moscow either due to its implausible nature, or because the trial balloon was never floated in any expectation of a determined push .
 He personally had survived an assassination attempt, but his party was banned from the November 2014 elections in the Donbas on a technicality .
 On the first-year anniversary of his movement and the federal parliament, he declared both suspended until further notice .
 Kofman pointed to the death of pro-Russian protestors in Odesa in May 2014 as a significant event as well as manifest opposition elsewhere in the southeast . Kof man pointed to death of anti-Russian protesters in May2014 as significant event .
 The pro-independence referendum organized by the rebels on 11 May 2014 was not held outside of the areas controlled by separatists . The fact that the project had failed beyond areas seized in the Donbas indicates that it had failed .
 The September 2014 Minsk Accord and the November 2014 elections in rebel-controlled areas were evidence that local de facto statehood had triumphed on the ground over aspirational geopolitical imaginaries .
 Even envisioning the former as a ‘lesser Novorossiya’ was not the game unfolding any more in eastern Ukraine . The former was a “lesserNovorossya” in preparation for the realization of the latter.
 Novorossiya will still have its attractions. As a signifier for separatism and for discontent with rule by a Westernizing elite in Ukraine, NovorOSSiya will continue its attractions .
Survey of people in southeast Ukraine found it attractive or repulsive . Survey was conducted in December 2014 .
 The U.S. National Science Foundation organized a survey of the population of six Ukrainian oblasts . The survey was conducted in the southeast of the country .
Ukrainegovernment controlled parts of Donetsk and Luhans’k oblasts . We could have conducted phone and even face-to-face interviews with residents in the Ukraine . The situation in the war zone persuaded us not to pursue this option .
 The third section of each instrument probed attitudes on specific local topics and recent developments, including electoral and security prospects . The fourth section of the instrument probes attitudes on local topics .
 In the six Ukrainian oblasts, the sampling was designed to be both population proportional and to adequately represent both rural and urban areas . The sampling was aimed at both population and population proportional .
First, the sample was divided by each of the six oblasts proportionate to the census population over 21 in each one .
 For each oblast, all settlements were stratified by size and type . The probability of each settlement being included in the sample is proportional to its size .
 The initial address was selected with street, house, and apartment chosen randomly . Next, for each settlement or group of settlements, a random selection of voting precincts was made .
Starting with the initial address, respondents were selected by the modified route sample method . Responders were chosen by a modified route Sample method .
After obtaining the initial address, the interviewer made a list of potential respondents who lived in sequential apartments . The interviewer questioned every third respondent from the list .
 The interviewer used the language of reply to determine the appropriate language for the survey . Respondents could answer the questions in either Russian or Ukrainian .
 The overall response rate was 41%, varying from a high of 55% in Dnipropetrovs’k Oblast to 34% in Kharkiv Oblast .
 The survey slightly oversamples females by 5.5% and persons over the age of 60 by 3.1%, with a corresponding undersampling of people under 30 . In comparison to the census data, the survey slightlyoversamples females.
 In the modeling, the values are corrected by weighting according to these differences . In the model, the value of a person's weight is adjusted according to their weight .
Oblast ratios do not need adjustment, as they correspond to the respective populations . Oblast ratios don't need adjustment as they are based on population numbers .
 Novorossiya concept has both historical and political connotations that can be somewhat orthogonal . We posed three questions on this complicated topic .
 It is entirely possible that a respondent could accept that Novorossiya was a historical province but reject the proposition that it has any contemporary relevance .
We asked first about the historical element and then posed two political questions about Novorossiya's relevance in contemporary Ukraine .
 52.3% chose the ""myth"" option, 24.2% the ""fact"" response, with a high ratio of 22.1% answering ""don't know" and 1.3%. Overall, 52. 3% of respondents chose the "myth" option
 The high "don't know" response rate can be the result of many factors, such as self-perceived lack of historical knowledge .
 We have witnessed this choosing of "don't know" as a way to dodge sensitive questions in post-conflict zones across the former Soviet Union .
 Overall, 52% chose the Russian political technology option, with 18% seeing Novorossiya as reflecting an independence wish . 18% of Russian voters chose the option, and again with a high ratio of ""don't knows"" at 18% .
 The summary results indicate a split opinion about Novorossiya, both its historical legacy and its contemporary political meaning .
 The large ratios of ‘don't know’ responses is significant in this instance . It reflects both uncertainty about the term itself and concern about answering a seemingly innocuous question . It has important territorial ramifications.
 It was precisely in the historical guberniya of Novorossiya that we were surveying. It was exactly in the history of the country's gubernia .
 The Novorossiya project was in the television news, both Russian and Ukrainian . The first Minsk agreement of September 2014 had eased the fighting, but few believed the ceasefire would hold .
 Conflict erupted again in Donetsk and Luhans’k oblasts in January 2015 before the forging of a second Minsk agreement on 11 February 2015 . The two sides are due to meet again in February 2015.
 Analysis of responses to the Novorossiya questions shows a close correlation with other political and ideological preferences . The questions were asked about Russia's political, ideological preferences.
 Residents of southeast Ukraine are divided about direction of country, direction of the country . Residents are also divided about the end of the Yanukovich regime and the success of the Maidan protests .
 To correlate these characteristics with each other is not very useful, since they essentially measure the same latent political/ideological beliefs . To correlation these characteristics, it's not very helpful, since it essentially measures the same.
 Rating Poroschenko highly is strongly correlated with negative attitudes toward Russian actions and to suspected Russian geopolitical ambitions . rating Poroshenko highly is highly correlated with positive attitudes to Russian actions .
 In statistical terms, putting these political/ideological measures into the analysis is a manifestation of endogeneity . The analysis is based on political andideology measures .
In effect, this position argues that there is an underlying construct that blends ideological, national, cultural, and political preferences . In effect, the position says there is a political construct that combines ideological and cultural preferences .
 The demographic and regional traits of respondents on the Novorossiya questions are more interesting. What is more interesting are the demographic and Regional traits of the respondents .
 We are using these questions to understand the responses to a widely known and debated vision for contested Ukraine . We are also using them as an expression of a deeper underlying societal divide .
 The many hundreds of public opinion polls in Ukraine conducted since the end of the Soviet Union have highlighted the regional factor in the country's politics .
 O'Loughlin says regional divisions hide significant oblast-to-oblast differences . However, rural-urban divergences below the oblast scale are also hidden .
 The choice of “region’s’ region and the respective boundaries dictates how well one can distinguish regional anomalies and evaluate the relative significance of the geographic element .
Political geographers have long argued that a contextual element is often identifiable, whereby concentrations of votes or political attitudes will be evident beyond what can be expected from the socio-demographic distribution . Of course, spatial trends will correlate with socio-Demographic distributions, but as
Local political socialization, access to media outlets, conversations with neighbors and fellow workers, or historical legacies . Such a regional factor is often the result of local political socializing, according to the author .
 The Novorossiya questions have been widely debated over the past two years . The answers to the questions are largely based on socio-demographic factors . The questions are a key part of the answer to the NovorOSSiya questions .
 President Putin has repeatedly asserted that he wishes to protect the rights of ethnic Russians and of Russian-speakers in Ukraine and other post-Soviet countries .
 The assumption is that these groups are coherent groups whose beliefs and interests are at odds with the majorities in the respective states .
 The language rights question in Ukraine is obliquely related to the national question . A large ratio of ethnic Ukrainians speaks Russian as their first language .
In our sample, we probed this question by asking what language respondents spoke at home . In our sample of language respondents, we asked what language people spoke in home .
 Asking about home language distinguishes common and everyday language use from ‘mother tongue’ or from the census definition of language .
 The ratios of Russians and Russian-speakers in southeast Ukraine are both much higher than in central and western Ukraine . There are sizeable differences between the six oblasts in the study area .
 Kharkiv, Odesa, and Zaporizhia have proportionately more Russians . Dnipropetrovs’k are more Russified than the more rural oblasts of Kherson and Mykolaiv .
 The interesting question is whether there are significant and proportional differences in the beliefs about Novorossiya between the oblasts and the language-national groups .
 The language that Ukrainians speak at home does not significantly influence their responses to the Novorossiya questions . Differences between the different language groups of Ukrainians are never significant .
 Putin's argument for protecting the rights of Russian-speakers has a false premise, he says . In this respect, Putin's arguments are not distinctively different from other Ukrainians .
 What is different, however, is the responses of self-identified ethnic Russians from ethnic Ukrainians .
 Putin's claim about ethnic Russians as a distinctive group within Ukraine has more credibility. Here Putin's claims about ethnic Russian within Ukraine have more credibility .
 There is about a 30-point difference in the three 13 responses on Novorossiya between Russians and Ukrainians .
 Novorossiya is a myth or a historical fact, but a low ratio of Russians who attribute it to the machinations of Russian political technologists for geopolitical ends suggests that the concept is grounded in historical and geopolitical realities . This difference is clearest for the question about
 The majority of respondents of all ethnic/linguistic groups reject the view that the history of Novorossiya could justify a separation from Ukraine . Russians thought so much less frequently than Ukrainians.
 The events of 2013– 2014 in Ukraine could harm the peaceful ethnic relations that have existed for centuries between Ukrainians and Russians on Ukrainian territory .
 The ethnic/linguistic groups are heterogeneously distributed across the oblasts . The regions generally match the divides noted above .
 Residents in Odesa and Kharkiv were less skeptical of Russian motivations and intentions in Ukraine compared to the other four oblasts . Residents were also less skeptical.
 Odesa and Kharkiv are the only oblasts where a minority adopted the position of the Ukrainian government . Novorossiya is a Russian political technological creation or an expression of a desire for independence .
 Novorossiya as a myth got 46% support in Odesa and only 32% in Kharkiv . On the Russian political technology prompt, 45% of OdesA residents agreed with this position with only 24% inKharkiv.
 Kharkiv has a high ratio of "don't know" answers in the political technology . It is 50% for political technology versus desire for independence question .
 Kharkiv was the scene of clashes between Maidan supporters and pro-separatist sympathizers . The Lenin statue in the center of the city was the focus of fighting in the fall of 2014 .
 Unexplained bombings and killings, as well as an attempted assassination on the governor, added to the tension . The governor was shot dead by police .
 A rupture in trade relations and hardening of the border through visa controls and tight inspections would significantly affect the livelihoods of Kharkiv residents .
 The May events in Odesa left a legacy of mistrust, a contested sense of victimhood, and a lack of clarity concerning the causes of the deaths . The overall beliefs about Novorossiya in this oblast are closer to the other four sample oblasts than to Kh
 Kharkiv respondents replied yes or “don't know’s” But the comparable figures for Odesa were 8% and 12% in line with the other oblast ratios on this sensitive question .
 Survey results corroborate maps of the various presidential and parliamentary votes that show sizeable differences within southeast Ukraine .
 A more nuanced discussion of geographic scale in the key disputes facing Ukraine is merited, but typically data are not available at the subregional level .
 Survey data do not allow consideration of local county and city distinctions because the sample size in any one place is too small for reliable comparisons . Survey data don't allow consideration.
 Even oblast differences are substantial and merit consideration in their own right . But, as shown here, even oblast Differences are substantial .
 Many statistical predictors are available to examine the responses of the residents of southeast Ukraine to the meanings and political ramifications of the concept of Novorossiya .
Both the predictors and the dependent variable share the same generic constructs that run through contemporary Ukraine .
 The socio-demographic attributes of adults who hold distinctive positions. What is more interesting are the social attributes of the adults who have distinctive positions .
 Our questions about Novorossiya could be seen as direct and provocative, but we chose this approach for clarity rather than speculate about answers to more abstract or academic questions .
 In the modeling, we use logistic regression for all three questions . Novorossiya is a myth or not, or all other options include “historical fact,” “don’t know, and refusals,’s
 The concept of Novorossiya could be used as the basis for separation from Ukraine . We distinguish between those who say that it could (149 respondents of the total sample) and all others .
 This latter category includes those who said it could not be, the “don’t know” or “refuse’s” answers, and those who picked the ‘myth’ option in the previous question . This latter
 Both sets of respondents reject the possibility of Novorossiya as a modern territorial referent. We combined the “not applicable’s’d answer with the ‘no’ answers’
 The coefficients indicate the relative importance of the various sociodemographic factors affecting these binary options . The respective coefficients thus indicate the importance of these factors .
 All models were fitted using Stata 13 with the ‘svy’ prefix for the regression models that indicate the survey nature of the Ukraine data .
 If the modeling ignored the clustering in the survey design and data collection, the standard errors would likely be smaller than they should be . The significance of the coefficients would be suspect .
 Those who believed that the end of the Soviet 15 Union was a good move strongly support the idea that Novorossiya is a myth . Those who claim a Soviet identity do not accept this view, adopting the position that NovOrossiya was a historical fact .
Like the ethnic Russian factor, the Soviet legacy is significant in understanding the responses across three questions .
 In an era of economic and geopolitical uncertainty, the stability and predictability of Soviet times remains attractive to those who struggle financially and living in conflict or post-conflict regions .
 Older people, pensioners, poorer respondents, and the unemployed dominate this ""Soviet demographic" and in post-Soviet regions where they are a minority Russians .
 Similar to the North Caucasus of Russia and Nagorno-Karabakh where local ethnicities similarly have high levels of ethnic pride . Those in southeast Ukraine who classify themselves as ‘most proud’ are also more likely to adopt nationalistic positions .
 Residents of Odesa and Kharkiv oblasts are less likely to think of Novorossiya as a myth compared to residents of the other four Oblasts in the study .
 The Novorossiya as myth or fact query elicited answers that point to a divide within the population of southeast Ukraine .
 The Russian ethnicity of the respondent and location in Russophone oblasts are helpful in predicting the nature of the response .
 Acceptance of the concept of Novorossiya as legitimate challenges the conception of the unity and territorial coherence of the post-1991 Ukrainian state .
 TV-watching habits are not important in this regard, although they appear significant for other Novorossiya questions .
 Modern mass media, especially television, have been critical. In this regard, modern mass media has been critical .
 Social media outlets have joined Internet outlets such as blogs, newspapers, and other journalistic outlets . Social media has become more popular on the Internet .
 The power of television remains very high, especially as newspapers decline in circulation . Over 90% of Ukrainians and Russians say that TV constitutes their main new source .
 The competing storylines and divergent explanations of the crash of Malaysian flight 17 in the war zone of Donetsk in July 2014 illustrate well the news chasm .
 The term ‘political technology’ has been used for about 20 years in the Russian context to describe the role of mass media control in promoting desired political attitudes .
 The term ‘Novorossiya’ is a creation of Russian political technology, or an expression of a wish for independence .
Seven predictors are significant in the logit model of the answers about Russian political technology . Seven predictors were significant in Russia's political technology.
 For these respondents, it is an artificial construction, a position also held by those who are “most proud of their nation.’s most proud’ of their country .
 The Soviet tradition and its detractors remain important, as does residency in Odesa or Kharkiv . The probability of believing that Russian political technology manipulates the concept of Novorossiya is significantly lower .
What is distinctive from the earlier model is the significance of television viewing habits . What is distinctive is the importance of television watching habits .
 Russian political technology is behind the resurgence of Novorossiya as a much-discussed and/or much-dismissed topic . Those who said that TV is their main source of news are significantly more likely to believe that Russian political tech is behind it .
 Ukrainian TV stations are exposed to a narrative counter to that of Russian channels . Most respondents in the sample watch Ukrainian television stations, they say .
 The ‘media war’ has reached an unprecedented level with no common ground . The “ media war” has reached a unprecedented level, says CNN’s John Sutter .
Consistently viewing the same newscasts and the same channels reinforces existing beliefs . Consistently watching the samenewscasts reinforces existing views .
 Given the low level of access to alternative voices, especially on the Internet, increased divergence of opinions about the ongoing conflict is a natural outcome . The Internet is less likely to compromise positions.
 Ukrainians who support the Kyiv government are concerned that a historical argument is being made to claim a large section of the country along the northern rim of the Black Sea as a separatist pro-Russian state .
Rebel groups in Donetsk and Luhans’k want to extend their territorial control from Kharkiv to Odesa . The frequent use of the “Novorossiya’s’ term by the rebel groups is a sign of concern
 The large number of "don't know" suggests either uncertainty about the political possibility or caution about answering a sensitive and provocative question .
 Seven predictors are significant. For distinguishing the small number of "yes" respondents from all others, seven are significant . For distinguishing a small number, seven predictors were significant .
 Older, poorer, and more nationalistic respondents are less likely to give a positive response to the question . The first model was the first model, but older, poorer and poorer, according to the survey .
 Those who claimed Russian ethnicity and those aged under 35 are more likely to agree that Novorossiya could be used for separation . Those with a university education are less likely to give a “yes’s’ answer .
 The importance of the media factor is evident, with those who watch Russian television more likely to agree that Novorossiya’s legacy could be used as the basis for separation . Those who say that television is their main news source are morelikely to disagree .
Those with the highest level of national pride do not believe that it could be used for separation . Those with the most national pride believe it can be used to separate .
 The consistency of key socio-demographic factors in southeast Ukraine in determining answers to questions about Novorossiya suggests a divided society .
79% of Ukrainians said they were “very proud’ or “proud’ of their nationality . 68% of Russians said that they were proud of their country . Older people were more likely to dismiss Novorossiya as an artifact of Russian manipulation .
 Those who live in Odesa and Kharkiv, ethnic Russians, find merit in the arguments about historical Novorossiya . By contrast, those who considered themselves as Soviet found merit in their arguments .
 The term signifies a credible desire for independence on the part of those dissatisfied with the current political and geopolitical trajectory of Ukraine . They further believe that the term signify a credible want for independence .
 The two oblasts of Odesa and Kharkiv are small but distinctive in the southeast . This latter group is small, but it remains distinctive especially in the two Oblasts. The two ObLasts are in the same area as the two of the
 A complementary approach to the Novorossiya questions by respondent characteristics is to cluster their answers and examine the profiles of those with similar responses .
 With the 14 socio-demographic variables from the logit analysis, we used k-nearest neighbor analysis with distance calculated using the Mahanalobis metric . We used the 14 social-demography variables to calculate distance .
 A reading of the diagonal values provides the clearest indicator of the ability of the characteristics to make the correct groupings .
 The k-nearest neighbor analysis predicted correctly for 82% of them, 8% incorrectly and 10% went unclassified . For example, of the 1,055 persons who said that Novorossiya was a myth, the analysis was wrong .
 Respondents who said that Novorossiya is a myth are also likely to have said that it is the result of Russian political intrigues .
 The Soviet legacy, TV main news source, national pride, and residence in Odesa or Kharkiv are key predictors . The average values of the respondent characteristics for each predictive classification were compared .
 The governance crisis of February 2014 in Ukraine sparked a broad crisis of European security structures . The Russian government responded by annexing Crimea and supporting secessionist sentiment in southeast Ukraine .
 A vanguard of cross-border activists seized on the historic geopolitical signifier, Novorossiya . They made it a rallying cry for their aspiration to create a secessionist territory across southeast Ukraine that would follow Crimea into the Russian Federation .
Novorossiya flags flew alongside those of localized secessionist projects in the Donbas region . Novorossya flags flew along those of local secessionists projects .
 The term served as an expression of Russia’s historical presence and longstanding interests in the northern shores of the Black Sea .
 The historical legacy was bolstered by assertions of the divergent interests of ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers living in this area after the ouster of the Yanukovich regime in March 2014 .
 The separatist aspirations of Novorossiya activists failed to gain traction across southeast Ukraine with the exception of the Donbas . The Donbas is one of Ukraine's most populous regions .
 The death of many pro-Russia activists in Odesa in horrific circumstances was also a symbolic death of the Novorossiya project .
 The results of our opinion survey conducted in the targeted six oblasts of southeast Ukraine in December 2014 confirms the project had only minority support . The results are based on the results of a survey conducted by the Ukrainian government .
 About half of the population believed that the concept of Novorossiya was a “historical myth’s” Half believed that its resuscitation and promotion was the result of ‘Russian political technologies’ rather than a belief that had wide or deep
Only a small minority believed that the concept offered a basis for a separation from the rest of Ukraine . Only a small majority believed that it offered a reason for separation .
 Novorossiya project was abandoned by residents of southeast Ukraine in May 2015 . A substantial minority of the residents of the region supported the project .
 Among ethnic Russians, in the oblasts of Kharkiv, Odesa, and Dnipropetrovs’k, among older and poorer residents, the Novorossiya project .
 The support for the project might indeed be higher than a first glance at the data might suggest. Further, it is quite likely that the support for a project might be higher.
In our work on support for separatist regimes in the Caucasus region, we have documented similar reluctance to answer sensitive questions . In our comparable work on supporting separatist regimes, we've documented similar concerns .
 There are no significant differences between the three groups of ethnic Ukrainians defined by language spoken at home .
 Russian-speakers do not hold different opinions from those who speak Ukrainian or both languages in their homes .
 The rapid rise over a few months to political prominence and public consciousness of a revisionist geopolitical imaginary allowed us to examine its support ‘on the ground’ through a scientific poll as the debate was sustained .
 Critical approaches now include close attention to the array of opinions about grand geopolitical conceptions, as well as to the assumptions, perceptions and ambitions of the framers of the imaginaries .
 The world political map is dynamic and we are likely to see further contentious spatial politics over separatist geopolitical imaginaries in the next few years .
 In some instances, Scotland, Catalonia, Alania, and now Republika Srpska, these imaginaries have clearly demarcated contemporary borders . Some are much older than others .
 In other instances, separatist geopolitical imaginaries are neither well demarcated nor old . In other cases, they are not well demARCated or old .
 Some, like Novorossiya, may be the pet projects of aspirant intellectuals and aspirant politicians . Until circumstances create an opportunity for them to be instrumentalized by external forces to serve particular ends .
 The future of Ukraine’s contested territories remains an open question . There may be local legitimacy but none internationally, but there may be international legitimacy .
 The authors sincerely thank Natalia Kharchenko and Volodymyr Paniotto of the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology for their cooperation in the development of the survey instrument . The survey instrument was completed in a highly efficient and expeditious manner over a few months .
 Detailed comments by Oleysa Tkacheva and an anonymous reviewer helped significantly improve the paper . The paper was published in the summer of 2013 .
 Disclosure statement no potential conflicts of interest are declared by the authors . The authors say there is no potential conflict of interest .
 No sociodemographic group had a rate 10 percentage points higher than the overall averages . A close examination of the “don’t know’s” respondents showed that no group of people had a higher rate than the average .
 This suggests that the high ‘don’t know’ rate is not a result of fear of giving an honest answer . This suggests the high rate of knowing is not the result of a fear of answering .
Cross-correlations between socio-demographic variables and key political questions show high values, typically 0.4.4 .
 The BBC News, May 12.02.02, is the BBC News.com/news/world-europepe-27369980 Beissinger .
 O'Loughlin, John, Gearóid Ó Tuathail, and Rebecca Chamberlain-Creaga were all named in the list .
 Wood, Elizabeth A. Wood, William E Pomeranz, E Wayne Merry, and Maxim Trudolyubov are among the three men .
 Current oblast capitals and borders and borders as well as major rivers are indicated for reference . Current Oblast capitals, borders and rivers are also indicated .
 Geographic distribution of the survey sample points in the six oblasts of southeast Ukraine .
 The six oblasts surveyed plus the two Oblasts constitute the territorial delimitation of Novorossiya, according to claims of the political leaders of the Donbas rebels in spring 2014 .
 Distribution of the responses to the three Novorossiya questions by oblast and by language-nationality groups .
 A Responses to the question of whether Novorossiya is a myth or a historical fact . The question is whether it is true or a myth .
 Novorossiya is a historical fact or were unsure whether it could be used as the basis for separatism . B For those whose said that NovorOSSiya is an historical fact, B for those who were unsure .
 C Responses to the question of whether support for “Novorossiya’s” represents the effects of Russian political technology or a desire for independence .
 For the question on separation, the "no" category also includes those who were not asked this specific question because they believe Novorossiya is a myth .