 Russian Government News 17 April 2014, 14816 words, English, 2014 AII Data Processing Ltd. It is a Russian government news agency .
 The annual special Direct Line with Vladimir Putin was broadcast live by Channel One, Rossiya-1 andRossiya-24 TV channels . The annual Direct Line was broadcast on Channel One.
 The Crimean Republic and Sevastopol, the development of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, and the situation regarding the Crimean Tatars were popular topics of the discussion .
 There were also questions about the situation in Ukraine, and the developments in the southeast of the country .
 The discussion also touched upon international issues, such as relations with the West and NATO, the deployment of U.S. anti-missile defence systems in Europe, the situation with Transnistria .
 Vladimir Putin answered questions from citizens of Russia and other countries . He also answered questions of Edward Snowden and Edward Snowden .
Questions raised about healthcare, housing, housing and utility services following the largest ever flood in the Far East last year . Questions also raised about the future use of Olympic facilities in Sochi .
 In the final part of the Direct Line, the President answered questions of his own choice .
 The live broadcast lasted 3 hours 54 minutes . The President responded to 81 questions and appeals . The broadcast lasted three hours .
 You are watching Direct Line with President Vladimir Putin. Good afternoon, you are on Direct Line .
 Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin are having another conversation today . The situation is different since the country we are talking to now has changed, he says .
 Crimea and Sevastopol have joined Russia since the breakup of the Soviet Union . Crimea and Crimea have been together for 23 years .
 Every question today will be directly or indirectly related to Crimea . For this reason, every question today would be directly and indirectly related.
 We will discuss a number of issues today, including healthcare, army, taxes, agriculture and naturally, Ukraine .
 There is no doubt that we’ll discuss developments in Ukraine’s southeast and the genocide that was unleashed in this region .
 Our colleagues Olga Ushakova, Valeriya Korableva, Tatyana Stolyarova and Dmitry Shchugorev will assist us during today’s broadcast . TatyANA Remizova and Anna Pavlova are working in the call and
 Russia's Public Television channel will be available for people with impaired hearing . The channel will also be available on Rossiya-1 and Rossiya 24 TV channels .
 Mayak, Vesti FM and Radio Rossii stations. Radio listeners can join our conversation on Mayak.
 Our call centre has been working for a week, and we will continue to take calls during the Direct Line broadcast . The call centre will be working for the week .
 People from other countries can call us at the number you can see on the screen . People from around the world can also call us on the phone .
 This year you can send video questions to the President from your PC or any mobile device . I’d like to remind you that this year you could send your video questions.
 Events are unfolding there with an incredible and sometimes alarming speed . The events are unfolding at a rapid pace .
Two months ago, no one thought Crimea would reunite with Russia . People in eastern Ukraine would stop armoured convoys sent from Kiev with their bare hands .
Before I answer your question, I'd like to go back a little to review recent events in Ukraine . I’d like to give a little insight into the recent events.
 Ukraine's president says he could not sign it on EU conditions . He said it would dramatically worsen the socioeconomic situation in Ukraine and affect Ukrainians .
 Yanukovych said he needed more time to analyse the document and to discuss it together with Europeans . Yanukovych said that he needed to analyse it and discuss it with Europeans.
 This provoked public unrest that eventually culminated in an unconstitutional coup, an armed seizure of power . This prompted public unrest, which eventually led to an armed takeover of power.
 People in eastern and southeastern regions of Ukraine were worried about their future and future of their children . They saw a rapid growth of nationalist sentiments, heard threats and saw that wanted to invalidate some of the ethnic minorities’ rights, including the rights of the Russian minority .
 Russians are native persons in Ukraine. On the other hand, this description is relative, because Russians are natives in Ukraine .
 An attempt to invalidate all decisions regarding the use of the native language was made . But an attempt was made to invalidated all decisions on the use.
 Kiev appointed new governors – oligarchs and billionaires – to these regions . Instead of starting a dialogue with these people, Kiev appoints new governors .
 These oligarchs have been appointed to head their regions . They believe that they earned their riches by exploiting people and embezzling public property . The oligarchs are appointed to heads their regions.
 nationalist groups did not surrender their weapons, but threatened to use force in the eastern regions . Meanwhile, nationalist groups didn't surrender their guns, but did not give up weapons .
 Ukrainian government threatened to use military force and even sent tanks and aircraft against civilians . Refusing to see that something was badly wrong in the Ukrainian state and to start a dialogue, the government said it would use force .
 I hope that they will see that they are moving into a deep hole, and that they're pulling their country along, I say . I hope they will be pulling their nation along.
 The talks that will start today in Geneva are very important, he says . "I believe that we should get together to think about ways out of this crisis," he adds .
 There’s no need to go to Donbass for this, because they can summon them to Kiev for a meeting . There's no need for this. It's not a need for them to go for this .
 They should talk with people and with their real representatives, with those whom people trust . They should also talk with those who trust them, and with real representatives .
 New leaders should release the arrested, help people to express their opinion in an organised manner, suggest new leaders and start a dialogue .
 Kiev has at long last started talking about de-centralisation . People in the eastern regions are talking about federalisation .
 To be able to understand what they mean, they should sit down at the negotiating table and search for an acceptable solution, says the U.S. government .
 Order in the country can only be restored through dialogue and democratic procedures, rather than the use of armed force, tanks and aircraft .
Top diplomats from the United States, Russia, the European Union and Ukraine are meeting in Geneva at this very moment .
 We feel strongly that this should not be a sham dialogue between representatives of the authorities . We want a dialogue with the people to find the compromise I was talking about .
 There are no Russian units in eastern Ukraine – no special services, no tactical advisors . No special services. No tactical advisors, no special forces or special services .
Local residents have removed their masks. All this is being done by the local residents, and the proof of that is the fact that those people have literally removed their mask .
 "They have nowhere to go, and they won’t leave. So I told my Western partners, “They have no place to go. So they won't leave," he said .
 I'm sure we’ll get back to the events in the southeast later in the course of this conversation . I’m sure we'll get back. I‘m sure they’re back to those events later in this conversation.
 You never gave as much as a hint about Crimea over the course of your political career. You never said anything about the Crimea over your career .
 You never even mentioned Crimea in private talks. You must have thought about it, but you never even discussed it in private talk .
 The most obvious risk was that the Russian speaking population was threatened . The threats were absolutely specific and tangible .
 Crimean residents think about their future and ask Russia for help . This is what made Crimean residents, the people who live there, think about the future .
 I said in a recent speech in the Kremlin that Russia had never intended to annex any territories, or planned any military operations there, never .
 The Ukrainian government says it was going to build its relations with Ukraine based on current geopolitical realities . But it is not the same thing .
 Russian-speaking people living in Ukraine are living in a comfortable political environment . They have always hoped they would not be threatened or oppressed . But we also thought that all native Russians would live in a peaceful political environment.
 Russians in Crimea were facing exactly that when they began raising the issue of self-determination . But when this situation changed, they were faced exactly that, when they started raising that issue .
 It was at this exact moment that we decided to support Crimeans, and not 5, 10, 10 or 20 years ago . It was the exact moment we decided on Crimeans .
 No one objected. I discussed this problem with the Security Council members, and no one objected .
 All the steps in the action plan were taken in a very precise manner, quickly, professionally and resolutely. And I’m more than happy now that all the steps were taken.
I would say the way the plan was executed was unique and unparalleled in history . I would say it was unparalleled and unique in history, says author .
 Mr Putin, we who live in Russia are very well aware of how things are done here, says Mr Putin . Mr Putin is a well-known figure in Russia .
 A complicated referendum was organised in the shortest time possible, security issues addressed, and Ukrainian units disarmed . It really gave the impression of a long-planned and prepared action . But indeed, this was done very quickly, says the author .
 It was done on the spot, and we had to play it by ear based on the situation and the demands at hand . It was played by ear, and it was done by ear.
 It was all performed promptly and professionally, I have to give you that . But it was all done promptly and professional, I've given you that.
 Our task was not to conduct a full-fledged military operation there, but it was to ensure people’s safety and security and security .
 Crimeans' own strong resolution would not have been possible without the Crimeans’ own resolution . But it would not be possible without a strong resolution .
I didn’t add the concluding line to my Kremlin speech about initiating a draft law on the inclusion of Crimea in the Russian Federation . I was waiting for the referendum results. Also, I must say that I didn't add the final line to his Kremlin speech .
 A referendum is the expression of the will of all the residents of an area. Polls and surveys are one thing, along with certain groups’ sentiments .
 More than 96 percent supported Crimea’s inclusion in the Russian Federation . The majority of the vote was made by the majority, if not unanimously .
 Let’s invite Sevastopol, a hero city and a city of military glory, to join in our discussion .
 Hundreds of people gathered in the heart of the city, on Primorsky Boulevard .
There are people from all walks of life, including navy and civilian personnel . There are people in the military, military and military.
 Crimea and Sevastopol to Russia have been granted accession to Russia . Crimea and Crimea have been given accession by Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 There are students and pensioners, veterans, workers, doctors, doctors and representatives of self-defence units .
 The Grafskaya Quay is a memorial to sunken ships and Admiral Nakhimov Square . The square is named after the navy man who fought and died as an infantry lieutenant . It is also named after an infantry officer who died as a lieutenant .
 Sevastopol is a symbol, a fortress, a city full of special meaning for Russia's destiny .
 Sevastopol residents have been contesting the right to speak Russian for 23 years . The city has been fighting for a long time to be Russian for the first time in 23 years.
 civilian personnel of the military units are very concerned about the fate of the Black Sea Fleet . The civilian personnel are concerned about its fate .
 The fleet provides work and staff and is the only unique artillery repair plant . For many of us, the fleet provides. work and Staff .
 Russia had certain agreements with Ukraine on upgrading the fleet . Russia has agreed to upgrade its fleet.
 Unfortunately, those agreements were not diligently fulfilled, if at all .
Major part of modern vessels and support ships will be transferred from Novorossiysk to Sevastopol . I hope there will be no such problems anymore and that the major part of today's vessels will be moved to Sevastsopol .
 A substantial amount of this work will be carried out in Crimean shipyards .
 The Russian Defence Ministry has already placed an order worth 5 billion rubles with one of the shipyards . The order is expected to be worth more than $5 billion .
 Crimea is not in high demand, it is idle. We undoubtedly will be increasing this potential of Crimea . We will increase this potential because currently it is not high demand .
 Sevastopol is a city of Russian naval glory, which every Russian citizen knows . The city is known for its naval glory .
People from different backgrounds and of different ethnicities live in Sevastopol . Many different people from different walks of life live in the city .
 The tragedy that is now happening in Ukraine has upset too many people . The tragedy has upset many people.
 Ukraine is currently in a situation where there is a divide within families, not just between nations . Ukraine is now in a position where there are a divide between families .
 Given the current state of affairs in Ukraine, we do not understand each other on many issues . We have even become enemies.
Make no mistake, this issue is highly relevant, and all of us are now guided by certain emotions . Make no mistake. This issue is now highly relevant .
 If we love and respect each other, we should find ways and means to understand each other .
 Ukraine and Ukraine are both countries in the Ukraine. But even if we are talking about relations, I'm confident that we'll find common ground with Ukraine .
 I hope that people in Ukraine will also understand that Russia could not do otherwise regarding Crimea . I hope people in the Ukraine will know that Russia cannot do otherwise about Crimea .
 I wanted to say that if we respect each other, we should acknowledge that each of us has the right to make our own choices . What I want to say is that we should respect each others, I said .
 People living in Ukraine should respect the choice made by Crimean residents, says Ukrainian official .
 Russia has always been close to Ukraine and will always remain closely related to it . Second, Russia will always be close to the Ukraine and always remain close to it.
 Russia has been providing Ukraine assistance for many long years, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm sure that we'll get back to that issue. I'm not talking about the assistance that Russia has provided"
 I'm confident that we will understand this despite all the emotional complications we’re seeing today. I’m confident that they will understand that we'll understand this, despite all of the emotional problems we're seeing today .
People from across Crimea joined us in Sevastopol in Crimea . It is highly symbolic that people from across Ukraine joined us here. It's highly symbolic.
 Many view reunification with Russia as the end of the third siege of this Hero City . Many of them view reunization with Russia to be a success .
 Many people regard the last 23 years as the third siege of the city and the whole region . Many regard it as the last23 years as a third siege.
 Crimea's dream of reunification has been fulfilled . There are naturally a lot of questions regarding the future of the Crimea .
 Crimea has been reunited with its motherland. Crimea is now in Crimea . Crimea is in the Crimea region .
 The self-proclaimed Ukrainian government is doing its outmost to make life intolerable for the people of Crimea . That said, the self- proclaimed Ukrainian government was doing its most to make lives intolerable .
Almost all banks have left Crimea, which means that we now have problems with exchanging hryvnas and people can’t make payments and transfers .
 Ukrainian banks are ignoring their requests and legitimate interests, pensioners say . Pensioners can’t withdraw their pension savings because Ukrainian banks have ignored their requests .
 This is one of the most urgent issues that has yet to be addressed. This is currently one of most urgent problems that has not been addressed .
 There are other issues as well, as you know, such as power and water supply . There are also other issues, as well as power, water supply and power .
 Oschadbank and Privatbank with its owner Mr Kolomoisky and the head of the Crimean branch Mr Finkelstein are not willing to meet us halfway . OschAdbank andPrivatbank are not ready to meet the halfway mark .
 Hryvna circulation is limited, so we have no other choice but to accelerate the transition to the ruble . The ruble has been used in the past for more than 20 years .
 The solution is to open accounts for individuals and legal entities and establish a new banking network . The solution to the problem is to set up a new bank network .
 I think it will take one month to open the required number of accounts, roll out the network and equip it with modern technology . I think that it will be about one month.
 Russian Government has already adopted a resolution to this effect . Pensioners and public sector employees will have equal incomes .
 During this period, incomes of pensioners and public sector employees will surge. During this time, incomes will surge .
 In Russia, pensioners receive twice as much as in Crimea . For pensioners, income will soar 100%, which means that the gap between pensions in Russia and Crimea will rise 100%.
 The average pension in Russia will be 11,600 rubles this year, while in Crimea it is about 5,500 rubles . In Crimea, the average pension is about 4,000 rubles, and in Russia it is 11,000 .
Public sector employees earn twice or even two and a half times more in Russia . The same goes for public sector employees, who earn more than twice as much in Russia.
Russian military personnel in Crimea earn four times as much as in Crimea . Russian military personnel will be serving in Crimea.
 Crimea's economy, infrastructure development in the tourism and travel industries. All in all, I'm confident, I hope and believe that people in Crimea will feel the economic benefits of joining Russia, not to mention Crimea’s economy .
 All benefits and preferences that were available to Crimean residents in Ukraine should remain in place . We believe that all benefits and preference that were offered to Crimean citizens should remain.
 If some programmes do not exist or didn’t exist in Russia, we will keep those preferences in place by providing additional subsidies to the regional budget .
 Crimea and Sevastopol will be able to benefit from all social norms and allocations that exist in Russia in accordance with applicable laws . Residents of Crimea and Crimea can benefit from the laws .
 Mr Putin, it is widely believed that Crimea is only good for vacationing and tourism . Mr Putin is believed to be the leader of Crimea .
 Crimea is associated with vacationing and tourism. You are absolutely right that Crimea is linked to tourism and vacationing . Crimea is a peninsula in Crimea, but it is also known as Crimea .
 Crimea has very good industrial and agricultural potential and we’ll develop it. Crimea has a good industrial potential and will develop it .
 There are viable businesses that require modernisation and additional investment, and we’ll take care of that . We’s certainly take care, we'll certainly take Care of that.
 shipbuilding and ship maintenance. There are also other industrial centres and promising businesses. I’ve mentioned shipbuilding, ship maintenance, but there are also others .
 The infrastructure has fairly good development potential, including the port and agricultural sector . There is an agricultural sector, and so on, so on .
 Regrettably, agricultural output declined by 60 percent in 2013 in comparison to 1990 . Agricultural output dropped by 60% in 2013 compared to 1990.
 Crimean agricultural enterprises produced only 40% of what had been their output in 1990 . In 2013, Crimean agricultural firms produced only 30% of their output .
 Rice farms use a lot of water, and water is currently a problem . Rice farms, for example, use a lots of water .
 Crimea was always famous as a base for the Russian Black Sea Fleet but also as Russia’s top health resort . Crimea was also known as Russia's and the USSR's top health resorts .
 Regrettably, the holiday infrastructure, hotels and resorts have been decaying . The holiday infrastructure has been decaying in recent years .
 Russian sanitary and epidemiological standards can't be used under Russia's sanitary standards . Some businesses, recreation facilities, resorts and hotels have been inspected .
 The free economic zone is something that can provide Russian investors with certain privileges in order to encourage them to come to Crimea and Sevastopol and accelerate development .
 I talked to Mr Alexei Chaly not too long ago and he suggested that we establish a development agency . He suggested that he suggested we establish an agency .
 I'm confident we’re on the right track and sure to achieve some positive and visible results. I’m confident we're on theright track and can achieve somepositive and visible Results. I'm also confident we are on the wrong track and that we will achieve some
 There are many SMS messages from people who are apprehensive that Crimea might lose its distinctiveness . Many SMS messages are from people concerned that Crimea may lose its distinctiveiveness .
 Crimea lacks a sewage system, which Crimea lacks to this day . They fear the arrival of big money, people will put up hunting lodges and big castles .
 These palaces with fences mushroomed all over the place against the background of an astounding disregard for average holidaymakers . These palace with fences mushrooms all over.
 I have spoken about this publicly on several occasions, perhaps not loud enough . I have already spoken about it publicly on many occasions .
 The Crimea people have been unable to freely express their will in Crimea . The Crimean people are not allowed to leave Crimea, according to the Russian government .
 They acted in a civil but a decisive and professional manner, as I’ve already said . It was a civil and professional way, as he’s already said, he says .
 It was impossible to hold an open, honest, and dignified referendum and help people express their opinion in any other way . It was difficult to hold a referendum, but it was impossible for people to express their opinions .
 There were more than 20,000 well-armed soldiers stationed in Crimea, Crimea .
 There were 38 S-300 missile launchers, weapons depots and rounds of ammunition . In addition, there were 38 missile launchers and ammunition .
 It was imperative to prevent even the possibility of someone using these weapons against civilians . It was needed to prevent anyone using them against civilians, it was said .
 Alexander Vitko is the new Russian Black Sea Fleet Commander . He has been in charge since Sevastopol, Russia's largest naval base .
 Vice Admiral Alexander Vitko is the Black Sea Fleet Commander. He is the Commander-in-Chief of the Black sea Fleet Commander . He is also the Chief of the Fleet.
 Comrade Commander-in-Chief thanks Russian people for support during Crimea period . He also thanks the Russian people.
 There were no major investments in Crimea’s military infrastructure over the past 23 years . No major investments were made in Crimea's military infrastructure .
 Former servicemen of the Ukrainian Navy enlisted in the Black Sea Fleet . The housing situation is particularly difficult for former servicemen .
 Comrade Commander-in-Chief's projects have become the pride of the Russian people .
 First, there will be a programme for the development of the Sevastopol Naval Base and the Black Sea Fleet in general . First, the programme will be for the developing of the naval base.
 All social programmes that are implemented in the Russian Armed Forces will apply to the City of Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet .
 Mr Putin, in his previous answer you mentioned Crimea's self-defence forces, in your previous answer, he said .
 The officers of the Crimean Berkut and of course, the Cossacks were the key players . The officers were the main players in the Crimea .
 There were many intense and dramatic moments, such as in Perekop where the Berkut was just a few hours quicker than the extremists who were bussed to Crimea . This helped avoid a major tragedy.
 Yury Abisov is commander of Crimea's Berkut riot police . Valeriya Korableva would like to ask her colleague to give the floor to the police commander .
 Mr Abisov’s troops, as well as other regional Berktu units, stayed in Kiev during the most difficult time .
 Colonel Abisov told me how they had to make decisions on their own . He took the wounded from hospitals and transported them to permanent garrisons while their vehicles were fired at .
 Dozens of fighters were killed, hundreds were wounded, but we had an order not to shed blood . We had a order to not shed blood.
 The burden of responsibility on the shoulders of a head of state, whether large or small is great, is great . The burden is great.
 In critical moments, one relies on his or her own personal experience and moral values .
 Mr Yanukovych fulfilled his duty in the way he considered possible and appropriate . As for Mr Yanukovych, he fulfilled his duties in the manner he considered Possible and appropriate.
 I spoke with him many times during the crisis and after he arrived in the Russian Federation. Certainly, he spoke with me many times, I spoke to him many time during the Crisis .
 He said he did not have the heart to sign the order to use force against his citizens . There can be different attitudes to this, but he said he thought of using force many times .
 The Berkut is concerned, you and your colleagues undoubtedly fulfilled your duty honestly, professionally and honourably . As far as the Berkut has concerned, it is concerned .
After all, what happened to you and the way your colleagues are treated now in Kiev will come back to bite the Ukrainian state. After all, you and your colleagues will be treated now, says one of the victims .
 You can’t humiliate the soldiers who protect the state’s interests, or force them to their knees, or malign them, or deprive them of medical assistance when they are in hospital .
 Berkut officers who are in hospital do not receive proper treatment or even food . I know that Berkut Officers who are hospitalized do not get proper treatment and even food.
 Our numerous appeals to Kiev authorities to allow us to take everyone in have gone unanswered . Our numerous pleas to the Kiev authorities have been unanswered .
 If a state treats people who honestly fulfil their duty like this, such a state can hardly count on others to behave similarly in the future .
 I think everyone will realise how professionally and honourably you executed your order, and they will thank you for it . I think that eventually everyone will recognise how professional and honourable you executed their order .
 Many of the callers point to historical allusions in the Ukrainian events . Many of them point to historic allusions.
 He had to leave, but he did not flee from Kiev . He was on a regional trip while the presidential administration and government buildings were taken over in Kiev .
 Yanukovych signed the agreement on February 21, which was guaranteed by three European foreign ministers from Poland, France and Germany . He believed that this agreement would be honoured .
 Yanukovych pledged not to use the army or other armed force against protesters . The opposition was to withdraw from occupied administrative buildings, dismantle the barricades and disarm its fighters .
 Yanukovych agreed to hold early parliamentary elections, to return to the 2004 constitution and to hold presidential elections in December 2014 . The president will also hold early presidential elections .
 Had they wanted it, he would have agreed to hold presidential elections in a month or a month and a half, he was ready to agree to anything .
 The opposition seized the presidential administration building, among other government buildings, and accomplishing a coup d’état in the full and classical meaning of the word . As soon as he left Kiev, the opposition renewed its attacks .
 No one can say why they did it, why they acted so unprofessionally and unwisely, and why they pushed the country towards the current situation .
 The president says the decisions we take in a critical situation depend on our experience and values . As for me, you know that we take our decisions on our experiences and values.
 The former KGB officer worked for the Soviet Union's KGB . He says he was trained in a specific manner that boils down to absolute loyalty to people and the country .
 Ukrainian issue, the unconstitutional seizure of power and Crimea are the number one issues currently discussed . The Ukrainian issue is the most important issue in Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government .
 According to a poll, some 96 percent of Russians think your decision on Crimea was right .
 Those who spoke in favour of it are Yury Bashmet, Denis Matsuyev and Karen Shakhnazarov . Those who speak in favour are Yuries Bashmet.
 Russian cultural figures supported Vladimir Putin and Russia’s stance on Crimea . Let me remind you about a letter from Russian cultural Figures who supported Putin and Russian President .
 He would not have understood me at all if I had taken any other stance, he said . So he wouldn't have understood him at all, if he had taken a different stance .
 The Ukrainian statehood ceased to exist when the Crimea statehood began to exist . There was no reason to deprive the people of Crimea of the right to determine their fate .
 Mr Putin said that the Ukrainian parliament is partially legitimate . He also said that Ukraine's parliament is partly legitimate .
 Crimea's people had every right to determine their destiny, according to the Crimean government .
 The decision was a difficult decision which has many international and political implications . Of course, I understand that it was a tough decision, but I understand it was an important decision .
 In the past 10 years, we have been forging ties with the People’s Republic of China . The convergence is mutual, he says .
 China's relations with China are progressing very successfully in terms of trust and collaboration, which are unprecedented . China's relationship with China has been described as 'unprecedented'
 This includes political cooperation and our shared views on international affairs and global security . This is the basis for these inter-governmental relations, says the author .
 NATO was established as a counterbalance to the Soviet Union and to theSoviet Union’s policy in Eastern Europe .
We are told it is changing and becoming more of a political organisation . We are told that it's changing and is becoming more political .
 Article 5 is still in effect, which is an article on mutual military support . But Article 5 remains in effect. It is an Article on mutualMilitary support .
 It is clear that we will be expanding collaboration with China . But it is absolutely clear that it will be expanded collaboration with the country .
 Our trade with the U.S. is 27. But trade with China is 87 billion, and it is growing, says CNN .
 Experts will agree that China is gradually becoming the number one economic power . China is slowly becoming the world's number one power .
 China's population of almost 1. billion and its modernised economy is an accomplished fact . With China’s population of nearly 1.billion, this is basically an accomplishedfact .
 China and Russia hold joint drills at sea and on land, in both China and Russian Federation .
 Russian-Chinese relations will be a significant factor in global policy and will substantially influence modern international relations . This gives us reason to assume that Russian- Chinese relations will have a significant effect on global policy .
 Mr President, let us return to the open letter signed by prominent Russian cultural figures. Mr President.
 Let me repeat how much I appreciate everyone’s support for my policies on Crimea as well as on other issues. Let me reiterate how much he appreciate everyone's support for his policies.
 Mr Shakhnazarov has known him for years, but frankly had no idea about his political views . He has been a friend for years.
 It came as a big surprise to me when he spelled out our common stance on some issues . He was clearly and eloquently, and much more vividly than I ever do .
 collective letters do no harm, but I would rather they not be orchestrated, I say . I think they do not harm, and I would like them to be orchestrated .
 I mean these things should speak from the heart and be spontaneous, rather than coolly organised by someone . I mean it should be spontaneous and not coolly arranged by someone.
 Let us return to the on-going public debate on Crimea and Sevastopol’s accession to Russia .
 Andrei Norkin is a well-know journalist and his colleague from 20 years ago . He is also a journalist and a friend of the past 20 years .