 Following on from a previous post, I have been reading lately about Ukraine’s 2014 Euromaidan Revolution .
 First-hand account of the Maidan, Kiev's Independence Square, written by a local writer living close to the square .
 Kurkov can smell the burning barricades and hear the sounds of grenades and gunshot . From his apartment, Kurkov hears the sounds from his apartment .
 The diary portrays the horrific violence perpetrated against many innocent victims . It is interspersed with the mundane day-to-day trials and tribulations of family life .
 It also sheds light on Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March of that year and on the ongoing conflict in the Donbas of eastern Ukraine .
 On 18 February, violence broke out during a peaceful march on parliament in which protestors demanded a change to the constitution to limit the powers of the president .
 Kurkov writes in his diary entry for that day . The Berkut threw grenades and fired rubber bullets, he writes . Kurkov wrote .
 Yanukovych fled on 22 February, having earlier signed an agreement with the opposition to make the constitutional changes demanded by the opposition . The opposition wants a presidential election by the end of the year .
 The diaries continue through to late April, by which time Russia had annexed Crimea following a hastily arranged referendum .
 Russians were infiltrating eastern Ukraine to organise pro-Russian rallies, their troops and military apparel massing at the border, all of which President Putin denied, and armed separatists were occupying government buildings .
 Kurkov writes on 24 March. It would be wonderful not to have to think about the possibility of a war, he writes .
 Dispatches from Kiev by Andrey Kurkov are published by Harvill Secker, London, 2014 .
 This month marks the fourth anniversary of Ukraine’s Euromaidan Revolution . It led to the ousting of President Viktor Yanukovych, the annexation of Crimea and war in the Donbass .
 The seeds of the revolution were sown when the president failed to sign an association agreement with the EU in November 2013 . The president initially agreed to do so, having initially agreed.
 People set up a base camp in the Maidan, Kiev’s central Independence Square .
 After weeks of mostly peaceful demonstrations, a march on parliament on 18 February turned violent . A march on Parliament in February was violent .
 Two days later, police began firing live ammunition, including automatic weapons and sniper rifles . Police also began firing automatic weapons, including sniper rifles.
 Despite concessions from President Yanukovych, the protests continued and the demonstrators took control of much of Kiev .
 The Euromaidan Revolution is remembered as a conflict between pro-Europeans and pro-Russians predominantly from Ukraine’s east . It was the first time the conflict was known to have occurred in the east .
 Ukraine had never existed as an independent country until 1991, to make sense of recent events . The country had never been independent until 1991 .
 A large swathe of western Ukraine belonged to Poland for much of its history . Some parts of the country were in the Hapsburg or Ottoman Empires . Other parts of Ukraine were part of Lithuania, Lithuania, and other parts of Poland .
 The western fringes were a true borderland, endlessly invaded and conquered . The frontier between nations ever shifting .
 The capital Kiev developed owing to its position on a trade route between the Baltic and the Black Seas . It became a sophisticated trading centre in medieval times, with links to Constantinople .
 Both Ukrainians and Russians believe their ancestry derives from Kievan Rus . Russians claim that their descendants moved away from the Dnieper region to found Muscovy .
 Ukraine's leadership towards rapprochement with Europe at the expense of Russia provokes hostile feelings . This helps to explain why Russians feel such a strong connection to Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s position as ‘Little Russia’ dates from a deal between Cossack leader Khmelnytsky and the Russian Tsar in 1686 .
 The Little Russia narrative was promoted under Catherine the Great a century later, when Russia experienced waves of expansion and large swathes of Ukraine .
 Further east and south was a Cossack stronghold, while the east was largely unpopulated steppe until coal-mining began in the late nineteenth century . The east was mostly unpopulated.
 Russian peasants were attracted to eastern Ukraine during its industrial revolution and again during Stalin’s industrialisation drive .
 The majority of population of the Donbass still aligns itself with its Russian Motherland . Today the majority of the population of this region, the Don Bass, still aligned itself with the Russian Motherlands .
 Crimea’s historical links to Ukraine are tenuous. Crimea's annexation of territory by another country is clearly deplorable . Crimea's history is tenuous, but Crimea's historical links with Ukraine are also tenuous .
 Crimea was for much of its history a Tatar land ruled by the Ottoman Empire . Parts of Crimea entered into the territory of Kievan Rus, the area of Crimea .
 Crimea was won by Catherine the Great in 1783, becoming part of the Russian Empire and later the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic . Crimea was part of Russia's Russian Empire.
 Its population at the beginning of the twentieth century was a mixture of Crimean Tatars, Ukrainians, Germans, Greeks, Jews and others . The region was mainly attracted to the region by its fertile land .
Russification is a process of Russification imposed from above by both the tsars and the Communists . It resonates more with Russians than Ukrainians than Ukrainians .
 The rise of Ukrainian nationalism at the beginning of the twentieth century was representative of only a small section of society .
 For an excellent insight into the Ukrainian Revolution of 2014, I recommend Ukraine Diaries by Andrey Kurkov .
 Anna Reid's Borderland provides a highly readable and entertaining discourse on Ukraine’s history . The book is published in the summer of 2014 .
 The focus turns to Ukraine’s current wave of nationalism and its impact on the Jewish community .
 The presence and place of Jews in the still-crystallising Ukrainian state remains a sensitive issue . This is not primarily because of a physical threat to Jewish well-being .
 Jewish communal buildings in Kiev require considerably less physical security around them than do their equivalents in Western Europe .
 Nationalist groups played a very visible role during the Maidan protests .
 The armed volunteer groups flew similar colours in the summer of 2014 when the Ukrainian army faltered . They bore the brunt of the fighting in Ukraine .
 Dmitro Yaros scored just 0.7% of the vote in the presidential elections of 2014 . He was the only candidate to win the vote .
 Efforts by the volunteer battalions to transform themselves into political parties have as yet achieved meagre results . Efforts have been made by volunteers to become political parties.
Ukrainian Jews still face difficult questions over their history and symbols .
 Ukrainian Jewish Committee executive director says apparent electoral weakness of nationalists is deceptive . Eduard Dolinsky, executive director of the Kiev-based Jewish Committee, says the apparent weakness is deceptive.
 He is concerned at the role of what he called “apologists of national memory’s’ role in the Holocaust and the persecution of Jews in Ukraine . He says he is concerned about what he calls ‘apologist of nationalmemory’
 The placing of these figures in a mainstream pantheon of national heroes in Ukraine is evident . Ukraine's national heroes are among the most popular in Ukraine .
Ukrainian parliament held a minute of silence for Petlyura on May 25, 2016 . The Ukrainian parliament held the silence for the first time in May 2016 .
 Other voices, both Jewish and non-Jewish, dispute the gravity and implications of the “mainstreaming’ of wartime nationalist leaders .
 Josef Zissels, chairman of the Vaad organisation of Ukrainian Jews, was quoted recently warning against “unnecessary assignment of blame’ in a country where Jews enjoy formal equal rights .
 The country faces enormous challenges ahead in the building of institutions, fighting systemic corruption and forging a version of national identity .
 The Jews, both the actual living examples of them in Ukraine and no doubt also the mythical, archetypal Jew that never seems to quite vanish from the European consciousness .
 Ukraine is saturated in Jewish memory – memory both tragic and sublime . Ukraine is a territory saturated inJewish memory .
 Jews have excelled in every field of endeavour – religious thought, Zionist and socialist politics, art, music, military affairs, science and religion .
 It is the birthplace of Rabbi Yisrael ben-Eliezer, the Baal Shem Tov, the founder of Hasidic Judaism . Rabbi Nachman of Bratslav, founder of the Breslov hasidic movement, was born in Miedzybo
 Goldie Meyerson, who became prime minister Golda Meir, was born in Kiev . He became Prime Minister of Ukraine in 2009 .
 Moshe Dayan was the son of Shmuel Dayan, who came from Zhashkiv, in the Cherkassy region, central Ukraine . He was a famed fighter and commander .
 Isaac Babel is one of the foremost Soviet novelists of the mid-20th century . His "Red Cavalry Tales" remains a classic of 20th-century Russian literature .
 Leon Trotsky, born Lev Bronstein, came from Yanovka, in the Kherson region of Ukraine . He was the architect of the Russian revolution and founder of the Red Army .
 Vladimir Ze’ev Jabotinsky, father of Revisionist Zionism, came from Odessa . He is also a former member of the Zionist movement .
 Solomon Rabinovitch, better known as Sholem Aleichem, came from Pereyaslav, in the Kiev governorate . He is known for his work in Ukraine .
 The area has played host to an astonishing gathering of Jewish creative energies . The area is home to a number of Jewish artists and musicians .
 Ukraine is the land of Bohdan Khmelnytsky, whose statue on his horse and rhino horn mace stands outside St Sophia’s Cathedral in Kiev . His Cossack rebels butchered 100,000 Jews in a 17th-century uprising .
 Simon Petlyura's fighters followed a similar murderous path during the Russian revolution of 1917 . It is the land of Simon Petlura, whose fighters followed the same murderous path .
 The mobile killing squads followed the German armies as they swept through Ukraine in the summer and autumn of 1941 . They systematically slaughtered Jewish populations in the verdant ravines and forests .
 The European Jewish Congress claims that 360,000400,000 Jews live in Ukraine . It would make it the fifth largest Jewish community in the world .
 Ukraine has been shaken in recent years once again by revolution, and its handmaiden, war . Ukraine has a history of being shaken by revolution .
 The Euromaidan Revolution toppled the pro-Russian government of President Victor Yanukovych in March 2014 . The Euromsaidan revolution was the first to topple Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych’s departure was followed by the Russian seizure of Crimea and then the outbreak of a Russian-supported separatist insurgency in the Donbass – the eastern provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The ill-equipped, rusty Ukrainian forces moved to crush the insurgency . They were met by the entry of conventional Russian troops in August .
 The Ukrainians suffered bloody setbacks in the battles of Ilovaisk and Debaltseve, before a cease-fire agreement was signed in Minsk on February 11 2015 .
 The war is not over, and the issues that led to its outbreak have not been resolved . The war has not been solved, but it is still not over .
 Ukrainians and their Russian enemies face one another along a static 400km frontline .
 Observers from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe monitor the ceasefire . The ceasefire has been in place for more than two years .
 This reporter spent several days in the war zone of eastern Ukraine . Shooting across the lines is a nightly occurrence .
 RPG, self-propelled grenades and machine guns too. And not just rifles – rifles – RPGs and self- Propelled grenades are among them .
 Over the past three years, 10,090 people have died in this largely forgotten conflict . The conflict has been largely forgotten.
 The war has impacted on Ukraine’s Jewish community in two central ways . Ukraine's Jewish community has been affected by the conflict .
 Jews in eastern Ukraine have suffered direct physical effects of the fighting . Jews resident in Ukraine have been affected by the fighting.
 Most of Donetsk and Luhansk’s Jews fled westward as the frontlines approached their homes in 2014 . Most of the Jews fled eastward as frontlines approach their homes .
 The provisions offered by the Ukrainian authorities to those made homeless by the war are minimal . The provisions are minimal, according to Ukrainian authorities .
 Efforts are ongoing by a variety of Jewish organisations to provide for Ukrainian Jews who have become refugees .
 The war of 2014 was an important moment in the ongoing development of national identity in independent Ukraine . The war was a key moment for the development of Ukraine's national identity .
 Ukraine's Jews are part of it whether they like it or not. This is a complex and sometimes fraught business, and Ukraine’s Jews are one of it's biggest issues .
 Both of these broad camps contain fringe elements that are hostile to Jews . Both of the broad camps have fringe elements of the Jewish community .
 On the pro-Russian side, neo-Nazi groups such as Russian National Unity and a number of Cossack groups maintain an armed presence in Luhansk and Donetsk .
 On the Ukrainian side, there are also militia groups active in the combat zone that use far right and neo-Nazi imagery .
 Ukrainian leadership is keen to make use of a nationalist heritage that celebrates Khmelnytsky and Petlyura . It includes organisations and figures that collaborated with the Nazi invaders during World War II .
 The public commemoration of such wartime nationalist leaders as Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych remains a starkly divisive issue . It is unlikely to lessen in intensity over time.