 From the moment you step on board, cabin attendants anticipate your every need . The cabin attendants are always prepared for your needs .
 This dedication to detail stems from the Japanese philosophy of Omotenashi . This dedication is based on the philosophy of the Japanese Philosophy of Omotsenashi.
 ANA is the best choice for flying to Japan and Asia . It's what inspires the world-class service that makes ANA the best flight service .
 Britain’s strategic ambition has fallen even lower than its defence budget, page 49 . Britain's strategic ambition is lower than the defence budget .
 How businesses linked to blacklisted oligarchs avoid Western sanctions, page 59 .
 Programmes that place the best graduates in poor schools are spreading around the world . Programmes are spreading across the world.
iatene (olelenial-lais) helping cure cancer.
 Scientists and engineers at Virginia Tech harness supercomputing power to analyze vast amounts of DNA sequencing . Using Microsoft Azure ’ | and HDInsight, scientists and engineers use Microsoft Azure .
 Fighting in south-eastern Ukraine intensified in the run-up to the meeting, raising doubts about the deal . The meeting is expected to take place in Ukraine's east .
 Barack Obama had earlier warned Russia's military intervention would be costly . Obama reserved right to send arms to Ukraine if diplomacy fails .
 Greece's problems mounted as the parliament voted strongly in favour of ending the country's current bail-out agreement . Greece’s problems mounted after the vote .
 A Eurogroup meeting of finance ministers broke up without even agreeing to disagree . The meeting was the first of its kind to take place at the Eurogroup summit .
 Greek prime minister promised to reverse unpopular reforms and spend more public money .
 The United Nations said hundreds of would-be migrants drowned trying to cross the Mediterranean from north Africa when their dinghies overturned .
 In Italy the captain of the Costa Concordia was found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to 16 years in prison . 32 people were killed when the ship capsized off the Italian coast in 2012 .
 A court in Belgium jailed the leader of a group that sent jihadist fighters to Syria to 12 years in prison .
 The group also handed out sentences to 44 other members of the group, which was called Sharia4Belgium .
 Nigeria’s electoral commission, an independent body, postponed for six weeks presidential elections . The elections were due to take place on February 14th .
 The commission delayed the vote after the police and army said they could not secure polling stations in the north of Nigeria . Boko Haram has overrun large parts of three states in the country .
 The war with Boko Haram has meanwhile widened to involve more neighbouring countries . The war has also widened to include more neighbouring nations .
 Niger declared a state of emergency after several attacks on Diffa, a border region abutting Nigeria . Niger declared an emergency after the attacks on the border region .
Attack by militants in Cameroon led to the kidnapping of as many as 30 people .
 The United Nations backed out of supporting a planned offensive in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo against the FDLR . Two generals assigned to lead the government’s forces are accused of human-rights abuses .
 Fuel-price protesters erupted in Haiti against the cost of fuel .
Protesters want more cuts in line with the plunge in oil prices . Prices have been reduced lately, but protesters want more .
 The trouble followed demonstrations earlier this year to demand that national and local elections, which are long overdue, be held .
 The president, Michel Martelly, has ruled since January, when parliament was dissolved . The president has ruled by decree since January .
 At least three people were killed and ten wounded in a gas explosion on a drilling rig operated by Petrobras, Brazil's state-controlled oil giant .
 It recently lost its chief executive, amid a rumbling multi-billion-dollar bribery scandal .
 Venezuela’s government took over a private supermarket chain and arrested its boss . The chain's boss was arrested.
 Nicolas Maduro claimed that the retailer was “waging war against the population’ by hoarding food . The president, Nicolas Maduro, claimed that he was ‘wagingwar against the people’
 Shortages of basic consumer goods have created long queues across Venezuela for months . Economists blame price controls and a lack of foreign exchange to pay for imports .
 Barack Obama formally asked Congress to authorise U.S. military action against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria . Obama formally requested Congress to approve the action .
 The president’s decision to launch air strikes against Is without congressional approval was controversial, though the administration says it was legal . The president's decision last summer was controversial.
 Mr Obama wants Congress to approve combat against Is for up to three years . The president wants the fight to be fought for three years.
 Hawks fret that putting an expiry date on military action will encourage America to wait for America to grow weary .
 Kayla Mueller, an American aid worker held by ts, had been killed by ts .
 The circumstances of her death were unclear, but jihadists claim she died when Jordanian jets attacked one of its bases .
 Alabama's chief justice ordered officials to defy the ruling . A federal judge had struck down the state’s ban on same-sex nuptials .
 Some towns went ahead and issued marriage The Economist licences . Others refused . Some towns issued marriage licences .
 The us Supreme Courtis expected to issue a definitive ruling on gay marriage in June . The court is expected to decide on the issue in June.
 Bruce Rauner started to curb the power of public-sector unions in Illinois . He is the new Republican governor of Illinois . The state's new governor has been in charge of the state's public- sector unions .
 He ordered the state to stop automatically collecting union dues from public employees who do not want to join ’ unions .
 The unions say they are entitled to this cash because non-members benefit from their collective-bargaining efforts . Unions say they're entitled to the cash because they are not members of the union .
 Mr Abbott’s approval rating has slumped to 24% amid a series of gaffes . Prince Philip has given a knighthood to Prince Philip .
 The president of Timor-Leste accepted the resignation of Xanana Gusmao as prime minister . The resignation is the first time the president of the country has accepted it .
 Former "poetwarrior" led struggle against Indonesian rule . Has been either president or prime minister since independence in 2002 .
 HSBC Suisse allegedly marketed tax-avoidance strategies to its customers . The allegations were published by several media companies similar to the WikiLeaks revelations .
 The number of people revoking their U.S. citizenship or residency rose to a record high of 3,415 last year . The Treasury published a list of people who did so .
 Congress passed the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act in 2010 . No reason was given for renouncing citizenship, but the number has leapt since 2010 .
 Sweden’s central bank surprised markets by cutting its main interest rate to -0.1%, joining just a handful of countries with negative rates .
 Inflation has been below Riksbank’s 2% target rate of 2% for three years .
 Sweden’s economy is growing faster than that of the euro zone, which is also battling deflation . However, Sweden's economy is still struggling to keep pace with euro zone .
 Harry Wilson is seeking a seat on the board with the express intent of getting it to buy back $8 billion-worth of shares . General Motors says Wilson is a former member of the task-force that restructured the carmaker as it sought to emerge from bankruptcy protection.
 Mr Wilson is backed by four hedge funds . He is the latest example of activist investors pressing a company for higher returns .
 Qualcomm fined $975m for abusing its market power when licensing patents for smartphone chips . China’s competition regulator fined Qualcomm $975million .
 It is the biggest antitrust penalty to date levied against a single company in China . It comes after a14-month investigation that drew comments from observers on the hurdles faced by Western firms there .
South Korea faces an antitrust investigation in South Korea, too, according to reports .
 Fosun, the largest privately owned conglomerate in mainland China, won its bid for Club Méditerranée . The holiday-resort firm was wildly popular in the 1970s but has struggled over the past decade .
 It is revamping its Club Med villages to appeal to the high end of the holiday market . It is expanding in China and expanding in the country .
 Eighty per cent of its new customers in 2013 were either Chinese or Brazilian . Eighty percent of new customers were either China or Brazil .
 OPEC's decision to maintain production levels in the face of plummeting oil prices may be working. There was some evidence that OPEC’s decision to keep production levels was working . There was also evidence that the decision could be working .
 The cartel raised the forecast for demand for its oil this year slightly, to 29.2m barrels a day . Cheap oil forces American and European oil companies to curtail their capital spending .
 Apple became the first company to notch up a stockmarket valuation above $700 billion at the close of trading . The company is the first to do so.
 It was valued at $710 billion on February 10th, $300 billion more than Exxon Mobil . Exxon Mobil has the second-highest market value, with the second highest .
 Apple is investing $850m in a solarenergy plant in California that will generate enough power for its new campus-headquarters as well as for local shops and businesses . Apple also announced thatitis investing $ 850m in the plant that will power the company's campus .
 Germany exported a record €11 trillion in goods last year . Boosted in part by a weaker euro, Germany exported €11 billion in goods .
 China posted a trade surplus of €217 billion, the second-highest in the world after China’s . It also imported more stuff, but still posted a surplus of $217 billion .
 American employers created 257,000 jobs in January, which was much more than had been expected . U.S. employers created 256,000 more jobs than expected .
 The unemployment rate rose slightly to 5.7%, but this was reckoned to be because more people who have been out of work are choosing to return to the labour market .
 India's economy grew by 7.5% year on year in the last three months of 2014, a slightly faster pace than China had recorded . Controversy continued to surround the revision to India's GDP statistics .
 Some analysts question the data, pointing out that the evidence from small businesses suggests that the economy is struggling .
 At one time or another, you may have had an unfortunate ation with a vending yw the slightest imprecision getting what you want . At one point or another.
 State Street Global over 140* SPDR ETFs. If not matched, you'll be left hanging .
Investors have the tools they need to build a precise and diversified portfolio . If you have a craving for precision, then visit 7 us at spdrs.com.com/highlights .
 Putin’s war on the West is time to recognise the gravity of the Russian threat . E IS ridiculed for his mendacity and ostracised by his peers .
 He presides over a freefalling currency and a rapidly shrinking economy . He preside over a rapid shrinking economy and a falling currency .
 International sanctions stop his kleptocratic friends from holidaying in their ill-gotten villas .
 Vladimir Putin purported to set on inheriting Russia’s presidency 15 years ago . Putin's success as a success might seem bleakly comical .
For all his enemies’ machinations, he remains the Kremlin’s undisputed master . For all his opponents’Machinations, the Kremlin's undisputed boss.
 He has a throttlehold on Ukraine, a grip this week’s brittle agreement in Minsk has not eased . He has been trying to keep his grip on Ukraine.
 Domesticating Ukraine through his routine tactics of threats and bribery was his first preference . The invasion has had side benefits, but the invasion has also had benefits .
 The conflict has usefully shown who is boss in Russia’s backyard . It has demonstrated the costs of insubordination to Russians .
 His overarching aim is to divide and neuter that alliance, fracture its collective approach to security, and resist and roll back its advances . His overarching goal is to break the alliance's collective approach and resist .
 Putin has sometimes seemed to stumble into accidental disputes with the West, driven by a paranoid fear of encirclement . From his tantrums over the Middle East to his invasion of Georgia, Mr Putin has often stumbled into accidental dispute with West .
 In hindsight, it seems that, given his outlook, confrontation may have been inevitable .
 Prevailing will require far more resolve than Western leaders have so far mustered so far .
 Putin lopped off Crimea last year, redrawing Europe’s map by force .
 The war he hallucinated into reality in eastern Ukraine has killed thousands. The war has killed tens of thousands of people .
Former Soviet states are only the latest bid to bludgeon former Soviet states into submission, whether through energy blackmail, trade embargoes or war .
 For Mr Putin the only good neighbour is a weak one; vassals are better than allies . Mr Putin's only good neighbours are weak one, he says .
To him, Western institutions and values are more threatening than armies . To him, western institutions andvalues are morethreatening than armies.
 He wants to halt their spread, corrode them from within and at least on the West’s fragile periphery . He wants his own model of governance .
In that model, nationstates trump alliances, states are dominated by elites, and those elites can be bought . In that model of nationstates, state is dominated by elite .
 The alliance crumbles after a pro-Russian uprising in Estonia or Latvia . Other NATO members decline to help quell the uprising .
 Putin’s stranglehold on his own country means he has time and freedom for this campaign .
Russian president has no qualms about sacrificing Russians' wellbeing to satisfy his coterie's greed or to further his geopolitical schemes . As he has amply demonstrated, he is not concerned about sacrificing Russian wellbeing .
 In the echo chamber his propaganda creates, the nationalism he peddles as a consolation for domestic woes is flourishing . And in the echo chambers he creates, his propaganda is flourishing.
 Barack Obama has blithely regarded Russia as an awkward regional power, prone to post-imperial spasms but essentially declining . Obama has considered Russia as a regional power.
 The West is debating whether to eject Russia from the G8 . Ukraine is aflame, but the West is still debating whether it should be ejected .
 To paraphrase Trotsky, Western leaders may not have been interested in Mr Putin, but Mr Putin was interested in them .
 Russia has graduated from harassing ambassadors and assassinating critics to invasions . His Russia has been known for harassing ambassadors, assassinating opponents .
 The current version of this quandary is whether, if the latest ceasefire fails, to arm Ukraine . It's not clear whether the current version will happen .
 Proponents think defensive weapons would inflict a cost on Putin for fighting on .
 Anyone who doubts his tolerance of mass casualties should recall his war in Chechnya . But anyone who doubts the war's tolerance should recall the war in the country .
 If fresh Russian aggression galvanises the alliance, arming Ukraine will become amore potent threat . If fresh Russia aggression galvanised the alliance.
 The crisis began with Ukrainians' desire to tilt towards the EU, and Mr Putin’s determination to stop them .
 Former Soviet countries that have joined Western institutions must be buttressed and reassured . Just as urgently, those former Soviet countries should be buttress and reassured.
 Putin squeals. If case for sending arms to the Donbas is doubtful, that for basing NATO troops is doubtful .
 Western leaders must make it clear, to him and their own people, that they will defend their allies, and the alliance, even if the struggle is covert and murky .
 Many Russians, including shameless Putinists, nounce the West’s decadence but exploit its schools and stockmarkets . So do many Russians, who deThe unbalanced global economy American shopper.
 It is long past time for every Russian parliamentarian and senior official to join the sanctions list .
 The West should use every available means to help ordinary Russians, including Russian-sympathisers in the Baltics and Ukraine, learn the bloody, venal truth about Mr Putin .
 Russia will be embraced when it has rulers who treat the world, and their own people, with respect not contempt, however long that takes . m. m The world is once again relying too much on American consumers to power growth .
 The American economy is motoring again, to the relief of exporters from Hamburg to Hangzhou . The U.S. economy is Motoring again.
 In January consumer sentiment jumped to its highest in more than a decade. Buoyed up by cheap petrol, Americans are spending .
 The mF reckons that American growth will hit 3.6% in 2015, faster than the world economy as a whole .
 Growing dependence on the U.S. economy has unwelcome echoes. But growing dependence on consumers in particular is unwelcome echoes of the American economy .
 China filled their ever-larger houses with goods from China . They fuelled gas-guzzling cars with imported oil .
 Big exporters recycled their earnings back to America, pushing down interest rates which in turn helped to feed further borrowing . Big exporter's earnings were pushed back to the United States .
 There, frugal Germans financed debt binges around the euro area’s periphery .
 After the financial crisis, the hope was of an end to these imbalances . The hope is that the world will soon see a change in how to deal with the crisis .
 Debt-addicted Americans and Spaniards would chip away at their obligations . Thrifty German and Chinese consumers would start to enjoy life for once .
 America’s trade deficit was about 6% of GpP in 2006 . The deficit had more than halved by 2009 .
 Hair grows faster than the euro zone, and what growth there is depends heavily on exports . Hair growth depends on exports, and the growth of hair is dependent on export growth .
 The countries of the single currency are running a current-account surplus of about 2.6% of Gpp . The surplus is largely due to exports to America .
 At 7.4% of GppP, Germany’s trade surplus is as large as it has ever been .
 China’s growth, meanwhile, is slowing, and once again relying heavily on spending elsewhere . China's growth is slowing; it is once again focusing heavily on spend elsewhere .
 China’s exports have actually begun to drop, but imports are down by more . China's exports are now down by less than a quarter .
 Consumption's contribution to growth in the fourth quarter of 2014 was the largest since 2006 . Consumption’s contribution to Growth in theFourth quarter of 2013 was the biggest since 2006. consumption's contribution was the highest since 2007 .
 Households and firms in Europe’s periphery are overburdened with debt, workers’ wages squeezed and banks in no mood to lend .
 The prospect of quantitative easing by the European Central Bank has sent the euro tumbling against the greenback . European exporters.
 The Federal Reserve appears ready to begin raising interest rates this summer . The Fed is expected to raise interest rates in the summer .
 That is sending yield-hungry capital to America, and the dollar skyward . That is send yield-hunting capital to the U.S. and dollar skywards .
 The short-term worry is that weak exports, arising dollar and a slowdown in energy investment will stifle the U.S. expansion .
 Rather than pull others along, America will be dragged down by their weakness . America's weakness will not be as strong as other nations, it will be its weakness .
 The longer-term fear is that growing imbalances will repeat the financial cycle of the 2000s . American exporters to America once again finance reckless consumer borrowing .
 The ratio of Americans’ debt to income to income has fallen from a pre-crisis high of more than 120% to around 100% . Consumers still have too much incentive to load up on debt, but consumers still need to pay more .
Politicians would do well to get rid of subsidies like tax relief on mortgage interest . Politicians would also like to see a reduction in mortgage interest subsidies .
 Leaders from Brussels to Beijing should not allow falling currencies to become a substitute for structural reform . Leaders from the EU to China should not let falling currencies become substitute for reform .
After all, he wants to stay in the single currency. After all, the vast majority of Greeks want to remain in the currency .
 Greek exit from the euro ever more likely. But even as he prepared to meet fellow European Union leaders for the first time this week, he was making a Greek exit ever morelikely .
 Mr Tsipras has put forward some good arguments against austerity that has been imposed on Greece as the price of its bail-outs .
 He has sound ideas on attacking corruption, fighting tax evasion and shaking up Greece’s cosy business elite .
 His first moves in office included promises to raise the minimum wage to pre-crisis levels . But he also promised to reverse labour-market reforms, restore pension increases and restore pension rises .
 These would not just breach Greece's bail-out terms, but also wreck the country’s economic prospects . Greece's economic prospects would also be affected by these measures .
 To reverse course in this way when Greece’s economy is at last growing and unemployment is falling is perverse . To reverse Course in thisWay when Greece's economy is last growing is perverse, says the writer .
 Bulgaria lags behind neighbouring Bulgaria, the poorest EU country, in areas such as enforcing contracts, registering property and providing credit . In its business climate it lags ahead of neighbouring Bulgaria.
 Mr Tsipras foolishly refuses to prolong Greece’s bail-out programme when it expires at the end of the month .
 Your pay is low for your qualifications, but at least the holidays are long, and the pension is gold-plated . The holidays are not long.
 Tene ought to ee a profession for hard-working altruists who want to improve children’s life prospects . Tene should be able to help children's life prospects.
 All too often school systems seem designed to attract mediocre timeservers . But all too often they attract mediocre timeervers.
 There is a case for removing the EcB, which is politicised by its involvement in the troika . The EcB has been involved in the Troika for more than a decade .
 Mr Tsipras cannot expect more loans without conditions, as the bad-tempered break-up of this week’s Eurogroup meeting demonstrated .
 Greece pays a smaller share of GpP in debt service than Portugal and Italy . The maturity and interest cost of the debt, two-thirds of which is owed to official European creditors, are so generous .
 The government is now required to run a primary budget surplus of 3% of GpP this year . This will rise to 4.5% from 2016 onwards, according to the government .
 A compromise of around 2.5% would allow him to spend more on social programmes . A compromise would let him spend more money on programmes .
 European leaders should give MrTsipras a simple message, says Mr Tsipras .
 The government will help him on debt and the budget, but only if he is prepared to make his economy more competitive, he says . He says. They will help his budget and debt, but not his debt .
 As lazy and incompetent teachers get away with slacking, committed ones often lose motivation . But, as lazy, incompetent teachers lose motivation.
 Jaded British teachers on online forums remind each other that it is just a few months till the long summer break .
 Yet it is possible to persuade the hardworking and ambi>> > tious to teach .
 Finland pays teachers modestly, but manages them well . Ten graduates apply for each training place . Finland pays teacher modestly but manages teachers well .
 South Korea recruits teachers from the top 5% of school-leavers and promises them fat pay cheques . South Korea recruit teachers from top 5%.
 In both countries teachers are revered, and results are among the world’s best .
 Even where the profession is in disrepute, high-flyers can be lured into the classroom .
 Teach First has helped raise standards in London and is one of the country’s most prestigious graduate employers .
 Spreading the revolution to the entire profession will mean dumping the perks cherished by slackers and setting terms that appeal to the hardworking .
 That may well mean higher pay, but also less generous pensions and holidays . That may also mean lower pay and less generous holidays .
Stiffer entry requirements would raise the job’s status and attract better applicants . Stiffer requirements would increase the job's status.
Schools know what it takes to succeed in difficult schools, and what it would take for success to become the norm . They know whatit takes for success, and how it takes.
 As they become more numerous and influential, they need to argue for a new deal for teachers .
 XiJinping is bringing a corrupt army to heel. The good ones deserve it, and pupils do, too .
 China’s army began admitting foreign journalists to its monthly briefings only last year . Now he must make it behave responsibly .
 Never before in China’s history have so many high-ranking officers faced such charges at once .
 No leader since Deng Xiaoping in the 1980s has held such sway over the armed forces . No leader has been in power since the late 1980s. No leader in the past has held sway over armed forces.
 His purge of its highest echelons may be aimed at crushing potential rivals . His purge may be part of a bid to crush potential rivals.
 It is part of Mr Xi’s campaign against corruption throughout the party and government . It has struck fear into the hearts of politicians and military officers, regardless of their loyalties .
 Mr Xishould now use his grip over the PLA to achieve more than just suppress the rampant practice of buying ranks and doing dodgy business deals .
 The army remains largely unchanged in two important, and worrying, ways . The army is largely unchanged, but the army remains mostly unchanged .
First, it is still deeply wary of contacts with its Western counterparts . First, it's not sure if it will make contact with other Western nations .
 During the cold war, America and the Soviet Union worked out codes of conduct to prevent accidents between their warships or fighter planes .
 China's army does not accept the kind of surveillance that the Americans and Russians routinely carried out near each other’s territory .
 The scarcity of “mil-mil’s’ contacts makes it harder for America and China to communicate in times of crisis .
 The pLa fosters a paranoid fear within its ranks that America is bent on China’s destruction . U.S. has been bent on the destruction of China's destruction .
 It is only natural for the pLa to be suspicious of the U.S. army and vice versa .
 The two countries are to cultivate a ‘new type of great-power relationship’ Mr Xi often says he wants and the world clearly needs to be built on stronger foundations .
 Mr Xi, it was announced this week, will travel to America in September for his first state visit .
 It would help if he curbed his army's tendency to portray America as China’s arch-enemy .
 This month the Pentagon said it would not send an aircraft-carrier on a visit to China this year . Both sides had been mulling the idea .
 John McCain said sending “one of the most sophisticated and lethal military tools in world history’s history would be a mistake at a time of anxiety in Asia .
 Such a gesture could help forge ties with the military establishment that America needs to know better . Such a move could help to forge ties.
 Simplicity can be the difference between a mission statement and a mission accomplished . It can be a difference between mission statement or a mission accomplishment .
Private schools cater to the elite, such as Groton, St Paul’s, Andover, Exeter and Hotchkiss . But they leave a pin prick on American life .
 American commentators do not see the need to run stories similar to those in the British media about how many businessmen, judges, army officers, lawyers and actors come from the 7% who are privately educated .
 Rich Americans send their children to state schools in the way rich Britons do not . Rich Britons send children to school in state schools. Rich Americans do not send their kids to state school in the UK .
Localised funding in America provides wealthy areas with schools that achieve better academically . But these schools are still part of the state system and its culture .
 Walk down a street in St Andrews or Durham and you will see what I mean. Walk down the street in the city of St Andrews and Durham .
 You chart the rapidly rising cost of college tuition and fees in America . You charted the rising costs of college fees and tuition .
 The burden for paying those costs has shifted greatly from the states to students and their families . However, what really matters is that the burden is that those costs have shifted greatly .
 The anti-tax agenda has substantially diminished the ability of states to underwrite the cost of higher education . The agenda has significantly diminished state's ability to underwriting higher education.
 One of America’s most important innovations was the creation of great public universities .
 What had been an extraordinary public good and aremarkable vehicle for upward social mobility is increasingly a private good, available to students from families who can afford it .
 Toa distressing degree America has broken faith with its commitment to public higher education . America's commitment to higher education represents a way up, says Toa .
 The body of a young woman was removed from under a train in Japan . The incident reminded me of an incident in Japan.
 Jumping in front of a train is one of the most common ways to commit suicide . It is also a common way to kill yourself .
 Removing that stigma and controlling access to guns would not, as you suggest, lower America’s suicide rate .
Cognitive behavioural therapy is better at treating depression and reducing suicidal urges than drugs . Cognitive behavioural therapy can help reduce suicidal urges, according to experts .
 Itis 20 years later and I still remember the thin gold watch on her limp arm . It is 20 years old and she still has a thin goldwatch on her arm .
 For most recipients, the state pension is related to nationalinsurance contributions . But for most recipients it's related to the nationalins insurance contributions .
 Thousands of nonresident British citizens opt to pay voluntary contributions to get full state pension when they retire .
 There is a big distinction between the state pension and the various non-means-tested giveaways that you mentioned .
 The state pension is a part-contributory, part-taxfunded system for ensuring a minimum income to the elderly . The pension is part-funded by the state to ensure the elderly receive minimum income .
 Free bus passes, winter heating allowances and the like are indefensible if they are paid out regardless of wealth .
 The jab reduces the likelihood of contracting other types of cancer caused by the human papillomavirus . But boys and young men should also get the jab as it reduces the chance of contracting cancer .
 The southern euro zone has started to recover nicely some four to six quarters ago . Far from remaining ‘stuck with nearzero growth’ those countries of the southern Euro zone have started to recovery nicely .
 In the last two quarters for which we have data, annualised growth averaged 2.4% for Spain, 2.2% for Greece and 1.2%, for Portugal .
 Greek indicators have started to nosedive with the rise of the Syriza threat . For Spain and Portugal, leading indicators project stronger gains ahead . But, sadly, Greek indicators are nosediving with the rising threat .
 The medicine was bitter, and probably dished out as an overdose in the case of Greece . The medicine may have been an overdose .
Ithas a mild recession precisely because it has not yet swallowed the labour-reform pill . Ithas the mild recession because it hasn't yet been swallowed the Labour-reforms pill .
 If Greece reverses its own labour reforms it will probably sink back into recession . The Economist February 14th 2015 .
 Greece's debt stock as ashare of Gpp, which you regrettably do, looks unpayable only if one looks at the wrong statistics .
 Greece's debt is at extremely concessional terms, resulting in an effective interest rate on public debt that is lower than Germany’s, and a public debt-service burden that, as a share of Gpp, is about the same as U.S.
 One of the hyenas depicted on the February 7th cover is cocking a leg while urinating .
 Peer review is evolving. The process by which academics check the work of their colleagues before it goes to print .
 Hungary’s most powerful businessman has unleashed invective over the past few days towards his country's prime minister . Some of their experiments might work, but others might work .
 The spat is the most serious break yet in Viktor Orban's governing Fidesz party . None of the popular hagiographies of St Valentine give any hint of him liking chocolate .
 Standing room C2 is a standing section on a plane . The airline is trying to get approval for a standing room on a flight .
 People who work for religious organisations should think about the consequences for their personal lives . People should consider the consequences of their lives, says the author .
 A woman's evolutionary reasons to play fast and loose are less obvious, for having many lovers will not bring her more children . They cannot claim the right to privacy .
 The programme aims to improve access to, equal opportunities in and the relevance of vocational training in Pakistan . The programme will strengthen the implementation partners capacity to develop competency based training programmes .
 CBT programmes & TLM for selected trades, organize meetings, workshops and trainings in the context of CBT development and implementation . Develop annual plans with budgets regarding CBT programme and TLM development activities .
 You have a Master degree, preferably in vocational training, engineering or business science . You need to be in business science or vocational training .
 Teaching experience gained at vocational colleges would be a further advantage . You also have at least 10 years of professional experience with designing, developing, implementing and evaluating of CBT programmes and teaching and learning materials .
 You have experience of cooperating with implementing organisations and working with multinational teams, preferably in countries undergoing conflict and crisis .
InterExec is the global leader in getting top executives to the pinnacle of their careers . InterExec is also the world's most successful executive.
We act discreetly to provide unrivalled access to prime opportunities which are rarely published . Using our unique international network and in-depth market knowledge, we act quietly to provide access to Prime opportunities .
 The CEB represents a major instrument of solidarity policy in Europe, helping its 41 Member States to achieve sustainable and equitable growth . TheCEB represents the major instrument in Europe's solidarity policy .
 The World Economic Forum is the international institution committed to improving the state of the world through public-private cooperation .
 We are currently looking for an outstanding person to lead the Tropical Forest Alliance 2020 . We are looking for a person to be the leader of the group .
 The Tropical Forest Alliance 2020 is a global public-private partnership where partners take voluntary actions, individually and in combination, to reduce tropical deforestation associated with the sourcing of commodities such as palm oil, soy, beef and paper & pulp .
 The World Economic Forum has been invited to host the TFA 2020 secretariat for at least three years from spring 2015 until the end of 2017 . The secretariat is supported by international donors including Norway and the United Kingdom .
 As the director of TFA 2020, you will be its recognized leader to all external private engagement, project and project and team management, public speaking, problem solving and synthesizing .
TFA 2020 steering committee will lead and manage the TFA 2020 secretariat . It will ensure objectives and expected deliverables are met on time, with right impact and within budget .
 If you have at least 15 years’ relevant experience in the public, private or civil society sectors, please apply . If you are an MD or PhD, you should apply for a PhD or MD .
 The European Food Safety Authority is at the heart of the EU's risk assessment system for food and feed .
 The REPRO Department is a catalyser and generator of innovation and changes . The Authority is responsible for the Department's work program .
 The position is based in Geneva and requires significant travel . The salary is in line with official international organizations .
 Its purpose is to help prevent long-term changes to the climate system of our home planet . The climate system is to protect our planet from climate change .
Climate finance flows into renewable energy and climate protection projects in emerging economies . It channels climate finance flows to renewable energy, climate protection Projects in emerging countries .
The Fund is seeking highly qualified individuals who demonstrate talent in multidisciplinary fields . The Fund is looking for individuals who demonstrated talent inmultidisciplinary field .
 This is a unique opportunity to be part of a start-up in international climate finance that offers stimulating challenges . This is the first time climate finance has been set up in the UK .
 Apply for GCF staff, consultancy and internship positions at www.gcfund.org .
 The Economist Intelligence Unit helps leaders prepare for opportunity, empowering them to act with confidence when making strategic decisions .
 The EIU is the global standard in providing quality, actionable intelligence to the public and private sector . EIU assesses issues that impact the marketplace for over two hundred countries .
 You will contribute to all areas of the region’s editorial output, undertaking economic and political forecasting and analysis .
 This willinvolve focusing on specified countries to produce several reports per month . EIU will also prepare daily research notes which interpret politicaland economic events .
 To succeed you must have experience of analysing and forecasting political and economic trends . Strong writing and editing skills in English are key to success .
 We are committed to equal opportunities and creating an inclusive environment for all our employees . We are dedicated to equal opportunity and equal opportunities for all employees .
 We welcome applicants regardless of ethnic origin, gender, religious beliefs, disability, sexual orientation or age . We welcome applications regardless of ethnicity or age.
 Commonwealth Secretariat to undertake short-term assignments on financing for development policy issues . This is an opportunity for individuals, companies, think-tanks, academic and research institutions to undertake assignments .
 We are seeking to establish a pool of specialist expertise which we can quickly access . We are trying to establish an expert pool of expertise that we can easily access .
 Consultants will be approached to undertake specific assignments such as research and analysis . They will also present/facilitating discussions at Commonwealth, International and expert meetings and conferences .
 Applicants must have a post-graduate degree in finance and / or economics . Your experience of working as a consultant / expert for international and/ or regional organisations dealing with financing for development policy issues.
 You have an in-depth understanding of the functioning of the global development and financing architecture . You also have outstanding communications skills to present convincingly to policymakers .
 The closing date is Thursday 12 March . To find out more, please go to thecommonwealth.org/jobs .
 Economist £58,578 pa gross + benefits three-year fixed-term contract London-based with international travel .
 You will be focused on the quantitative analysis and forecasting of macro-economic and financial market variables in client countries . You will support the development of debt management strategies based on a risk management framework .
 Your debt management experience must have been gained in government or international organisations . You must be a citizen of a Commonwealth country .
 We work with our member governments in areas of economic, social and political development . We also work with member governments.
 Recent refocusing of our priorities has created some outstanding opportunities to help us provide practical technical assistance, offering thought leadership and innovative solutions .
 As we improve the wellbeing of 2. billion citizens, 60% of whom are under 30 years of age . We give you the opportunity to take a significant step in your career and make an important contribution .
 The closing date is Monday 23 February . To find out more, please go to thecommonwealth.org/jobs .
 France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine to sign a deal to end a year-long war fuelled by Russia and fought by its proxies . Russia’s aggression in Ukraine is part of a broader, and more dangerous, confrontation with the West .
 The 1mr has said it will lend Ukraine $17. billion to prop up its economy . Meanwhile the 1mr said it would lend the country $17 billion .
 Alexander Prokhanoy is a nationalist writer who backs Russia's war in Ukraine . He compares European civilisation to a magnet attracting Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia feels threatened not by any individual European state, but by the European Union and NATO, which it regards as ex20 Briefing What Russia wants > pansionist . Russia feels not threatened by any European state.
 America “wants to freeze the order established after the Soviet collapse and remain an absolute leader, thinking it can do whatever it likes,’ says Putin .
 The Donbas rebels are fighting against a corrupt Western way of life in order to defend Russia’s distinct world view . They are fighting not only the Ukrainian army, but against the corrupt Western ways of life .
 Mistaken hopes many in the West equate the end of communism with end of the cold war .
 Russia’s version of soft power would achieve little. But without the ability to apply hard power, Russia's version of hard power would achieved little .
 Russia has invested heavily in defence, says NATO’s new secretarygeneral, Jens Stoltenberg . Russia “has invested heavily,’ says NATO's new secretary-general, a former Norwegian prime minister .
 Russia's defence spending will have tripled in nominal terms since 2007 . Russia will be halfway through a ten-year, 20 trillion rouble ($300 billion) programme to modernise its weapons .
 A revised military doctrine signed by Mr Putin in December identified “reinforcement of NATO’s offensive capacities directly on Russia’'s borders . Measures taken to deploy a global anti-missilé defence system.
 Mr Putin is fond of saying that nobody should try to shove Russia around when it has one of the world's biggest nuclear arsenals .
Ordinary contract soldiers are catching up with the elite airborne VDV troops . The Gru Spetsnaz went into Crimea without military insignia .
Boots on the ground South-east Ukraine shows the new model army at work .
 There have also been at least two nearmisses between Russian military aircraft and Swedish airliners .
 Many pro-Russian parties did well in last May's European elections, taking between them a quarter of the seats . Such behaviour is in the Kremlin’s pocket, according to the Kremlin .
 This has raised fears of a coherent pro-Russian block forming in Strasbourg . This has also raised fears that a pro-Russia block is forming .
 In Greece, the now-ruling radical-left Syriza party leans towards Russia . The party is now in power in Greece .
 New foreign minister Nikos Kotzias visited Moscow in February . It was his first visit to a foreign capital outside the European Union .
 Another left-wing, broadly pro-Russian upstart, is Podemos in Spain, which leads in the polls .
 France’s National Front, the foremost right-nationalist party, openly admires Mr Putin . Its leader has accused the Westofdouble _ standardsindealing with Russia .
 It recently accepted a €9.4m loan from First Czech Russian Bank, a lender with indirect links to the Kremlin . The lender is a lender that has indirect links with the Kremlin.
 Bela Kovacs has lobbied on behalf of Russian interests and supported the invasion of Crimea . Kovacs is a member of the European Parliament .
 Fidesz, Hungary’s ruling party, once fiercely anti-communist, has also been cultivating closer ties with Russia .
 In July the prime minister, Viktor Orban, said he was striving to build “an illiberal state’s within the Eu .
 Nigel Farage has called Mr Putin ie woud leader he most admires, at least a political operator .
 FN's populist parties have accepted Russian money, but it is hard to be sure, given their opaque finances . There is scant evidence that Europe’s populist parties, FN apart, have accepted Russia money .
 Anton Shekhotsov, an expert on fringe parties, thinks that the loan to the French party is the exception rather than the rule . He says the loan is an exception to the rule.
 The Kremlin preferred to provide “fees’ to individual politicians than financial support to their parties, he says . He points out that the Kremlin, in the past at least, preferred to give "fees" to individuals .
 A motley crew of populists were flown in to give ringing endorsements of the Crimea referendum and the election in the Donbas .
 Among them were Mr Kovacs and Aymeric Chauprade, an adviser to Ms Le Pen .
 Russian media falsely portrayed these lackeys as 26 ae independent observers . The lackeys are not independent observers, according to Russian media .
 Since 2013, when Russia restarted largescale snap military exercises, at least eight have been held . At least eight of Russia's military exercises have taken place since 2013 .
 In December the Kremlin ordered one in Kaliningrad, an exclave that borders Lithuania and Poland, both NATO members .
 It mobilised 9,000 soldiers, more than 55 navy ships and every type of military aircraft . The military mobilised more than 5,000 troops, including 1,000 marines and 1,500 soldiers .
Meddling and perverting Destabilisation is also being achieved in less military ways . Meddling, pervertingDestabilisation, is being achieved with less military methods .
 Far-right groups seduced by the idea of Moscow as a counterweight to the EU, and by its law-and-order policies .
Zeus Rodriguez is the president of St Anthony Schoolin Milwaukee, a mini Republican primary is underway .
 A signed photograph of Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, competes for space with snaps of Rand Paul and Jeb Bush . All three of them presidential hopefuls are running for president .
 St Anthony's is popular among conservatives because it has more pupils taking advantage of governmentfunded vouchers than any other private school in America .
 The local neighbourhood was once populated by German and Polish Catholics but is now home to the Hispanic sort .
 95% of first two classes of high-school students from St Anthony’s have graduated . More than 90% have gone on to college .
 Milwaukee's public schools, by contrast, spend a whopping $13,000. All this, for a cost to taxpayers of just $7,500 per pupil .
 Republicans are pushing to increase the number and scope of school voucher schemes . The Republicans' success in state elections in November helped them win state elections .
 Governor Walker called for the expansion of Wisconsin's three voucher schemes . He left the details fuzzy .
 In each of the 24 states that have vouchers, lawmakers propose to make more children eligible . Robert Enlow of the Friedman Foundation advocates for school choice .
 George P Bush (son of Jeb) recently argued for their introduction to Texas, where he is land commissioner .
 Most of the change is taking place lower down, thanks to vouchers aimed at poor kids in awful public schools . At last, a real recovery 26 Tycoons and farm subsidies 28 Barack Obama’s war powers 29 Gay marriage in Alabama 29 Bondage in the Bible belt.
 America will look a bit more like Japan or the Netherlands, where private schools serve lots of hard-up families and children do better in exams .
 The first came in the late 19th century amid a panic about Catholic Europeans subverting the country’s Protestant identity .
 James Blaine, a former Speaker of the House of Representatives, proposed an amendment to the federal constitution banning public funding for religious schools . Blaine is a former House Speaker .
 The proposal failed, but many states passed their own version of a Blaine amendment . Currently three-quarters of states ban directly spending public money on religious institutions .
 The ban on publicly-funded Catholic schools spurred the creation of lots of privately-funded ones . The ban led to lots of private-funded schools .
 The second wave came after the desegregation of public schools in the South following Brown v. Board of Education .
 The third wave has been underway since 1990, when Milwaukee’s pioneering school-voucher programme began . Milwaukee's pioneering school programme began in 1990 .
 Most began life as schemes to help families in predominantly black neighbourhoods find something better . They were then extended to children in foster care and those with special needs .
 Only now are they being ex-24 U.S. parents who sent their children to lowcost private schools anyway .
 Milwaukee’s experience with school vouchers has been mixed. Despite providing the inspiration for this movement, Milwaukee's experience with the school vouchers is mixed . The city's history with vouchers has also been mixed .
 There have been some successes like St Anthony’s. There have also been some horror stories.
 One new private school was run by a convicted rapist . Another by a man who used school money to buy himself a pair of MercedesBenzes .
 The outright frauds have since been weeded out, but there remain a lot of poorly performing private schools . There are many bad public schools in the U.S.
 Wisconsin’s education department has commissioned evaluations over the past 25 years . Test scores of children at private schools are no better than those who stayed in public school system .
 Dc found no statistical difference between children who were given vouchers and those who were notin reading and maths . This is consistent with the federal government’s evaluation of the voucher scheme for poor parents in Washington .
 In both Milwaukee and Washington, voucher schemes get similar results to the public schools but with much less money . In both cities, vouchers get the same results but with less money.
 Under the pc scheme, each voucher is worth $8,500 a year, compared with $17,500 to educate a child in the public school system . Under thepc scheme, the vouchers are worth $9,000 a year .
 In Milwaukee, the difference is smaller but still amounts to several thousand dollars . In Milwaukee the difference in Milwaukee is smaller than in Milwaukee .
 Parents like being given a choice, which explains why vouchers, once granted, are hard to take away . Another consistent finding from voucher schemes is that parents like to have a choice .
 Milwaukee’s experience overall has been mixed, but it still has lessons for elsewhere . Milwaukee's experience overall is mixed .
Around 40% of parents in Milwaukee exercise some kind of choice over their children's education, an unusually high share .
 With so much competition, it is hard for any school to grow complacent . With so many competition, there is no way to get out of it .
 Some private schools do very well with poor black and Hispanic children, others fail them and yet manage to stay in business . Even with lots of parents choosing there is a need for an authority to close the bad schools down .
 The good schools, however constituted, have good teachers, inspiring principals and respond to their surroundings . The good school, however, has good teachers.
 St Marcus Lutheran is a private school on the other side of town from St Anthony’s . The school is on the same side of the town.
 Some 90% of the pupils at St Marcus are from black, low-income families . The school is based in London.
 If parents can't bring their children to school, the staff will go and pick them up . The staff will pick up their children and take them to school .
 Some children come from chaotic homes, so the school stays open until 8.30pm and serves dinner .
 In a state that sends a higher proportion of black men to prison than any other, rates are below the national average for all races . St Marcus' alumni are in prison at a higher rate than all other states .
 In their first quartercentury, voucher schemes have faced fierce opposition and coped despite much smaller budgets . In the first quarter century, vouchers have faced intense opposition andCoped despite smaller budgets.
 A recent report found that illicit smokes are more than 20% of total consumption in 15 states . The report also said that illicit smoking is a significant part of the total consumption .
 At last, a proper recovery WASHINGTON, DC Allsorts of Americans are feeling more prosperous . The economy has technically been out of recession for six years .
 Many who had given up looking for work are trying again, and succeeding . Many who have given up trying again are trying to find work .
Lower oil prices also help, since America is still anetimporter of the stuff . Lower oil prices are also a good thing for America, since it's still aneporter of stuff .
 Contraband flows as % of cigarettes smoked, 2013 OUTFLOWS. Contrab and flows as% of cigarettes smoke .
 At 5.7%, America’s is one of the lowest in the OECD, a club of rich countries . The OECD is a group of countries with the lowest percentage of the population .
 Firms added more than 1m net new jobs in the three months to January . The best showing since 1997 was the best since 1997 .
 The Job Openings and Labour Turnover Survey, released on February 10th, showed that by the end of December there were 5m job openings . It was the highest level since 2001, the survey showed .
 unemployment benefits took effect at the beginning of 2014 . It may have made lowskilled workers more appealing to employers .
 By encouraging the jobless to accept lower wages, it may have enticed companies to create more jobs .
 Half of the jobs added in January were in low-wage industries like restaurants and shops .
In the past year, the unemployment rate for Americans without a high-school diploma has fallen by one percentage point . With more work available, the number of people without a diploma has dropped by one per cent .
 As the prospects of those at the bottom have brightened, more and more Americans have got up off the sofa and pulled on work boots .
 The Bureau of Labour Statistics says slack work or business conditions shrank as disappointed jobseekers gave up hope . It is not the first time that jobseekers have given up hope.
 In 2010 1.3m Americans were not looking for work because there was none available . In 2010, there was no work in the United States .
 The labour-force participation rate is finally inching up. No wonder, then, that the labour-forces participation rate has finally inched up .
 Things are also looking better for those Farm subsidies Milking taxpayers WASHINGTON, DC .
 4m Americans who work part-time say they would rather work full-time but can’t get the hours thanks to the lousy economy .
 Average weekly earnings in January were 2.8% higher than they were a year earlier . It was the biggest increase since mid-201u.
 That sounds great, but it is probably down to people working longer, rather than better . It is likely to be down to working longer than better.
 In the fourth quarter of 2014 labour productivity fell by 1.8% on an annualised basis . In 2014, the figure was 1.7% lower than in 2013 .
 Americans put in 5% more time at the office, the biggest jump in hours since 1998 . The biggest jump since 1998 was the biggest increase in hours in hours.
 Janet Yellen will not rush to increase interest rates from current rock-bottom levels . Yellen is the chair of the Federal Reserve .
 Americans would struggle to repay some of their record-beating creditcard debt .
 inflation will remain close to zero in 2015 and Gpp growth is not wild. That would lead to big problems in the economy where inflation will stay close tozero in 2015 .
 As crop prices fall, farmers grow subsidies instead of growing alfalfa . Ms Yellen should enjoy the recovery while it lasts .
 To be treated as a farmer in America doesn't necessarily require you to grow any crops . To this day, to be a farmer doesn’t necessarily need to grow anything .
Between 2007 and 20 Uncle Sam paid some $3m in subsidies to 2,300 farms where no crop of any sort was grown .
 Between 2008 and 2012, $10.6m was paid to farmers who had been dead for over a year . The money was spent on farmers who died in the past year .
 Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack is promoting a rule to crack down on payments to non-farming folk . Such payments explain why he is promoting the rule, he says .
Taxpayers are braced to be fleeced again. But with crop prices now falling, taxpayers are bracing for more fleecing .
 American farm subsidies are expensive, harvesting $20 billion a year from taxpayers’ pockets . The subsidies are often more expensive than they should be .
 Most of the money goes to big, rich farmers producing staple commodities such as corn and soyabeans in states such as Iowa .
 Few voters realise how much of their money is given to farmers and even fewer would change their vote because of it . Opposition to spending is muted; few voters realise that many farmers are given to them .
 The 2014 bill, which passed with 68 votes in the Senate and comfortably in the House, at least nodded to reform . The bill passed the Senate in 2014, and the House in 2014 .
Congress abolished direct payments based on land ownership . Most importantly Congress abolished direct payouts for land owners .
 Farmers now get more subsidised insurance, and new payments which are linked to past crop prices and productivity . Instead, farmers get more subsidies, and more subsidies .
 Congress delegated the task of defining who is really a farmer to Mr Vilsack’s department . Those not ‘actively engaged’ in farming are in theory banned from collecting subsidies .
 It could also get America into trouble with the World Trade Organisation if payments exceed certain thresholds .
WeDA predicted that net farm income would decline by 32% between 2014 and 2015 . Ominously, on February 1oth the usDA predicted the decline .
 Commodities such as corn and soya have become less valuable of late thanks to soaring supply and weak demand .
 But those gains will be wiped out and more by the cost of compensating farmers for their lower incomes .
 Any new rules designed to stop nonfarmers from getting payments will be unlikely to work, predicts Mr Smith .
 Many landowners have already found their way around similar rules introduced in the farm bill of 2008 . Many landowners are nominating young children as farmers or providing management advice .
 He announced his intention to work with Congress on refining and ultimately repealing the hastily drafted Authorisation for Use of Military Force granted in the first days after the 2001 attacks . He said he would work with the Congress to refine and ultimately repeal the hastily draft Authorisation of Use of
 Mr Obama's political rise was rocket-powered by his opposition to the 2003 Iraq war . Alas for Mr Obama.
 The president asked Congress for a fresh AUMF endorsement of a limited use of America’s armed forces .
 Local forces were best placed to defeat the extremist group, he said . AUMF wording is intended only to give him “flexibility, for instance to send special forces after targets in locations where local allies could not act .
 The request to Congress comes six months after America began air strikes against Is fighters in Iraq and Syria .
 Mr Obama already claims legal authority for today’s strikes under a broad reading of the 2001 AUME . The AUME permits attacks on al-Qaeda and ‘associated’ groups .
 New authorisation invites the Republican-controlled Congress to give explicit backing for a long-lasting campaign to “degrade and defeat’s. 1s.
Draft would repeal a 2002 AUMF under which President George W Bush invaded Iraq . The draft would repeal the AUMf under which Bush invaded the country .
 Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina signalled that Senate hearings would become a broader debate about Middle East strategy . Graham: U.S. firepower also needs to be used against Assad in Syria .
 The AUMF risks failing in the Senate if it does not ‘let us counter Assad’s air power’ Mr Graham told reporters . The Senate could fail if it doesn't “let uscounter Assad”
 Libertarian Republicans are more sceptical that American might do much good in that region . Republicans are also sceptical of American's success in that area .
 Some Democrats fear that the current lan~ guage could allow Mr Obama or his successor to launch a fresh ground war in the Middle East .
 With 60 votes needed to ensure passage in the Senate, a final text will need bipartisan support . A final text needs 60 votes to pass the bill .
 There are already some 2,630 American troops in Iraq, advising Iraqi and Kurdish forces and protecting American facilities .
 A programme to train Syrian opposition fighters in neighbouring countries remains embryonic . A programme is to train vetted Syrian rebels in neighbouring nations .
 Polls show that Americans consider Kayla Mueller, a young aid worker, a serious threat . The murder of Americans, most recently, was the murder of Kayla Muller, an aid worker .
 Most oppose sending ground troops to Iraq if air strikes do not work . Most oppose ground troops if air strike does not work. But most oppose sending them to Iraq.
Jack Goldsmith, a former Pentagon lawyer, teaches national-security law at Harvard Law School . Goldsmith says the draft AUMF amounts to a striking expansion of presidential authority .
 The 2001 aumF is already being interpreted broadly to allow strikes on Is. It's already beinginterpreted broadly to let strikes on is Is .
 New 2015 AUME “builds on and adds to it’s on,’ he says . But rather than supersede that old authorisation or place time limits on its validity .
 Alabama's first same-sex marriages were solemnised on February 9th . For inside this courthouse Alabama’s first marriage was solemnised .
 Campaigners for gay rights feel that history is on their side, so they are not shy about invoking it . Campaigners say they want history to be remembered .
 Pro-gay demonstrators outside the same courthouse likened their opponents to the white southerners who tried to preserve Jim Crow .
 Some Alabamians feel it is their Godgiven duty to do exactly that . Now, as then, they feel it's their God given duty to carry out that duty .
 Last month Callie Granade struck down Alabama's ban on gay marriage as unconstitutional . The judge was appointed by George W Bush .
 Roy Moore, the chief justice of the state Supreme Court, ordered probate judges in Alabama not to allow gay marriages . On February 8th, shortly before the first gay marriages were due to take place, Moore ordered judges notto allow them .
 Alabama’s governor, Robert Bentley, a Republican, bravely stayed out of the fray .
 14 of Alabama’s 67 counties agreed to process the necessary paperwork for same-sex unions . The Human Rights Campaign says 14 of the 67 counties in Alabama have agreed to do the paperwork .
 The events of the past few days hint about the U.S. Supreme Court's intentions .
 Judge Moore begged it to delay gay weddings in Alabama until it makes its own nationwide ruling on gay marriage . Alabama is expected to make its own ruling on the issue .
 Cinemas in Little Rock say that almost every ticket for this weekend has already been sold . Cinemas say that most of the tickets have been sold.
 In Arkansas as a whole, tickets have sold 2. times as fast as Fandango, an online ticket seller, expected .
 Moviegoers in West Virginia, Kentucky and Alabama are also gluttons for punishment .
 Sex shops in Arkansas are cashing in with discounts on domination gear and classes on bondage .
 Southern sexuality scholars say that watching Miss Steele being tied up and flogged gives repressed women permission to delve into their inner naughtiness .
 Many expect gay marriages to be allowed in all 50 states by this summer . Many expect same-sex marriage will be allowed by the end of the summer .
 In 2006 about 81% of voters supported an amendment to Alabama’s constitution banning same-sex weddings . The amendment was passed by a majority of voters .
 Half the people in central Southern states now oppose gay marriage and 41% favour it . It is difficult to know how many have changed their minds .
 "They won’t say anything because they in the same situation," she predicts . However, she predicts, “they won't say anything’s because they’re in a same situation,’ she says .
 Gay couples in Mobile were not allowed to wed on February 9th . Many gathered to celebrate anyway before one of the city's Mardi Gras parades .
 Cari Searcy spoke of her pride in grasping her spouse's arm in public . Searcy was a plaintiff in the case that struck down Alabama's gay-marriage ban .
 White House insiders were already talking about breaking Mr Obama’s campaign commitments, says Axelrod .
 Mr Axelrod deduced that there was a “tension’ between a campaign that had promised to bring hope and change to America and the task of actually governing .
 Chicago-based strategist was already a veteran when he met Mr Obama .
 By then he had run enough campaigns to develop his “remedy not replica’s theory of politics. By then, he had ran enough campaigns.
 This holds that voters almost always choose change over the status quo, even when a popular incumbent is stepping down, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Voters often look for a candidate who seems to correct perceived weaknesses of a departing leader .
 Mr Obama watched Mr Obama deliver a soaring hymn to a post-racial, post-partisan America at the 2004 Democratic National Convention .
 Mr Axelrod concluded that the young lawyer might just be the cure for the country sick of George W Bush .
 Mr Axelrod helped his improbable candidate win the 2008 presidential primaries . He took his youth and inexperience into strengths at a time of deep alienation with politics as usual .
 He coined the slogan ‘Yes We Can’ and helped craft television ads and speeches . Mr Obama vowed to tame Washington and restore frayed global alliances .
 Mr Axelrod has uncommon insights to offer. If “Believer’s bruising return to reality were merely an account of MrAxrod's bruising return, it would be a historical footnote .
 The book adds to the growing body of evidence that Mr Obama is quite an odd man .
 Mr Axelrod is at pains to relate how his former boss is more human and anguished by tales of woe and suffering than many suppose . But he does concede that Mr Obama is astonishingly self-assured, and self-aware .
 Barack Obama is quoted telling Mr Axelrod shortly before announcing his candidacy . It turns out that being Obama is a pretty good gig in and of itself .
 Axelrod blames Republicans for wrecking Obama's plans to seek bipartisan deals . He says Obama has aggravated opponents by lecturing them on why it is in their own political interests to agree with him .
 Hillary Clinton's presumed ambition to represent her party in 2016 is still valid, she says . Hillary Clinton is the most successful Democratic strategist of his generation .
 Mr Axelrod has suggested in interviews around the book's launch that Mrs Clinton's years of Washington experience will be much more of an asset in this campaign than in 2008 .
 Many of Mr Axelrod’s observations about voter disillusion, and the importance of mobilising great armies of enthusiastic volunteers, will still apply in 2016 .
 Mr Axelrod comes close to conceding that Mrs Clinton was correct in her pessimism about Washington .
 In his book he recalls Team Obama’s shock when the president found it was facing “monolithic” Republican opposition to his agenda . The economy stood on the brink of a depression .
 Even ifno candidate can run on ‘Hope and Change’ this time, that does not make “I Told You So’s a winning slogan .
 At the core of the 2008 Obama insurgency was a belief that being a “very capable’s Democrat was not enough to win the presidency . At the heart of the Obama insurgency is a belief of being a very capable Democrat.
 Many voters decided that it was not just Republicans, but politics that was broken . But many voters had decided that they wanted to change the way they felt .
 Nor was she willing to break with a system full of lobbyists and deep-pocketed political action committees, he adds .
 This time Mrs Clinton faces no serious rivals for the Democratic crown, even before she announces her intentions .
Around 30 pensioners gather for a meeting in a largely abandoned shopping gallery in Santa Teresa, Caracas .
 Ministry of Social Movements and Communes official Alexis Rondon begins to speak . After a video and some announcements, Rondon, an official of the ministry, begins to talk .
 Mr Rondon’s rambling remarks over the next 45 minutes belie that claim .
 Venezuela is faced with an “economic war,’ he calls on his audience to check food queues for outsiders . He calls on audience to draw up acensus of the district to identify opposition activists and government supporters .
 Hugo Chavez's "Bolivarian Revolution" faces gravest threats yet to its survival . Chavez took power in Venezuela 16 years after he died, two years after his death .
 The regime is running out of money to import necessities and pay its debts . The regime wants to pay its debt and import necessities .
 There are shortages of basic goods, from milk and flour to shampoo and disposable nappies .
 Queues, often of several hundred people, form each day outside supermarkets . Queues are often of many hundred people .
 Both debt default and the measures that would be required to avoid one pose risks to the regime. Both debt defaults and measures that are required to be avoided pose risks.
 It is on course to lose a parliamentary election later this year, which might then be followed by a referendum to recall Nicolas Maduro .
 Venezuela's revolution could end as early as 2016. That could bring Venezuela’s revolution to a peaceful and democratic end as soon as 2016 .
 Caracas buzzes with speculation that the armed forces will oust the president . The armed forces are in charge of Venezuela's government .
 Venezuela is suffering from the combination of years of mismanagement and corruption, and the collapse in the price of oil, which accounts for almost all of its exports . Venezuela has been suffering from years of corruption and mismanagement .
 Chavez was the beneficiary of the greatest oil boom in history . Chavez, an army officer, was an Army officer .
 From 2000 to 2012, Venezuela received around $800 billion in oil revenue, or two-and-a-half times as much in real terms as in the previous 13 years .
 Some went on health care and low-cost housing for the poor, who hailed Chavez as a secular saint . Others hailed him as a saint .
 Another chunk was given away in the form of cheap oil to Cuba and to other Caribbean countries, assuring Chavez loyal allies . Another chunk of the oil was given to Cuba.
 Filling a 60-litre tank with petrol costs less than a dollar at the strongest official exchange rate . Filling the 60- litre tank is less than one dollar at a dollar.
 petrol worth $2. billion a year is smuggled to Colombia and Brazil, according to an official estimate .
 Chavez expropriated or nationalised 1,200 companies, from steelworks to cleaning products . The public payroll has more than doubled in 16 years .
 Most now lose money and require government loans just to meet their payroll, says Victor Alvarez, Chavez’s industry minister in 2005-06 .
 The state subjugates the still-large private sector through price controls . Price controls discourage investment and production, which discourage investment .
 Venezuela imports much of the food and consumer goods it used to produce, though not enough to meet demand . The result is that Venezuela imports a lot of food, consumer goods, but not enough.
 The government arrested bosses of a big pharmacy chain and a supermarket company this month .
Until it was modified this month, there were three separate official exchange rates, ranging from 6.30 to the dollar for food and medicines to 50 for many other imports . Until it was changed, the rate was 6. 30 to thedollar for food, medicines, and
 Jorge Giordani was Chavez's economic guru . Some $20-25 billion was swindled in this way in 2012 alone, he says .
 Even before the oil price collapsed, “2ast-century socialism’s’ had become unaffordable . ‘2ast’ was unaffordable, according to the author .
 Instead of saving windfall oil revenues, as prudence would dictate, the government racked up debt . The government spent more than $1 billion on oil revenues .
 Between them, the government and ppvsa, the state oil company, issued more debt than any other emerging economy in 2007-11 .
 The fiscal deficit is heading for 20% of Gpp this year, according to independent economists . The deficit will be 20% this year.
 In 2013 a third of Venezuelans were living in poverty, up from a quarter the previous year, according to the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean .
 Venezuela faces a brutal squeeze if the price of its oil stays at this week’s level of around $50 a barrel . Much of the country's oil is heavy and sulphurous .
 This includes debt payments by the government and ppvsA adding up to $10. billion in 2015 . This includes government and pvsA payments by government .
 The central bank’s international reserves total just $21. billion . However the central bank's international reserves are just $ 21. billion.
The government has vowed to make a €1 billion debt payment due on March 16th . The government has promised to makea €1billion debt payment. The debt payment is expected to take place on March 15th .
 Mr Maduro spent most of January travelling abroad seeking emergency loans, without tangible success . Mr Maduro has been in the country since November .
 In addition to official reserves, the government may be able to draw on another $20 billion held in opaque funds .
 On February 10th it announced changes to the foreign-exchange regime . It would charge some importers closer to the market rate for dollars .
 The change falls short of what is needed to adjust the economy to the scarcity of hard currency . But the change is not enough to change the country's economy .
 debt payments totalling $5 billion start falling due in October . The government may be able to stumble on until October .
 A patrimonial regime Mr Maduro lacks Chavez’s political cunning and popular appeal . Mr Maduro, a former bus driver, lacks Chavez's political cunning.
 He sidelined several powerful ministers and replaced them with military officers . He also replaced some powerful ministers with military officials .
 He has built a loyal political tribe, centred on his own extended family and that of Chavez, says Margarita Lopez Maya .
 The authoritarian state he commands is sliding towards totalitarianism, says the president .
 On January 27th the defence minister issued an unconstitutional decree allowing the armed forces to use their weapons against protests if these turn violent .
 Cuban intelligence agents police the armed forces and the ministries, alert for any sign of dissent .
 Chavez seized control of the judiciary and all the other constitutionally independent branches of the state .
 Moody's cout -*Estimate tForecast studied more than 45,000 rulings issued in 2004-13 by the supreme court . In no case did they rule against the government.
 Under Mr Maduro, what the government calls its “media hegemony’ is now all but complete, says Mr. Maduro .
 Regime insiders, acting through front men, have bought up opposition media . Government refusal to approve the import of newsprint and advertising boycotts .
 El Nacional is one of only a handful of independent newspapers that survive . Miguel Henrique Otero is the proprietor of the newspaper . He says his newspaper is a small, independent newspaper .
 Even as repression increases, the regime is being weakened by internal divisions . The regime is also being weakened.
 The government should scrap the petrol subsidy, unify the exchange rate and rely on the private sector to reactivate the economy, some say .
 Socialist Tide accuses the government of being corrupt and bureaucratic, and Mr Maduro of betraying Chavez .
 Leamsy Salazar was in charge of Chavez’s personal security for ten years . He was a naval captain for 10 years . Salazar is a former naval captain who served as Chavez's security chief .
 Santa Barbara de Dos Lagunasis is a rural shantytown in Caracas . Valles del Tuy is a self-built dormitory settlement of small, roughly finished houses of brick or concrete .
 Mr Capriles, a lean 42-year-old with lively eyes and dark stubble, gets a warm welcome .
 He hands out vouchers for building materials, promises to repair two sports pitches . He listens to complaints about overflowing sewerage and poor housing . He also offers to repair sports pitches and listen to complaints .
 The radicals are led by Leopoldo Lopez, a former mayor of a wealthy Caracas district . They want to oust Mr Maduro through street demonstrations .
 Mr Lopez has been in jail for a year on trumped-up charges . He says he is a political prisoner .
 Brazil's Petrobras scandal engulfs the country's largest oil giant . The scandal has been dubbed the biggest corruption scandal in Brazil .
 The pt disliked a successful reform of Petrobras in the 1990s, which stripped it of its monopoly of production and distribution . The pt was subjecting it to market discipline and corporate governance .
 Petrobras made huge deep-sea oil strikes in 2007 . Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, Brazil's president, saw a chance partially to restore PetroBRas’s monopoly .
 New oil laws drawn up by Dilma Rousseff give company sole operating rights and minimum 30% stake in the new fields .
 Lula and Ms Rousseff saw oil as the spearhead of an industrial policy that involved fostering favoured sectors and presumed national champions . Lula was the head of a policy that saw oil being used to foster favoured sectors .
 Lula ordered Petrobras to build four new refineries, three in the poor north-east . Lula has ordered the construction of four refineries in the region .
 A new rule required up to 85% of equipment and supplies for the oil industry to be nationally produced . The new rule requires up to 80% of the equipment, supplies and equipment to be produced .
 A dozen new shipyards studded the Brazilian coast, fed on cheap government loans . The Brazilian coast has been hit by a wave of new shipyard construction .
 Ms Rousseff boasted 74,000 new jobs during her campaign last year for a second term . They provided 74,00 new jobs, boasted her during her election campaign for second term.
 Prosecutors have identified at least 2. billion reais in “suspicious payments’ on Petrobras contracts . In a plea bargain, the company’s former purchasing chief has revealed that 3% of the value tution allows in 2016 .
 Mr Capriles trusts in the retail politics at which he excels. Deprived of media exposure, he has a good reputation in retail politics .
 He says change can only come by winning over many disillusioned chavistas . He says he now sees as possible .
 The two wings of the opposition are drawing closer, with the help of the Catholic church . The Catholic church is the main source of support for the opposition .
 Even at the height of Chavez’s popularity, the opposition had the support of one Venezuelan in three .
 Polls suggest twice as many as many identify themselves as opposition supporters than as chavistas . Now polls suggest that twice as much as many are opposition supporters as the opposition .
 Many feel alienated from the leaders of all his division’s contracts was diverted to the PT and its allies for personal gain or campaign finance .
 The firm’s most recent quarterly results disclose a potential writedown of 88 billion reais in the value of its assets .
 This comes on top of the damage to its profits caused by Ms Rousseff’s freeze on petrol prices . In a now-abandoned effort to offset her inflationary fiscal policy.
 Minority shareholders in Petrobras have seen the value of their investment slashed by 80% since 2008 .
 Dozens of managers from Brazil’s biggest construction companies are in jail . They were Petrobras contractors and operators of the shipyards .
 Banks reluctant to lend to these companies until their future is clearer . Banks are reluctant to lending to these firms until they are clear of their future .
 Sete Brasil, a company set up by Petrobras and its bankers to build and lease to it 28 drilling rigs, has run out of cash, a source says .
 Petrobras has scrapped two of the unbuilt refineries after spending $1 billion on them . It has abandoned work on doubling output at another and on revamping a petrochemThe Americas 33 on both sides .
 The psuv faithful in Santa Teresa repeat the official line that Venezuela is threatened by “the empire’s empire” and by Colombian paramilitaries .
 Mr L6pez, the propaganda holds, is a fascist who would strip the poor of everything they have gained . He would strip them of all they had gained .
 Mr Maduro himself draws a parallel between his government and that of Salvador Allende, an elected Marxist toppled by General Pinochet’s CIA-supported coup in 1973 .
 Allende may have governed badly, but he governed democratically, unlike Chavez or Mr Ma>> ical complex .
 The pt’s expansive industrial policy was ruinously expensive for Brazil . The pt's expansive industrial policies were ruinous for the country .
 Petrobras is the world’s biggest corporate investment programme . The company is set to launch the world's biggest investment programme in 2015 .
 Fixing the level of national content so high was a recipe for delay and extra cost . Fixing national content was a Recipe for delay, extra cost and extra time .
 Sharing out the work for political reasons deprived the shipyards of economies of scale . The shipyards were deprived of scale.
 The pt has placed Petrobras in serious jeopardy, at least until the accountants can agree on how to treat the losses caused by corruption . The pt is now in serious danger, according to the report .
 The deep-sea oil is only viable at today’s price “if we make an effort to reduce costs,’ says Eduardo Braga .
 The shipbuilding industry needs “consolidation’s” national-content rule, he says . The national- content rule should be “more flexible to guarantee competitiveness for our oil industry, he said .
 What Brazil needs now is a policy that will align Petrobras with the national interest, rather than that of its managers and the ruling party .
 This means cutting the company down to size and exposing it to competition . This means reducing the company's size to competition. This means exposing the company to competition, it says .
 suppliers are encouraged to set up in the country . It means using oil money to upgrade skills, infrastructure and the research base .
 Ordinary Brazilians now know exactly who “our people’s people are. It isn’t them.
 It is Venezuela’s opposition who are the democrats, unlike some of those who plotted against Allende . It is Venezuelans who are democrats.
 The U.S. has kept well away from Venezuela . The United States has not imposed sanctions on officials identified as having committed abuses .
 If a coup comes it will be because the army decides that Mr Maduro is no longer capable of defending its interests or because hardship prompts the social explosion that is the regime's deepest fear .
 The real threat to it may come in the parliamentary election, which on present trends it is all but impossible for it to win .
 Even a clean election will not settle the question of who will take responsibility for the economic adjustment that the regime’s corrupt incompetence has rendered inevitable .
 There is talk of a church-brokered government of national unity after the parliamentary vote . The vote is expected to be held on Sunday .
 That would at least increase the chances of a peaceful transition from a failed regime . That would be at least more likely to be a peaceful change from a failing regime .
Under the country’s unique “binominal’ system, each parliamentary constituency has two seats . The winning candidate takes one and in most cases the runner-up takes the other .
 This has reserved nearly all the seats in parliament for two big coalitions, the centre-left New Majority and the centreright Alliance . This has been reserved for the president, Michelle Bachelet, who belongs .
 It kept small parties out of parliament unless they joined one of the two big coalitions, and ruled out landslide victories by either side .
 The Alliance has tended to over-represent the Alliance at the expense of New Majority . It has also over-represented New Majority at the cost of the Alliance .
 Rural areas, which had supported Pinochet, were given more weight than their populations warranted . Rural areas had supported the Chilean government .
 The $1.1 billion a year it earns from sales of cut flowers is not far behind the $1 billion that comes from coffee .
 Cloudy skies took some of the bloom off this year's crop, but growers are feeling festive about Valentine's Day . The Valentine’s Day season accounts for a tenth of their sales .
 Growers are expecting bouquets to sell briskly in the United States . Three quarters of Colombia’s flowers will be sold in the U.S.
 The ruling New Majority has mustered the votes to scrap the binominal system . The measure passed both houses of parliament in January and should become law soon .
 Under new system the number of lower-house constituencies will be cut from 60 to 28 . New system will cut the number to 60 from 28 to 60 .
 Each will return between three and eight candidates, depending on its population, to be chosen by proportional representation . Each candidate will be chosen between three or eight candidates .
 In some constituencies small parties will be sure of winning a seat with just 13% of the vote .
 The new voting system promises to end what Ms Bachelet has called the ‘permanent draw’ between left and right . It has produced weak majorities for governments and turned off voters .
 Less than half of the electorate bothered to vote in the last election . The last election was held in 2010 .
 The new system may cause political fragmentation, which in other countries has made coalition-building and governing difficult .
 Its backers reckon that making the legislature more representative is worth the risk . Its backers say that making it more representative would be worth a risk .
 Ms Bachelet’s foes complain that when the permanent draw is broken the main winner will be her New Majority coalition . Ms Bacheslet's foes say that when she is in charge of the New Majority, she will be in charge .
 It is possible that it will break up as smaller groupings seek electoral success on their own . It is also possible that smaller groups will also break up.
 Cynics say that the candidate quota for women is unlikely to do much good . They expect parties to dispatch female candidates to their least winnable constituencies .
 Many Chileans, disgruntled with the ruling elite, want fewer politicians, not more . Chileans want fewer leaders and fewer politicians .
 Its authors hope Chile’s more vibrant politics will prove him wrong . They hope that Chile's more vibrant Politics will prove his wrong .
 He had turned an anti-corruption movement into an electoral machine, winning voters from across religious, caste and class lines . He had won voters across religious and caste lines, winning from across the country .
 His AAP took power in Delhi, the national capital which is effectively a state .
 Mr Kejriwal blew his opportunity on a supporter’s face, according to a friend .
 As Delhi’s chief, he attacked venal police and bureaucrats, and gave the poor free water and cheap electricity .
 He launched an over-ambitious campaign in last year’s general election .
 He apologised both for quitting in Delhi and for fielding too many candidates nationally . He apologised, both for quit in Delhi.
 Assembly polls in Delhi on February 7th gave Mr Kejriwal one of the biggest wins for any party, anywhere in India.
 Mr Kejriwal becomes chief minister on February 14th . He will get a platform for opposing Narendra Modi, the prime minister .
 Mr Modi could speak about national issues on television and on public debate . He could also speak on national issues.
 If he is smart, he will hunker down and try to run Delhi well, so voters might trust him later nationally . If he's smart, however, he'll hunker to run well, but he will try to be smart .
After results were announced on February 10th he vowed not to be arrogant . After results he vowed to not be arrogant.
 If the election had been held in July, it would be the earliest plausible date for Mr Modi's victory . The Byp has recently won four other state polls .
 AAP had time to marshal voters, who liked Mr Kejriwal’s humility and promise of honest rule .
 Many voters have welcomed a check on what is widely seen as his arrogance . He is known as highhanded and aloof in government .
 One ByP minister in Delhi in December called non-Hindus “bastards’ and earned only a light reprimand from Mr Modi .
 A fringe around the BJP seeks mass conversions to Hinduism, while stirring fears of ‘love jihad’ A supposed Muslim campaign to seduce Hindu women is also being used by the BJP .
 Mohan Bhagwat of the Hindunationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, an ally of Mr Modi, repeatedly says that all Indians are Hindus .
 Jairam Ramesh, a former cabinet minister, says Congress is "staring at the abyss of irrelevance" Unless it reforms and finds a new leader, he says .
 The AAP’s main strategist, Yogendra Yaday, talks of his party filling a vacuum in the national opposition .
 A test looms in assembly elections in poor but populous Bihar, where the Byp hopes to expand .
 The budget on February 28th will signal support for radical devolution of power to states . Those anxious for change hope the budget will signal his support for change .
 He may see such reforms as a boost to the economy which would win him more support . Or he may back off, fearing the political risks .
 The margin, 61 votes to 39, was hardly a ringing endorsement of Mr Abbott’s leadership, just 17 months after he became prime minister .
 Mr Abbott has spent much of his term fighting to win voters’ confidence . Since he led the conservative LiberalNational coalition to power in September 2013, he has spent most of the term fighting for voters' confidence .
 Newspoll survey published as Liberal colleagues in Canberra cast their votes on his future . But it showed just how much he has failed.
 More than two-thirds of those surveyed were dissatisfied with Mr Abbott’s performance . More than 2-thirds were dissatisfied.
 Voters backed him at least partly out of despair with the former Labor government and its debilitating leadership wars . Voters also backed him in the wake of the Labor government.
 The public mood soured after his government announced its first budget last May . The government's first budget was announced in May .
 Mr Abbott had once promised not to make cuts in health, education and welfare . But it seemed to fall most heavily on poorer Australians . It contained cuts in spending on health,Education and welfare that he had promised to make .
 Mr Abbott and Joe Hockey did a bad job of selling the budget to voters, appearing dismissive of their concerns . Australia's treasurer and Australia’s treasurer, appeared to be dismissive of voters' concerns .
 Prince Philip awarded knighthood to Prince Philip on January 26th . Prince Philip is the husband of Australia's head of state, Queen Elizabeth .
 Mr Abbott reintroduced knighthoods and dames to Australia’s honours system last year . 40 years after they were abolished, they were reintroduced last year.
 The ‘knightmare’ brought ridicule on Mr Abbott, and further stoked concerns that he was out of touch with modern Australia .
 Queensland's government could lose power after a state election on January 31st . The results of which were expected to be declared soon after The Economist went to press .
 Mr Abbott's leadership has recently extended to his own backbench mps. Grumbling about Mr Abbott’s leadership has been extended to the backbench .
 He angered colleagues by declaring that it was for the public to “hire and fire’s leaders. He angered others by saying it was a public effort to ‘hire andFire’ leaders .
 Some felt Mr Abbott was casting himself in a presidential role, ignoring conventions of Australia’s Westminster system .
 The drama has reflected a growing pattern among Australian politicians from both sides to move against leaders when poor polling seems to threaten electoral oblivion .
 Leadership upheavals have only fed the cynicism of many Australians towards their politicians .
Businesses fret about the turbulent political scene’s impact on business confidence and certainty .
 In a country where voting is compulsory, about 40% of people now vote for minor parties and independents, says Mr Marsh . About 40% vote for smaller parties or independents, he says .
 Liberal and Labor once shared most of the vote between them . Now they offer outdated ideologies to an increasingly diverse Australia .
 Mr Abbott's government will present its second budget in May . The latter may be sorely tested again.
 Former civil servants, schoolteachers and professors are among those attempting to block trucks bringing supplies for a vast new facility in and near the camp .
 Some of those attempting to reach the base by canoe have been stopped by coast-guard vessels and re-launched in rough waters .
 conservatives are standing alongside left-wingers in opposition to the base. That could spell trouble for the Americans .
 Okinawa hosts about half of all 53,000 American troops in Japan . 32 military sites occupy nearly a fifth of the main island’s tiny area .
 The Americans do not want to lose even more public support for their presence, which they consider vital to regional security . The U.S. and Japan consider their presence vital to the region .
 In 1996 U.S. officials agreed to relocate the most unpopular base at Futenma .
Ten years later a site at Henoko, adjacent to Camp Schwab, was formally selected . Ten years later, Henoko was selected .
 Shinzo Abe broke the impasse by persuading Hirokazu Nakaima to reverse the opposition that had made him popular .
 On February 6th he launched a review of Mr Nakaima’s decision, with a view to overturning it .
 The dugong is an endangered sea-cow that grazes off the coast at Henoko . A study commissioned by Mr Nakaima could have concluded that the planned base would have little effect on the dugong .
 In January the government cut by 5% Okinawa’s yearly subsidy, the source of nearly half of its budget . The government cut the subsidy by 5%.
 Both American officials and anti-base activists note that Mr Onaga may already be softening his stance .
 One member of his review panel worries that the governor may have appointed too many conserva lawyers to the Henoko project . Another member of the review panel says he is not especially worried about the project .
Construction may have proceeded so far that even Mr Onaga would balk at the cost of stopping it . By the time the panel releases its verdict this summer, the panel may have concluded .
 No mainland prefecture would willingly accept a new base and its rowdy marines . No mainland Prefects would willingly accepted a new Base .
 Futenma is a massive U.S. air-force base on Okinawa . The base is located on the island of Okinawa .
 One American officer jokes that the base would be so crowded in the event of conflict that helicopters would have to park on its golf course .
Anti-American feeling does not run deep on Okinawa . For now, despite the bases, anti-American feelings do not run long on Okinawa.
Residents' wishes could change if residents' wishes are ignored, says protest leader . But that could change, says Ashitomi, the protest leader.
 The demonstrators could shift to demanding the removal of all American military sites on Okinawa .
 ROKERS’ billboards outside Tan Lieu, a poor rural community in northern Vietnam, advertise “Labour Export’s’ jobs abroad . That could put the Americans and Mr Abe, in a bigger quandary .
 Vietnam's youthful population of 90m adds up to15m each year to the growing work pool . Vietnam’s youthful population adds to 15m per year to its work pool.
Economic growth at 6% is not fast enough to keep all of them employed . But economic growth, at 6%, isn't fast enough.
 Young Vietnamese are pouring overseas as maids, builders and factory workers. Dreaming of fortune, young Vietnamese are dreaming of fortune .
 Assembling mobile phones on 12and 16-hour graveyard shifts was “easier than farming’s, she says . She says.
 The family borrowed close to $5,000 to pay a labour broker to pay for a trip to the UK .
Today's prime destinations are Taiwan, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea . Today's prime destination are Taiwan and Japan .
 Since 2005 the number of Vietnamese working abroad on labour contracts has nearly doubled . About 500,000 people have worked abroad since 2005 .
 The $26 billion that migrants send home each year helps bridge a yawning wealth-gap between rich and poor provinces .
 P ICTURES of pets adorn the facades and menus of restaurants in Nam Dinh, a city in northern Vietnam where cats and dogs are commonly consumed . Official migration channels are surely safer than illegal ones that facilitate the movement of sex workers across VietAnimal welfare in Vietnam .
 A victim yelps as a butcher raises his knife. Down the road, terrified puppy-eyes stare out from a metal cage beside a dog restaurant.
 The proprietor says his staff gets through scores of kilograms of dog meat per day . He says he gets through hundreds of kilograms a day .
 Vietnam, a one-party state, already has many critics of its repression of dissent, corruption and a banking sector plagued by bad debt . Vietnam is one- party state .
 The government wants to avoid even more bad publicity that may damage its image . Even relating to the treatment of animals.
 Tuan Bendixsen of Animals Asia, an NGO in Hong Kong, reckons that dog thieving for this purpose has become even more widespread in Vietnam since 2013 .
 China cracked down on dogeating in Beijing when it hosted the Olympic games in 2008 . It remains popular in some parts of the country, especially in winter when it is considered to help keep the body warm .
 More than a third of Vietnamese who migrate legally are women . Some of them end up being exploited, some of them women .
 A report on trafficking last year concluded that Vietnamese have among the highest debts of all Asian expatriate workers .
 As a consequence, they are “highly vulnerable’ to debt bondage and forced labour . They are ‘highly vulnerable,’ they say .
 Poor treatment encourages some workers to break their contracts and look for better work, often illegal . Some workers break contracts to look for a better work .
 In 2012, South Korea cancelled its Employment Permit System for Vietnam . It became such a problem in South Korea that in 2012 its government cancelled its employment permit system for Vietnam.
 South Korea will close the gates again unless the share of illegal workers among Asia 37 tons of them are smuggled from China . Permits were later issued again on a trial basis, but Vietnam’s labour ministry said in January that South Korea would close gates again .
 Foreign criticism and growth of a pet-owning middle-class at home is putting pressure on the government .
 Vietnam pledged in 20%, albeit non-bindingly, to stop the dog-meat trade . Along with other South-East Asian countries, Vietnam pledged to stop dog- meat trade .
 A draft of the nation's first veterinary law is due for debate in May in the National Assembly, Vietnam’s legislature . The draft is expected to be debated in May .
International aid donors have opened a handful of offices where prospective migrants can learn about their rights . With support from international aid donors, the offices have opened .
 Vietnam’s press also makes much of police busts of lawbreaking labour recruiters . Vietnam's press is also making much of law breaking labour recruits .
Government lacks the political will to regulate the labour agencies, says Futaba Ishizuka . The labour agencies are often unlicensed affiliates of state-owned enterprises .
 rural Vietnamese, especially from northern and central provinces, are eager to go abroad . For all the tribulations, rural Vietnamese are still eager to travel abroad .
 In Tan Lieu, 64km from Hanoi, slender concrete homes, financed by remittances, are rising next to the paddies . The concrete homes are being built in the city of TanLieu .
 Malaysia's highest court on February 10th came up with the verdict its critics said had been scripted for it all along . Ms Hang says she has already saved the $3,200 needed for the renovation of the family home .
 Anwar Ibrahim, the opposition leader, was convicted on a charge of sodomy . He had sex in 2008 with a young man who had worked for him .
 Mr Anwar would be out of the next two general elections . Since a prison term also entails a five-year ban after release from running for political office, this would rule him out .
 The three-party coalition he heads, Pakatan Rakyat, poses the most serious threat the United Malays National Organisation, UMNO, has faced in its nearly six decades of continuous rule .
 Najib Razak's sentence sounds like good news for the prime minister . But opposition depends heavily on Mr Anwar’s leadership, so the opposition depends on him .
 Having Mr Anwar out of the way certainly offers political benefits to the government .
 In 20133, when he led the Pakatan campaign, it won more of the popular vote than the UMNO-dominated coalition, Barisan Nasional . Thanks to gerrymandered constituencies, the coalition won only 40% of parliamentary seats .
 One of its members is a conservative Islamist party, appealing to the ethnic-Malay, Muslim majority . Another is a multiracial, secular, secular party .
 Mr Anwar himself has been an important factor in keeping these elements together .
 Former deputy prime minister fell out with his mentor, Mahathir Mohamad, during the Asian financial crisis in 1998 . He emerged as the leading advocate of reformasi, reformasi .
 His latest conviction, however, is a mixed blessing for the government . The conviction is the latest in a long line of convictions for corruption .
 It insists the judiciary is independent, and points out that in this case, the charges were brought by the alleged partner .
 conspiracy theorists will interpret Mr Anwar’s legal travails as politically motivated . But conspiracy theorists, a category including virtually every observer of Malaysian politics, will interpret him as political .
Mr Anwar’s supporters at home will think he did no more than state the obvious . They walked out, but Mr Anwar's supporters walked out .
 Malaysia is often praised as a model of Muslim-majority democratic moderation . Even abroad, many will be suspicious .
 Mr Anwar was acquitted of this charge in 2012 because DNA evidence had been mishandled . The government’s prosecutor to appeal against the decision .
 The case has harmed the image of Malaysia’s judiciary, says Mr Najib . So, unfairly or not, he is seen as implicated in its decisions, he says .
 His reputation as a liberal and moderate has been dented by his government’s use of another archaic and draconian law on sedition .
Political cartoonist known as Zunar was arrested this week for a tweet critical of the verdict on Mr Anwar .
 Mr Najib promised to repeal the sedition law in November . But he said it would actually be strengthened .
 Dr Mahathir has the support of the opposition. They present a far greater immediate threat to Mr Najib than does the opposition, especially since they have the support.
 He vacated the prime minister’s office in 2003 and is now 89, but remains a powerful political force . He is still a powerful power force.
 Mr Anwar has turned against Mr Najib, as he did against his predecessor, Abdullah Badawi . He has also turned against his former rival, AbdullahBadawi, before that .
 UMNO hardliners will have less reason to worry about the opposition, and can concentrate their fire on Mr Najib's leadership .
1mps, a sovereign-wealth fund, have been handed a weapon in the troubles surrounding 1mps . Mr Najib chairs the board of advisers.
 It is behind on debt repayments and accused of a woeful lack of transparency . It is accused of failing to make clear how much it has paid for its debts .
 Malaysian banks reported to have threatened it with being called into default if payment is not made this month .
 Malaysia's troubles might even have an impact on Malaysia’s standing as a sovereign borrower .
 Mr Najib has little room to make good his promises of political liberalisation . He has been attacked by his own right flank from his right flank .
 Even economic reforms may stall, even though he has a respectable record of widening the tax base and cutting fuel subsidies .
 The most difficult ones require the ending of Malaysia’s rules mandating commercial discrimination in favour of the Malay majority . Most difficult ones need the end of Malaysia's rules.
 BN's ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian components fared disastrously in 2013 . The BN risks becoming a mere shell for an UMNO ever more beholden to Malay-nationalist forces .
 Mr Anwar is a political chameleon whose real beliefs are sometimes hard to pin down . But he could at least credibly lead a coalition that bridges Malaysia's ethnic divides .
 Mr Najib's incarceration is a dark day not just for Malaysia’s opposition, but for the country itself .
 General Xu's recent retirement as highest ranking uniformed officer in the armed forces was astonishing news .
 General Xu accepted “extremely large bribes’ for which he now faces trial . General Xu, the media said, had accepted ‘extremely large’ bribes .
 The People’s Liberation Army, as the Chinese army, navy and air force are collectively known, has not fought a war for 35 years .
 The world’s largest fighting force is now engaged in a fierce battle at home against corrosion within its ranks .
 Xi Jinping, China’s president, has taken his sweeping anti-corruption campaign into the heart of the pLa . He seems unafraid to show that a hallowed institution is also deeply flawed .
 The pLa took the unprecedented step of revealing that 15 generals and another senior officer were under investigation or awaiting trial . In January the pLa revealed 15 generals, another senior officers are under investigation .
 It said it would launch a stringent review of recruitment, promotions, procurements and all of its financial dealings in order to root out corruption .
 Mr Xiis keen to clean up the army is to ensure that it remains a bulwark of party rule .
 The pra is the party’s armed wing-its soldiers swear allegiance to it rather than the people or the country . The pra was the party's armed wing.
 All officers are party members and each company is commanded jointly by an officer in charge of military affairs and another whose job it is to ensure troops toe the party line . All members of each company are part of the military.
 Fighting military graft is intended to enhance both of these qualities of the military . It is also intended to improve the quality of the armed forces .
 Mr Xi wants to develop a lean, rapidly deployable fighting force . China regards a vast maritime area as well as Taiwan and Japanese-controlled islands in the East China Sea .
 Many Western experts believe the PLA is becoming increasingly able to assert China’s territorial claims, despite corruption . The PLA has been accused of corruption by the Chinese government .
 General Luo's warnings are taken seriously by Mr Xi . But warnings such as those by General Luo are taken serious by MrXi .
 Military corruption, though seldom spoken of so publicly before, has long been a problem . Military corruption has been a major problem in the past .
 In the 1990s the pra, at first with the party’s blessing, dived into commerce . The pra was the first in the country to become a business.
 The army set up 20,000-30,000 business across China, says Mr Cheung . He says hotels, financial services and nightclubs are part of the army .
 In 1998 President Jiang Zemin called a The Economist. Also in this section 40 A film’s unusual talent 40 The economy and the goat-year .
 Wages are still not high enough to reduce incentives for corruption, say officials . But wages are still high enough for corruption to be reduced, they say .
 Senior officers receive a pittance compared with the bosses of state-owned enterprises . Senior officers are paid less than bosses of the state- owned enterprises .
 Many supposedly affordable homes built for soldiers since 1999 were instead constructed as luxury villas and sold off or enjoyed by military personnel .
 Some generals reportedly erected ceilings twice the standard height in order to add a floor later . Some generals may have added a floor to their ceilings to make sure they did so .
 PLa says it will scrutinise appointments more closely and make secret inspections to stamp out the acceptance of bribes by recruitment officers . The PLa said it will make secret Inspections of recruitment officers more closely .
Private companies will be allowed to bid for most defence contracts . To cut costs and break up monopolies, private companies can bid for the most contracts .
 Military auditors recently joined a national meeting of their civilian counterparts for the first time . The PLA is beginning to air its problems more openly .
 One of his first jobs after graduating was as a personal sec>> 40 China > retary to the minister of defence . He is a former personal sec.
 Mr Xi will find it hard to change such a secretive and hidebound institution . But even with his enormous authority Mr Xi would find it difficult to change it .
 The fallen generals can expect tough punishment, but the PLA tends to deal with its own wrongdoers with a light touch . The PLA can expect a tough punishment.
 The ill-defined quality of “political reliability’ will remain a crucial factor in gaining promotion . One wide open to abuse will be a key factor in getting promotion .
 Most troops have no direct combat experience, commanders are ill-trained in the complexities of modern warfare . Training for rank-and-file troops is not realistic enough, according to military officials .
 Annual double-digit increases in defence spending have helped equip the PLA with some advanced weaponry . But not necessarily the ability to use it effectively .
 An extra lunar month is added every so often to stay in line with a wholly solar calendar . It is in fact a lunar-solar mix, with an extra lunar months added every year .
 This ancient system, some 2,500 years old, is not just an academic curiosity . It's not just a curiosity, it's an ancient system .
 The Chinese New Year holiday, and with it a peak in consumption and prices, scuttles back and forth between January and February (in the Gregorian calendar), complicates annual comparisons .
 ‘Wolf Totem’ is a film based on a Chinese novel critiquing man’s impuise to tame nature . A young man from Beijing attempts to domesticate a wolf .
 Lu Jiamin was jailed for more than a year for his role in the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 .
 Worried his subsequent writings would be banned, he wrote the novel under a pen name, Jiang Rong . He wrote the book under the name Jiang Rongs .
 Jean-Jacques Annaud had been banned from China for making ‘Seven Years in Tibet’ The film depicts the Chinese army invading Tibet and portrays the Dalai Lama sympathetically .
 China Film Group, a state-owned giant, and others made Mr Annaud a rare foreign director of a Chinese feature film . The film's budget of more than $40m.
 In 2007 an English-language translation won the inaugural Man Asia Literary Prize . The award was awarded to the best translation in the world of English .
Censors turned a blind eye to the author's background and refrained from banning the book . The acclaim was so great, it was so swift to spread, that censors decided to turn a blindEye to the book.
 Mr Annaud says he was surprised when representatives of the Beijing Forbidden City Film Corporation visited him in 2007 to ask him to make the film .
 In late December 2009, Mr Annaud did apologise, months after his hiring had been announced .
 Mr Annaud declared he had ‘never supported Tibet’s independence’ and had no “personal relationship’ with the Dalai Lama . In an open letter circulated in Chinese online, he says.
 Mr Annaud’s self-criticism helped protect against that, and the Chinese system in turn protected him .
 Chinese economic data shows that the country's economic growth is slowing . The country's economy has been hit by a slowdown in recent months . China's economy is expected to grow by more than 1% in the coming months .
 Consumer prices rose just 0.8% from a year earlier, a sharp decline from preceding months . Consumer prices were up 0.7% from the previous year .
 Everything from shipping to roadworks is completed in a rush before China shuts down for its New Year .
 January appeared unusually sluggish compared with a year earlier, according to a report . January's January was unusually slow compared with January 2013 .
 Consumer inflation typically sheds about half a percentage point in Januaries when the New Year comes so late . Consumer inflation usually sheds half a Percentage point in January .
 As for trade, adjusted for the calendar, the declines in exports were still big but not as severe as reported .
 An unseasonably warm winter made for lower vegetable and fruit prices, weighing on inflation . The cold winter is expected to make for lower fruit and vegetable prices .
 The collapse in global commodity prices has eroded the value of imports . The fall in global commodities prices has been blamed for the decline in global prices .
 China’s oil demand, for example, was about the same in volume terms as a year earlier . China's oil demand was on the same level as last year .
 China's statisticians wait until March to publish the full range of data for the economy . January and February are lumped together to assess the true state of retail sales and industrial output .
 January numbers are almost certain to show that the economy is slowing, though not as dramatically as implied by the January numbers . The January numbers show the economy was slowing, but not as much as expected .
 It has started easing monetary policy, most recently by raising the proportion of deposits that banks are free to lend .
 capital outflows as itis to the slowdown in growth. But this is as much as a response to capital outflow as it is to the slowest growth in growth . This is also as much a response as it's to the slower growth in the past .
 The government knows that it will have to wait for one more cycle of the moon to get a better reading .
 Al Arab first went on air the Gulf statelet gagged it on February 9th . Authorities said it must close for good, claiming it was not properly licensed .
 Al Wefaq's real sin was to give airtime to Bahrain's main opposition party . The opposition party has been accused of giving air time to the opposition .
 The short life of Al Arab is emblematic of a wider flowering of independent Arab media, and its subsequent withering . Al Arab's short life is emblematically of a broader flowering of the independent media .
 The channel took shape during the heady days of the Arab spring, when autocratic regimes were falling and people yearned for free media .
 Appetites had been whetted since the early 1990s, with the advent of the internet and satellite Tv .
 Some regard the mother of all independent Arab media to be Al Jazeera, a panArab television station that first broadcast in 1996 .
 Qatar was funded by the ambitious rulers of Qatar . It broke the mould of Arab journalism, which then consisted of reheating official press releases .
 The station's professional journalists, topclass technology and feisty talk shows set a new standard for freedom of expression . The station’s professional journalists and top class technology and talk shows are set to change .
 Audience figures rocketed to tens of millions as it won scoops that included airing video and audio tapes of Osama bin Laden .
By 2011 it was playing a role in fomenting the Arab spring by streaming live footage of protesters from Tunis to Tripoli . By 2011 it had streamed live footage from Tunisia to Tripoli.
 Al Arabiya, a Saudi-based broadcaster, came on air in 2003 . It was one of many broadcasters that tried to emulate it . Other broadcasters have tried to do so .
 Al Jazeera's influence has since waned amid perceptions that its journalism has turned partisan . But al Jazeera’s influence has now waned, amid perceptions its journalism is partisan .
Among population aged 13 and up 42 Israel's partisan newspapers 42 Palestine's culinary delights 43 South African tourism 43 Justice in Chad and Senegal 44 Nigeria’s delayed vote .
 The most acute criticism surrounds al Jazeera's kind treatment of Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood . Al Jazeera's treatment of the Muslim Brotherhood is a line that corresponded closely with Qatar's foreign policy .
 Al Jazeera once provided a model of free speech, local regimes are now seeing in it a model for propagating their own views across the region .
 Iran and Syria backed the launch in 2012 of Al-Mayadeen, a pan-Arab satellite channel based in Beirut . The channel is based in Lebanon .
 Syria's president Bashar Assad is inimical to the Gulf channels that are inimicals to him .
 Al Modon, a Qatar-funded news site, says it was launched partly to counter Saudi Arabia’s media influence in Lebanon .
 A loss of trust in the impartiality of satellite TV is all the more worrying . Satellite TV had been seen as an alternative to local media long cowed by authoritarian governments .
 Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s army chief came to power he quickly closed down Islamist television stations .
 Three Al Jazeera journalists were imprisoned in Egypt for more than a year on spurious allegations of belonging to a Muslim Brotherhood cell .
 Mazen Darwish is just one of 12 journalists in Mr Assad's jails . Others have their work stymied by rebel militias .
 In Saudi Arabia, four journalists have been jailed after covering Shia protests in the eastern province .
Little wonder that much news broadcast on local channels is mind-numbingly 41 Middle East and Africa > dull .
 In Saudi Arabia, television stations mainly offer religious fodder and reports of royal beneficence .
 Syrian state television once claimed Al Jazeera was building sets of Syrian cities so as to stage fake protests .
 Private media is often little better since it is owned by big businessmen whose interests usually lie in buttering up regimes .
 He has thatin Israel HaYom, the country's best-read paper, which not only glorifies him and his wife, but also damns their foes .
 Recently, Netanyahu's cheerleading seems to be causing him as much harm as it does good .
 Mr Netanyahu is facing an election on March 17th . Opponents accuse him of being in hock to his publisher, an octogenarian American casino mogul .
 Mr Netanyahu has used his Twitter feed to attack its critics . He has been accused of violating regulations on campaign funding .
 One ray of hope is that people increasingly seek news online, where resources and wannabe journalists have proliferated since the Arab spring .
 Internet access is surging across the region and is used particularly by young people in places like Saudi Arabia to find alternative sources of news .
 Noni Moses is the reclusive publisher of Yediot Ahronot, which had previously been Israel's largest circulating paid newspaper .
 Yediot’s attacks on his family, he bridled, were no longer taking place daily in print, but hourly on the internet . He bridled.
Netanyahu's call for early elections 13 months into his term was motivated less by his desire to rid himself of a quarrelsome cabinet than by concern for the survival of Israel HaYom .
Avigdor Lieberman grew up in the Soviet Union . His foreign minister called it Pravda .
 Many Israelis just call it Bibi-ton, merging Netanyahu’s nickname, Bibi, with iton, the Hebrew for newspaper .
 Mr Moses has broadly supported a two-state settlement with the Palestinians . Mr Adelson ridicules the thought of a negotiated compromise .
 For years he and his Israeli wife have brought tens of thousands of Americans on partisan tours of Israel . For years they have brought thousands of U.S. congressmen, including congressmen.
 The Republican congressmen he funds are now inviting Mr Netanyahu to talk to Congress shortly before the Israeli elections .
Mr Adelson's speech will get a favourable write-up in Mr Adelson’s newspaper . His speech will, no doubt, get a favorable write- up in Mr Adelson.
 Madr Masr is a newspaper in Egypt that manages to push boundaries, perhaps because it is written in English .
 Networks in rebel-held Syria broadcast local news via YouTube channels or Facebook pages . A few including Aleppo Today broadcast on satellite .
 New media fall into the habits of their older brethren, such as uncritically airing conspiracy theories . But even new media fall in to their older brother's habits .
 Such silliness may not quite accord with the Jeffersonian ideal of a free press acting as a guardian of liberty .
 But better a cacophony of dissenting voices than the stifling monotone of state-controlled or cowed media . But better than a cacopony of dissenters online or beamed from satelites .
Mr Batteh says the region's people are sophisticated consumers who browse several news sources .
 The king of cauliflowers AL-RAM A humdrum food in gourmet form I . MAY challenge the spirit to think of cauliflower as anything but an overrated, ungainly plant .
 A variety of plain vegetable that attracts a crazed following at this time of year . But in the craggy land between Ramallah and Jerusalem, there is one variety of that plain vegetable .
Every winter stands manned by farmers along most of the West Bank’s winding roads . Proud growers display vivid yellow bouquets wreathed in green roughage .
 When boiled, the white vegetable resembles a brain and releases a gassy aroma redolent of cheap cafeterias .
 This is zahara baladi, an ancient local cultivar that takes a full year to grow and is in season for just a few weeks .
 The plant has a nice, mustardy hue. The flavour is well-rounded, sweet and earthy and the texture irresistibly creamy .
 All this is enough to entice Palestinian Jerusalemites to leave their homes in blustery weather .
Ramallah chefs have a gastronomic renaissance brought about by successful Ramallah chefs . Their craze reflects not just the brief flowering of a delicacy, but also a gastronsomic renaissance .
Cauliflower has been mentioned by Arab botanists for more than a millennium . Cauliflower is a popular dish in the Middle East .
Maqluba is a gem of Palestinian cuisine in which fried florets are cooked with chicken or lamb in a huge pot of spiced rice that is triumphantly turned upside down before serving .
Translated literally, zahara baiadi means wild flower, and it usually makes its appearance some time in February, just as the hills erupt in a riot of colourful blooms .
Commercial vegetable growers sometimes try to engineer their plants so as to produce saleable crops twice a year . Commercial vegetable growers often try to produce salesable crops.
 purists will always insist on the existing variety of zahara baladi . But purists have always insisted on the current variety of baladi.
 It is said to cure everything from respiratory ailments to postnatal pain . It is also said to be able to treat everything from pain to respiratory ailments .
 In villages, chunks of the stuff are artfully combined with onion and spices and blended into a light dough that is fried . The dough is a fritter.
 mtafayeh is a one-pot wonder consisting of lamb and zahara baladi cooked with goat yogurt, tahini, lemon and fresh minced garlic .
 Tambo International dressed for the bush, with cameras slung and wallets bulging, ready to splash out on wine and adventure . Tambo is a travel agency based in South Africa .
 A record 10.3m visitors arrived in 2014; the sector hauled in $10. billion . The sector employed 645,000 people .
 GbP growth has limped, at about 2% for the past two years and unemployment is at 35% and rising . It is a bright spot in an otherwise dismal economy .
 South African government's imposition of stringent new immigration laws rather baffling. All this makes the new laws more baffling than usual .
 Starting in June, children under the age of 18 will have to carry an unabridged birth certificate . Parents' names will be listed when arriving and leaving .
 If only one parent is accompanying the child, then sworn affidavits from the other parent are required . The other parent is required to accompany the child .
 This is supposedly to stop child trafficking, but is far more heavy-handed than other measures imposed elsewhere . This is supposed to stop the trafficking of children, but it is more heavyhanded than any other measure .
 Another regulation, also coming into effect on June 1st, will force visitors from places needing advance visas to apply in person at a South African embassy or consulate .
 In China and India, which are big, growing markets for South African tourism, this could mean flying to the nearest big city .
 The government has shown slight signs of wobbling. It has twice delayed the application of the new rules, and set up a team.
 A leaked report by Grant Thornton, a consultancy, said the policy could cost more than 100,000 jobs . The Tourism Business Council of South Africa said it could cost 100,00 jobs .
 Diplomats say rules will deter investment and tour companies are reporting cancellations . Diplomats from Asia and the Middle East say the rules are to deter investment .
 South Africa's tourism minister has said the sector's huge benefits could melt away . Even South Africa’s tourism minister says the sector could be left out .
 South Africa makes life harder for visitors, but nearby countries are doing the very opposite . South Africa is making life harder.
 Zambia and Zimbabwe are testing a single joint visa, easing travel to Victoria Falls on their shared border . Zimbabwe and Zambia are testing the single visa, allowing them to travel on the shared border.
 If the six-month experiment succeeds, other neighbouring countries are set to join .
 A “uni-visa system for the 15 countries of the Southern African Development Community is nowhere near to being ready, despite having been mooted in 1998 . In contrast, a ‘uni-Visa’ system for 15 countries, a bloc dominated by
 South Africa’s fear of a deluge of illegalimmigrants has been a big sticking point . South Africa's fear of illegal immigrants is a major sticking point for South Africa .
 Hissene Habré is likely to be formally charged in the next few days by a special African court . He committed a string of atrocities when he was president of Chad from 1982-1990 .
 The judges of the so-called Extraordinary African Chambers will decide what charges he must face . The judges were set up in 2012 in Senegal .
 Mr Habré, now aged 72, has been living in Senegal since fleeing from Chad at the end of his reign .
 He is alleged to have committed crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture . He is also accused of committing crimes against human rights and war crimes .
 Around 40,000 people are reckoned to have been killed and many more tortured during his rule . Chad’s truth commission says many were tortured during the rule .
 He was indicted by a Senegalese court and arrested in 2000, whereupon he was arrested . They filed a case against him.
 Belgium won a case against Senegal at the International Court of Justice . The UN's main judicial organ is for adjudicating disputes between states .
 A new Senegalese president, Macky Sal, gave the case a fresh lease of life . Aminata Touré served as his prime minister until last summer .
 Nigeria oversaw the innovative creation of the Extraordinary African Chambers . Nigeria was endorsed by the African Union .
 The Au has been increasingly hostile to the International Criminal Court in The Hague . It has sought to bring human-rights abusers to book since its creation .
 Mr Habré could not, in any case, be tried before it, since his alleged crimes were committed before the ICC was set up .
 AU said last year it would promote its own continental human-rights court . But incumbent leaders and their senior officials must be exempt .
 The court in Senegal may well be a one-off, but it sets the right sort of precedent for the continent's abusive presidents .
 Years of inept governance, military rule and corruption have left citizens disillusioned .
 Many are unimpressed by their choices in the coming presidential elections . Many are not impressed by their choice of presidential candidates .
 electoral officials said they were delaying the elections scheduled for February 14th by six weeks . A darker cloud of uncertainty was cast over Africa's biggest economy .
 Private polls conducted for both parties suggested that the vote had gone ahead as planned . President Goodluck Jonathan might well have been clearing his desk .
 The 20 presidential poll was postponed too, but this hold-up is particularly controversial because the army was forced by the army .
 generals told electoral officials they would not provide security for a vote in the north-east . The jihadists of Boko Haram control an area of roughly 30,000 square kilometres .
 A postponement would give the army time to secure the region, they said . A postponing would give them time tosecure the region .
 Jibrin Ibrahim of the Centre for Democracy and Development a f called the army’s action “direct blackmail’ of the electoral commission .
 Nigeria's army has suffered repeated coups. In part that is a reflection of how deeply suspicion of the army runs in Nigeria .
 Olusegun Obasanjo is a former president and stalwart of the ruling party . He recently sided with the opposition and expressed concern over the delay .
 Boko Haram has been waging war since 2009, and gaining ground steadily . Boko Haram wants to establish an Islamic state .
 It has struck across borders, most recently with attacks in Niger and Cameroon . It has also struck in Niger, Cameroon and Niger, most recent with attacks .
 Most Nigerians laugh at army's confident assertion that security can be restored in time for a poll in late March .
 In January Chad began moving up battle-hardened soldiers, who are now fighting militants within Nigeria . In January, Chad began fighting militants in Nigeria .
 Its men have reportedly liberated towns including Gamborou, Malam Fatori and Baga, according to reports . The men are said to have liberated towns such as Baga .
 Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, Chad and Benin have agreed to send a multinational force of about 8,000 to battle insurgents . Separately, Nigeria and Niger, Niger and Cameroon, have also agreed to fight the insurgents .
 Boko Haram thought to field no more than 6,000 fighters, but getting it under way may take time . Such a multi-pronged assault ought to gain further ground against Boko Haram, which is thought to have more than 5,000 members .
 Nigeria is only accepting foreign help with “lukewarm acquiescence’s, one Western diplomat argues . Nigeria only accepts foreign help.
 It is unlikely that it will allow foreign forces beyond its border towns . It is likely that it won't be allowed beyond its borders .
Security situation is unlikely to change in six weeks before the vote . In short, the security situation is likely to change. In short.
 If it goes ahead as planned at the end of March, a further delay would be unconstitional . Voters in large parts of the three north-eastern states most affected by Boko Haram would likely be disenfranchised .
 Nigerians are asking whether the enforced pause will swing the outcome of the vote . Germany under Chancellor Angela Merkel is largely wrong about economic policy .
 Germany’s apparent economic strengths are the lowest unemployment in two decades, they say . A balanced federal budget masks weaknesses and policy errors, the authors say .
 Given low interest rates, now would be a golden opportunity to borrow and invest more at home . It would provide a Keynesian stimulus to the entire sluggish euro zone .
By definition, this surplus measures the excess of savings over investment . By definition, it is a surplus of savings. This surplus measures excess of Savings over investment.
Public investment in Germany has fallen from 6% of GpP in 1970 to 2% now . Public investment in the country has fallen to 6% in 1970 .
 Roads, bridges, broadband internet and much else could do with more money . Roads, Bridges, bridges and broadband internet could do more with money .
The Cologne Institute for Economic Research reckons that the capital stock of German machines has not risen in real terms since 2008 . The Cologne Institute of Economic Research, another thinktank, reckons.
 Frans Timmermans is the editor of The Economist . He is the author of a new book, The Economist, on Europe's economic and economic growth .
 Other German economists are sceptical about claims of underinvestment . But other German economists say there is no evidence of such claims .
Christoph Schmidt, chairman of the German Council of Economic Experts, thinks published ratios ofinvestment as a percentage of GDP can be misleading when compared between time and between countries .
Reunification in 1990 caused a one-off investment boom in both parts of the country . Reunification led to one- off investment boom.
 The trend of declining public and private investment remains clear. Yet the trend of decline remains clear, according to experts .
 A recalculation to fit European Union norms lifts Germany’s investment ratio from 17% to 19%, by including companies’ research and development spending .
 German ones have for years preferred to invest abroad, not at home . But German ones prefer to invest overseas, not in Germany .
 The main reason for low domestic investment, says Michael Htither, the Cologne institute’s director, is uncertainty and nervousness .
 continuing anxiety over Greece and the euro has been especially damaging . Continuing anxiety over the eurozone has been particularly damaging .
 More recently worries about Russia, which is more commercially entangled with Germany than with other big Western economies, have unsettled the business climate .
 The biggest problem for many businessmen may be benighted government policies . But the biggest problem may be the lack of government policies.
 Germany’s “energy transition,’ a plan to exit simultaneously from fossil fuels and nuclear energy . These start with Germany's ‘energy transition’ The plan is to exit both fossil fuel and nuclear power .
 The surcharge that many firms have to pay on a unit of energy is larger than the entire cost of electricity paid by firms in America .
 Half of firms polled by Mr Hither’s institute claim that this makes any new investment unattractive . Half the firms polled say that this is not true .
 Many complain about a shortage of skilled workers despite Germany's admired apprenticeship system . Many also complain in a country that has an ageing, shrinking population .
 Mrs Merkel's government has made things worse by letting some workers retire at 63, rather than 67, as previously envisaged .
 owners are put off investment by a cap on rents in many cities . Owners are putting off investment.
 A new federal minimum wage is yet another measure that will add costs for business . The new minimum wage will also add costs to the economy .
 The best way to boost investment is to fix these policy errors, argues Mr Schmidt . Mr Schmidt says.
 The government could leave the choice of technology to the market . It could also leave the decision on energy to be made on energy .
 The pension age could be raised again; minimum wage should be lower . The minimum wage could be lower.
 Germany led resistance to calls for more public money to be put into the European Commission’s planned investment programme .
 At home it is constrained by the constitutional ‘debt brake’, adopted in 2009, which requires state governments to balance their budgets by 2020 and the federal one to do so by 2016 .
 Wolfgang Schauble has beaten the timetable, balancing the budget in 2014 . The finance minister has been in charge of the budget since 2010 .
 He and Mrs Merkel are proud of the “black zero, which demonstrates that Germans sticks by the rules, as others should .
 Germany is a long way from rectifying its investment shortfall at home . The books may balance, but Germany is still struggling to find a way to save money .
 Muhammad, 20, died fighting jihadists of Islamic State across the border in the Syrian town of Kobane . Kurdish forces declared victory on January 26th .
 Pan-Kurdish sentiments have been sharpened by the battle against Is, in turn stirring the long-standing rebelliousness of Cizre . Bedr Han rose up against the Ottomans in the early 19th century .
 Scores were killed in 1992 when Turkish forces opened fire on civilians who celebrated the Kurdish new year in defiance of orders to stay home .
 Muhammad was imprisoned for a year for throwing stones at a police vehicle . Muhammad was jailed for one year for the crime .
 The Justice and Development party has made unprecedented overtures to the Kurds . The party has eased bans on the language and talking to the imprisoned PKK leader, Abdullah Ocalan .
 Many Kurds believe the state is behind the violence that has recently gripped Cizre . But many Kurds believe it is not the state behind the recent violence .
 One 12-year-old was shot, allegedly by security forces, on January 14th .
 The unrest began in October when Turkey refused to let Kurdish fighters open a corridor to Kobane . The unrest started in October.
Huda-Par, an Islamist Kurdish party, was used by the Turkish state to fight the PKK in the 1990s . It escalated into street battles between PKK supporters and Huda-par . Hizbullah (unrelated to the eponymous Lebanese militia) was used to fight
 The PKK insists that Huda-Par has links to 1s and that Turkey backs both . The PKK says that Turkey back both the PKK and the Turkish government .
 In Cizre, men and women huddle round wood-burning stoves as they keep nightly vigil . Huda-par and Turkish forces are on the rise in the city of Cudi .
 Thousands of Kurds ekes out living harvesting crops in western Turkey .
 Unemployment in Cizre runs at 70%, against a national average of 10%, says Leyla Imret, the 27-year-old HDP mayor .
 She insists the HDpP will win the minimum 10% of the vote needed to win parliamentary seats in June’s election .
 Polls suggest it may not clear the hurdle. But this time it plans to run as a party despite polls suggesting it might not clear it .
 In Diyarbakir, many Kurds don't want to be part of the Turkish parliament anyway . Many Kurds don’t want to have a part in the parliament.
 If the HDP is not represented in parliament, tensions could spiral out of control, he warns .
 Some 200,000 Syrian Kurds who fled the war prefer to stay in rough camps run by HDp-run municipality rather than a shiny refugee complex built by the government .
 A section for ‘martyrs of Kobane’ has been added to the local cemetery . This correspondent counted 66 fresh graves .
 Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, is at one end, Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, at the other .
 Mr Pu’in is due in Budapest on February 17th, two weeks after Mrs Merkel .
 Viktor Orban's visit will mostly be about renewing Hungary's gas contract which expires this year . Orban wants what he calls a “flexible’s arrangement, he says .
 Mr Putin wants to show the world that he is not as isolated as some claim .
 The Ukraine crisis and Mr Orban’s links with Russia have put Hungary in the spotlight .
 Georgia's prime minister has just visited; Turkey's president is expected soon . Georgia’s prime minister had just visited .
 He caused considerable alarm around the European Union in July 2014 when he declared that Hungary would remain a democracy but become an ‘illiberal state’ He cited examples of Russia, Turkey and China as examples of the state .
 Mrs Merkel criticised the term on her visit, but was firmly rebuffed by her host .
 Russia is Hungary’s biggest trading partner outside the EU, and supplies most of its gas . Russia is the country's largest trading partner in Europe .
 America’s loss of interest and influence in central Europe points to greater focus on Germany and Russia, argues Mr Orban .
 The cancellation of Russia’s planned South Stream gas pipeline was a blow . The cancellation was a major blow for Russia .
 Cheap gas is a fundamental pillar of government's populist policies, says Peter Kreko of Political Capital, a Budapest thinktank .
 Many in the West think the cosying-up between Mr Orban and Mr Putin has gone too far . Many in West think it has been too much .
 Hungary has taken a €10 billion ($11 billion) loan from Russia to upgrade its ageing nuclear power plant . Hungary has also taken a $11 billion loan from the Russian government .
 Mr Orban also broke ranks over EU sanctions on Russia last year . He said they did more harm to Europe than to Russia .
 Hungary has repeatedly called for autonomy for ethnic Hungarians in western Ukraine . Hungary has also called for independence for the country's minorities .
 At worst, it was seen as a set-up; at best, the result of U.S. puritanical excess .
 The spectacle of a handcuffed mF head doing the ‘perp walk’ aroused special outrage . The spectacle was the first time a handcuffed head has been seen doing a “perpwalk’s”
 France now has its own home-grown version in a courtroom in Lille . Those charges were eventually dropped, but France now have its own version in the courtroom .
 Mr Strauss-Kahn is accused of “aggravated pimping’s’, an offence that carries up to ten years in jail . He and others have been charged with the offence .
 The presiding judge in the trial, which opened on February 2nd, made it clear that this was a criminal, not a moral, no longer a world saviour tled government in Kiev .
 He has courted Germany, on whose economy and investment Hungary depends most heavily . He has been courted by Germany for years .
 The case against Mr StraussKahn hinges on whether he knew that women who attended soirées libertines, or group-sex parties, were paid .
 Strauss-Kahn admitted taking partin such parties but no more than ‘four times a year’ He said he was too busy “saving the world’ after the global financial crisis .
 Aman many once saw as a Socialist front-runner for president is no longer a public figure . Aman once was seen as a socialist front- runner for president .
 There has been plenty of news coverage, but no editorial outpouring of moral disapproval . There is no moral disapproval of such news coverage .
 The day after Strauss-Kahn testified, Le Monde, a left-leaning newspaper, had no story about the trial on its front page .
 As the prostitutes testify, this tolerance is being put to the test . But as the prostitutes testified, this is being tested .
 A group of topless feminist protesters tried to disrupt Mr Strauss-Kahn's arrival in court .
Journalist Jean Quatremer said it was time for the media to examine their own silence .
 Once-powerful French figure had his bedroom activities exposed in public, semi-pornographic detail . Never before has such a once-powerful figure had such a bedroom activity exposed .
 Most cases of sexual assault against French politicians are dropped, including one by Tristane Banon, a French writer, against StraussKahn .
 A taboo has been broken, and traditional indifference to sexual excess called, painfully, into question . But a taboo has now been broken.
 Russia's relations with Hungary are "isolated from the overall situation in the world," says Vladimir Sergeyev . Russia's ambassador to Hungary says relations are ‘isolated’
 Doomsday scenarios include the break-up of the country, which could push waves of refugees across the border .
 Some 200,000 ethnic Hungarians live in western Ukraine, and many could seek sanctuary . Many may seek sanctuary in Ukraine .
 Frans Timmermans takes on the Brussels blob IRST VICE-PRESIDENT for Better Regulation, Inter-Institutional Relations, the Rule of Law and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
 The bureaucratic ring of Mr Timmermans’ official description belies the formidable challenge of his role, which is to get Europe to do less .
 In fact, he has been more of a sponge, soaking up difficult issues as they arise, from sustainable development to controversial article in transatlantic trade deal .
 Brussels's legendary appetite for rule-making is kept in check . His trickiest task is to ensure that Brussels’s legendary appetite is kept under check .
 Mr Timmermans asked each of his colleagues to make the case for their legislative priorities . He asked them to make their cases for their priorities .
 The resulting ‘work programme’ for 2015 had just 23 items, a fraction of previous years’ lists . The resulting programme for 2015 has just 23 things, a quarter of previous year’s lists .
 A review of existing EU law is under way, with a view to cutting red tape . The review of the existing law is expected to take place in coming months .
 This is an unfamiliar approach in an organisation where “more Europe’s often serves as a secular creed. This is a different approach to the secular creed, says David Cameron .
 Mr Timmermans insists his job is about getting Europe to work better, not acting as deregulator-in-chief .
 His approach has riled Eurocrats and members of the European Parliament . But his approach has also riled European Parliament members .
 Mr Timmermans has been tackling the “Brussels logic’s biggest challenge, he says . Policymakers do not obstruct projects they consider useless for fear of seeing their ideas squashed .
 Mr Timmermans ridicules a failed attempt by the Eu to regulate the use of olive-oil jugs in restaurants .
 His instincts play well in Britain, which is preparing for its own debate on the role of Eu .
 David Cameron has pledged to renegotiate Britain’s membership if he retains power after an election in May . Cameron has also pledged to hold an in/out referendum if he wins the election .
 Some have suggested that Mr Timmermans should take charge of any talks with Britain .
 Dutch foreign minister also expressed scepticism about Cameron's motives in seeking new deal .
 His presence will reassure pro-European Britons that their message will find receptive ears . But his presence in the senior ranks of the commission will reassure them of their message .
 The mandarins in Britain’s civil service were delighted by his appointment .
 European countries worried about Russian aggression were similarly cheered . European nations worried about Russia's aggression were also cheered .
 One Brussels-based diplomat credits this intervention with unifying the EU behind a tougher line on Russia . The EU has a tough line on the Russia.
 If the Eu has held together on sanctions, it has floundered on a broader strategy . The U.S. has not been able to find a solution to its problems with sanctions .
 In 1991, he holed up in a government building during an attempted coup, talking to local MPs and dispatching reports back to The Hague . In 1991 he was in Moscow during a diplomatic stint in Moscow .
 Europe is struggling to work out how best to deal with Vladimir Putin, he says . It is because most countries stopped paying attention after the end of the cold war, he adds .
 For years the Eu has been in firefighting mode, battling to hold the euro together or reacting to unrest in its neighbourhood . The soothsayer of subsidiarity has been fighting to hold euro together .
 These emergencies have consumed energy and resources, but also raised awkward questions about where the limits of European power should be drawn .
 Across Europe grumpy voters have been turning to populist parties that assail Brussels for its bureaucratic excesses .
 The assignment granted to Mr Timmermans thus repre-sents a double gamble . The assignment was granted to the Dutchman .
 The forces behind greater integration, particularly in the economy, need not spill over into areas best left to national, or even local, governments. And second, that the forces behind great integration need to be left out of the country .
 Mr Timmermans is well placed to take on Brussels’s bureaucratic machine . Fluent and more-or-less accentless in six European languages .
European Parliament has been in a row with the European Parliament over his decision to withdraw a “circular economy’s (ie, recycling) plan .
 If Mr Timmermans has a weakness, say observers, it is a scratchy vanity that can rub colleagues up the wrong way .
 He always thinks he knows best, says a former colleague, and, even more troubling, he usually does . He always thought he knew best, he says .
 If his ambition sometimes tips into arrogance, that may not be the gravest sin in a place that too often takes pride in consensus over conflict . But if his ambition often tips into arrogation, that might not be a sin .
 In the original book, Dr No had grand plans of his own, which were thwarted by bird guano .
 Britain’s strategic ambition has shrivelled even more than its defence budget . RITAIN has long prided itself on punching above its weight .
 Europe’s most serious security crisis for a generation, it has been little more than a backseat driver . Yet in its response to Russian aggression in Ukraine, Europe's most serious Security crisis has been a back seat driver .
 Francois Hollande of France and Angela Merkel of Germany flew to Moscow . French President Francois Hollande and German President Angela Merkel also flew in .
 Britain was slow to react when Barack Obama announced he was forming a coalition to defeat Islamic State last September . Britain was also slow to respond to Obama's announcement of a coalition against Islamic State .
 In a House of Commons vote held, languidly, a few weeks later, the government only asked for authorisation to strike targets in Iraq . The vote was held in the House of Parliament .
 Commons defence committee report says country carried outless than one air strike a day .
 The committee visited Iraq, it found a total British military contingent of just three people outside Kurdish areas .
 Rhetorically, the government remains committed to the idea that Britain is a great power . The government is committed to Britain's great power, says the government .
 The last Strategic Defence and Security Review, in late 2010, paved the way for a cut of 8% in the defence budget .
 Britain has slipped from fourth to sixth in the global defence spending league since 2012, according to siIpRi, a think tank . France, Saudi Arabia, Russia, China and America have been in the top six .
 The country's relative military decline has been less dramatic than the country's diminished appetite to be a leading security player on the world stage .
 The Milibandwagon wanted their country to aspire to be a great power and not accept decline . The highest level since the first survey in 2010 was the highest level in the survey .
 Britain is quietly pulling its weight as part of NATO's efforts to reassure members in eastern Europe who feel threatened by Putin’s irredentist Russia .
 In 2017 it will be the lead nation for the alliance’s new 5,000-strong rapidly deployable spearhead force . The alliance will have a 5,500-strong rapid deployable force .
 The Anglo-French defence treaty of 2010 recognised a shared interest in still wanting to play a global role with reduced means .
 Money has been saved on testing nuclear weapons, developing an unmanned combat aircraft and producing a new anti-ship missile . Money was saved on developing a new aircraft and a new missile .
 The Conservative-led coalition can also claim success in dealing with the Ministry of Defence’s overheated equipment budget .
 It committed itself in 2012 to funding a tenyear £159 billion equipment programme that includes two aircraft-carriers, a modernised air-transport fleet, more battlefield helicopters, new attack submarines and destroyers .
 If the plan sticks, Britain will have smaller but still highly capable armed forces . If it sticks, the UK will have small but highly capable forces .
 The ministry’s Future Force 2020 requires spending increases of 1-2% a year in real terms from 2015 . The equipment programme is part of the Future Force2020 programme .
 A new Strategic Defence and Security Review must be completed by the next government later this year . Work on it has stopped because of the general election in May .
 If Mr Cameron is reelected, defence will probably have to take at least some of the pain coming from the second stage of the government's austerity programme .
 Britain fails to meet its NATO commitment to spend at least 2% of cpp on defence . Cameron again pledged to do so at the alliance summit he hosted in Wales only in September .
 Mr Cameron was leftin no doubt that Britain's influence would wane significantly if defence spending fell further .
 Should Labour win power, defence will rank even further down its list of priorities . If Labour wins power, it will rank further further down the list.
 Sir Nick worries that Britain no longer has a clearidea of what its armed forces are for .
 The campaign's message is unlikely to be heard amid the competing retail offerings to voters .
 Much of the data, stolen to expose alleged tax evasion, was made public in a co-ordinated splash by a group of media outlets .
 The haul, dating from 2005 to 2007, includes hundreds of embarrassing documents, from internal e-mails breezily discussing undeclared client funds to details of “bricks of cash being handed over to account-holders.
 The owner of the Ivy restaurant in London withdrew sFr5m in cashina single day . His lawyer has said this involved no impropriety .
 The leak dents the image of the London-based bank and may give it a legal headache . The leak may give the bank a legal headaches .
 Criminal cases are piling up in Belgium, Spain, Spain and Argentina .
 France has concluded that more than 99% of its citizens on the list were likely to be evading tax . France says more than 100% of those on its list may have evaded tax .
 A broader Anglo-Swiss agreement on reclaiming tax-evading money has also disappointed by bringing in around £1 billion in two years . About one-third of the amount that had been expected was expected .
 This allows formerly tax-shy Britons to pay overdue taxes and penalties anonymously through their offshore banks via a withholding arrangement . This allows them to pay their taxes anonymously via a withheld arrangement .
 The agency's defenders say it took a ‘pragmatic’ approach to the HsBc files . The best way to maximise revenue was to offer tax evaders a brief window during which they could come clean and pay reduced, civil penalties .
 Criminal prosecutions are costly and tricky, especially when the data is stolen, and may have netted even less . Criminal prosecutions can be difficult and tricky .
Taxman seems timorous. But with lurid details appearing daily in newspapers, the taxman appears timorous .
Coming shortly before a general election, the revelations have kicked up a political storm .
 Conservative mps gleefully pointed out that the misdeeds took place during the previous Labour administration .
 Labour figures retort that they did not come to light until the coalition was in power . David Cameron made Lord Green, HSBC's boss at the time, a minister some time after it should have been clear that the bank was in HMRC's sights .
Labour was campaigning against tax evasion and aggressive tax planning by companies even before this debacle . Labour was campaigning for tax evasion before the debacle .
 Ed Miliband has taken aim at Britain's offshore dependencies, such as Jersey and Bermuda, threatening them with blacklisting . They are more compliant with global anti-moneylaundering standards than most OECD countries .
 Mr Cameron has made a crusade out of stamping out banking and corporate secrecy . Mr Cameron's crusade is to stamp out banks and secrecy .
 A whistle-blower identified poor controls at the private bank as recently as 2013 . The bank was subsequently sacked by the bank .
 HSBC is already under the cosh on both sides of the Atlantic for past sins, including facilitating sanctions evasion and the laundering of drug money .
 The Americans are reportedly considering revoking the deferred-prosecution agreement . To settle these, it paid $19 billion to the Americans .
Prosecutors talk darkly of issuing international arrest warrants for the current and former heads of the bank if it does not co-operate . diamond dealers were big users of HSBC Geneva .
In Britain, too, calls for scalps will grow louder until the election . In Britain, the calls for Scalps will continue to grow louder .
 Hannah B Harvey teaches you the tried-and-true methods professional storytellers use to capture and hold onto an audience’s attention .
Knowing what storytellers do in the process of crafting and delivering memorable tales can help you enhance the stories you tell to children at bedtime .
 The Hero’s Journey Tensive Conflict and Meaning Giving Yourself Permission to Tell 10. Offer expires 03/02/15 TheGREATCOURSES.com/3ECON 1-800-832-2412 .
 For 25 years, The Great Courses has brought the world's foremost educators to millions who want to go deeper into the subjects that matter most .
 Download or stream to your laptop or PC, or use our free mobile apps for iPad, iPhone, or Android . Use our free Android apps to help you with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Labour's general-election campaign so far is not terribly one nation anything, not to be terribly one .
 Labour's early showing in the campaign has been more divisive than unifying, even as its appeal appears less national . The party's shrinking support in Scotland and tin ear to the more affluent south, by the day .
 Labour leader has mainly been promising to spend oodles on the Nus, while launching blistering attacks on business . His objection is to the fact that, instead of trying to fix Labour’s big weaknesses, he has been focusing on the economy .
With hardly a pause to acknowledge the jobs and wealth firms helpfully create, he promises to intervene in energy and banking markets . He promises to raise corporate taxes and to foist more apprentices, higher wages, more paternal leave and other gimmes onto company books .
 Labour leader denounced Boots boss as a Monaco-based tax avoider . Boots boss is one of Britain’s most trusted firms .
 Mr Miliband wants a more productive private sector, which is good, but appears to have given little thought to the greater inefficiency of the public sector .
 Labour's campaign chief, Lynton Crosby, rules with an iron bar . Compared with the Conservatives, Labour’s campaign lacks a clear chain of command .
 No one knows whether Douglas Alexander, the campaign manager, Lucy Powell, the deputy campaign chief, or Mr Miliband is in charge .
 Many speak of local issues as most important; this is partly true, but partly an acknowledgment of the weakness of the party’s main message . Few are depicting on their leaflets.
 Most of the modest role for private health-care providers in the NHS was created under Labour . There is no such Tory scheme; most of the private health care providers in NHS were created by Labour .
 Miliband instructed his lackeys to “weaponise the NHS, on the basis that Britons love it, Labour invented it, and it is creaking under the pressures of an ageing population .
 Half a dozen Labour candidates gave your columnist the same reply as your columnist .
 New Labour would like to be able to say more about aspiration, getting on, hope for the future . Mr Miliband is silent.
 Electoral history suggests the Tories should be streets ahead . In David Cameron they have a relatively popular leader .
 Labour has the most disliked opposition leader since records began and dismal ratings on the election’s biggest issue, the economy .
 The two parties are level-pegging, on around 32%, but the advantage Labour enjoys from outdated constituency boundaries puts it ahead .
 To win a majority, the Tories need about a six-point lead, which is hard to imagine . To win the majority, Tories need a six point lead.
 In recent months Labour’s vote has been leaking to the protest parties it may end up in government .
Few Tory-Labour switchers to be had, so less call for economic reassurance they traditionally look for . It is also based on a calculation that the Tories are at close to their core support .
 Bagehot struggles to understand why Mr Miliband cannot do both things at once . But he says he doesn't understand why he can't do both.
 Many of his prescriptions are sensible. Strip away the attention-grabbing rhetoric, and many of them are sensible .
 Britain’s economy is growing but its workers are unproductive, which is why the recovery has not been widely felt .
 Improving skills through apprenticeships is therefore an excellentidea, which businesses should applaud . Improving skill through apprenticeship is an excellent idea, businesses should applauded .
 Miliband couched even his more radical ideas in terms of the need to improve markets . Miliband might have won a few of the predators over.
 The problem with Mr Miliband is not so much that he is a dangerous extremist . In Germany or Sweden he would be considered solidly centrist .
 It is that he appears unable to couch or even consider, his earnestly held beliefs in such a way as to build a consensus of support for them .
 The impression is of a political autistic, with extraordinarily little awareness of how he comes across or learn from his mistakes .
 That is a worrying trait in the man pitching to be Britain’s next leader .
 About 70% of new arrivals last September had reading and mathematical skills below the minimum expected for their grade .
 Most countries have schools where most children are from poor families . Expectations are low, and teachers are hard to recruit .
In most, the falling prestige of the teaching profession makes matters worse . In most, in most, it makes matters Worse .
 Ms Sarmiento graduated from a four-year biology degree course a year early . But she had to see off fierce competition to win her teaching spot .
 Teach for America accepts just one in six applicants . The scheme that placed her in a position that was placed her at the center of the world's most successful program .
 It looks for a stellar academic record and evidence of traits that distinguish the best teachers in tough schools . It also looks for leadership, resilience and motivation to help the poor .
 Recruits get five weeks’ training and pledge to work for two years in a disadvantaged school . Recruits will work for five weeks' training and two years' work in disadvantaged school.
 The number of applicants is falling slightly as the graduate jobs market strengthens . After two decades of growth, the number of applications has fallen slightly .
 Americans are no longer surprised that bright, ambitious graduates want the most demanding teaching posts . Thanks to its 25-year history and 40,000 alumni, Americans are not surprised that young graduates want most demanding posts .
 A quarter of European and Latin American countries, as well as Australia, China and India, have something similar . Australia, India, Australia and China also have similar issues .
 Many schemes are new, with just two or three cohorts placed in schools . Many of the schemes are not new .
 Ambitious youngsters attracted by the lack of a teaching qualification, the chance to make a difference . The high-energy approach.
 Many applicants have degrees in mathematics and science, subjects where teachers are scarce . Many applicants had degrees in science and mathematics .
 Results seem positive, though so far there have been few rigorous evaluations . Results seem to be positive, but so far, there are no rigorous evaluations.
 Pupils of TfA recruits do just as well in reading as those of other teachers . In maths, their test scores are better than those of others .
 Britain’s Teach First credited with helping to improve standards in London .
 It now provides nearly a quarter of new teachers in the country’s most difficult schools . It is now providing nearly a Quarter of new Teachers in the most difficult school.
 Critics fret that afew weeks of training is too little for a novice teacher, no matter how gung-ho .
 Teach First provides the graduates it places in schools with support . Like its counterparts elsewhere, Teach First offers the graduates with support.
 Experienced colleagues help them with lesson planning and mentors visit their classrooms .
 Most enroll in a teacher-certification course . Some countries insist on this, meaning that university tutors are on tap .
 New teachers struggle most in their first two years, even in the easiest schools .
 Now 90% return for a second year, a higher share than for all novice teachers, in all types of schools .
 Some countries add weekend gatherings and seminars for participants to swap ideas and commiserate . Some countries added weekend gatherings for participants.
 Dzameer Dzulkiflii who runs Malaysia’s scheme says such support is expensive in the rural areas where many are based .
 The cost of the Tf model is what may prevent it going mainstream, says the author . Tf's cost could prevent it from going mainstream .
 Such pilot programmes can drag standards up across the board. But such pilot programmes matter because they can drag standard standards up .
 Most countries' programmes aim to turn out alumni who will lead more than a single classroom . Most countries’ programmes are aimed at turning out alumni.
 Several help participants find private-sector jobs after their two-year stint in the private sector . Several help people find private sector jobs.
 Leaders in any sector who have seen the battlefield will become powerful allies in the quest to improve the worst schools .
 Fifteen of the 15 who have completed Peru’s programme now work in its education ministry .
 A team of alumni from Lithuania’s scheme recently helped draft its tenyear education strategy .
 A fifth of school principals in Washington, Dc, are Tia alumni . Kaya Henderson is the schools chancellor, and several of her senior staff .
 Many who leave teaching English-language education move to social programmes or start-up ventures . Many of those who leave teach English- language education are moving to social programs .
 Chaitra Murlidhar is an engineer and alumna of Teach for India . She now works for a non-profit foundation set up by Thermax .
 A teacher-retraining scheme she designed is being used in Pune, an industrial city in India .
 Alumni in Australia and Spain have created online teaching resources for teachers and pupils . They have created digital and video lessons that can be personalised .
 Last year Teach First was runner-up in a national poll to find Britain's most prestigious employer of graduates .
 Evgenia Peeva of Teach for Bulgaria is to demonstrate that poor children from barely literate families can learn if they have excellent teachers .
 Many pupils yawn their way through class. It has often been a thankless task, many pupils yawning through class .
Experts say the situation is similar in much of the non-Anglophone world . Comparable global data are scarce.
 Common problems include bad teachers hired via written tests rather than oral ones . Outmoded approach sees English as a foreign language to be taught about, rather than a lingua franca .
 Teachers’ lack of fluency means too little English conversation in the classroom, says John Knagg of the British Council .
 It is as if they were being taught to swim without ever getting into the water . It is not as if the swimmer was taught to do it without getting into water .
 China has made English compulsory in school from a young age . But teachers are overstretched and mostly underqualified, says Jing Zhao, a visiting researcher .
 Just over 1m English-language staff teach over 200m Chinese pupils, a heroic, if mind-boggling, teacher-pupil ratio .
 Many speak a scripted English in class and prefer to focus on the pen-and-ink grammatical work on which pupils are examined .
 The problem is compounded by education systems that are out of touch with parents’ demands for more English instruction . The problem has been compounded by the education system's lack of understanding of parents' demands .
 Japan has said it will bolster the mandatory English requirement for children in primary school . But only from 2020 when the country hosts the Olympic games .
 In Latin America “there is a huge gap between what the system provides and what the students actually need,’ says Rosangela Bando of the Inter-American Development Bank .
 Better-off city-dwelling children are more likely to have private language lessons, internet access or the chance to travel abroad .
 Even in state systems where instruction has long been poor, there are signs of change . But even in states where instruction is poor, the state is showing signs of improvement .
 Agustin’s colleague, Armando Velazquez, refuses to speak a word of Spanish in the classroom .
 At the start of one of his first classes, a pupil mimes vomiting when asked whether he likes English .
 Lionel Messi is described as fast, rich and famous . The Argentine footballer is described by the youngster as a 'fast, rich' and 'rich and famous'
 A year ago Mr Velazquez benefited from an English-language course that he says changed not only his teaching, but his life . He says the course changed his life.
 On-the-job training has also produced results in Chile and Malaysia, says Mr Knagg . Such on-the job training has been successful in both countries .
 It makes up for its dearth of English-speaking teachers by contracting Filipinos who teach via videoconferencing .
 Interactive technology can help make lessons more lively, as South Korea has discovered . South Korea says it has discovered how to use the technology to help students learn .
 Canada is helping China to do, rather than just teaching English . The goal should be to teach other subjects in English, as Canada is trying to help China .
 China's biggest property tycoon wants to become an entertainment colossus . Ang JIANLIN started life with a red spoon in his mouth .
 The youngster was able to join the People’s Liberation Army at 15 and avoid the worst deprivations of the Cultural Revolution .
After 17 years in the army, he decided that the future belonged not to generals but to businessmen . After 17 years, he said he wanted to be a businessman .
After a stint as a bureaucrat, he formed a property company in the north-eastern city of Dalian . He used $80,000 of borrowed money to start the company in 1988 .
 You do not expect blaring disco music and strobes, leggy beauties and champagne first thing in the morning .
 Mr Wang, the British maker of the sleek craft seen in James Bond films, celebrated his latest deal on February 1oth .
 InFront Sports & Media holds some of the marketing rights to FIFA’s World Cup . In front of the ballroom of the Sofitel Wanda hotel in Beijing, he toasted a $1. billion deal .
 The previous month he took a 20% stake in Atlético Madrid football club . He has also taken a 20 per cent stake in the Spanish club .
 Mr Wang is also on track to become the world’s biggest owner of five-star hotels . He has investments in Sydney, London, Chicago and Los Angeles .
 Hollywood moguls were perplexed when some Asian guy hadn’t heard of Amc, a big but struggling American cinema chain, bought Amc for $2. billion in 2012 .
 Some scoffed at his plans to spend $8 billion on the world's largest studio complex in Qingdao, China .
 Leonardo DiCaprio, John Travolta, Kate Beckinsale and other celebrities to fly there for the project’s launch in 2013 .
Lionsgate is rumoured to be behind "The Hunger Games" The studio behind the film is in his sights, according to reports .
 Disney plans to open Shanghai Disneyland next year . Mr Wang wants to transform Dalian Wanda into a global entertainment colossus capable of beating Disney .
 He is dreaming up acquisitions that will increase his group’s annual revenues by 2020 to $100 billion . A fifth of his group's annual revenues will come from outside China .
 The influence of his years in the PLA, where he rose from border guard to regimental commander, is evident . His influence is evident in his years at the PLA .
 Why authors need to be entrepreneurs? For daily coverage of business, visit Economist.com/business-finance.com .
 Dalian Wanda's charmed career and his free-spending ways raise several important questions about his future . Wanda has been in the news for several years, but his career has been a success .
 Wanda's bricks-and-mortar empire faces the twin dangers of a weak property market and rising online competition . Wanda’s bricks andmortar business faces the double threat of weak property markets .
 Jones Lang LaSalle estimates total floorspace at shopping malls in the biggest 20 cities will rise from 62m square metres to 87m in two years .
On top of the risk of oversupply, the value of the land on which developers’ loans are secured is falling .
 Oscar Choi, an analyst at Citigroup, visited Wanda Plaza malls in cities large and small . He was impressed by how efficiently they were run, and their pulling-power among local consumers .
 E-commerce is hitting many Chinese shops hard. All this is helping the group with its defences against the spread of e-commerce .
 In August it launched a 5 billion yuan venture with Baidu and Tencent, two leading internet firms . Consumers use their smartphones to choose products but are then led to a physical shop .
 Wanda is now wiring up all of its shopping centres with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth sensors so that shoppers can be monitored intensely . As part of this plan, Wanda will also use Bluetooth sensors to monitor shoppers .
 A new app, to be launched soon, will ping people with promotions and information as they step inside the malls . The app will let them do such things as book parking spaces .
 Consumers can peruse goods on the shelves but pay on their mobile phones to save queuing, and have their goods delivered straight to their homes . Consumers can also pay for their goods to be delivered on their phones .
 Citigroup predicts that net profits at the firm’s property division will keep soaring, rising by over half between 2014 and 2016 .
 He acknowledges that sales of these sorts of things are suffering at his centres . He admits that sales are suffering in his centres.
 Wanda has done more than its rivals to shift its malls’ mix of tenants in this direction .
 tenants offering such services occupy about 40% of floor space, which is to rise to 60% over time . Now, tenants offer such services occupying about 40 per cent of the floor space .
 His diversification into theme parks, film-making and other entertainment services follows a similar logic . He is also known for his work on theme parks.
 As the country’s investment-driven model of growth gives way to one focused on consumption, the services sector seems certain to rise .
 CCTV has named him its "Economic Person of the Year" not once but twice . CCTV, the main state television network, named him as its “Economic Person Of the Year’
 Given his firm's operational know-how and its sensible diversification strategy, it would be wrong to dismiss him as just another Asian crony capitalist living off his connections .
 Mr Wang laughs that all he gets from his old army buddies is requests for money . He laughs that he gets all the money from his army buddies.
 Bo Xilai, a powerful Communist figure and former mayor of Dalian, is jailed on corruption charges . He insists that they did not get along .
 Mr Wang says his firm had already spread beyond Dalian by the time Mr Bo secured power . He says he did not need his help to succeed .
 Bloomberg conducted a lengthy investigation of Mr Wang’s ties to the political elite but in the end did not publish the story .
 Dalian Wanda insists that neither it nor Mr Wang have received any sort of undue benefit from their connections to people in power . Wanda says neither Mr Wang nor Mr Wanda has received any undue benefit.
Commercial acumen has played a large part in Dalian Wanda's success, says Mr Wang . Mr Wang's commercial acumen is fair to say that Mr Wang’s commercial acumumum has been a big success .
 Independent accounts describe how he got his first break by doing unpleasant tasks that state-run property firms spurned .
 Dalian's civic leaders wanted to redevelop the city's slums, he jumped at the chance . For example, when Dalian’s mayor wanted to redevelopment the city’S slums.
 By adding a small toilet to each refurbished flat, a luxury enjoyed only by members of the elite at that time .
 Wanda was also ambitious in expanding beyond its home base, something made difficult at the time by a thicket of regulations and local favouritism .
 Mr Wang brags that these days they are chasing him . He turns down most of their offers of cheap land .
 Despite the country’s reputation for endemic graft, ‘It is possible to get prime land in China without being corrupt,’ says Yvonne Zhou of the Boston Consulting Group .
Local governments are falling over themselves to modernise their centres by attracting a prestigious Wanda Plaza .
 Citigroup's recent move into cultural industries has clearly been made with government support .
 Development projects that have a cultural element enjoy swifter approval . Development projects have a culture element.
 AMC’s cinemas showed no Chinese films before his takeover but now show up to tena year . Mr Wang boasts that AMC's cinemas show no Chinese movies before he took over .
 A 1.1,700 metre canal, a Wanda department store, two Wanda hotels and several office buildings have been rebuilt in the old city of Wanda .
 Mr Wang risks coming across as too much the playboy in an increasingly Cromwellian China .
 He deserves credit for building a mighty business empire, and certainly has much to celebrate . He deserves to celebrate, he says, but he has a lot to celebrate.
 As his ambition grows, investors may come to see his contacts as a growing vulnerability . But as his ambitions grow, investors will see him as a vulnerability .
 The son of a Communist guerrilla hero should know that from time to time the party suddenly and unexpectedly devours its own. He should be aware of the party's sudden and unexpected changes .
London, Milan and Paris come next; and in the autumn they repeat the circuit . London, Milan, Paris and Milan come next .
 Lots of aspiring fashion hubs in emerging markets, from Shanghai to Mumbai, are staging lavish shows . Lots of emerging markets in China and India are also staging lavish Shows .
 Some industry commentators wonder if there are better ways for fashion brands to spend their marketing budgets than parading their wares at more and more shows .
 For now, for now, they remain central to the business of flogging posh frocks . But for now at least, they are still central to their business .
Department stores and other retailers are ready to sign contracts if they like what they see . First, because buyers from department stores and others are in the audience, ready to signs .
 Second, as a broader brand-building exercise, to convince consumers that a label is still at the cutting edge . Third, as part of a wider brand- building exercise, is to convince customers that a brand is still on the edge .
 luxury brands have been cutting out middlemen in their distribution chains . That is largely because luxury brands are cutting out the middlemen .
 More than 80% of the shoes, bags and other products bearing the Prada label are now sold in its own shops, compared with about 50% a decade ago .
 For Burberry, the share has grown from less than 40% to more than 70% over the same period . Burberry's share of the company has risen from lessthan 40% in the last three years .
 The fashion shows have become less about selling the latest collection to other retailers’ buyers and more about communicating the brand's image to a wider public .
 They launch new ranges more frequently, often staging their own publicity events . They launch their own ranges more often .
 The main fashion shows are still the image-burnishing flagships of a more diffuse promotional effort . But the main fashion show is still more diffuse than ever .
 Franca Sozzani, editor of Vogue Italia, says little has changed in the staging of the main shows .
 Digital technology and social media are making them more accessible to the public . But digital technology is making social media more accessible for the public.
 There are now legions of fashion ‘influencers’ with big followings on Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest .
 A recent survey of the luxury industry by the Boston Consulting Group concluded that word of mouth overtook magazines last year as the biggest influence on consumers’ purchase decisions .
 Marc Jacobs has used e-mail addresses to get devotees to register in advance for live-streams in return for a chance to win tickets .
The luxury industry in the 1990s was defined by the rise of global brands . The luxury industry was defined as the world's first luxury industry .
 The 2000s were all about those brands taking control of the retail “experience’s” offered to customers .
 The BCG report posits that in the coming decade, the industry will focus on getting to know individual customers .
 The Constellation Taurus is a 59metre, 80-tonne freighter that is perfect for anyone looking to break into interstellar trading . For $180 you can buy a Constellation.
 “Star Citizen’s” video game being developed by Cloud Imperium Games is ready for lift-off . The game will be released in 2016 .
Crowdfunding has been good to the makers of video games . Crowdfunding is a way to raise money directly from fans .
 So far the game has accumulated $72m; another few million dollars rains down every month . So far, the game's $72million has accumulated .
 Bitcoin-inspired publishing platform raised $18m. Its nearest competition is Ethereum, a Bitcoin-based publishing platform .
 In return for pledges, pledges range from $36 to $18,000 . Virtual spacecraft to use in the game, early access to unfinished versions, T-shirts and so on .
 What they do not get is equity in the business or a cut of any profits. What they don't get is Equity in the company or any profit from the business .
Modern-day patrons of the arts are willing to pay because they like the idea of "Star Citizen" and want to see it produced . As with other “reward crowdfunding’s’ campaigns, these modern- day patrons are willing.
 More conventionally financed games-makers try to appeal to as broad an audience as possible . Bigger, more conventionally funded games-making games-maker tries to appeal.
 CIG’s owner, Chris Roberts, says there is a chunk of the audience that “doesn’t want those compromises,” he says .
 Some fans fear Mr Roberts is taking on a bigger, more complex project than he can handle . Even so, some fans fear he's taking on more complex projects .
Games can be released in stages to reassure backers, he says . In response, he notes that one advantage of games is that they can be release in stages .
 CIG has already sent some of them a module that lets them take a tour of their new spacecraft . Another lets them stage dogfights with other craft, and another lets them perform dogfights .
 Mr Roberts, who has also worked in Hollywood, thinks crowdfunding could work for big-budget films and television . He says crowdfunding could also work for films and TV .
 Fans would have to find ways to involve fans in the production process without giving away the plot .
 sanctions have tightened incrementally since last March . The principal economic tools at its disposal are sanctions, which have been tightened .
 Companies that would have been subject to sanctions because of their links to “designated’s Russian oligarchs have managed to wriggle free of the restrictions with well-timed transactions .
 These have had the effect of reducing the stakes held by parties subject to sanctions below thresholds that would trigger penalties against their businesses . These have also had the impact of reducing stakes held.
 It was compiled for one of the many Western companies that fret about whom they can or cannot do business with under the sanctions regime . It is a list of companies that worry about what they can and can't do with under sanctions .
 Originally set up by Gazprom, an energy giant, it provides insurance to Russian firms . The company provides insurance for Russian firms on sanctions lists .
Every member of the Sogaz board, including Alexey Miller, is affiliated with a sanctioned entity . Every member of Gazprom's board is involved in a sanctioning entity .
Until March 51% of Sogaz belonged to Bank Rossiya via a wholly owned subsidiary, called Abros . Until March 31% of the bank was owned by a subsidiary, Abros.
 Rossiya is Russia’s 17th largest bank, and its owners have links to Mr Putin .
 The remainder of the shares in Sogaz were divided between Gazprom, its subsidiaries and other figures close to the president .
Under the rules, Sogaz should have been too, as an entity that is 50%-or-more-owned by a_ sanctioned party. Under the rule, Sogsaz should be 50%- or more-owned.
 The transaction was not filed with the Russian authorities until March 24th, after sanctions took effect .
 Sogaz was able to produce comfort letters showing Western counterparties that it was not subject to sanctions . With Rossiya’s stake below 50%, Sogz was able. to producecomfort letters .
 A note in Sogaz’s 2013 accounts, published in April 2014, mentions Rossiya losing control through a share transaction, but gives no reason for it .
 The Office of Foreign Assets Control, the arm of the Treasury that oversees sanctions, closed the loophole in August .
 A firm is blacklisted if the stakes of sanctioned individuals add up to 50% or more . Now, the firm will be blacklisted.
 Sogaz should have been subject to sanctions because of its links to both Bank Rossiya and Kordeks, a 12.5% shareholder reportedly controlled by Mr Timchenko . U.S. had blacklisted the company several months earlier .
 Rossiya cut its stake again, two days before OFAC changes were announced . Sogaz avoided sanctions once more, according to paperwork .
 A document published by Sogaz in late August states that Abros, the Rossiya subsidiary, now holds only 32.3% of the company . The document says Abros now holds just 32.2% of SOGaz .
 It said the transaction had taken place on August 6th and had been registered on August uth, just before the sanctions were expanded on August 13th .
 The total shareholdings in Sogaz of sanctioned parties had fallen to 44.8% , again bringing it below the threshold . This meant that the total shareholding in SOGaz of sanctioning parties had dropped to 44%.
 Rossiya later seems to have given away its remaining stake in Sogaz to Abros itself . In another curious development, Rossiya has transferred ownership of Abros to itself .
 A tiny sliver of Abros is not management-owned. Another striking feature is that a small sliver is not managed-owned .
 A firm called Bolshoi Dom 9 has six shareholders, including its largest investor, Yuri Kovalchuk, all own stakes in Rossiya . The firm is affiliated with the bank .
 This stake is very small but attracted the private investigators’ attention . The private investigators' attention is the focus of the investigation .
 The shareholders’ links to Abros, they say, “must be that they continue to exert influence over Abros and therefore, Sogaz,’ they conclude .
 Rossiya nor Sogaz responded to multiple e-mails seeking comment . Neither Rossiya or Sogz responded to several e-mail requests for comment .
 Rossiya, also under sanctions, would want to distance itself from its former subsidiary . So it is unclear why Rossiya would be under sanctions .
 If Abros were no longer a majority-owned subsidiary of the bank, it would be taken off the list . It could be that Rossiya hoped that if Abros had no longer been a majority owned subsidiary, it could be removed from the list.
 Mr Timchenko is also a founder of Gunvor, a giant oil-trading firm, and Torbjorn Tornqvist, a Swede .
Until March 2014, 43.6% of Gunvor was owned by Fentex Properties . Mr Timchenkbo is the sole beneficial owner of the company .
An identical stake was held by Frefika Foundation, a vehicle owned by Mr Tornqvist . An identical stake is held by the Frefka Foundation .
 The remaining 12.8% was owned by a share plan for senior Gunvor employees, with no voting rights . The remaining 11.7% of the shares were owned by senior employees .
 Mr Timchenko was put on OFAC's sanctions list on March 20th 2014 . America alleged that Mr Putin had an undisclosed economic interest in Gunvor .
 Fentex Properties sold its stake in Gunvor to Mr Tornqvist, giving him 87.2% of the shares and 100% of voting power .
 Gunvor denies that Mr Putin is a beneficiary of Gunvor orits activities . Mr Timchenko “has absolutely no ongoing involvement’s in the firm, says Gunvor .
 Messrs Timchenko and Tornqvist “had been in talks about a divestiture for a while prior to the actual sale’s actual sale, the company says . But it says it was “in part because of strategic differences.
 It says this process was speeded up after the first round of sanctions on March 6th . It says the process wasSpeeded up.
 The Hartwall Arena in Finland has hosted concerts by the likes of Miley Cyrus and Aerosmith . Another business linked to Mr Timchenko is the Hart wall Arena .
 Several big concerts were threatened with cancellation because of worries that the arena itself would be blacklisted . The arena itself was also threatened with canceling .
 At some point around the time of sanctions, it is unclear when exactly the shareholding structure changed .
 Total ownership of the venue by sanctioned parties thus fell to 49.5%, meaning it could continue to be used for concerts by Western stars without repercussion . Since the son was not on the sanctions list, the venue could be used without repercussions .
 Roman Rotenberg told a Finnish newspaper that a deal for him to take control had been in the works since 2013, before the Ukraine conflict .
 The Economist sought comment from the Rotenbergs through smp, a bank they co-own, but was unable to reach them . The Rotenberg's co-owned the bank.
 Western lawyers say other Russian companies have concluded similarly welltimed transactions . The effect of these transactions has been that they avoided sanctions, they say .
 Two senior sanctions lawyers told us they have seen evidence of such transactions . Neither was willing to provide names .
 European subsidiaries of Russian companies thought to be controlled by parties on sanctions lists appear to be only indirectly owned by them . After August 2014, it is hard or impossible to ascertain.
 OFAC declined to comment on these specific cases or on whether it might broaden its sanctions so that businesses subject to this sort of share transfer remain blacklisted . OFAC has not said whether it may broaden its sanction for businesses that are subject to the type of transfer .
 It did say that it encourages Western firms to watch out for purported changes in ownership . It did said that it encouraged firms to look out.
 OFAC says it would continue to urge Western counterparties to exercise caution . Even in scenarios where a bona fide transfer brings sanctioned parties’ combined stakes to below 50%.
 Some lawyers think OFAC will not be too concerned about cases like that of Sogaz because it is not those firms but their owners who are the main targets .
 The oligarchs who have had to loosen their grip on them are still feeling pain . Even if some of their businesses dodge sanctions, the oligarchs still feel pain .
 OFAC says divestments are genuine transactions, not window-dressing . OFAC: The timing of the divestments is that the blacklisted are forced to sell assets they would rather keep .
 Western firms may still suffer if Western firms give it a wide berth in the sanctions .
 Western governments design them with a degree of ambiguity, so as to encourage Western firms to play safe and shun any company that might conceivably be connected with targeted people .
 This approach increases uncertainty for Western companies that do business with such firms . But this approach increases the risk of losing business to such firms.
 Faced with this, many have felt obliged to hire investigators like those who looked into Sogaz's affairs .
Law firm Gibson Dunn says Russian business's use of offshore jurisdictions is costly . Even seasoned sleuths can't give firm assurances about ownership and control .
 The broader worry is that sanctions are too easy to dodge, undermining their credibility at a time when the West wants to appear strong .
 The book will become a blockbuster without Ms Lee so much as signing a copy . Ms Lee will not sign a copy of the book .
Standing out as a book writer today requires more than a bright idea and limpid prose. Standing out as an author today requires a bright ideas and limping prose .
 Authors need to become businesspeople as well, thinking strategically about their brand, and marketing themselves and their products .
 There is more competition for readers’ and reviewers’ attention, and fewer bookshops to provide a showcase for new titles . More competition for Readers’s and reviewers' attention .
 In 2013 some 1.4m print books were published in America, over five times as many as a decade earlier . In 2013 1.3m printbooks were published by American publishers .
 Publishers are increasingly focusing their efforts on a few titles they think will make a splash . Publishers are neglecting less well-known authors and less popular themes .
 Many authors dream of a happy ending, having delivered their magnum opus, they sit back and enjoy a stream of royalties .
 Even the most successful writers need to invest large amounts of time and resources in promoting themselves .
 Authors mostly used to rely on public-relations staff provided by the publishing house . Authors most used to use public- Relations staff.
 Authors must court an expanding variety of ‘influencers’ People whose opinions can determine a book’s success, authors must court them . Authors must also court people whose opinions are key to success .
 Once a select group of newspaper reviewers were the principal arbiters of literary taste . They were the main arbiters for literary taste.
 The amount of newsprint devoted to reviews keeps shrinking . Now, a host of bloggers and social-media pundits fill the gap .
 Oprah Winfrey used to help books soar up the charts by discussing them on her television show .
 More recently Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook has become an important endorser of Facebook .
 psychologist Steven Pinker enjoyed a ‘Zuckerberg bump’ in sales of his book, “The Better Angels of Our Nature.’s boss told his followers he was reading it .
 Pre-orders of books all count toward the first week's sales figures . Canny authors try to get people to buy copies in advance of publication .
 Eric Ries went on a “pre-book’s book tour to drum up interest before his work, ‘The Lean Startup’ Even had a firm name, and started selling it online more than a year in advance of its publication .
 The Times compiles its lists by tracking sales at a few thousand shops, wholesalers and online retailers . The Times also tracks sales at online retailers and stores .
 It is not hard for writers to find out which outlets feed their numbers into the rankings . There are firms that provide such information, for a fee .
 Wordsmiths can route their book tours accordingly, and encourage buyers to place orders at those shops . Wordsmith's can then route their tours accordingly .
 A quiet period is when there is less competition for a place on the bestseller lists . Another way of working the system is to release a book in a quiet period .
 Last year the Times added 12 new bestseller categories, including travel, humour and spirituality .
 It has also expanded its main lists, to 20 books, which gives more authors a shot at making the charts . It also has expanded its list of books to 20, with more authors on the list .
 If they fail to make a Times bestseller list, they can always try for another one, such as Amazon’s .
 Their moment of glory may have lasted a mere few seconds, but no one needs to know that . The moment of victory may have been a few seconds.
 The open secret of publishing is that very few authors can live by books alone. Chapter and purse is the open secret.
 Some of the most successful ones make most of their money from public speaking, consulting or teaching . Some use publicity gained by their books to justify higher fees .
Chris Anderson, Alain de Botton and Alain De Botton are paid tens of thousands of dollars for each lecture . Anderson is an author and former journalist at The Economist .
 Simon & Schuster announced it would sell online video courses led by some ofits authors .
 The trouble with many budding writers is that they are not cut out for this new world, says one writer .
 Readers these days want to get to know the creators of the books they buy . Readers want to know what they buy.
 Diffident authors may feel uncomfortable with getting so close to their fans .
 Instead of spending money on expensive branches, we pass the savings on to you .
 Syriza party worked for more than a year while in opposition to prepare their policy platform . LEXIS TSIPRAS and his radical left Syriza Party worked for over a year .
 Over 80 committees were charged with producing specific proposals for overhauling different sectors of the Greek economy . The Greek economy is one of the biggest economies in Greece .
 Planning for power is one thing; exercising it quite another, especially when a country is in a hole as deep as Greece's .
 Syriza’s programme, if fully implemented, will result in a sharp fall in revenues and a large increase in social spending .
 Many Greeks stopped paying taxes before last month’s elections, anticipating cuts and forbearance . Yet many Greeks stoppedpaying taxes before the elections, expecting cuts and a forbearance.
 Government revenues fell by more than 20% in January on an annual basis . The 2015 budget is now likely to be derailed by the end of March, says a former finance minister .
 Greece's €245 billion bail-out envisages austerity and reform, not splurges and backtracking . None of which plays well with Greece’s creditors .
Prime Minister Tsipras was about to meet Angela Merkel, Germany's chancellor, in what promised to be a fraught exchange .
 Unless some sort of agreement is found soon, another Greek default looms when IMF debts mature in March . The IMF debt is expected to mature in April .
 Since the financial crisis began, its economy has shrunk by more than any other rich country’s . The economy has grown by more.
 Between 2008 and 2014 nominal GDP, a rough proxy for an economy's capacity to repay debts, fell by 22%, much more than any other European invalid .
 The economic collapse is comparable to one on the other side of the Mediterranean, in war-torn Libya . The collapse is similar to one in the Mediterranean .
Despite losses imposed on some private-sector lenders, did little to lower them . The trouble with price-match guarantees is still to be solved .
 At the end of 2009 Greece owed €301 billion, then around 127% of GpP, mainly to the private sector . Greece owed around €300 billion at the end.
Today it owes around €315 billion 475% of GDP, all but €70 billion of which comes from public lenders . Today it owes about €315bn of GDP to public lenders, and €70bn of that comes from the public .
Money comes with conditions aimed at stabilising Greece’s finances . But the money comes with Conditions aimed at stabilization of Greece's finances .
 These include cuts to Greece’s minimum wage and pensions, lay-offs of civil servants and privatisation of various assets, including ports and state-owned buildings .
 Creditors like Mr Schauble hope the package will make Greece more competitive and thus spur economic growth .
 The crunch has come because Greece wants to keep the low rates but not the conditions . Greece has been trying to keep low rates, but not conditions, according to the Greek government .
 Nadia Valavani plans to scrap a hated property tax, enfia, a popular move that will cost the state €2 billion in revenues .
 Ms Valavani also says a tax on businesses offering services to tourists will stay at 13% and not be hiked to the standard 23% as planned .
 The Aegean islands, Greece’s most prosperous region, will continue to enjoy lower rates of value-added tax than the rest of the country .
 The threshold at which income tax bites will be restored this year to €12,000 . The threshold is set to be restored to € 12,000, leaving around 3m low-income 63 64 Finance and economics .
 The privatisation programme, due to raise a total of €25 billion, has been halted . This year, the programme will raise €3 billion, including €3. billion this year .
 Mr Tsipras is pinning his hopes, optimistically, on a tax crackdown . To balance the books he is trying to balance his books.
Smuggling cigarettes and fuel costs the government around €15 billion a year . Smuggling cigarette and fuel cost the government €15billion a year.
 Panayotis Nikoloudis, a former anti-money-laundering tsar, says there are 3,500 cases of large-scale tax evasion amounting to €7 billion . The property market will eventually boom.
 It is even proving true in Europe, despite the continent’s sluggish economy . It is proving true, despite Europe's sluggish economy, according to experts .
 Europe saw €213 billion of commercial-property transactions last year, up by 13% from 20133 . The highest annual total since 2007, according to Real Capital Analytics .
 The number of transactions more than doubled in Spain last year . There were big gains in Switzerland and the Netherlands, too .
Austria, Ireland and Switzerland surpassed the top of the last cycle. Three European markets surpassed the transaction levels of 2007 .
 Europe’s rebound outpaced the 9% rise in global property transactions, although not a 15% increase in U.S. deals . Europe's rebound outpace the 9%.
 Investors are enthusiastic for bricks and mortar. It is hardly surprising that investors are enthusiastic.
 In both cash and government-bond markets, yields are zero or even negative . In both the cash and the government- bond markets.
 By comparison, yields of 5% on American property or even 4% on office blocks in central London look attractive .
Prime offices in Madrid are now changing hands at 4.5%, compared with around 8% at the bottom of the market . Prime offices in the best locations are now 4. 5% in Madrid, compared with 8% in Spain .
 Prime property yields in all Europe’s capitals are now at or below the level of 2007 .
 Long-term returns from property look very respectable, says property expert .
 In the ten years to end-September, American commercial property delivered a total annualised return of 7.9%, according to IPD . returns in both Canada and New Zealand could yield €2 billion in 2015 .
 Greece would still be €4 billion short if all this money was collected . But in the unlikely event that all the money were collected, Greece would be €3 billion short .
 Many governments’ plans do not add up, of course, and Mr Tsipras has already signalled a willingness to compromise . Many governments' plans are not expected to add up .
 Greece would keep ‘70%’ of previously agreed reforms . Those ditched would be replaced by ten new measures agreed with the OECD . The new measures would replace the despised “troika’s” of the EcB .
 That compares with the 81% annual return achieved by American equities over the same period and with the 6.8% Annual return achieved on long-term Treasury bonds . That compares to the 81%.
 The equivalent rates for British equities and long-term bonds were 8% and 6.8% respectively . The equivalent rate for British Equities and Long-term Bonds was 8% .
 On the first point, central banks are still cutting rates in much of the world . On the second point, the world's central banks still cut rates .
Central banks are likely to be cautious with inflation very low, central banks say . There is the possibility of rate rises in America and Britain over the next year .
 The world economy is not exactly racing, but forecasts predict growth of more than 1% in the euro area and Japan and more than 3% in America .
 The government would spend an extra €19 billion on “humanitarian assistance’ for struggling Greeks . The Greek government would also spend more than €20 billion on humanitarian assistance for the struggling Greeks.
 Despite the low interest rates the country is being charged, the loans are profitable . Most European governments can borrow at even lower rates .
Investors should be resilient to another downturn, according to experts . The 2008-09 recession was one of the worst years in the world .
 In terms of supply, it is easy to be misled by The Economist’s of-. fices of the flocks of cranes perched over London .
 Globally there is yet to be the kind of development spree that usually marks the peak of the property cycle. Globally, there is still not a lot to do with development spree .
 Commercial property's streak could last a good deal longer, say experts .
Corporate bonds have had a very good run. Lots of investors need income and the obvious alternative to property has had a good run .
 Investors have even been willing to accept a negative yield on bonds issued by Nestlé . Nestlé is a Swiss foods group .
Until the 1970s property was the asset of choice for long-term investors such as university endowments and pension funds . The property is now a popular asset for many investors .
 Government bonds have been replaced in recent decades by government bonds, which are much more liquid .
 If yields on bonds stay at Japan-like levels for a while, the allure of property will only increase . If yields stay at Japanese-like level, property prices will increase .
 If inflation returns, property will be a better hedge than conventional government bonds . Eventually, such logic will inflate a bubble, of course, says author .
 Residential property in London has already reached that point . London has a combination of low rates and international capital .
 The surge of interest in second-tier and more speculative commercial-property projects is only just beginning, at least in Europe .
 Greece's debts could generate savings worth 17% of GppP, according to Mr Darvas .
 Eurozone officials could also release €1. billion in profits from an earlier EcB bondbuying programme .
 Greece’s government will have to offer much more in return, and Mr Tsipras will have two constituencies in mind .
 Yanis Varoufakis and George Stathakis have voiced support for completing the sale of the state's 67% stake in Piraeus Port Authority .
 China’s Cosco, which already runs a profitable container terminal, is frontrunners among the shortlisted bidders . Denmark's Maersk, which runs the pipeline at the port, are frontrunners .
 Theodore Dritsas is shipping minister and has vowed to block the deal . He is one of the left’s stalwarts, but he is also the shipping minister .
 Panayotis Lafazanis has blocked two other deals aimed at bringing Greece fully in line with Eu energy directives . He heads a new ministry for “productive reconstruction’s, environment and energy.
 The other group Mr Tsipras will have to keep happy is an electorate buoyed by the government's feisty dealings with the rest of Europe .
Earlier this month Apollo Global Management announced that profits were down by 79% year on year in the three months to December 31st . Earlier this month the company announced that it had been down 79% on year.
 Energy-related assets, whose valuations have fallen with the oil price, are largely to blame . Energy- related assets, such as oil prices, have also fallen .
Private-equity funds have invested heavily in the energy sector . The shale boom in America has led to the investment .
 More money was raised for energy buy-outs in America in 2014, according to Preqin, a data provider . More deals were made, than ever before, says the data provider.
 Private-equity firms mainly invested in oilfield-services companies, which support the industry but do not own oil themselves .
 There is greater scope for the type of restructuring private-equity types, such as selling off lessprofitable units or firing people .
 The buy-out firms had also begun to invest in Finance and economics 65 oil companies themselves . But the oil price is a more straightforward bet on the price .
 Carlyle’s earnings were dragged down by its stake in SandRidge Energy . The company lost 58% of its value over the quarter and has just announced that it is mothballing most of its drilling rigs .
 Samson, an American producer partly owned by xx, has also fallen in value . Samson is a producer in the U.S.
Private-equity investors are now more interested in the sector than ever, says Antoon Schneider from Boston Consulting Group .
 Many see the situation now as akin to the collapse in property prices in 2008, when investors who had borrowed too much were forced to sell as prices plummeted .
 Some oilservices firms that cater to ongoing operations may have been hit unfairly hard and could well bounce back . Some oil services firms provide maintenance for offshore rigs .
 Companies that specialise in more expensive ways of getting oil out of the ground were already suffering from the problem of overcapacity before the price fell .
 The volume of high-yield debt in the energy sector is now three times what it was in 2008, according to Credit Suisse .
 Cheap oil is imperilling borrowers, such as American shale producers, who need cash to stay afloat until prices rebound .
Private-equity firms can name their terms when offering financing . Many banks are unwilling to lend and many companies desperate not to sell assets .
 Blackstone alone says it has $9 billion available for energy investments . Not to mention the energy-related debts it might buy through credit funds .
 Warburg Pincus, another private-equity firm, closed a $4 billion energy fund late last year . Warburg is a private- equity firm that has been in the process of closing its energy fund .
 All of which holds out a ray of hope for those private-equity funds that are sitting on devalued energy investments .
 GppP is typically measured by reference to the prices and structure of the economy in a base year . Gpp P is usually measured byreference to the price of the country's economy .
 Over time this snapshot becomes less relevant, and the Gop figures are less accurate, so the base year is updated every few years . Over time, this snapshot is less relevant.
 Narendra Modi's victory in national elections last May owed much to general dismay about a floundering economy . Narendra Modi’s victory in the election last May.
 A real growth rate of 7.5% looks a little too lively given sluggish car sales, feeble demand for credit, and soggy revenue growth .
 The recent sharp fall in inflation explains some of the discrepancy in inflation . But the recent sharp drop in inflation is not all the reason for the sharp fall .
 Firms’ top-line growth has slowed in part because prices are not rising as quickly as fast as they are .
 The cso reckons GppP will grow by 7.4% in 2014-15 in real terms, half a percentage point faster than in previous year .
 Falling inflation makes it look like economic activity is growing more slowly than it is . In other words, falling inflation makes economic activity look more slowly .
 Prospects for India’s economy are brighter than for other emerging markets .
 Lower commodity prices have hurt raw-material exporters such as Brazil, Russia and South Africa . India imports 80% of the oil it consumes and much else .
 The introduction of new coins triggers a debate about what currency to use S INFLATION . Zimbabweans abandoned the Zim dollar in favour of the American one in 2008-09 .
 Shopkeepers with no access to American coins have had to hand out pens, sweets and chewing gum instead of change . Since then, shopkeepers have been handing out pens and sweets .
 The central bank began issuing “bond coins’s” in American cents, to be used only in Zimbabwe . Just over a month ago, the central bank started issuing ‘bond Coins’ in Zimbabwe.
 That has triggered a debate about whether the country needs its own currency again . That has sparked a debate on whether the U.S. needs to use its own currencies again .
 Inflation stopped dead, boosting growth and bringing about a general expectation of macroeconomic stability . Inflation has stopped.
 Once normal commerce resumed, importers enjoyed reduced transaction costs and foreign investors did not need to worry about exchangerate volatility .
 The economy is on the skids again, thanks largely to mismanagement, and this time the lack of a local currency is exacerbating its ailments . The lack of local currency has worsened the economy's woes .
 Meltdown is held off by remittances of up to $500m a year from Zimbabwe’s diaspora . Government deficits and foreign aid are also holding off .
 The U.S. government bans all business dealings with certain Zimbabwean officials and companies . It pays a quarter of the country’s health-care costs .
 The government’s indigenisation policy, under which foreign-owned assets are partially expropriated, has scared off investors . The government's indigenization policy has scared investors .
Only sophisticated foreign firms with billions to spend on pits and drills can get at the stuff below . Only sophisticated foreign companies with billions of dollars can spend on pit and drills .
 Zimbabwe has adopted U.S. monetary policy along with the dollar . Zimbabwe also adopted American monetary policy .
 The Federal Reserve’s talk of higher rates is the opposite of what its economy needs . The Fed's talk of a higher rate is the same as what the economy needs.
 Zimbabweans have not forgotten the misery of life with the Zim dollar, when shops were empty and petrol was rationed . Zimbabweans are still living in the country.
Without public trust, no government can imbue paper with value. They have little reason to believe officials would manage the currency better in future .
 Stockbroking was seen as a dubious business, devoted less to working with the customer than to working the customer .
 Morgan Stanley's expanded stockbroking operation has put paid to such sceptical assumptions . After a wobbly start, Morgan Stanley’s expanded stock Brokerage operation has been put on hold .
 James Gorman has emerged from the crisis with an enhanced reputation . Gorman is the chief executive of the bank's chief executive . He has been in charge of the company since 2007 .
 Wealth-management units, as stockbroking arms have been rebranded, are boosting returns at other American banks, too .
 Merrill Lynch is now earning pre-tax margins of 25% as a division of Bank of America . Merrill Lynch collapsed during the crisis thanks to an ill-timed foray into proprietary trading .
 By 2013 big American wealth managers had more than recovered from the pronounced shrinkage of assets during the crisis, Aite Group says .
 Their profitability has also been bolstered by a shift from charging for individual transactions to levying an annual fee of 1-2% on all the assets they manage .
 The award is designed to provide work experience for a promising journalist or would-be journalist . The winner will spend three to six months at The Economist writing about economics.
 applications should be sent to deaneinternny@economist.com by March 6th . Applications should be submitted by March 7th .
 Japan appears as another rich country in which wealth is becoming ever more concentrated . The problem is not the super-rich N THOMAS PIKETTY’s bestseller, ‘Capital in the Twenty-First Century’
 The bursting of Japan’s asset bubble in 1991 is one reason why the rich have amassed less than in America or many European countries .
 The share of wealth held by the richest tenth of Japanese is lower than in famously egalitarian spots such as Norway and Sweden .
 The second-lowest of the 46 economies surveyed by Credit Suisse Research Institute, above only Belgium . In fact, it is the second lowest-ranked economy in the world .
 The share of income going to the wealthiest has been fairly stable too . The share has been stable too, according to the report .
 The share of national income taken by the top 1% in Japan fell from a high of 9.5% in 2008 to 9% in 2012 .
 The most important is not between the mega-rich and the rest, as ‘Capital’ would have it, but between a privileged cadre of workers on permanent contracts and those with more tors are better off with index funds .
 In practice, many individuals follow the pack, and so sell when they should buy and buy when they need to sell . But many people still sell when to buy and when to sell.
 Wealth managers draw up an investment plan with clients and then stick to it . Wealth managers, in contrast, draw up plans with clients.
 The benefits may come more from avoiding panicked shifts in strategy than from any special skill, according to experts .
 Study on behalf of Merrill by Dalbar, a research firm, concluded that returns to individuals who invest on their own trail those who hire financial advisers by three percentage points a year .
 Merrill was stunned to find its market valuation had been surpassed by Charles Schwab, a discount broker . That helps explain a dramatic reversal since 1999 .
 Schwab and others like it are trying to become more like precarious jobs, including Vanguard and Fidelity . Schwab, Fidelity and other companies like it, including Fidelity, are becoming more precarious jobs .
 The average annual salary for permanent employees is around ¥5m, compared with ¥2m for less secure workers . The average yearly salary for Permanent workers is around $5m .
 Many argue that what Japan really needs is alot more inequality, but of a different kind . Many argue what Japan needs is more inequality.
 Robert Feldman of Morgan Stanley argues that if people were paid for what they accomplish, the economy would grow faster . He says people would be paid to do what they do .
 Japan’s chronically low levels of business creation mean that there is worryingly little wealth inequality of the sort created by entrepreneurs .
 ‘Capital’ has sold over 130,000 copies so far in Japan . None of that has stopped “Capital” selling more than a million copies .
 Mr Piketty has tapped into growing doubts about Abenomics, the economicrevival plan of Shinzo Abe .
 Mr Piketty warned that inflating asset prices could increase the gap between haves and have nots .
 Abe's main economic concern at the moment is bullying big companies into lifting workers’ pay .
 Fidelity announced the acquisition of eMoney earlier this month . EMoney provides wealth-planning products to small advisory firms who use them to bring in and retain clients .
 Anyone who has recently visited a British supermarket will be familiar with such seemingly generous deals . The deals typically extended to shoppers after they pay .
 The four biggest British supermarket chains all offer some form of price-match guarantee . They promise that their customers could not save any money by shopping elsewhere .
 Economists have long been suspicious of such promises, which can leave consumers worse off . But they have been skeptical of promises that can leave them worse off.
 The problem is that price-match guarantees can blunt the logic of competition . Price-match guarantee is a problem that can blunt competition's logic, says the author .
 A car dealership worries about a rival undercutting its prices and stealing customers .
 Even if the dealership can respond by cutting its prices too, it might lose sales in the interim . The dealership could also lose sales.
 As a result, cutting prices no longer wins the competitor new business . Buyers stay loyal and invoke the guarantee instead of switching .
 All that price cuts achieve for the competitor is the erosion of profits on existing sales. All that Price cuts achieve is the loss of profits.
 It will probably conclude that prices and margins are better left high . It will likely conclude that price prices are higher than margins .
 Consumers end up suffering due to a guarantee that at first glance seems good for them . Consumers suffer due to the lack of a guarantee.
 There is no evidence that Britain’s current crop of price-match guarantees has hurt consumers .
 Even when one player had much lower costs than the other, prices still rose . Prices still rose by less than one player, even when one had lower costs .
 Most relate only to another store’s advertised prices, not to the sum that it would actually charge after applying its own price-matching offers . Most relate to the advertised prices.
An incumbent supermarket charges £4 for a steak and offers a price-match guarantee . Suppose an incumbent supermarket charge £4.
 The savvy entrant could advertise a higher price of £5, while promising not just to match any lower price, but to refund twice .
 The advertised price of £5 would not trigger the incumbent’s own price-matching guarantee . Yet the advertised price would not triggers the incumbent's own own guarantee .
 Customers may still be tempted to switch by price cuts structured in this way . Customers might still be tempt to switch.
 There are other reasons why guarantees might be harmless, or even welcome . That may be too clever by half.
 refunds usually come in the form of a discount on the next shop . To take advantage, a customer must return with the voucher .
 Anyone with a stack of unused gift vouchers knows. Remembering to do so takes effort, as anyone with an unused gift voucher knows .
 Customers may value the straightforward price cut more highly, since taking advantage of it is less of a hassle . Any discounts it offers will be matched by the first supermarket in the form of vouchers .
 If enough customers think this way, the result would be a genuine price war . Some might find switching stores more of a chore than remembering to bring their vouchers with them .
 A firm can sell to customers at a high price while using a guarantee to attract more price-sensitive, hassle-tolerating customers . For instance, if some customers are too busy to shop around, a firm could sell to them ata high price .
 A price-guarantee may be an attempt to signal genuinely lower prices and thus stand out from the crowd . Finally, a price-Guarantee might be a attempt to sign up to lower prices .
 This works only if there is a genuine difference in efficiency between rival stores, such that only one can afford to sell on the cheap . This works if there's a genuine differences in efficiency.
 The nimble firm might want a price war in order to speed the lumbering one’s demise .
 Any attempt by the lumbering firm to collude tacitly is futile. If it offers a guarantee, its bluff will be called, if it offers it .
 Low-cost firms make such promises, consumers can take them as a sign of a competitive offering .
 There are more expensive supermarkets that are promising to match each other’s prices .
 Only one has pledged to match the deals on offer at Aldi and Lidl . Nimble low-cost rivals are making inroads into the market .
 Those on board expected creatures to be sparse in number and entering hibernation . Those expected to be less on board than expected.
 planktonic animals such as copepods and krill were abundant, active and grazing on the still smaller algae of the phytoplankton, themselves adapted to manage with the tiniest sliver of winter light .
 Larvae were turning into adults and a few species were even reproducing . Larvae are turning into adult species .
 This revelation of life in the middle of the polar night is one of many surprises of recent Arctic science .
 The world's northernmost habitat is changing people's understanding of the world’s northern most habitat . People are changing their knowledge of the northernmost habitats .
 The Arctic, sparsely populated and rarely visited by outsiders, is easily forgotten by those at lower latitudes . The Arctic is often overlooked by outsiders .
 A1°C rise in temperatures at the equator will have effects, but does not change much . A 1°C increase in temperatures will have effect, but not much .
 Between 1996 and 2014, the rate rose to148,000km?, even though the past two seasons have seen an increase in summer ice compared with the low point in 2012 . The rate has risen to 148,000 km? between 1996 and2014 .
 This accelerating rate involves two feedback loops, one well-known, the other less so . This is one of the fastest-growing loops in the world .
 Ice reflects sunlight but water, which is darker, absorbs it . The ice reflects sunlight, but water absorbs it.
 Some would melt in summer and freeze again in winter, but most would remain throughout the year . Some would freeze in winter and melt again in summer, but some would remain in winter .
Millions of square kilometres melt away in summer and refreeze in winter . Now, millions of square kilometers melt away. Now, thousands of square km of land are melting away .
 Multiyear ice is eroded by the wind and pounded from below by ocean currents, so its surface is pitted and ridged . The surface of the ice is pitted, ridged.
 When multi-year ice thaws, the meltwater gathers on its surface, forming ponds between the ridges .
 A fair amount of ice remains uncovered, and continues to reflect sunlight . That means a fair amount remains, and the ice reflects sunlight .
 Meltwater from first-year ice, though, spreads right across the smooth surface, reducing reflectivity far more . It also reduces reflectivity much more .
 Carbon compounds produced by this photosynthesis are known, but they are rising .
In 1982 a column of Arctic seawater with a cross-sectional area of a square metre fixed 26 milligrams of carbon a day . In the summer of 1982, the column was fixed 26milligrams a day.
With rising primary production, you might expect the rest of the ecosystem to be flourishing, too . With risingPrimary production, and thus more food available, more food is available .
 There has been a substantial increase in the number of cod, especially of sexually ac69 > tive cod, more than seven years old . There has, for example, been an increase in cod.
 These fish are now found much closer to the pole than they used to be, at 79° or 80° north . The fish are also now found far closer than they were before .
 Unlike some other seals, harbour seals do not depend on ice to give birth or to moult . So the ice’s retreat is less bothersome to them.
 As a predominantly temperate species, they benefit when waters warm up . They benefit when water warm up, they say .
 Other species, though, are being squeezed by competition from these newcomers and by changing conditions in general .
 In the waters where cod thrive, minke whales and harp seals are struggling, at least to judge by the condition of their blubber .
Study by Bjarte Bogstad of Norway’s Institute of Marine Research found blubber of both species had declined from being more than 4omm thick in the early 1990s to less than 35mm now .
 The whales may be suffering because the Arctic zooplankton on which they feed are being replaced by more temperate species that are harder to catch or less nuttritious . The whales are also suffering because they are more difficult to catch .
 Garry Stenson of Fisheries and Oceans Canada says number of harp-seal miscarriages has risen greatly in response . He reckons that the number of miscarriages is rising in response.
 Harp seals exemplify the difficulty of adapting to changing conditions . Harp seal seals are often unable to adapt to change conditions in the wild .
 The obvious response for an ice-dependent animal such as a harp seal would be to follow the retreating ice northward from its breeding grounds near Newfoundland .
Dr Stenson says harp seals will swim north, but only if there is no ice in March, as happened in 2010 . Dr Stenson: "There will be no ice" in March.
 In 20 March ice and they stayed put, only to be almost wiped out when the ice melted later in the summer . In 20 there was a little March ice. In 20 April ice and it was nearly wiped out .
 This sort of thing, of course, is all part of the cut and thrust of ecology. This kind of thing is part of a cut and Thrust of ecology .
 The Arctic’s biological awakening may suddenly be capped, says Arctic expert .
 The Deep Space Climate Observatory should have got off the launch pad and into orbit on February 11th .
Jon Lawrence of Britain’s National Oceanography Centre has looked at what might happen to nutrient availability and productivity in an ice-free Arctic .
 He concluded that as ice melted, primary production would rise by only 1%, not 300%, as a linear extrapolation would suggest . He concluded, as the ice melted.
In the Arctic, the lost surface nitrates do not seem to be being replenished . Perhaps because of a lack of the upwelling currents found elsewhere, the nitrates are not replenished.
 Mr Lawrence calculates that almost all the extra productivity the Arctic is likely to see will thus take place at least 20 metres below the surface .
 Arctic's creatures may not flourish in the extra sunlight. Another reason the Arctic’s creatures have evolved to take advantage of a short summer .
 This season is so compressed that the timing of plant growth, animal births and feeding cycles has to be closely synchronised . This season has been so compressed this season that it is too much time for plants to grow .
Since copepods are food for predators, the ecosystem as a whole will suffer . Since copepod is food for predator, the ecosystems will suffer.
 Two recent studies built computer models to describe the impact of changing environmental conditions on food webs .
 These looked at how many species are in the web, how many links there are between these species (ie, who eats whom) and where they live .
 Both models suggested that the condition of some Arctic food webs is coming under strain . Both models suggest that some food webs are under strain.
For example, copepods whose internal clocks better matched changed conditions would spread rapidly . For example,Copepods' internal clocks would better match conditions .
Because the poles are cold, warm air flows from the equator north and south in order to equalise temperatures . The poles are warm, warm and cold, so the poles can be equalised .
 The Earth’s rotation disturbs these air currents, creating the jet stream, which flows around the planetina . North-west Europe hotter than other places at the same latitude .
 If the temperature gap between the north pole and the equator narrows, then the poleward flow of air might falter . If the Arctic is warming faster, the air flow may falter, according to scientists .
 A huge build-up of dry, freezing air is known to affect much of the northern hemisphere’s weather . There seems to be a link between sea ice in parts of the Arctic and lower temperatures in Siberia .
As the jet stream weakens, its waves become exaggerated, creating pockets of air connected with extreme weather events, such as the exceptional cold that hit the American Midwest in January 2014 .
 The links between these weather patterns and the warmer Arctic are unproven . The links are not clear.
 Variation is so great, they argue, that if there is some sort of signal from the melting Arctic, it is being lost in the noise .
 For the same reason, it is too early to write off the signal altogether, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Whether the Arctic Ocean’s awakening is for good, or ill, or both, it is unstoppable .
It is cheap, requires no power or skill to use and yields instant results . It is cheap and requires no skill or power to use .
 In the rough-and-tumble of the sea rather than on the bench, that equipment needs to be robust .
Natural selection ee eval evolution happens by random mutation and selection . Such marine measurements are important in order to track the acidification of the ocean .
Technology is the result of conscious design, the mutation part of the process may be deliberate rather than random . But since technology is a result of design, it might reasonably be assumed to be deliberate .
 A study just published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society suggests that this is not always the case .
 Nicholas Makris and colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have been looking at the evolution of the violin . They have been working with Roman Barnas, a violin-maker at the North Bennet Street School, in Boston .
 The holes in a violin’s body amplify the emerging sound of the violin's sound . A violin's shape has been changing over the years .
 ‘fitheles’ is a word derived from vitula, the Latin for heifer, the source of the gut for the strings . They were called “fithele’s’.
 The instrument arrived at its modern form between the 16th and the 18th centuries . It was produced in Cremona, a city in northern Italy that produced the Amati, Guarneri and Stradivari dynasties .
 The answer, arrived at after several pages of advanced mathematics, is that holes’ sound-amplification properties depend not on their areas but on the lengths of about by rising carbon-dioxide levels in the air .
 The xPRIZE foundation has put up $2m in prize money to be awarded to those inventors who can come up with devices which will do that tracking best . The charity is a charity that runs technology competitions .
 On February 9th, in Seattle Aquarium, the competitors started going mano amano . The competition started in Seattle, Washington .
 At the industrial era's dawn in the mid-8th century, the ocean’s surface waters had a pH of 8.2.2 . The pH of the ocean's surface waters was 8.3 .
 They showed how the shape of the hole varied over the centuries, and how that affected its power output . The hole's shape and power output were shown by the scientists .
 The final Cremonese design had twice the sonic power of the circular holes of the fithele .
 Dr Makris doubts “design’s is precisely the right word for what happened .
 The market, presumably, favoured those journeymen withina | workshop who made more powerful instruments .
 When they became masters, they then passed their ways of doing things on to their own apprentices . When they become masters, their apprentices passed their skills on to them .
 Only at the end of the period might a deliberate change have been made, as the holes get suddenly longer .
 Intriguingly, intentional attempts in the 19th century to fiddle further with the f-holes’ designs actually served to make things worse, and did not endure .
Living organisms have absorbed about a third of the carbon dioxide emitted by fossil fuels . mutation and selection seem to have arrived at an optimal result .
 The pH scale is logarithmic, which means a 25% increase in acidity . That has reduced average surface pH to 8.1, a fall that may sound trivial but, because of the scale, is not trivial .
 Many sea-creatures, though, make their shells and skeletons out of calcium carbonate or calcium phosphate . The material is materials that dissolve in acids .
 Preliminary studies suggest that some of these animals are already finding it harder to survive than they used to . Some of the animals have been found to be more difficult to survive.
 If acidification gets worse, everything from tropical coral reefs to temperate-water mussel farms may be affected . If that is true, the problem of acidification will get worse .
 This will in turn have an impact, albeit indirectly, on organisms further up the food chain . This will be in turn impact, but will also have an effect, even though it will have a negative effect .
 The machines used to measure seawater’s pH cost $10,00020,000 each . They cannot be deployed at depth because the pressure there will damage them .
 The Wendy Schmidt Ocean Health xpriZE hopes to correct both flaws . The contest will be held on September 26, 2015 .
 Half the prize money is for low-cost contenders, aimed at the likes of oyster farmers and government officials who cannot measure seawater's acidity .
 The other half is for highperformance scientific meters able to monitor the deep ocean for months at a time .
 Smartphin is the first category in the first class of the pH-pupil category . The first category will be the first in the category of pH-phin .
 The brainchild of an engineer called Benjamin Thompson, this is designed to replace the stabilising fin under a surfboard . This is the first time this has been designed by the engineer .
 Sensors within the fin record the water’s temperature, salinity and acidity, and then broadcast those data to base via the mobile-phone network . The data is recorded from global-positioning satellites .
 Dr Chen thinks his device might be commercialised for as little as $1,000 . Dr Chen's device could be used in a commercialised version of the device .
To cut costs as much as possible it employs standard p-cell batteries and cheap memory cards to record data . To cut costs, the company uses standard batteries and memory cards .
 Another entrant is, to all intents and purposes, a 21st-century reboot of the litmus test .
 Between now and March 7th these devices will measure the pH of water pumped from Puget Sound . The devices are among 17 entrants to the contest .
 Up to five finalists that survive the ordeal will be tested on a cruise this summer . They can measure acidity to within 0.02 pH units, and will then be tested in a cruise .
 Only two firms make seawater pH meters at the moment . Paul Bunje, who runs the competition, says only two companies make pH meters .
Once the prizes have been awarded, they can expect alittle competition themselves . Once the prizes are awarded, the prizes can expect a little competition .
 For many, the very word will conjure an image of Princess Leia from “Star Wars’s’ Star Wars . The very word is “Princess Leia” or the holodeck of the starship Enterprise .
 Every approach tried so far represents a trade-off between the quality of the image, its size and the cost of the kit that produces it . Making the first two acceptable means the third is exorbitant .
 The gizmo is designed to project screen-sized moving holograms . It is not much more than the cost of a high-end television set .
 Holography works by squashing all the three-dimensional information in a scene into a structure called an optical grating .
 When this grating is illuminated, light bounces off its bumps and troughs in such a way that the reflection reconstructs the original scene .
 An unchanging grating grating yields a static hologram, such as is found on a bank card .
Gadget-makers and military types would dearly like to use similar trickery to create holo-videos . But gadget-makers would love to use the trickery by continuously varying the grating.
 Dr Smalley’s team have just reported in the Review of Scientific Instruments . The latest iteration of this article is the latest iteration.
 Dr Smalley was a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . His story began when he was just a student .
 In 2013 he published the design of a chip that costs roughly $10 to produce . The chip is capable of making a small, simple hologram .
 The chip is a crystal of lithium niobate that has a light-carrying channel called a waveguide carved into it .
 Lithium niobate is piezoelectric-meaning that when a voltage is applied to it, it contracts or expands, becoming more or less dense as it does .
 If voltage varies, this makes moving patterns of moreand less-dense material . If the voltage varies. This makes moving pattern of more and less-Dense material more and more.
 Changing the frequency with which the voltage varies changes the pattern of the voltage . Changing the voltage with which a voltage varies the pattern changes the frequency .
 Since light takes different paths in material of different densities, such patterns can form optical gratings that change sufficiently fast to create moving holograms . Such patterns can be used to create holograms.
 As light passes through such a grating it is diffracted into a horizontal fan, forming a holographic line . The line is equivalent to one line of a television display .
 This can then be run through a scanner that splits it up into multiple lines, one above another, generating a picture . If desired, if desired, the scanner can then create a picture. This can be used to generate a picture of the scanner .
 Dr Smalley was able to use red, green and blue light simultaneously to create a coloured, holographic image .
 This single-waveguide image can be seen only by looking straight along the waveguide’s axis .
 The next task is to scale the design up by linking many crystals together, to create an image both bigger than a single crystal’s display .
 Dr Smalley's latest paper is about controlling precisely where the optical output of a waveguide goes . That means controlling the output of the waveguide.
 To align the outputs of many devices, the team needed to know in exquisite detail how the colour and angle of light coming out of each one of them change as the voltage frequency is altered .
Dr Smalley and his collaborators have discovered the crucial voltage frequencies that diffract different colours independently of one another but at angles which overlap nicely .
 multicoloured images will be created from numerous waveguides in a way that resembles Monet rather than Jackson Pollock . This will allow multicolour images to be created in a manner like Monet .
 In principle, such a display should be able to produce room-sized holograms . Such a display could be able of producing room-size holograms.
 The domestic response to Andrei Zvyagintsev’s film, ‘Leviathan’, says alot about today's Russia, and especially about the church O THOSE in the know . There are two Russian trailers for “Lev
 The official version nods at the praise that has already been showered on the film at the Cannes film festival and the Golden Globes . The film is also nominated for an Academy Award .
 A “film made for the Western elites,” preaches Father Vsevolod Chaplin .
 It has been denigrated as heresy and slander by supporters of the state and the church . It has also been praised by liberals who recognise its truths .
 The main character, Nikolai, is a soulful car mechanic who lives in a wooden house by the Barents Sea with his frustrated wife and a depressed teenage son .
 The mayor is represented by a drunken and corrupt mayor who is closely advised by an Orthodox priest . His house and land are being taken from him by the state .
 Nikolai's friend, a lawyer, travels from Moscow to help him fight the mayor . Nikolai’s friend is a lawyer from Moscow .
In the end, Nikolai loses his wife, his freedom and his house, which is bulldozed to make space for a new church . The mayor and the priest preaches about patriotism and love for the Russian state .
 One can almost feel the sweaty mayor’s breath, with its reek of vodka and onion .
 Boats are shown rusting in the sea; a giant whale’s skeleton rots on the beach .
 Eliot Lawrence before Arabia 76 Love songs, a history 76 Racism and the theatre . Eliot 75 Lawrence is a priest a kGB general . Eliot Lawrence is the author of the book "Culture of Culture and the priest akGB general"
 It would have been an anti-Soviet picture; today it is an anticlerical one . Today, it is a anticleric one .
 The Soviet Union may have gone, but the reverence for the state remains . The state is almost sacred in Russia .
 The role played by communist ideology has been largely replaced by that of the Orthodox church . The Orthodox church has turned into something of amonster, like the state itself .
 This metamorphosis of religion into ideology is one of the most striking themes of ‘Leviathan’ and of contemporary Russian life .
 The Bolsheviks destroyed churches and shot priests, but they also adopted Orthodox Christianity . They also adopted its imagery and language to sanctify their rule .
 Josef Stalin appealed to the nation when the Nazis invaded the Soviet Union using the biblical “brothers and sisters” and enlisted the church as an ally .
 The Committee for State Security has adopted the role of guardian of the state . Like the ke¢B, the church has adopted a role of guardians .
 religion has become an ideology, used by the godless state to justify both its sacred status and its right to break its own laws .
 All the mayor needs to do, he says, is to show authority and force, crushing an individual like Nikolai . Nikolai says he needs to show power and force.
 A few days before the film was released in Russia, Kirill, the patriarch of the Orthodox church, took to the floor of the Duma .
 He praised the Soviet era for breeding “solidarity’ in people . He lashed out at the depravity of the West .
 Neither Western free73 > doms nor laws, he argued, can bring good by themselves without the fundamental values generated by the state .
 Kirill was one of the first to call for Pussy Riot to be punished three years ago . The punk band staged an anticlerical performance in a Moscow cathedral, referred to in the film .
 The former mayor of Moscow, Yury Luzhkov, gave a flat to Kirill in the House on the Embankment . It was originally built for the Bolshevik leaders .
 Thomas Hobbes could barely imagine what a monster church and state have become . Hobbes himself could hardly imagine what he would have become.
 One Russian liberal essayist wrote that “Leviathan’s depicts a people who have fallen from God .
 QE is a debasement of the currency leading to hyperinflation and economic ruin . To some on the Republican right in America, this evolution is a rake’s progress .
 They want a return to the gold standard, whereby the amount of money would be linked to a country’s gold reserves .
 Christine Desan, a Harvard law professor, challenges the view of money's history as a fall from grace .
 She is part of the “cartalist’s school which argues that money did not develop spontaneously from below, but was imposed from above by the state or ruler .
 A sovereign might offer tokens as payments for goods and services, and agree to accept those tokens back to meet taxes or debts . A sovereign may also offer tokens to pay taxes and debts .
 In effect a guarantee from the state, this made such tokens useful for private trade . In effect, this makes such tokens use for private trading .
 governments were able to charge for the service of turning gold and silver bullion into coin . Government was able to turn gold into coin.
 The standard medieval complaint was that there was not enough money to go round . Despite this incentive for the creation of money, the standard medieval complaints were not met .
 Modern economists tend to think of money as a real, not a nominal, issue . Expanding the money supply may raise prices but not affect the volume of goods and services being traded .
 Coin shortages encouraged the use of money from abroad, the author argues .
 The coinage was debased by the practice of “clipping’ of coins, or shaving off the edges to save the silver . In addition, the coinage of the medieval practice was also debased .
 All this led to the frequent need to reclassify or redenominate the coinage . The coinage has been reclassified or redened in recent years .
 Sometimes it was the monarchs who were pulling off this trick as a way of boosting their own finances . Sometimes it's a way to boost their own money.
 Every change prompted howls of complaint from losing parties .
 This attitude underwent a reversal after the Glorious Revolution, which brought William III to power in 1689 . Whig financiers set up the Bank of England .
 The king’s creditors naturally had an interest in sound money . Britain adopted the gold standard, which was to last in peacetime at least for much of the next two centuries .
 Over the long run, prices were remarkably stable during this period . Over the short run, the discipline required by this standard required some short, sharp slumps .
 The advent of universal suffrage after the first world war made it impossible for democratically elected governments to impose such costs on voters . commodity money disappeared and “fiat money (ie, money that is what the government declares it to be) becam the norm .
Jonathan Cape; £25 HEN Thomas Stearns Eliot died in 1965 . Few other poets could claim to match his achievement .
Since Eliot's death, little has been known of the life that led up to his creation .
 Valerie Eliot refused to authorise any biographies . The poet's reputation became tarnished with accusations of anti-Semitism .
 Some 50 years on, a new biography sheds light on a tricky, brilliant writer .
 Mr Crawford charts the creation of one of the finest pieces of literature in the 20th century . In doing so Mr Crawford charted the creation in a book published in the 1920s .
 Few previous biographies have been able to delve into Eliot’s early years of his life .
 Mr Crawford’s book, by contrast, is rich with detail .
 Aged ten, Eliot astounded his family by reading John Milton, a complex 17th-century poet . Aged 10, Eliot read John Milton.
 During his time at Harvard, he spent time writing bawdy ballads with his drinking companions . He was introduced to modern French poetry which would profoundly change his writing style .
 ‘The Waste Land’ reverberates with the sound of other poems and differing languages .
 Eliot’s unhappy personal life, as much as his literary background, inspired his great poem . But it was Eliot's unhappy life, which inspired the poem .
 She flirts with old flames and with Bertrand Russell, the philosopher, with whom she would have an affair . She would also have a affair with Russell .
 Londoners live in seedy neighbourhoods and countryside, where they rent a cottage with Russell . They move between London and the countryside .
 Both suffer breakdowns; these nervous attacks and bitter sexual recriminations underpin Eliot’s poem .
 The poet and his wife separated in 1933 and Vivien entered an asylum five years later . Vivien and the poet were married and had a daughter together .
 She was an early reader of “The Waste Land’s” The Waste Land . She was also instrumental in encouraging Eliot to write poetry .
 Ned Lawrence knew that his family was different, in some unspoken way, from other families, and that he was not at all like his four brothers .
 Tough beginnings can either inhibit a personality or stimulate its growth . Such tough beginnings can also inhibit the personality of a person .
 Lawrence”, a quirky but rigorous biographical study by Anthony Sattin, a British travel-writer, fell firmly in the second category . The man best known as Lawrence of Arabia is best known for his work in Arabia .
 Lawrence was a hero of the first world war who rallied the Arabs to rise against the Ottoman empire . He lobbied for the Arab cause, with disappointing results, in post-war negotiations .
 Lawrence’s life is less shrouded by fantasy and legend, the author suggests . The early part of Lawrence's life should be slightly more accessible .
 He was secretive as well as inquisitive, sceptical of received truths . He was also passionate about medieval history, cathedrals and brass rubbings .
 During his teenage years, he would hang about building sites in his home city and gather fragments of pots and jugs . He reconstituted and delivered to grateful museum curators .
 He knew there was something odd about his parents’ relationship but could not divine what . Only later did he learn that, scandalously for those times, they had never married .
 His father was an Anglo-Irish baronet who had left his legal wife for Lawrence’s mother, a governess who was herself born out of wedlock .
With her, Ned had an intense but strained relationship with her, she wanted to know more about him than he would tell . With her, he had a strained relationship .
 His letters from teenage cycling trips round France contained lots of information about castles . But only intermittent signs of real feelings .
 The same might be said of the letters he wrote to many recipients, from the Levant .
 The pale-skinned lad known ironically as ‘Dahoum’ was a local boy who carried water to Lawrence’s excavating team at Carchemish, Turkey .
 In 1919, Lawrence said he had “liked a particular Arab very much’s death from typhus . He had only just learned of Dahoum's death two years earlier .
 Mr Sattin avoids adding to the speculation about the exact nature of this friendship .
 Lawrence recalled the relationship as one in which there was such mutual understanding that the pair could spend hours together in silence .
 Lawrence's memoirs may have been in the memoirs he burned in August 1914 . If Lawrence ever wrote a fuller account of his friendship with Dahoum, it may be in his memoirs .
Biographers such as Mr Sattin have to be diggers and restorers, sifting a mass of evidence and gluing it together .
 They have survived repression, expanded human freedom and proved uniquely hospitable to the voices of the marginalised . They have also survived repression and expanded human rights .
 Robert Palmer's definition of love includes bizarre Sumerian fertility rites . The dreary, repetitive artlessness of Robert Palmer is a capacious definition.
 Mr Gioia proves as gifted at noticing cross-cultural similarities as he does at unearthing trivia .
Both Provencal troubadours and contemporary rock and roll owe tremendous debts to African and Middle Eastern influences . Both Proven Cal troubadour and contemporary Rock and Roll owe huge debts to Africa .
 Sentiments of courtly love emerged in songs in Georgia and Provence at roughly the same time .
 Songs in late-medieval Europe and regions today known as Bihar and West Bengal struggled with similar questions of how to balance spiritual and carnal love .
 Darwinian view of love songs is that they are an evolutionary necessity, says Mr Gioia . He says they fulfill a role similar in nature and intent to bird songs .
 In 1667 it canonised a pope who had previously written libretti for opera . The church thundered against ‘lewd and sensuous songs’ but this objection weakened and eventually faded .
 To appease Human Resources and dodge “those superficial laws about harassment, he asks Ileen studiously to document Jaclyn’s missteps, she asks .
 Jaclyn's prickly demeanour disrupts the ‘teamwork atmosphere’ he wants for his office . Jaclyn’s prickly demeanour disrupts the ‘ teamwork atmosphere.’
With a proper paper trail of her mistakes, he can send Jaclyn packing without fear of a lawsuit . He can send her packing without a lawsuit.
 Set in a generic doctor's office with drab linoleum flooring, this play turns latent prejudice into something palpable and uncomfortable .
 Jaclyn, performed with stage-dominating charisma by It's for you-hoo notes, play a prominent though rarely positive role in folk songs around the world .
 Allan Bloom, a conservative American philosopher and polemicist, grumbled that “rock has the beat of sexual intercourse’ The charge was levelled against the tango in the early 20th century, the waltz in the 19th and the sarabande in the
Like many critics today, Tonya Pinkins is gripped by a regrettable need to say TonyaPinkins is black . Like many critics, he's gripped by the regrettable needs to say he is black.
 She is hard-working, but also, indeed, a bit snappish and sometimes rude to patients . She's a hard- working, but she's also a bitsnappish.
 Race, that detail that people like to pretend isn’t important, suddenly becomes inescapably central . The detail that we pretend isn't important is inescapable .
 Racism, plainly, is something that white people want to believe is behind them, but black people know it pervades their days .
 Two high-profile cases in which white police officers killed unarmed black men and were not seriously punished . The incidents have forced Americans to confront a darkandpernicioustruth about the country's racial inequities .
 The notion that a few decades of civil-rights laws and a bit of affirmative action have been exposed as hubris has been exposed .
 "Rasheeda Speaking" is part of a wider conversation that Americans are finally having nowis also a distorted view of things. But the idea that “Ras heeda Speaking’s” is partof a wider discussion of things .
 There are plenty of opportunities to laugh, though some of the chuckles rise up from a grim place .
 Such a compulsion rarely produces observations of value, and Mr Gioia’s are no exception .
 Bloom is worried that modern love songs feature “sexual elements...so heightened and the romantic trappings so noticeably absent” that they recall Mesopotamian fertility rites .
 EDHEC-Risk Institute has been offering a unique PhD in Finance programme to elite practitioners . It aims to redefine the investment banking and asset management industries .
 EDHEC-Risk Institute PhD in Finance creates an extraordinary platform for professional development and industry innovation .
 practitioners on the programme's executive track learn to leverage their expertise and insights to make original contributions at the frontiers of financial knowledge and practices .
 EDHEC-Risk Institute PhD in Finance is the ultimate degree for finance executives . The Institute is based in London, England, and is based at the University of London .
 Come to Wharton to develop the instincts and mindset you need to broaden your leadership perspective and strengthen your skill set .
 The executive education program taps into the minds who taught Silicon Valley's most successful innovators .
Combining the strengths of three world-class graduate schools and the disciplines of international relations and public policy in modules spanning 14 months .
 Avi Turetsky, COO, Riverside Europe Fund The Riverside Company, Brussels, Belgium . The Riverside is situated in the heart of Europe and in a thriving global financial center .
Nearly 90% of IPDET participants would recommend this program to a colleague . This program targets individuals who manage, conduct or fund evaluations in a development context .
 Applicants should be fluent in English with a sound track record in oil & gas . Applicants need to be fluent with sound track records in oil and gas .
 The Office Burundais des Recettes manages revenue collections from Customs, Domestic taxes as well as non-fiscal revenues on behalf of Government of Burundi .
 OBR with the support of TradeMark East Africa seeks to engage individuals/firms to enhance and develop its communications strategy . OBR wants to engage people/firm to enhance the communications strategy.
Trade TMEA cannot answer any query relating to this tender three days or less prior to the submission deadline .
 AMRO offers competitive remuneration and expatriate benefit packages pursuant to the internal guidelines of the company . AMRO has been in charge of the AMRO for over 30 years .
 ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies. Background in setting benchmarks on key macroeconomic indicators and guidelines for policy recommendations for multilateral .
 Specialists will conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies . They will work on CMIM related issues .
 Main duties include supporting country surveillance and making policy recommendations . Main duties are to make policy recommendations and support country surveillance .
 Specialists will conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies . They will work on CMIM related issues, including macroeconomic and financial statistics .
 We require candidates to possess excellent oral and written communication skills in English . We require candidate to possess oral and writing skills.
 This would require devoting about 30 days per year, including time spent in two meetings with members of the ISPC Secretariat, and other colleagues in the System .
 All applications will be treated in the strictest confidence. 10th 2015 is the 10th anniversary of the application .
 A fourth Council Member will be appointed in March 2016 with expertise in plant genetic resources and their management . A fourth council member is expected to be appointed next year .
 CGIAR is committed to achieving diversity in terms of gender, nationality, culture, and educational background . The CGIAR aims to achieve diversity in the future .
As women are currently under-represented, we would particularly encourage applications from women . Applicants from Asia and Latin Applications for all four positions will be considered simultaneously .
 The IWPs are ately qualified developers through ‘documentary’ They are hungry for developers, they say .
 The crop scientist should possess extensive knowledge of agronomy, and the physiology of crops and cropping systems relevant to developing countries .
 The social scientist will have research experience in policy, institutional, or household analyses, holding, a disciplinary qualification in the noneconomic social sciences .
 The water research and management scientist will have research experience in agricultural projects in developing countries which focus on water use . The water researcher will have experience in agriculture projects .
 The plant genetic resources scientist will have detailed international knowledge of conservation, management, and use of plant geneticresources for agriculture .
experience of strategic planning approaches to agricultural research will be an asset . Experience of strategic Planning approaches to Agricultural Research will be a asset .
 RFP bidding documents shall be issued subsequently to the Qualified Bidders, shortlisted through Stage-i bidding process . RFP documents will be issued later to the qualified bidders .
NTPC Limited, 6th Floor, Engineering Office Complex, SA-8A, Sector-24, NOIDA, Distt. Manager, NTPC Limited. Manager: NTPC Ltd. The 6th floor is the engineering office complex of NTPC .
 The date & time of receipt of bids for above mentioned packages is up to 1400 Hrs. The date and time of the bids is not yet known .
 The date and time of opening of Price Bids for the respective Packages shall be intimated separately after opening of Techno-Commercial Bids .
 The New Delhi-based NTPC Bhawan is located in New Delhi . It is located on the outskirts of the city .
 KLT Il represents one of the few remaining port facilities owned by the NPA . The port is not under some form of long term PPP management . The NPA is not in charge of the port facilities .
 activities at KLT II include handling and storage of fish and shrimp and containers . Today, activities include the handling andstorage of fish, shrimp, containers .
 The resulting effect has been the poor development of KLT II's facilities, and the related emergence of a sub-optimal operating environment .
 The Federal Government is resolved to halt this decay in infrastructure by providing the enabling conditions and environment necessary to spur private sector investment at KLT Il. The Federal government is resolved.
 The Federal Ministry of Transport has embarked upon the project to concession an area on KLT II for the development of a Container Terminal . The project will be part of a concession area for the project .
 The ICRC Act of 2005, being the principal federal law for concessions and PPPs, would apply to the proposed concessions . It would be the first time the law has been applied to concessions .
 The container terminal will be situated on Phase II of Kirikiri Lighter Terminal . The terminal is located on the site of the Kirikir Terminal .
 The KLT II container terminal will be expected to handle both domestic and international cargo . The terminal will also handle both international and domestic cargo .
Bidders must be local/ international terminal operators . They must be able to demonstrate successful management, investment and operation of a container terminal .
 Evidence of ample financial resources (including letters of support from reputable Nigeria or intemational financial institutions)
 Technical and operational capabilities covering:. Type of business engaged in by members of bidding entity . Experience in Nigeria and/or international experience .
 The NPA will evaluate and pre-qualify applicants for the NPA . NPA can also evaluate and qualify applicants .
TThe Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. Haver Analytics. TThe Economist. tThe Economist . t the Economist .
Start the day with analysis and reporting from The Economist's correspondents around the world . The Economist is based in New York and London .
 i Global defence spending increased by 1.7% in 2014, following three years of decreases . Listen in cars, planes and trains with no interruptions using the full offline listening mode .
 Chinese expenditure continued to outflank that of regional rivals, increasing by 9.7% in 2014 .
 North America and Europe declined, despite concerns over Russian ambitions in Europe . In contrast, spending in North America, Europe declined .
 Russia’s own defence spending increased by 8.3% in 2014 . It continues to spend moreasa percentage of cpp than America .
 America's share of the global total has fallen from 47% in 2010 to 38% in 2014 . America remains the biggest military spender, but its share of global total is now 38% .
 U.S. currency terms United States 2,068. Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index one inlocal in$ Feb 11th week currency terms . Other markets% change on December 31th 2013 Index.
 tCredit-default-swap spreads, basis points. Markit; Thomson Reuters, *Total return index .
 Economist.com/indicators & On air and on point Our radio app, with updates available every weekday morning .
 SD Sena Aaa 132,05 ses ee Ni eax Ese od 143.5 .
 Richard von Weizsicker, first president of his reunited country, died on January 31st, aged 94 ORTY years . Economic and financial indicators R.
 Richard von Weizsacker observed this as he gave the speech of his presidency and his life .
 In 40 years, a people could traverse the desert and reach the promised land . But they could also forget old lessons and stray from the path .
 Andso, 40 years after their surrender in the war they had started, the Germans should face their crimes and their own destruction as honestly as they could .
 The day of their defeat was the moment of their liberation. Only then, and this was his shocking twist-would they understand that the day of the defeat was their liberation .
 Helmut Kohl, then chancellor, had muttered something similar a few weeks earlier, but the public had taken little notice .
 The thought came from the ceremonial head of state, a white-haired and elegant aristocrat . It was delivered in dialect-free German that resonated with gravitas .
 Mr von Weizsacker became the first German president to visit Israel . A few months after the speech, he became the president of Israel .
Members of the ss were still being honoured among war dead . Germany’s historians were on the verge of a long academic struggle over whether the Holocaust was unique .
Not everybody was ready to take the last step towards freedom through honesty . Not everybody was prepared to take a last step to freedom through honest honesty .
 Germans knew that this appeal came from a man as deeply implicated as any of them . But Germans knew it came from an man who was deeply implicated in the case .
 Ernst had been a senior official in Hitler’s foreign ministry . His father, Ernst, had been an official in the Hitler's foreign ministry.
 Carl Friedrich worked on nuclear fission to give Hitler the bomb . His oldest brother, Carl Friedrich, was a physicist who worked on fission . Carl Friedrich was also a physicist .
 As a gangly teenager he invaded Poland with the Wehrmacht as part of the 9th Potsdam, an elite Prussian infantry regiment .
On the second day of the war, Heinrich's middle brother was shot through the throat not far from him . Heinrich was shot by his middle brother in the war .
With his regiment he laid siege to Leningrad and advanced almost to Moscow . With his regiment, he lay siege to the city and advanced to Moscow.
 In 2009 journalists confronted him with a newly discovered order from 1941 that told his regiment to take no prisoners . The order was discovered by journalists in 2009 .
 Many of the men who tried to assassinate Hitler on July 20th1944 came from his regiment . The men tried to kill Hitler were from the same regiment .
 He was close to them, and remembered, in a billet on the eastern front, shooting holes in a portrait of Hitler . He was a close friend of the Nazi leader, and shot holes in his portrait .
 After the war, his father was accused of war crimes in the Nuremburg trials, he interrupted his law studies to defend him . He argued that he had tried to prevent even worse crimes .
 Ernst had signed an order to deport 6,000 Jews to Auschwitz, and his son could not save him from prison . Ernst signed the order, but his son was not able to save him .
 For a while he would not touch politics, he went instead into business and became president of the lay assembly of the Lutheran church . He quietly lived by the teachings he lived by .
 He preached reconciliation among Christians in divided Germany . He was among the first to demand that the westward-shifted border of Poland should be seen as permanent .
 Mr Kohl brought him into centre-right politics in 1969, as a member of the Christian Democratic Union . He was never a party apparatchik .
 In the 1970s he naturally supported Ostpolitik, the policy of rapprochement with all the eastern countries . It did not matter that the idea came from Willy Brandt's rival Social Democrats .
 Mr von Weizsacker had been in Berlin when the Wall On Kristallnacht was smashed .
 In 1981 he became mayor of the city's western side, now split by a wall as though in punishment .
 Brandenburg Gate remains closed as long as the German question remains open . But he insisted that the question remained open as long the Brandenburg gate remained closed .
 Slim, ascetic and patrician, he made a telling contrast with the fat, shabby chancellor . He made the telling contrast between the fat and the fat.
 The cbu boss revelled in political combat. The head of state stood apart, a figure of decency, dig_ nity and goodness .
 When Germany was at last reunited, he was the best spokesman the country could have wished for .
 Perhaps the sweetest moment occurred just after the Berlin Wall fell in November 1989 .
 The president rushed to Berlin and approached the wall at Potsdamer Platz, in no-man's-land .
 East German soldiers breached the wall to make a border crossing .
 You become someone new -- someone with » more skills, more confidence, more opportunities . You become a new person with more skills and more confidence . You are someone new—someone with more skill and confidence .
Start learning a language today and find a new you in a world of possibility. Start learning a new language today.
 Offer limited to TOTALe CD-ROM set purchases made directly from Rosetta Stone . Free shipping for products shipped within the United States only .
 Rosetta Stone TOTALe includes interactive online services that require online access and are offered on a subscription basis for a specified term . The company also offers online access for a specific term .
 Online services must be begun within 6 months of purchase or are subject to forfeiture . Online services can be begun in 6 months or can be forfeited .
Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates . Oracle and Java is a registered trademark for the company .