 The U.S. is sending all kinds of signals it supports Ukraine against Russia . But the regime's corruption is almost as big a threat at Putin's proxies .
 Four years ago, tens of thousands abandoned their homes to gather on Maidan Square to fight for a better life . It was just four years ago.
 The trade union building that served as the headquarters for opposition movements is now covered with the giant letters “Freedom is our Religion’ and drawings of broken chains .
 During the movement, it was buzzing with energy, hosting activists, refugees sleeping on the floors, and doctors treating victims of the repression .
 Pro-regime forces burned down sniper fire during the crackdown on Feb. 2014 .
 The message on the walls today is powerful, but look behind and the building hasn’t yet been reconstructed . The investigation over the shootings is still stalling .
 This is, sadly, an apt metaphor for the situation of the country today, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This is a apt metaphor of the situation in the U.S.
 Ukraine will face new presidential elections next March 31 . It is entering a dangerous year where the tenuous progress made since 2014 could be reversed by Russia .
 It is tempting to look elsewhere, prioritize military and diplomatic support in the face of foreign aggression . It's tempting to focus on military support in face of aggression .
 The Trump administration has proved its willingness to support Ukraine militarily . The U.S. has shown it is willing to support the Ukraine .
 The delivery of Javelin anti-tank missiles, opposed by the Obama administration, will substantially increase the cost for Russia of further aggression .
 Ukraine’s leaders use the war as a pretext to escape their own responsibility. These steps are critical, but our military and financial efforts to support Ukrainian sovereignty will be in vain if reforms are scaled back .
In November, a poll conducted by the International Republican Institute showed corruption to be the major concern of respondents . In November, the poll found that corruption was a major concern for respondents .
 The country isn't ruled by political leaders, but by a small coterie of oligarchs sharing the pie . Next year’s elections aren’t likely to change that .
 Poroshenko administration managed to reassure foreign investors and donors by taking steps to clean up the banking sector, raise energy prices, and improve its public procurement system .
 NABU has little impact without the establishment of an independent anti-corruption court to prosecute and sentence those charged in such cases . NABu has no impact without an independent Anti- Corruption Court .
 Poroshenko has continuously evaded demands from donors to set up the court . Poroshenko's government has repeatedly evaded donors' demands for court set up .
 Last fall, NABU delivered two “notices of suspicions’ against high-level targets close to power .
 SBU leaked the names of undercover NABU officers, to sabotage their work .
 Parliamentarians close to the presidential party drafted a law that would have made it easier to dismiss the head of the independent authority .
 International outcry stopped this, a sign that external pressure still works, but more will be needed in the coming months .
 Europeans could exert more leverage and signal that even visa-free travel with the EU can be rescinded . Europeans could use more leverage to get more access to Europe .
 As the country gears for election, they expect further pushback against their agenda, and themselves .
 One of her colleagues returning from vacation was greeted at the airport by menacing protesters after someone leaked her travel information .
 NGO members have been asked to disclose their assets and income through e-declaration . This is a strange demand for individuals who don't deal with public money .
 This is viewed as a way to embarrass them publicly in a country with very low salaries . This is seen as an attempt to humiliate them in the country .
 Despite the elite’s unpopularity, prospects for an outsider candidate at the presidential election seem grim .
 Many hope Slava Vakarchuk, a popular rock star, could run for office as an outsider candidate . So far, his intentions are unclear .
 Most young leaders that emerged from Maidan are scattered among different parties . Most of the young leaders emerged from the Maidan city.
 Svitlana Zalishchuk is an MP elected after Maidan who is trying, with others, to bring together reformist political currents .
 TV channels and resources controlled by a small group of oligarchs. Barriers to entry for new forces are high.
 Europeans could clean their own systems from kleptocratic money laundered in their capitals . Europeans could take measures to clean their systems from money laundering in capitals .
 We should not give up on Ukraine; this will be a generational struggle testing our attention span . We should be careful of the Ukraine crisis, says John Sutter .
 It needs “trust, backup and time,’s Alex Ryabchyn, a reformist MP, told me .