 The crisis in Ukraine may be about to enter a new and less violent phase. The Ukraine crisis may be in a new phase, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The ceasefire that was brokered in Minsk in early September 2014 is still in place . The ceasefire was in place in September 2014 .
 Professor Stefan Hedlund says the death toll has been reduced . Violations are numerous and the killing has not stopped, he writes .
 The enforcement of the proposal is likely to be a major problem but it will help reduce the number of deaths . The proposal is a positive step towards a lasting solution .
 Petro Poroshenko met his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin in Milan on Friday, October 17, 2014, on the sidelines of the summit of Asian and European leaders in Italy . There were few signs that an agreement on the fundamentals was close.
On self-rule for the rebel-held areas in Donbass, and then on postponement of the free-trade agreement with the European Union . On self- rule for the rebels, then on postpone the free trade agreement .
 Russia accepted to pay a price of US$385 per thousand cubic metres . In a mooted deal, it would see resumption of Russian deliveries of gas cut off since June 2014 .
 This is less than the US$485 that Russia has demanded in accordance with a contract signed in 2009 . This is more than the U.S. $485 demanded by Russia .
 It was negotiated under the supervision of EU Energy Commissioner Gunther Oettinger in June, 2014 . Gazprom has been on offer from Gazprom ever since .
 Russia maintains that the price is US$485 and that it has generously granted a US$100 discount . Russia maintains it has given a US $100 discount.
 A fair deal would have entailed agreeing on a price without discount . Since a discount may be withdrawn at will, a fair deal could have been a fair price .
 The Kremlin may have an interest in winding down the hostilities in Donbass, east Ukraine .
 Putin no longer makes glowing speeches about ‘Novorossiya’ and the right to protect Russians abroad .
 He has taken a cool attitude to the self-proclaimed ‘People’s Republic’ He may feel that the war has already served its main purpose .
 Ukrainian state will be forced to accept rules that are written in Moscow . It was fought to destabilise and weaken the Ukrainian state to the point where it will be force to accept Moscow rules .
 Kiev is making concessions and is dependent for survival on a steady flow of billions in credits from the West . Kiev has been making concessions to the West.
 Western taxpayers will be on the losing side, but it is clear that it will be sizeable, and that Western taxpayers are on the lose side . But it's clear that the loss will be sizable, and it will also be sizeable .