 Ukrainian pilot detained in Russia since 2014 has made a triumphant return home . She traded for two Russians in a prisoner swap that saw her trade for two Russian pilots .
 Savchenko was exchanged for two Russian intelligence operatives held by Ukraine . Savchenko thanked her supporters and promised to fight for the release of other Ukrainians in Russian jails .
 Flanked by her mother and sister and holding a Ukrainian flag, she posed for a photo . She posed for the photo.
 Her return was celebrated in Ukraine, where she is viewed as a national hero . She is seen as a possible future political leader .
 It also marks a significant moment of detente between Moscow and Kiev, and a breakthrough in on-off diplomatic negotiations conducted in Minsk .
 The prisoner swap comes a few weeks before the European Union decides whether to extend sanctions against Russia . Putin's annexation of Crimea in 2014 and his covert invasion of eastern Ukraine.
 Putin, Poroshenko, Angela Merkel and François Hollande had a telephone conversation on Monday, Kommersant newspaper reports .
 Russian media said a special presidential plane sent by Putin took off from Kiev to Moscow . Yevgeny Yerofeyev and Alexander Alexandrov were on board .
 Both told Reuters in interviews last year they were Russian special forces soldiers . They were captured while carrying out a secret operation in the rebel-held Donbas region .
 The plane arrived back at Moscow's Vnukovo airport on Wednesday afternoon . The two men were reunited with their wives .
 Putin “had signed an order to pardon pilot Savchenko’s pilot, Russian media reported .
 The president said on state TV that he hoped the prisoner exchange would reduce tensions in the Donbas region .
 Savchenko volunteered to fight with ground unit against pro-Moscow separatists . Pro-Russian separatists launched an insurrection in eastern Ukraine against Kiev’s pro-western government .
 She was captured and put on trial in southern Russia . She was charged with complicity in the deaths of Russian journalists who were killed by artillery while covering the conflict .
 While in Russian jail, she was elected a member of the Ukrainian parliament . She is widely regarded in Ukraine as a symbol of resistance against Russia .
 Putin said he had pardoned Savchenko following a request from the journalists’ families . Putin said it was a request for the journalists' families .
 Her release is a boost for Poroshenko, whom critics accuse of failing to tackle corruption .
 Dmitry Gudkov is the lone liberal opposition deputy in Russia's parliament . He argued that if Russia had exchanged Savchenko earlier, he might not have been murdered near Kiev in March .
 Gudkov: "There wouldn’t have been another split in society over an artificial propaganda story" Savchenko was elected to the Ukrainian parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
 opposition Parnas party member Andrei Pivovarov wrote on Twitter . Pivvarov: "People shouldn’t be hostages"
 Valentina Matviyenko, speaker of the upper house of parliament, insisted Savchenko not exchanged but transferred to Ukraine under prisoner transfer agreements .
 MP Alyona Shkrum wrote on Twitter that Savchenko's mother had not had time to cook a pot of borscht for her daughter's arrival .