 Akhmetov released a video message in which he fiercely attacked pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine’s southeastern provinces .
 Akhmetov was far from the first person in the Ukraine crisis to hurl the term at his ideological opponents . Yet Akh Metov is far from first person to use the term in Ukraine crisis.
 He was unusual only insofar as the word has been much more commonly used by the pro-Russian side in the conflict . He is unusual only because the word is often used by pro- Russian side .
 Thomas de Waal De Waal is a senior fellow with Carnegie Europe . He specializes in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus region . He is a former member of Carnegie Europe.
 On the surface, the use of this term may merely seem to be a symptom of strong emotions in eastern Ukraine .
 The word genocide has been used as a weapon of political rhetoric for more than 60 years . In the former Soviet Union, more than in any other part of the world, the word genocide is used in political rhetoric .
 The use of this language casts the Russian-Ukrainian conflict as a replay of the ideological divide of the Second World War . Russia and Ukraine branded as “antifascist” and “profascist’s” respectively .
 These labels are weapons in a rhetorical conflict that fuels the fighting on the ground, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A legal concept has turned a crime against humanity into a politicized accusation with a general application . The terms are the result of a nearly seventy-year process that has turned the concept into a legal concept .
 The use of the word genocide in the Soviet Union and its successor states has its origins in the beginnings of the Cold War . The word genocide was used in the USSR and the Soviet Republic .
 The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution declaring genocide a crime under international law . In 1946, as the world confronted the repercussions of the Nazis’ mass killing of Europe’s Jews in what came to be known as the Holocaust .
 The accord sought to deter future acts of mass killing of that scale . By giving a word to what had been called a “crime without a name,’s aim was to deter such acts .
 The Soviet Union supported the resolution, but problems arose when the UN attempted to craft a legal definition of the term . The United States and the Soviet Union were both involved in the resolution .
 Moscow objected to a reference in the declaration that allegedly misidentified the “object of genocide’s ‘object’ by including political groups alongside national, ethnic, racial, and religious ones .
 Stalin feared that the inclusion of this criterion could lay his government open to prosecution for genocide for destroying his own enemies . He feared that this criterion would lay his Government open to prosecutions for genocide .
 The tribunal proposed for hearing cases of genocide was formulated as a supranational organ . In the future, a citizen of one country might be charged with genocide in another .
 The Soviet Union feared that its adversaries could potentially use this as a political weapon . It feared that this could be used by its adversaries .
 In 1948, the UN adopted the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . The new crime was codifying the new crime .
 The idea that was initially adopted as a noble cause by the victorious Allies over Nazism was tarnished as those same Allies began to fight the Cold War .
 The Soviet delegation succeeded in removing the reference to political groups from the convention . Other ideas it had proposed also failed to make the cut, including the idea that genocide was inherently connected to fascism and racist theories .
 The Soviet Union immediately appropriated the new term for its own political goals in the Cold War .
 Writing in 1956, Traynin accused the U.S. of carrying out genocide against African Americans with its Jim Crow laws .
 Traynin had similar condemnations of apartheid in South Africa and the treatment of Indian highlanders in Bolivia .
 Condemning these abhorrent practices, Traynin's rhetoric went over the top . Traynin’s rhetoric went on the top.
 To Andryukhin, genocide was not just a crime committed by Western "imperialist" powers, but one backed by conscious ideology and carried out with relish and glee .
 As important as Traynin's and Andryukhin’s examples of genocide are the ones they never, or seldom, cite . Traynin”s and Andyukhin's examples are the most important .
 Jews are mentioned only in passing as one of the main groups killed . In Traynin’s discussion of the Nazis’ death camps, Jews are only mentioned in passing .
 Any mention of the Armenian Genocide is conspicuously absent from both texts . The Armenian Genocide was not mentioned in the texts .
 Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide in 1944 after immigrating to the United States . Lemkin frequently used anticommunism to argue that the U.S. government should ratify the UN genocide convention. Lemkin was the first Polish lawyer who coined the
 Washington was unreceptive to Lemkin's ideas, he says . Lemkin fell back on the support of anticommunist Eastern European immigrant communities .
According to Lehman, “genocide, developed to a science by Nazi Germany, has been practiced on an even vaster scale by Soviet Russia . ‘genocide’ has been practice on a even vast scale by Russia, Lehman says .
 The trend continued in the second half of the twentieth century and became even more marked after the fall of Communism . That trend continued for the first time in 20th century .
 In post-Soviet political discourse, the word genocide became even further unmoored from its original legal formulation than the already-loose meaning it had acquired during the 1950s and 1960s .
Post-Soviet peoples began to explicitly label themselves, rather than others, as victims of genocide . For the first time, post-Soviet people began to publicly label themselves as victims .
 The term has been employed so broadly in the current Ukraine crisis. It is in the context of this semantic shift that the term is used so broadly .
Post-Soviet peoples and governments rediscovered and reinvented national histories, cultures, and languages . They constructed fifteen new nation-states out of the wreckage of the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
 In the process, the new nations frequently described their past sufferings as “genocide” with barely any reference to the international legal understanding.
 Tzvetan Todorov has noted that no one wants to be a victim . Many want to have been victims, but many want to be victims .
 The status conferred by past victimhood gives justification to complaints and demands that might otherwise seem unreasonable . The status confer by past victims gives justification for complaints .
 If a group can prove that it has been the victim of injustice, it “obtains a bottomless line of moral credit’s moral credit,’ says the author .
 Armenians termed the 1988 pogroms by Azerbaijanis against Armenians in the town of Sumgait genocide . In the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the disputed territory of Nagorny Karabakh, Armenians called it the ' 1988 pogsroms
 Azerbaijanis did the same with reference to the killing by Armenians of Azerbaijani civilians outside the town of Khojali in 1992 . Azerbaijanis also used the name of Armenians who were killed in 1992.
 Abkhaz and Ossetians have accused the Georgian state of genocide against them . Georgia has accused the Abkhazi of committing genocide against ethnic Georgians .
 Circassians have called on the world to recognize the mass deportation of their ancestors from the Russian Empire in the 1860s as genocide . They won recognition of the term from the Georgian parliament in 2011 .
 “G-word’ has entered the mainstream vocabulary as a description of many kinds of abuse or victimization . In contemporary Russia, the ‘G- word’ is used to describe abuse and victimization in Russia .
 If continued, Delyagin warned, those policies would lead to ‘financial repressions’ analogous to the most intense period of Stalin’s Great Purge .
 "Eurasianism" is now a dominant ideology in President Vladimir Putin's Russia . Ethnic Russians are at risk of genocide both from Russia's neighbors and from foreign powers .
 Glazyev does specifically refer to the UN genocide convention . Unlike many around him who have cried genocide, he does specifically refers to the convention .
 He emphasizes that the commission of genocide need not require physical violence, merely the creation of conditions that make it impossible for a people to survive .
 His version of Russian politics in the 1990s reads like an opposition conspiracy theory . But ordinary Russians are perpetually cast in the role of victims, he says .
After the shelling of the Russian parliament in 1993, the “victorious revolutionaries’ had total impunity, Glazyev writes .
 Glazyevbacks up his partisan claims with statistics about the decline in living standards, health, fertility, and education levels of the Russian population during the 1990s .
 His work also touches on moral issues, perhaps foreshadowing his role today as an adviser to the increasingly socially conservative Putin .
 Glazyev blames Russia’s falling birthrate on the country's economic collapse . He also blames ‘propaganda of debauchery’ and “dubious methods of sexual education’ developed outside the country and then implanted in Russia .
 This “genocide’s origins back to the West, but it traces its origins to Russia .
 He places Russia’s ‘economic genocide’ in the context of several historical genocides, including the Soviet elimination of so-called class enemies . He also places Russia's "economic genocide" in thecontext of several historic genocide.
 genocide label has proved especially divisive in Ukraine . In one country in the post-Soviet space, it has proved particularly divisive .
 The question of genocide has been a serious and polarizing issue for much of the country’s history since independence . There, the question of Genocide has been an issue for many years .
 Ukraine's genocide narrative can be traced back to 1933, when a horrific man-made famine took more than 2 million lives in Ukraine . The famine was caused by Stalin’s grain requisition policies.
 The Holodomor is one of the grisliest chapters of Ukrainian history . It raised the question of whether it was genocide or genocide .
 Many Ukrainian nationalists answered “yes,” and this led to more questions . Many Ukrainians answered ‘yes’ and this leads to more Questions .
 Viktor Yushchenko came to power as a result of Ukraine’s Orange Revolution of 2004 . The suffering became one of the ideas underpinning the presidency of the president .
 Yushchenko actively promoted the idea of the famine as genocide as genocide . Previous presidents had commemorated the Holodomor .
 Yushchenko promoted a tougher law that would criminalize Holodomor and Holocaust denial . The parliament never voted on the bill .
 When he succeeded Yushchenko as president in 2010, Yanukovych took a different position on the Holodomor .
 Shortly after coming to power, he told the Council of Europe that the Holodomor was not genocide .
 Political opponents tried to take Yanukovych to court for denying that the Holodomor was a genocide . Political opponents even tried to try to take him to court .
 Each November, he gave a formal address commemorating the victims of the famine . He referred to it as a “tragedy’s’ or an “Armageddon,” but never a genocide .
 In Russia, the description of the Holodomor as a genocide was largely rejected both by politicians and by historians . Some of whom accused Ukrainians of anti-Russian bias, some of whom accuse Ukrainians of bias .
 Ukrainian cultural scholar Mykola Riabchuk argues that anti-Russian interpretations of the Holodomor were neither official view nor prevalent in society .
 Yushchenko was very careful not to blame Russia, Riabchuk said .
 Some Ukrainian scholars partly explain the different identity of the southeastern provinces . Donetsk and Luhansk were wiped out in the 1933 famine and replaced by a more Russified Soviet worker population .
Donbas is so rebellious, disloyal, Riabchuk said . "This is part of the explanation why we have the current troubles,’ he said .
 In Russian discourse, the idea of a “genocide’s’ perpetrated by Ukrainians against ethnic Russians proliferated in opposition to the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 The bill in question was rejected in the Ukrainian parliament . The author believed it could still be passed in the future .
 Russian speakers would be excluded from the government, have their media eliminated, be unable to defend themselves in court, and even face assault and murder . If that happened, she predicted, Russian speakers could face assault, murder and assault .
 The publication accused the “Orange junta’s” of denying the ‘native Russian land, heroic Crimea’ Its language . The publication also accused the junta of denying “native Russianland, heroic Crimean” its language .
 The word is again being invoked in the current conflict in Ukraine . It is no surprise, then, that the word is being invoked again .
 In eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian separatists know that they are challenging the status quo and the international order, which places them at a disadvantage .
 The regime is trying to protect its fundamental human rights, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Russia's Sergei Glazyev has framed events in eastern Ukraine as part of his broader narrative of persecution of ethnic Russians in other post-Soviet states . In Russia, he's the most persistent exponent of a genocide against Russians .
 Antifascism has become a central idea in Putin's Russia, reinforcing a growing tendency to identify the modern country with Soviet Union .
 The Red Army’s victory over Nazism is increasingly reframed as a victory of the Russian nation rather than of the multiethnic Soviet people .
 The enhanced prominence given to Victory Day on May 9 and debates about giving the city of Volgograd its old name of Stalingrad are further reflections of this reimagining of history .
Glazyev even told BBC interviewer that Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko is a Nazi . Accusations that the new Ukrainian government is fascist fit into this narrative .
 The Holodomor is a less politicized issue now than it was during the Yushchenko presidency . On the Ukrainian side, it is notable that it is less politicizing now than in the past .
 Even Rinat Akhmetov, who now supports the government in Kiev, is a Russian speaker . He previously had strong ties to Yanukovych .
 The Holodomor remains in the background of this ideological battle . For some, the majority of participants in the battle are not involved .
 Ukraine already has a national genocide, and making more accusations would only serve to delegitimize the Holodomor . Ukraine has been accused of genocide, but it is already a genocide .
 The current Ukrainian leadership has instead used a different kind of inflammatory language, accusing the rebels of being “terrorists’ who undermine Ukraine’s state order .
 The terrorist label has gained greater traction in the international community after the tragic downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in eastern Ukraine .
 Such rhetoric makes the task of reconciliation much more difficult and reduces the space for political compromise in eastern Ukraine .
 People of different ethnic, religious, and linguistic identities can live and have lived together in Ukraine in peace .
 The invocation of genocide, a word that signifies “ultimate evil,’ incites the belief that Russians and Ukrainians are incompatible . It closes down opportunities for dialogue and cooperation .
 In a crisis where words matter, the implacable rhetorical war in Ukraine helps fuel an increasingly dangerous conflict, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: In the crisis where Words matter, it helps fuel the conflict .
 Matthew Kupfer is a junior fellow in the Carnegie Russia and Eurasia Program . He is a member of the Carnegie Russian and Eurasian Program .
 Segodnya.ua: "V svyazi s situatsiyei na Donbasse Rinat Akhmetov sdelal ekstrennoye zayavlenie’s.ua, May 19, 2014.