 State-owned gas company, Naftogaz, was awarded $2. billion in a lengthy, ugly legal battle with Russian gas behemoth Gazprom .
 Stockholm Arbitral Tribunal ruled on a years old dispute regarding natural gas transit fees in favor of Ukrainians . The tribunal ruled on Wednesday .
 Naftogaz learned of Gazprom's decision not to supply gas to Ukraine this month . Russia's revenge began immediately on Thursday when Gazprom announced it would not supply gas in Ukraine .
 Russia and Ukraine's bitter divorce has Gazprom at the heart of the fighting . Gazprom has been in the midst of a bitter divorce with Ukraine .
Former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych rejected a European trade deal in favor of cheaper Gazprom gas . Kiev erupted in protest when Yanukovych rejected the deal . The former Ukrainian president rejected the trade deal .
 Ukrainians felt Yanukovych was choosing Russian interests over sovereign, economic interests . Many Ukrainians felt that Yanukovych chose Russian interests rather than economic interests.
 Yanukovych was kicked out of power in 2014, setting off a firestorm of reactions by the Russians that led to the annexation of Crimea . A separatist war pitting ethnic Russians and pro-Kremlin militants against the Ukrainian government in the Donbass region .
 The move led to sectoral sanctions on Russian energy and finance . The move has ostracized Russia from the West .
 The two energy companies went at each other's throats in Ukraine . It all started in Ukraine with these two companies going at each others' throats .
 For Euromaidan movement activist of Ukraine, a Naftogaz legal victory would normally be boring news .
 Gazprom has the muscle to pressure Naftogaz by any means necessary, insiders say . Gazprom is the largest company in the world .
 Gazprom defaulted on its shipment obligations and awarded damages of $4.63 billion . Yesterday's tribunal in Stockholm found that Gazprom Defaulted on shipment obligations .
 The award means Gazprom has to make payments to Naftogaz in the order of $2.56 billion . residual payments for gas delivered in 2014 and 2015 have been settled . The award will mean Gazprom must make payments in order to make the payments .
 Naftogaz CEO Andriy Kobolyev: "This is an important day for the people of Ukraine and for the future of European gas markets”
 Kobolyev has become a vocal opponent of Gazprom's planned Nord Stream II pipeline . Gazprom has planned to connect Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea . The pipeline is expected to be completed in 2014 .
 The pipeline was sanctioned by Washington last summer but is not dead yet . Kobolyev used the arbitration panel's ruling to take a swipe at the pipeline .
 The Tribunal did not grant Naftogaz's claim for revision of the transit tariff . Naftogsaz’s 2009 request for revision did not fulfill procedural requirements .
 The Tribunal also did not accept Naftogaz's claims for revision of the Transit Contract based on European and Ukrainian energy and competition law . The Tribunal said the implementation of regulatory reform on Ukrainian territory is a task for Ukrainian authorities .